IP/QB. 10 SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY MEDICAL OFFICERS OF THE ARMY OF INDIA. EDITED BY SIR BENJAMIN SIMPSON, M.D., K.C.I.E., SURGEON-GENERAL WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PART V. 1890. 1.SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY MEDICAL OFFICERS OF THE ARMY OF INDIA. EDITED BY SIR BENJAMIN SIMPSON, M.D., K.C.I.E., SURGEON-GENERAL WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PART V. 1890. 1.On Milk as a Medium for Choleraic Comma-Bacilli. BY SURGEON-MAJOR D. D. CUNNINGHAM, M.B., F.R.S., BENGAL MEDICAL SERVICE. In a paper which was published in the last number of this periodical, an account was given of the results of a series of experiments on the behaviour of Choleraic Comma-Bacilli when introduced into water and soil of various qualities, and it was pointed out that these appeared to demonstrate that the Bacilli were very feeble organisms when exposed to a struggle for existence in these media. As a supplement to these experiments another series was subse- quently tried in regard to the phenomena presenting themselves where milk was employed as a medium, and these gave results which appear to be sufficiently remarkable and sufficiently opposed to current beliefs to merit detailed descrip- tion. A special interest attaches to the behaviour of Comma-Bacilli in milk, as the latter is so often, and frequently on very insufficient evidence, regarded as the exciting cause of cases of cholera, and as it has also been affirmed to be a spe- cially favourable medium for the development of the Bacilli. For, in the first place, if milk really does play an important part as a vehicle in the propagation of cholera, and were, at the same time, a favourable medium for the growth and multiplication of Comma-Bacilli, the evidence would, in so far, at all events, be in favour of the views of those who regard the Bacilli as the specific cause of the disease. But, apart from the question of causal relation, there can be no ques- tion as to the frequency of the association of the Bacilli with the disease as characteristic constituents of the alvine discharges2 Scientific Memoirs by readily afforded by means of suitable cultivations. Moreover, independently of any questions specially relating to cholera, or any individual disease, we find milk, of the very impure quality ordinarily in use in India, so frequently regard- ed as a cause of disease that it appears to be very desirable to obtain some definite data regarding its normal behaviour in relation to schizomycete organ- isms generally, and specially in regard to its relation to any, such as comma- Bacilli, to which definite pathogenic properties have been ascribed. In dealing with any subject of this nature it cannot be too clearly borne in mind that we must distinguish between the potential capacities which any material may possess as a medium under special conditions, such as those of steri- lisation, from those which it possesses under ordinary circumstances and when al- ready populated by schizomycete organisms. From the point of view of practical hygiene it is of comparatively little moment what the properties of milk may be when in an exceptional condition, such as that of sterilisation, and it is its properties in the condition in which it ordinarily comes into use which alone merit serious consideration. This, however, would seem, to a great extent, to have been over- looked, and the results of experiments on sterilised milk to have been regard- ed as affording sufficient grounds for statements referring to the fluid generally. The experiments, of which it is proposed to give an account here, were accordingly, not confined to an investigation of the phenomena presenting themselves in sterilised specimens of milk, but dealt with the fluid as ordinarily supplied for use in the European houses and native bazaars of Calcutta, with specimen's procured under Special precautions against contamination; with speci- mens which had been boiled, and with others which had been really sterilised: The results have been included in tabular form in order, so far as possible, to avoid tedious repetition of details in the text, which can thus be confined to the description of the general phenomena presenting themselves in each group of experimentsMedical Officers of the Army of India. 3 Number of speci- men. Date at which pro- cured. Source. General condition wheih obtained. Nature and treatment of individual samples. Subsequent condition. III Mar. 10th. House sup- ply. As in the previous specimen. I. Tube in the incu- bator at 37°C. March 11th. Strongly acid; fully co- agulated and separated into coagu- lum and fluid. IV Mar. 12th. ,, As in the previous specimen. As in the previous specimen. March 13th. Highly acid and fully coagulated. V Mar. 15th. Bazaar As in the previous specimen. I. Tube in the incu- bator at 37°C. March 16th. Strongly acid; odourless; fully coagulated and separated into coagulum and fluid. 2. Tube in the open laboratory. March 16th. Strongly acid; co- agulated; separation of coagulum and fluid beginning. VI May 9th. Zoological Garden. Obtained direct in a sterilised beaker from a cow, the udder and teats of the animal and the hands of the milkman having been washed with solution of cor- rosive sublimate and subsequently with spirit. Re- action neutral. I. Tube in the incu- bator at 37ºC. May 10th. Reaction transitorily feebly acid, becoming neutral on drying; not coagulated. May 11th. Very faintly acid; not co- agulated. May 13th. Faintly acid; fluid, but co- agulating on being boiled. VII May 21St. House sup- ply. In a sterilised tube. Reaction transit- orily faintly acid; neutral on drying. I. Tube in the incu- bator at 37°C. May 22nd. Reaction acid; fully co- agulated and separated. VIII May 23rd. House In a sterilised tube. Reaction transit- orily neutral; faint- ly alkaline on dry- ing. I. Tube in the incu- bator at 37°C. May 24th. Reaction acid; fully co- agulated and separated. IX May 25th. 4 Scientific Memoirs by Number of speci- men. Date at which pro- cured. Source. General condition which obtained. Nature and treatment of individual samples. Subsequent condition. XII May 31st. Bazaar The milk siphoned into distinct sam- ples derived from the upper and lower strata. I. Tube of the top milk in the in- cubator at 37°C. June 1st. Reaction acid; fully co- agulated and separated. 2. Tube of the bot- tom milk in the incubator at 37ºC. June 1st. Reaction acid, but not so strongly so as that of the previous sample: fully coagulated and separ- ated. XIII June 7th. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 5 posed to the ordinary atmospheric temperature, which, as a rule, was considerably lower than that of the incubator, and in no instance was constantly at such a high level during the entire period of 24 hours. In only one case was there neither permanent acidity nor coagulation after the specimen had been under observation for a period of 24 hours, and in this the milk had been obtained under very special precautions. The specimen is that which is numbered VI in the Table and was drawn direct into a sterilised beaker from which the plug of cotton wool had just been withdrawn and at once transferred thence to a steri- lised and plugged flask, and finally to a sterilised tube. The udder and teats of the cow and the hands of the milkman had both been freshly washed, first with a 5% solution of corrosive sublimate and then with spirit, immediately before the milk was withdrawn. In spite of being kept constantly in the incubator, spon- taneous coagulation had not occurred up to a period of 96 hours afterwards, and only set in on boiling. The reaction too was quite exceptional, as it was only transitorily acid after the lapse of 24 hours, and only faintly acid permanently after 96 hours. The result clearly shows that the development of acidity and of coagulation is determined, principally at all events, by contamination of the fluid during drawing and subsequent preservation. TABLE II.6 Scientific Memoirs by Number of specimen. Date at which procur- ed. Source. Reaction. Nature of cultivation. Date at which set. RESULT. III Jan. 9th. House- supply. ... Plate. Treat- ed as in the previous spe- cimen. Jan., 9th. January 10th. A growth of colonies in the proportion of 48,150 per C. C. Almost all of them appeared to consist of the short, oval, often paired Bacilli described in the account of the cultivation of specimen I. As in that case scattered rods of larger size and appa- rently due to diffuse growth of Bacillus Subtilis were also present. IV Jan. 16th. ,, Neutral ,, Jan. 16th. January 17th. Crowded with concrete colonies in the proportion of 132,000 per C. C. Also a thin, diffuse, superficial growth visible at one point. The defined colonies consisted of the short oval Bacilli and the smaller form of Micrococcus occurring in the cultivation of specimen I. The diffuse growth consisted of Bacillus subtilis. V Mar. 1st. ,, Faintly alkaline. ,, Mar. 1st. March 2nd. Small colonies in the proportion of 80,000 per C. C. One definite patch and apparently a very thin, generally diffused film of Bacillus subtilis. The small colonies con- sisted of the common short oval Bacilli occur- ring in the previous cultivations and of minute straight Bacilli and large Micrococci similar to those present in the cultivation of speci- men I. ,, Mar. 4th. March 5th. Crowded with minute colonies of short oval Bacilli and large Micrococcus. VI Mar. 8th. ,, Neutral ,, Mar. 8th. March 9th. Colonies present in the propor- tions of 103,950 per C. C. These almost entirely consisted of the large Micrococcus occurring in several of the previous cultiva- tions. As in other cases, a very limited, superficial, diffuse growth of Bacillus subtilis appeared to be present, the stratum, how- ever, being too thin to be recognisable. ,, Mar. 9th. March 10th. Crowded with minute colonies of the large Micrococcus and the oval Bacillus occurring in previous cultivations. VII Mar. 10th. ,, ,, ,, Mar. 10th. March 11th. Colonies present in the propor- tion of 51,000 per C. C. The greater number of these consisted of the common lacteal oval Bacilli. One large foliated patch of the large Micrococcus. VIII Mar. 12th. ,, ,, ,, Mar. 12th. March 13th. Crowded with colonies in the proportion of 340,000 per C. C. These con- sisted of Bacillus subtilis, the common lacteal oval Bacilli, large Micrococcus and slender straight Bacilli. A certain number also were apparently composed of some form of yeasty growth of cells of some higher fungal species. IX May 9th. Zoolo- gical Garden. ,, Plate. Inoc- ulated with 0.058 C. C. Set in incu- bator at 37°C. May 9th. May 10th. Colonies of the common, large, lacteal Micrococcus in the proportion of 25,245 per C. C.
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 7 Number of specimen. Date at which procur- ed Source. Reaction. Nature of cultivation. Date at which set. RESULT. Plate. Treat- ed as before. May 11th. May 13th. Absolutely crowded with colonies of the common, large, lacteal Micrococcus. X May 21st. House- supply. Faintly acid, be- coming neutral on drying. Plate. Treat- ed as before. May 21st. May 22nd. Absolutely crowded with colonies of the common, short, oval, lacteal Bacillus. XI May 23rd. ,, Neutral, becoming faintly al- kaline on drying. ,, May 23rd. May 24th. Relatively very few colonies, the proportion being only 3,400 per C. C. They consisted of the common lacteal oval Bacilli and large Micrococcus.. A very thin, diffuse growth of Bacillus subtilis appeared also to be present. ,, May 24th. May 25th. Crowded with colonies of the com mon lacteal oval Bacilli and large Mi- crococci. XII May 25th. ,, ,, ,, May 25th May 26th. Crowded with colonies of the com- mon lacteal oval, and small straight Bacilli, and large Micrococcus. A thin, diffuse growth of Bacillus subtilis appeared also to be pre sent. XIII May 271h. Bazaar ,, ,, May 27th. May 28th. Number of colonies very small, only giving a proportion of 8,670 per C. C. They appeared to consist entirely of the common large, lacteal Micrococcus. There was also, seemingly, a very thin, diffuse growth of Bacillus subtilis present. XIV May 29th. ,, ... ,, May 29th. May 30th. Numerous colonies were present. These consisted of large Micrococci and common lacteal oval Bacilli, which, where situated at the lower surface of the Agar- Agar, had in many cases elevated it into bub- bles, due to gaseous evolution. XV May 31st. ,, ... Plate. Inoc- ulated with 0.058 C. C. Siphoned off from bottom of the milk. May 31st. June 1st. Both plates alike. Containing numerous colonies of the com- mon lacteal Schizomycetes. Plate, Similar. ly inoculated from top of milk. ,, ,, XVI June 7th. ,, Neutral Plate. Inoc- ulated with 0.058 C. C. of milk from the top. June 7th. June 8th. Numerous colonies of the common lacteal Schizomycetes. Plate. Inoc- ulated with 0.058 C. C. from the bot- tom. ,, June 8th. Colonies not nearly so abundant as in the previous cultivation, but of the same nature.
8 Scientific Memoirs by Numbe of specimen. Date at which procur- ed. Source. Reaction. Nature of eultivation. Date at which set. RESULT. XVII July 15th. Bazaar Faintly alkaline on drying. Plate. Inoc- ulated with 0.03 C. C. from the bot- tom of the milk. July 15th. July 16th. Crowded with colonies of common lacteal Schizomycetes in the proportion of 340,965 per C. C. Small straight Bacill and short oval ones the most prevalent forms XVIII July 25th. 9 Medical Officers of the Army of India. tionally small number of them. The figures corresponding to it are those of No. 9 in the above series, and are greatly in excess of those in Nos. 10 and 11, corresponding with samples of milk in regard to which no special precautions had been taken, and which underwent the normal and rapid change in reaction and coagulation. It was, however, a pure cultivation of one only of the species of schizomycetes commonly present in milk. In cases where successive culti- vations of one and the same sample of milk were made at different periods sub- sequent to procural there was ample evidence that, for some time, a very rapid multiplication of schizomycetes took place, the successive cultures showing progressive increase in the numbers of colonies which developed in them. A rapid multiplication of schizomycetes thus occurs during the period in which the milk is becoming acid and coagulating, but all the species normally present in common specimens of milk do not appear to be equally active in producing these changes. The exceptional sample of milk ultimately became acid in re- action, but, even after an interval of 96 hours, was only feebly so, and only co- agulated on being heated, although it was at the same time crowded with speci- mens of one of the common lacteal organisms. As specimens of sterilised milk inoculated with what seemed to be a pure cultivation of the same organism in other cases showed coagulation within 24 hours, although with only transitory acidity, it is a little difficult to account for the great delay manifesting itself in this particnlar instance. There was on the whole a remarkable uniformity throughout the entire series of specimens in regard to the nature of the schizomycetes which they contained. In regard to those which gave rise to definite colonies, two forms were characterised by the extreme regularity with which they made their appearance in the cultivations, one of them having occurred in 21 of the entire series of 24 cultivations and in 17 of the 20 samples of milk, and the other in 19 of the 24 cultivations and in 16 of the 20 samples. The first consists of a large species of Micrococcus and was that which was alone present in the specimen of milk, in regard to which special precautions against contamination were taken at the time when it was obtained. The other was a very short Bacillus, the extremi- ties of the rods being rounded so as to cause them to assume an oval form, and there being a great tendency for association of the rods in pairs. The species occurring next in order of frequency was another species of Bacillus distin- guished from the previous one by the greater length and relative slenderness of its rods. It was present in 11 cultivations derived from 10 distinct samples of milk. A certain amount of Bacillus subtilis was recognised in nine cultivations, derived from as many distinct samples of milk. In only one case were definite colonies of it present in all the others it appeared to be present in the form of diffused films spread out over the surface of the plate, and often so thin as to escape notice entirely until the presence of rods contaminating specimens derived from colonies of the other schizomycetes served to c
10 Scientific Memoirs by reveal them. It is very probable that growths of Bacillus subtilis of this nature were present in other cultivations of the series than those of which it is recorded, as the results of cultivations of boiled milk, as will be shown pre- sently, clearly demonstrate that spores of Bacillus subtilis are of constant occur- rence in ordinary samples.of milk. The schizomycetes, which may be fairly re- garded as normal constituents of ordinary samples of milk in Calcutta, are thus a large Micrococcus, an oval Bacillus, a small slender Bacillus, and finally Bacillus subtilis. Other forms, such as the small species of Micrococcus occurring in specimen I of Table II, and one or two other Bacilli, sometimes occur in small numbers, but their appearance is an exceptional, not a normal phenomenon. In the case of one specimen, No. VIII of Table II, cultivation, in addition to colonies of common lacteal schizomycetes, yielded others composed of dense masses of yeast-like cells. The first four photographs in the plate show the proportions of colonies present in cultivations of unboiled specimens of milk of twenty-four hours' growth. The first three are from cultivations set immediately after the milk was obtained and figure 3, when taken along with the two previous ones, shows the relatively small numbers of colonies appearing in a cultivation of the speci- men of milk obtained under special precautions to avoid contamination, as com- pared with the numbers present in cultivations of specimens of the common milk supply of Calcutta. The fourth figure, compared with the third, shows the excessive multiplication of schizomycetes in specimens of milk when kept for any length of time. Both cultivations to which the figures correspond were obtained from the same sample of milk, but that illustrated in figure 3 was set immediately after the sample was obtained, while that of figure 4 was not set until 48 hours later. One point which came out very clearly in this series of cultivations was the relative repression, and in many cases apparent complete suppression of Bacillus subtilis in milk, which is associated with the presence of the other schizomycetes normally present in the fluid and the acid fermentation with which their presence and multiplication is associated. As will be shown in the fourth Table, spores of Bacillus subtilis appear to be a constant content of ordinary. specimens of milk, but the development of the species in all these cultivations was inconspicuous, and in many instances no development at all seemed to occur. The repressive influence of the other forms was specially indicated by the fact that when growths of Bacillus subtilis did occur they were associated with the first cultivations derived from any specimen, that is, at periods when the numbers of the common lacteal schizomycetes were relatively small, as com- pared with what they were subsequently.
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 11 TABLE III.12 Scientific Memoirs by Number of speci- men. Number of corre- sponding specimen of unboil- ed milk in Table 1. Date at which pro- cured. Source. General condition when obtained. Nature and treatment of individual samples. Subsequent condition. VIII ... May 9th. Zoologi- cal Gar- den. Obtained at the same time as the previous specimen,but from a differ- ent cow. The udder was not in this case special- ly prepared and the calf had to be al- lowed to suck ere the ani- mal would let down her milk. It was drawn direct into a steri- lised beaker and transfer- red to three sterilised flasks. 1. Boiled in a steri- lised flask and set in the incu- bator at 37°C. May 10th. Fully coagulated and separated. Reaction acid. 2. Treated as above. May 10th. Coagulated, but separation only beginning; com- plete separation occurring at once of boiling. 3. Medical Officers of the Army ofIndia. 13 Number of speci- men. Number of corre- sponding specimen of unboil- ed milk in Table I. Date at which pro- cured. Source. General condition when obtained. Nature and treatment of individual samples. Subsequent condition. 3. Boiled in a steri- lised tube and set in the incu- bator at 37ºC. May 26th. Fully coagulated and separated. 4. Residuum in the flask, clean but non-sterilised, in which the speci- men was pro- cured. Twice boiled like I and 2, and left in the open laboratory. May 26th. Did not undergo coagulation on being boiled anew. XII X May 27th. Bazaar. Reaction neu- tral; faintly alkaline on drying. I. Boiled in a steri- lised flask and set in the open laboratory. May 28th. Not visibly coagu- lated until reboiled, when coagu- lation and separation occurred. 2. Boiled in a steri- lised tube and set in the incuba- tor at 37°C. May 28th. Fully coagulated and separated; reaction acid, becom- ing neutral on drying. XIII XI May 29th. ,, Obtained in a sterilised flask 1. Boiled in a sterilised flask and set in the laboratory. May 30th. In soft, loose coagu- lum. Full coagulation and separation taking place on boiling. 2. A portion, after the cream had been allowed to rise and partially skim- med off, treated as above. 3. Cream: boiled in a sterilised tube and set in the incuba- tor at 37ºC. May 30th. Fully coagulated and separated. 4. Skimmed milk: treated as 3. 5. Residuum in the flask remaining after the milk for the previous speci- mens had been removed; boiled and set in open laboratory. May 30th. Remaining unaltered and not coagulating on being boiled anew. XIV XII May 31st ,, Siphoned into separate sam- ples from the top and bot- tom. 1. Top-sample; boiled in a sterilised tube and set in the incubator at 37ºC. June 1st. Fully coagulated and separated: reaction acid.
14 Scientific Memoirs by Number of speci- men, Number of corre- sponding specimen of unboil- ed milk in Table I. Date at which pro cured. Source. General condition when obtained. Nature and treatment of individual samples. Subsequent condition. 2. Bottom-sample; boiled in a steri- lised tube and set in the incubator at 37°C. June 1st. Quite fluid; non-co- agulant on boiling: reaction feebly alkaline on drying. 3. Bottom-sample; boiled in a steri- lised flask and set in the open laboratory. June 1st. Just as sample 2. 4. Nature and treat- ment as in 3. 5. Residuum remain- ing after the milk for the previous samples had been drawn off: treated as 3 & 4. June 1st. Softly coagulated and undergoing complete coagula- tion and separation on boiling. XV XIII June 7th. ,, Reaction neu- tral. Milk from the bottom siphoned off into 34 steri- lised tubes, and milk from the sur- face into two sterilised tubes. 1. Thirty-three of the sterilised tubes of top-milk boiled at 10 A.M. and again at 6 A.M. Set in the incubator in the interval and after the second boiling. June 8th. All alike quite fluid and neutral: non-coagulant on being boiled anew. June 9th. Milk still fluid; contents of one tube coagulating on being anew boiled: all boiled again on the 9th and kept in a boiling water-bath for some hours both on the 11th and 12th. One more tube coagulated on the 13th. All the rest, which have not yet been employed in inoculation experiments, remain fluid and unaltered save slight browning up to the present date, Septem- ber 6th. 2. Residuum after re- moval of the milk for the tubes: boil- ed for a long time and left in the open laboratory. June 8th. Coagulating and se- parating on boiling. XVI ... July 20th. ,, Neutral 1. Milk from the bot- tom; boiled in a sterilised tube and set in the incuba- tor at 37ºC. July 21st. Quite fluid: neutral. XVII XV July 25th. ,, ,, 1. Milk from the bot- tom; boiled in a sterilised tube; in the incubator at 37°C. July 26th. Quite fluid.
15 Medical Officers of the Army of India. Number of speci- men. Number of corre- sponding specimen of unboil- ed milk in Table 1. Date at Which pro- cured. Source. General condition when obtained. Nature and treatment of individual samples. Subsequent condition XVIII XVI July 29th. Bazaar. Neutral 1. Milk from the bot- tom; boiled in a sterilised tube; in the incubator at 37°C. July 30th. Faintly alkaline; quite fluid. July 31st. Faintly alkaline; in soft loose coagulum with a little supernatant fluid. XIX XVII Aug. 3rd. ,, ,, 1. Nature and treat- ment as above. August 4th. Quite fluid and seem- ingly unaltered. August 8th. Reaction faintly acid, almost neutral on drying; loosely coagulated and partially separated into coagulum and fluid. XX XVIII Aug. 15th. ,, Faintly alka- line. 1. Nature and treat- ment as above. August 16th. Quite fluid; reac- tion very faintly alkaline; non- coagulant on being boiled anew. August 17th. Quite unaltered save that reaction is now neu- tral. 2. Nature and treat- ment as above. August 16th. Quite fluid; reac- tion very faintly alkaline. August 17th. A soft powdery coagulum and a little superna- tant fluid; reaction very faintly acid. Table III corresponds to the first table of the series, but shows the changes occurring in specimens of milk which were boiled when first procured. In order to facilitate comparison a separate column has been introduced showing the numbers of the specimens in Table I to which those of the present table corre- spond. The most striking differences which the boiled, as compared with the unboiled specimens of milk, showed were in regard to reaction and coagulation. The results were not, however, of uniform character throughout, for, whilst in some cases the specimens after a period of 24 hours remained perfectly fluid and unaltered in reaction, in others, especially if they had only been once boiled, coagulation had occurred, sometimes only imperfectly, but in others fully developed and of the normal type, and the reaction, although not so highly permanently acid as is normal to unboiled specimens, was yet transitorily decid- edly acid, and in some cases remained feebly so permanently. The most curious point in regard to this difference in results was that the occurrence of coagulation and alteration in reaction appeared to be more closely related to the stratum of the sample from which the given specimens were ob- tained than to the fact that they had been exposed to repeated boiling or not.
16 Scientific Memoirs by This fact was first ascertained accidentally during the course of a series of operations devoted to the attempt to obtain a sufficient stock of sterilised milk to form the basis for experiments on the phenomena following inoculations of Comma-Bacilli. For some time these proved unsuccessful, due to the fact that the milk, even if boiled more than once in carefully sterilised vessels, either had coagulated spontaneously within the course of 24 hours or underwent full coagula- tion and separation on being boiled anew after that interval. In the course of these attempts it was observed that residual portions of milk treated with less care than the rest of the fluid, and representing the residue of the stock supply remaining in the vessel in which it had been obtained, sometimes remained un- altered when those which had been treated with special care had undergone change. Attention having thus been attracted to differences in the strata of the milk as determining the different phenomena presenting themselves under what otherwise appeared to be uniform conditions, a series of experiments was directed to the investigation of the point, and by siphoning off specimens from the upper and lower strata of identical samples of milk it was clearly shown that, whilst a single boiling sufficed to secure an abolition of the normal acid fermentation and coagulation of specimens from the lower strata, a similar treatment failed to do so with specimens taken from the top. When the phenomenon of normal coagulation and acid fermentation occur- ring in spite of the specimens having been boiled first presented itself, it appeared not impossible that it was related to atmospheric conditions and especially to elevation in temperature, as it did not manifest itself in any of the first samples of the series obtained in the beginning of the year and when the temperature was relatively low. The earliest example in which the pheno- menon manifested itself was in a sample of milk obtained on the 8th of March, whilst in May, at a time when the temperature was very high, it occurred as a normal event. On the recognition of the different relations which different strata of one and the same specimen of milk bear to the occurrence of the phenomena, it appeared, however, probable that the different results obtained in connection with the different periods of year were really related to these, and not to conditions of temperature. The earlier samples were portions of milk in- troduced directly into sterilised tubes from that presented for use at table, and may very well in some cases have been derived from the lower stratum of the entire bulk of the fluid representing the house-supply; in only one of themMedical Officers of the Army of India. 17 This difference in the phenomena presented by portions of milk from one and the same sample according to the level in the fluid from which they have been obtained is a very striking one. It certainly cannot be ascribed to the presence of any living ferments in the upper strata and absent in the lower ones, as the results of cultivations of boiled milk showed that in all cases, and whether the fluid had been obtained from the upper or lower strata of the sample, sterilisation had been completely effected in regard to all organisms save Bacillus subtilis, and that this was present throughout the entire depth. On the other hand, the occurrence of acid fermentation and coagulation is unequivocally related to the presence and multiplication of schizomycete organisms in the milk, so that it appears to be probable that the explanation of the phenomenon must lie either in the actual ferment developed by the schizomycetes and affecting the milk, having a ten- dency to accumulate in the upper portion of the fluid, or in peculiarities in the constitution of the latter as a material to be acted on by it. This, however, is a point which will be again referred to in connection with an account of the results of cultivations of specimens of boiled milk. Ordinary acid fermentation and coagulation thus does not occur in samples of the lower strata of any common mass of milk as supplied in Calcutta, if these have been once boiled so as to destroy the normal lacteal schizomycetes present in them, and if complete sterilisation be effected, the fluid remains permanently unaltered, save that in some cases a very slight and often fugitive acidity may gradually manifest itself. If, however, complete sterilisation be not effected, if the Bacillus subtilis surviving ordinary boiling remain in the fluid, whilst the normal acid fermentation and coagulation does not occur, coagulative changes of a different type manifest themselves at a later period. The coagulum in these cases is not of the firm consistence of that in the case of the ordinary acid fermentation, nor does it appear in the form of large masses but as a copious deposit of fine powdery flocculi, easily diffused throughout the fluid, which thus, after agitation, for a considerable time appears to casual observation as though it retained its original characters and had not undergone any coagulative change. TABLE IV.18 Scientific Memoirs by Number of specimen. Number of corre- sponding specimen in Table II. Date at which pro- cured and boiled. Source. Reaction. Nature of cultivation. Date at which set. RESULT. Jan. 10th. Twice boil- ed at 10 A.M. and 1 P.M. 2. Plate inocu- lated with 0.083 C.C. Set in incubator. January 11th. January 13th. A solitary colony of Bacillus subtilis. Jan.11th Treated as above. Jan. 11th. Faintly acid. 3. Plate inocu- lated with 0.083 C.C. Set in incubator. January 12th. January 13th, and subse- quently quite sterile. II IV Jan. 16th. Twice boil- ed; at to A.M. and 1 P.M. House- supply. Jan. 16th. Neutral. 1. Plate treat- ed as above. January 17th. January 18th. A pure cultiva- tion of Bacillus subtilis. Jan. 17th. 1 reated as above. Feb. 27th. Neutral. 2. Plate treat- ed as above. Feb. 27th. February 28th, and subse- quently remained absolutely sterile. III VI March 8th Once boil- ed. ,, March 8th. Neutral. 1. Plate treat- ed as above. March 9th. March 10th. A pure cultiva- tion of multitudes of colonies of Bacillus subtilis: smell faint and mouldy. IV VII March 10th. Once boiled. ,, March 10th. Neutral. 1. Plate set as above. March 11th. March 12th. Surface in greater part covered by a continuous, slightly wrinkled stratum of Bacillus subtilis. March 11th. Once boiled. March 11th. Neutral. 2. Plate set as above. March 12th. March 13th. Absolutely sterile. V VIII March 12th. Once boiled. ,, March 12th. Neutral. 1. Plate set as above. March 13th. March 14th. Containing colo- nies of Bacillus subtilis in the proportion of 271,320 per C.C: a pure cultivation. March 13th. Once boiled. March 13th. Neutral. 2. Plate set as above. March 14th. March 15th. Sterile. VI ... March 15th. Once boiled. Bazaar. March 15th. Neutral. March 16th. Acid. 1. Plate inocu- lated with 0.058 C.C. and set in incubator. March 16th. March 17th. Surface covered by a thick, continuous, dry, tough coating of Bacillus subtilis. VII IX May 9th. Once boil- ed. Zoologi- cal Gar- den. May 9th. Neutral. 1. Plate set as above. May 10th. May 11th. Absolutely crowded with colonies of Bacillus subtilis; smell smoky. May 10th, 11th, 12th, 13th, 14th. Once boil- ed. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, Plates set as above. May 11th, 12th, 13th, 14th, 15th, May 12th, 13th, 14th, 15th, 16th. Abundant crops of Bacillus subtilis.
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 19 Number of speci- men. Number of corre- sponding specimen in Table II. Date at which pro- cured and boiled. Source. Reaction. Nature of culti- vation. Date at which set. RESULT. May 15th. Twice boil- ed; 9 A.M. and 12-30 P.M. 7. Plate inocu- lated with 0 058 C. C. and set in in- cubator. May 16th. May 17th, and subsequently absolutely sterile. VIII ... May 9th. Once boil- ed. Zoologi- cal Gar- den. ... 1. Plate set as above. May 10th. May 11th. Covered by a con- tinuous, dense, dry, wrink- led, thick coating of Bacillus subtilis; smell musty. IX X May 21st. Once boil- ed. House- supply. May 21st. Faintly acid; neut- ral on dry- ing. Ditto May 22nd. May 23rd. Full of colonies of Bacillus subtilis. X XI May 23rd. Once boil- ed. 20 Scientific Memoirs by Number of speci- men. Number of corre- sponding specimen in Table II. Date at which pro- cured and boiled. Source. Reaction. Nature of culti- vation. Date at which set. RESULT. XVI XVIII July 25th. Once boil- ed. Bazaar Neutral 1. Plate inocu- lated with one common needle dipped in a ste- rilised, neutral solution of salt into which one looped needle dipped in the milk had been introduced. July 31st. August 1st. Covered by a continuous stratum of Bacil- lus subtilis. XVII ... August 3rd. Once boiled. " August 3rd. Neutral. August 8th Faintly acid. 1. Plate set as above. August 8th. August 9th. Covered by a continuous stratum of Bacil- lus subtilis. XVIII XX August 15th. Once boiled. " Neutral Ditto August 16th. August 17th. An abundant pure cultivation of Bacillus subtilis. Table IV bears the same relation to Table II that the previous Table bears to Table I. It shows the results of a series of cultivations of boiled specimens of milk. These are very uniform and show clearly that a single and brief boil- ing is sufficient to clear normal samples of the fluid from all living organisms save Bacillus subtilis, which then multiplies with excessive rapidity. The num- bers of colonies of the latter organism occurring in cultivations of boiled milk are illustrated in the four photographs on the right side of the plate. In connection with Bacillus subtilis there are two phenomena in these experiments specially noteworthyMedical Officers of the Army of India. 21 sample of milk which had not been boiled. The latter are entered under No. IX of Table II. It will be seen that while the two cultivations of the unboiled speci- men failed to show any evidence of the presence of Bacillus subtilis, that of the boiled specimen within 24 hours became covered by an enormous growth of the species in the form of a continuous, thick, dry, wrinkled stratum covering the entire surface of the plate. Judging by the very feeble development manifesting itself in any of the cultivations of unboiled samples of milk, it would not appear probable that the proportion of rods and spores of Bacillus subtilis originally present in the fluid is considerable, as, were it so, the species would probably show more evidence of success in the struggle for existence with its compan- ions. Direct evidence of this was obtained by means of a series of successive cultivations of one sample of boiled milk, the results of which are recorded in Table V22 Scientific Memoirs by In all other cultivations of boiled milk periods of from 18 to 24 hours elapsed between the boiling of the milk and the establishment of the cultivation, but in this series the first cultivation was set within 10 minutes from the boiling, and, although the amount inoculated and the subsequent treatment were identical with those which in other cases were invariably followed by an enormous crop of Bacillus subtilis, the cultivation in this case proved absolutely sterile. This, however, was not the case with a similar cultivation set 24 hours later, for here the usual result followed and the plate became occupied by innumerable discrete colonies and an abundant, diffuse, superficial growth of Bacillus subtilis. It would appear, thus, that only a relatively small number of the spores of Bacillus subtilis are normally present in ordinary samples of milk, and that these are incapable of successfully holding their own in the struggle for existence with the other schizomycete organisms with which they are normally associated, but that, if relieved from the struggle by the destruction of their rivals by means of boiling, they find the medium well adapted to their development and multiplication. The sample of boiled milk from which the above results were obtained also afforded an excellent demonstration of the series of changes which occur in specimens of boiled but not sterilised milk23 Medical Officers of the Army of India to be followed by complete sterilisation. These phenomena are, no doubt, due merely to the presence and properties of the spores of the Bacillus. The ex- posure to the continued elevation of the water-bath suffices at once to destroy the vitality, not merely of the developed rods, as brief boiing does, but also that of all the spores which may simultaneously be present. The precise effect of mere brief boiling will vary necessarily according to the absence or presence of spores. Should the medium be exposed to brief boiling at a time when all pre- existent spores have germinated, and before a new crop has matured, a single exposure will be sufficient to secure sterilisation; but, if periods of boiling do not correspond with periods of absence of spores, the treatment might, of course, be repeated indefinitely without securing the occurrence of sterilisation. The tendency to produce spores and the rate with which the process is carried out in individual cases probably varies, not merely in relation to variations in external conditions to which the Bacilli are exposed, but also in relation to hereditary tendencies in the latter themselves, so that even in cases where external condi- tions are absolutely alike, a uniform result in respect of amount and rate of spore- formation need not necessarily present itself. So far as it was possible, the specimens of milk forming the greater bulk of this series were exposed to ex- actly similar conditions, the similarity of thermal ones, at all events, being abso- lutely secured by the use of an incubator retained at one steady temperature throughout, and yet treatment, which at one time of year seemed to be quite effectual in securing sterilisation, at another entirely failed to do so. That inde- finitely repeated exposures of the medium to boiling at relatively brief intervals should in some cases fail to secure sterilisation, whilst two boilings at wider intervals secure it in others, must surely be related to presence or absence of spores. It might at first sight seem that frequent repetition of boiling must inevitably tell in favour of sterilisation, but, of course, it need not do so unless the rhythm of the cycle of spore-formation and evolution of Bacilli from the spores falls in such fashion that periods of boiling and of absence of spores coincide with one another. Unless this be so, the rapid repetition of the boiling in place of telling more favourably for sterilisation than less frequent treatment may act in precisely opposite fashion. A single boiling falling exactly at a time of absence of spores will serve to secure sterilisation, many repeated boilings, if they do not coincide with periods of such character, will, of course, fail to do so, and the very frequency of repetition may secure such want of coincidence. When, as the result of experiments of the nature of those recorded in the previous tables, some definite idea of the normal phenomena presenting them- selves in specimens of the ordinary milk-supply in Calcutta had been obtained, a special investigation of the behaviour of Comma-Bacilli in the latter were carried out. Considerable delay occurred ere these could be initiated, and this, taking the locality and time of year24 Scientific Memoirs by of the Bacilli. The laboratory was closed from the middle of March until the 6th of May, and during the interval all the tube-cultivations of Comma-Bacilli, even those specially set on the 18th of March, had completely died out. This was not at first sight regarded as a matter of any importance, as it appeared desirable to carry out the experiments with cultivations of the Bacilli not too far removed in succession from their original choleraic source, and, taking the time of year into account, there appeared to be no likelihood of any difficulty being encountered in securing a fresh stock. Steps were at once taken to obtain sup- plies of choleraic materials. These were at first derived from the Medical Col- lege Hospital, but, although derived from cases regarded and recorded as cases of cholera, and more than one of which terminated fatally, in no instance could any Comma-Bacilli be obtained from them in spite of most careful and repeated cultivations. The materials derived from this source proving so unfruitful, mate- rials were next obtained from the Sealdah Hospital. These, as in the previous case, were derived from cases which were regarded as typical cases of cholera, but for some time the results were identical with those recorded of the other materials25 Medical Officers of the Army of India. canal will naturally regard it as the result of imperfect diagnosis; those, on the other hand, who regard the presence of numerous Comma-Bacilli in the intestinal contents of choleraic patients as a result, not a cause, of the morbid state, will see in it a confirmation of their opinion. In any case, it is a phenomenon calculated to excite a certain reserve in the acceptation of a belief in the absolute value of the presence of cultivable Comma-Bacilli as specially diagnostic of the nature of any case as a true case of cholera. If we place implicit faith in the diagnostic value of the presence of cultivable Comma-Bacilli in the alvine dis- charges, we must believe that the diagnosis of cholera in Calcutta is very imper- fect, and that the registration of the prevalence of the disease is liable to be correspondingly greatly in excess of its actual prevalence, but if we do not, we can only see additional ground for scepticism in regard to the essential causal relation existent between the presence of the Bacillus within the intes- tinal tract and the development of choleraic phenomena in the organism. Returning from this digression, it remains to consider the phenomena manifesting themselves in cases where Comma-Bacilli have gained access to samples of milk. Three distinct series of experiments specially relating to these were carried out. In the first the results following the access of Comma-Bacilli to samples of milk of ordinary quality, as represented by the milk commonly procurable in the Calcutta bazars, were the special subject of investigation; in the second the enquiry was directed to the phenomena presenting themselves in cases where the common normal lacteal schizomycetes had been partially re- moved by means of boiling, so that the intrusive Comma-Bacilli had no longer to contend with any living elements in the milk save Bacillus subtilis; in the third, the effects manifesting themselves in cases where the milk, in place of having its schizomycete population merely reduced, as in the previous series of experiments, has had it absolutely abolished ere inoculation of Comma-Bacilli26 Scientific Memoirs by TABLE VI.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 27 No. of speci- men. Nos. of corre- sponding spe- cimens in Tables I & II. Nature and treatment of specimens. Date of inocu- lation. Nature of cultivations. Date at which set. RESULTS. I. II. 27th July. Fully coaguated and separated; reaction strongly acid. 28th July. Reaction violently acid. 1. Plate; inocu- lated by a needle dipped in sterilised salt solution inocu- lated by a loop- ed needle from the milk. 26th July. 27th July. Smell musty, non- choleraic; crowded with colonies of the common lacteal Schizomycetes; not a trace of Comma-Bacilli. 2. Plate; inocu- lated as above. 27th July. 28th July. Numerous colonies of common lacteal schizomycetes; not a trace of Comma-Bacilli. IV IXVI XIX Milk in a steri- lised tube; inoculated with 0.03 solution, con- taining Com- ma-Bacilli of 48 hours' growth. 29th July. ...... ...... 30th July. Exactly like its corn- panion, non-inoculated tube; re- action acid; slightly frothed; at first in soft loose coagulum, after- wards undergoing separation. 1. Plate; inocu- lated as above. 30th July. 31st July. Exactly like its com- panion plate of non-inoculated milk; smell mouldy; numerous colonies of common lacteal schizo- mycetes; no Comma-Bacilli. V XVII ... " 3rd Aug. ...... ... 5th July. Strongly acid; fully coa- gulated and separated. 1. Plate; inocu- lated as above. 4th July. 5th July. Smell mouldy; numerous colonies of common lacteal schizo- mycetes; none of Comma-Bacilli. 2. Plate; inocu- lated as above. 5th July. 6th July. An abundant crop of colonies of common lacteal schizo- mycetes; no Comma-Bacilli. VI XVIII XX Milk treated as above, save that the Comma-Ba- cilli were de- rived from a cultivation of only 24 hours' standing. 15th Aug. ...... ...... 16th August. Exactly in the same condition as its companion speci- men of non-inoculated milk; strong- ly acid; coagulated, and partly separated; somewhat frothed at the top. 1. Plate; inocu- lated as above. 16th Aug. 17th August. Exactly like a plate- cultivation of the same milk set on the 15th previous to inoculation, save that the number of colonies of common lacteal schizomycetes is considerably greater; not a trace of colonies of Comma-Bacilli. The amount of the solution containing Comma-Ba- cilli was equal to about 0.0029 of the bulk of milk. The six experiments recorded in this Table were practically identical in nature and results. The actual quantity of fluid containing Comma-Bacilli intro- duced into the milk varied slightly in the different experiments, and so did the E2
28 Scientific Memoirs by precise amount of the milk. In one case where the point was accurately deter- mined, the amount of the fluid added to the milk was equivalent to about one three-hundredth of its bulk. The fluid which was employed was in all cases crowded with enormous numbers of healthy Comma-Bacilli, the amount of them being indicated indirectly by the opalescent character of the fluid, and being directly ascertained by means of cover-glass preparations, whilst their quality was determined by observations of the results following their cultivation in various sterilised media, such as Agar-Agar beef-juice gelatine and sterilised samples of milk. The fluid was in all cases prepared alike, a small quantity of freshly steri- lised solution of common salt being introduced into a tube-cultivation of Comma- Bacilli of 24 or 48 hours' standing, and containing a great growth of the organism diffused over the oblique surface of the medium. Thorough shaking then sufficed to wash off the greater part of the growth and to diffuse the Bacilli through the salt solution, which coincidently exchanged its previous transparency for opalescence. A little of the opalescent fluid was then removed by means of a freshly sterilised and calibrated pipette, and a single drop from the latter added to the sample of milk under investigation. This was contained in a sterilised and plugged tube, which was then set in the incubator at 37° C., and subsequently examined from time to time. The exa- mination dealt in the first place with the general phenomena of change manifest- ing themselves in the milk, and, secondly, with the evidence as to the persistent presence and multiplication of the normal lacteal schizomycetes present in it originally and of the inoculated Comma-Bacilli. The phenomena presenting themselves in the inoculated specimens were compared with those occurring in corresponding specimens of milk derived from the same primary sample, which had not been inoculated, but which had otherwise been exposed to like con- ditions. In regard to the general changes manifesting themselves in the milk, the inoculated specimens showed no appreciable differences from their non-inoculat- ed compeers, and the presence of the Comma-Bacilli did not appear to have interfered with the progress of the acid fermentation and coagulation normal to ordinary samples of milk. Within the course of 24 hours coagulation had occurred in every case, and the reaction had assumed various degrees of per- manent acidity. Separation of the coagula and fluid had generally begun to occur, and in every case was fully carried out within 48 hours from the com- mencement of the experiment, the acidity at the same time becoming very strongly pronounced. The cultivations of the inoculated milk also showed nothing to distinguish them from those derived from the fluid in its normal condition. An abundant development of colonies of the common lacteal schizomycetes invariably occurred within 24 hours in plate-cultivations of the milk which had been set 24 hours subsequent to the inoculation of the latter, but in no case
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 29 could any development of colonies of Comma-Bacilli be detected, and the gene- ral result of the series of experiments was thus to show that the Bacilli, even when introduced in very large numbers, do not find conditions in ordinary sam- ples of milk favourable to their multiplication or even to their continued survival for any considerable time. So much having been ascertained, it next appeared to be desirable to follow the course of events subsequent to inoculation somewhat more closely, and a series of cultivations derived from one and the same sample of milk, but set at successive periods shortly after inoculation had been effected, was accordingly carried out. The results of these are embodied in Table VII:30 Scientific Memoirs by goes, it would appear to indicate, not mere survival, but also multiplication of the Comma-Bacilli as occurring for some time subsequent to their introduction into the milk, for a larger number of colonies of the organism were present in the cultivation set at four hours after inoculation than in that set only two hours after it. The period of multiplication would seem, however, to be a brief one, for the third cultivation of the series, set at six hours subsequent to inoculation, showed a diminution in the number of colonies, while that set 10 hours after inoculation contained only a single recognisable one. The last cultivation of the series gave the normal result for cultivations established after the lapse of 24 hours from the period of inoculation, in containing large numbers of colonies of common lacteal schizomycetes and a complete absence of Comma-Bacilli. The cessa- tion of multiplication and onset of disappearance of the Bacilli would appear to have been coincident with the development of acidity in the mediumMedical Officers of the Army of India. 31 No. of speci- men. Nos. of corre- sponding specimens in Tables III & IV. Nature and treatment of specimen. Date of inocu- lation. Nature of cultivations. Date at which set. RESULTS. III. IV. 1. Plate; inoculat- ed with a com- mon needle dipped in ste- rilised salt solution in- oculated by one looped needle dip- ped in the milk. July, 23rd. July 24th. Full of large colonies of Comma-Bacilli; scattered and un- healthy looking rods of Bacillus subtilis also present, seemingly due to the presence of a thin, diffuse, surface growth; smell strongly cho- leraic; practically a cultivation of Comma-Bacilli. II XVIII ... Milk boiled in a sterilised tube, July 29th. July 31st. Inoculated as above. ... August 1st. Reaction neutral; smell putrid; coagulated. August 6th. Reaction faintly acid at first, faintly alkaline on drying. 1. Plate; inocu- lated as above. Aug. 1st. August 2nd. Covered with discrete and confluent colonies of Comma- Bacilli and a thin, diffuse growth of Bacillus subtilis. 2. Plate; inocu- lated as above. Aug. 6th. August 7th. Apparently a pure cul- tivation of Bacillus subtilis. III XIX XVII Milk boiled in a sterilised tube, August 3rd. Aug. 9th. ... ... At the time of inoculation the milk was coagulated and partly separat- ed; coagulum of the loose, pul- verulent character nominally asso- ciated with Bacillus subtilis; full of Bacillus subtilis; smell strong, pu- trid; reaction faintly acid, almost neutral on drying. 1. Plate; inocu- lated as above. Aug. 14th. August 15th. Covered by a continu- ous, thick stratum of Bacillus subti- lis and containing a limited number of colonies of large Comma-Bacilli; smell non-choleraic. IV XX XVIII Milk boiled in a sterilised tube, August 15th. Aug. 17th. ... ... At the time of inoculation the milk showed coagulation characteristic of the continued presence of Bacil- lus subtilis, being full of fine, loose, powdery flakes, with a little free, supernatant fluid; reaction very faintly acid. August 18th. Separation of coagu- lum and fluid considerably advanc- ed; reaction neutral. August 21st. Reaction neutral. August 22nd. Reaction very faintly acid. Sep- tember 29th. Reaction neutral. 1. Plate; inocu- lated as above. Aug. 18th. August 19th. An abundant growth of colonies of Comma-Bacilli, and a partial and very thin, diffuse growth of Bacillus subtilis.
32 Scientific Memoirs by No. of speci- men. Nos. of corre- sponding specimens in Tables III & IV. Nature and treatment of specimen. Date of inocu- lation. Nature of cultivations. Date at which set. RESULTS. III. IV. XX XVIII ... ... 2. Plate; inocu- lated as pre- viously. Aug, 19th. August 20th. A very limited num- ber of colonies of Comma-Bacilli, and one or two very thin, localised films of Bacillus subtilis. 3. ,, ,, Aug. 20th. August 21st. A single large colony of Bacillus subtilis; no Comma- Bacilli present. 4. ,, ,, Aug. 21st. August 22nd. Surface almost cover- ed by a thick stratum of sporing Bacillus subtilis; one or two large colonies of small, feebly-staining Comma-Bacilli. 5. ,, ,, Aug. 22nd August 23rd. A solitary colony of large Comma-Bacilli; no Bacillus subtilis. 6. ,, ,, Aug. 23rd. August 24th. One or two colonies of short, thick Comma-Bacilli, and a localised very thin diffuse film of Bacillus subtilis. 7. ,, ,, Aug. 24th. August 26th. An abundant growth of sporing Bacillus subtilis and small, feebly-staining Comma- Bacilli. 8. ,, ,, Aug. 31st. September 1st. Smell very faint, non-choleraic; crowded with a diffuse growth and ill-defined colo- nies of small, feebly-staining, vacuo- late Comma-Bacilli, and a thin diffuse growth of Bacillus subtilis. 9. Plate; inocu- lated by one common needle dipped in the milk. Sept. 19th. September 20th. An abundant, mixed growth of Bacillus subtilis and Comma-Bacilli. In the case of the boiled samples of milk referred to in the above table, it will be seen that inoculation with Comma-Bacilli was carried out at some time subsequent to the boiling33 Medical Officers of the Army of India. this procedure the capacity for co-existence of Comma-Bacilli with Bacillus sub- tilis in a medium already thickly populated by the latter organism was most satisfactorily determined. Apart from the length of interval between the opera- tions of boiling and inoculation, the conduct of all the experiments was practi- cally identical. The samples of milk, having been briefly boiled in sterilised test tubes over an open flame, were kept in the incubator until the period when inocu- lation was performed. During the interval they underwent the changes charac- teristic of specimens of milk occupied by pure growths of Bacillus subtilis in greater or less degree34 Scientific Memoirs by number, and in some cases apparent total absence of Comma-Bacilli with a pro- portionate increase in the quantity of Bacillus subtilis. For example, in the case of Sample II of the Table, the first cultivation, which was set twenty-four hours after inoculation, yielded an excessive crop of Comma-Bacilli, and only a feeble growth of Bacillus subtilis, whilst the second cultivation, which was set five days later, showed a very abundant and seemingly pure growth of the latter species only. Again, in the case of Sample III, where only a single cultivation was carried out, and that five days subsequent to inoculation, the growth of Bacillus subtilis was excessive, and Comma-Bacilli, although not entirely absent, were present in relatively very small numbers only. This result does not, how- ever, appear to be constant in regard to the time at which it occurs, for in Sam- ple IV a cultivation set a fortnight after the date of inoculation showed exces- sive growth of Comma-Bacilli, and only a limited development of Bacillus sub- tilis. In the case of this sample an extended series of cultivations was made. The results of these so far agreed with those in the previous cases that they indicated an initial period of excessive growth of Comma-Bacilli, succeeded by a period during which a great diminution in their numbers occurred, with simul- taneously increased activity in the growth of Bacillus subtilis, but, after this, neither persistent depression of growth of the former organisation, nor persistent excess of the latter manifested themselves. On the contrary, the successive cul- tivations, which were carried out subsequently, appeared to indicate an alternation of periods of relatively excessive and depressed activity in the case of both species alike. The results in this instance clearly showed that there is not necessarily any rapid suppression of Comma-Bacilli in association with Bacillus subtilis in samples of boiled milk, for the fluid continued to yield abundance of both species, up at all events to the 19th September, when the last cultivation of the series was carried out, or up to a period of almost five weeks subsequent to inoculation. The general results of this series of experiments are to show that boiled milk affords a much more favourable medium for the growth of Comma-Bacilli- than the unboiled fluid does, providing conditions certainly favouring excessive multiplication of the species for some time and not definitely precluding its continued presence in large numbers and in a living state for a very considerable period. The last set of experiments were devoted to the investigation of the pheno- mena following introduction of Comma-Bacilli into specimens of milk which had not merely been boiled but actually sterilised, and the results are embodied in Table IX.
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 35 PLATE IX.36 Scientific Memoirs by No. of speci- men. Nos. of corre- sponding spe- cimens in Tables I & III. Nature and treatment of specimens. Date of inocu- lation. Nature of cultivations. Date at which set. REMARKS. I III XIII XV ... ... I. Plate; inocu- lated by a looped needle dipped in ste- rilised salt so- lution which had been pre- viously inocu- lated by a looped needle, dipped in the milk. Aug. 15th. August 16th. An enormous and pure growth of Comma-Bacilli. 2. Plate; treated as above. Aug. 24th August 26th. No Comma-Bacilli; an abundant growth of intrusive Bacil- lus subtilis. 3. Plate; treat- ted as above. Aug. 30th August 31st. Exactly like the pre- vious plate. The milk in all the experiments consisted of sterilised specimens of the sample numbered XV in Table III, and which were experimentally shown to be completely sterilised on the 10th of June, cultivations from that time onwards failing to show the presence of any living elements in it. Up to the present time, September 19th, the specimens of it which yet remain show absolutely no change save a diminution in bulk due to gradual evaporative loss. They retain their fluidity completely, save for the presence of a thin dry tough skin which has gradually formed on the surface as evaporation has progressed. The re- action is in some instances faintly acid at first, becoming neutral on drying, and in others absolutely neutral throughout, and were it not for the presence of the superficial film above described, and the slightly brownish tinge which they acquired as the result of the prolonged exposure to an elevated temperature during the process of sterilisation, they present all the essential characters of specimens of fresh milk. The inoculation of those specimens which formed the subjects of special ex- periment was carried out in the same fashion as in the cases where fresh or merely boiled specimens of milk were dealt with. The introduction of Comma- Bacilli was ultimately followed by coagulative changes in the fluid. These were unconnected with any conspicuous alterations in its re-action, and the resultant coagula rather resembled in character those associated with the fermentive changes accompanying the persistent presence of Bacillus subtilis than those occurring in the case of the ordinary spontaneous acid fermentation and co- agulation of common specimens of milk. In one case, where the fluid was directly examined in regard to its content of Comma-Bacilli at a period 24 hours subsequent to inoculation, the cover-glass preparations showed the presence of
37 Medical Officers of the Army of India. numerous specimens of them. Cultivations also afforded unequivocal evidence of the occurrence of their excessive multiplication in the fluid subsequent to their introduction. This, moreover, was not limited to periods shortly following inoculation, as in the case of merely boiled specimens, but appeared to persist continuously for a very considerable time. For example, in the case of sample II, cultivations set at 48 hours, ten days, and a fortnight subsequent to inoculation all alike produced excessive growths of Comma-Bacilli. The effect of freedom from a struggle for existence is very clearly indicated by this phenomenon, and even more emphatically when we compare the results in this instance with those recorded in the case of sample III. In the first instance the medium through- out remained free of any schizomycetes save the inoculated Comma-Bacilli, in the second an intrusive organism in the shape of Bacillus subtilis accident- ally entered the medium at some period subsequent to inoculation. In the first instance Comma-Bacilli remained in the medium in excessive numbers up to a fortnight subsequent to inoculation; in the second they were present in great numbers six days subsequent to inoculation, and when the medium still remained uncontaminated by intrusive Bacillus subtilis, but at some period between that time and the date at which the next cultivation was set-15 days after inocula- tion38 Scientific Memoirs by 9. Cultivations fail to show any differences in the nature of the schizomycetes pre- sent in the two areas, and show no important difference in regard to their numbers. 10. The phenomenon must, thus, apparently be explained either as due to a special accumulation of the ferment, elaborated in connection with the growth of the schizomycete organisms, in the upper portions of the fluid, or, more probably, as the result of special accumulation there of those constituents in the milk which are the subjects of the fermen- tive change which leads to the alteration in reaction and coagulation. 11. Coagulative change ultimately occurs in specimens of milk which have been de- prived of all their living schizomycete contents but Bacillus subtilis. 12. This, however, differs in nature from the common coagulation of unboiled speci- mens in occurring apart from the development of acidity to any considerable extent, or as a constant event, in the fluid, and in the character of the resultant coagula, which form a finely pulverulent deposit in place of the large dense masses occurring in the case of com- mon coagulation. 13. The measures which suffice to secure true sterilisation in milk differ somewhat in different instances, due to differences present in the condition of the Bacilli at the time of their application-measures serving to secure sterilisation where no spores are present being naturally not necessarily capable of producing the same effect where spores exist. 14. Complete sterilisation can be certainly arrived at by means of subjecting the milk to the temperature of boiling water for some hours, and after this the fluid remains practi- cally permanently unaltered save in undergoing a gradual evaporative diminution in bulk. 15. The milk in ordinary use in the bazaars and European houses in Calcutta is not a favourable medium for the multiplication or even continued existence of Comma-Bacilli. 16. Their introduction does not interfere with the normal processes of excessive mul- tiplication of the common lacteal schizomycetes and the acid fermentation accompanying it, and, as the latter advances, the Comma-Bacilli rapidly cease to multiply and die out, so that, under normal circumstances, the medium is free of living specimens of them within the course of twenty-four hours. 17. Milk, however, which has been exposed to boiling for a short time becomes a medium in which, for some time, at all events, an excessive multiplication of Comma- Bacilli certainly follows their access. 18. The presence of the Comma-Bacilli in such cases seems to exert a temporary repressive influence on the development of the normal content of Bacillus subtilis. 19. The repression is, however, only temporary, and Bacillus subtilis again becomes very abundant. 20. This rejuvenescence of Bacillus subtilis is sometimes associated with marked decrease in the activity of multiplication of the Comma-Bacilli, or even with their complete suppression, but, in other cases the two species may persist in large numbers in associa- tion in the same medium for a period of several weeks' duration. 21. Sterilised milk affords an even more favourable nidus for the growth and multipli- cation of Comma-Bacilli than boiled milk does, apparently due to the protection which it provides against a struggle for existence. These facts, beyond their purely scientific interest, appear to have an im- portant bearing practically. They seem to indicate that the ordinary milk supply of the bazaars of Calcutta, and presumably of India generally, furnishes a medium which, from the high degree to which it is normally contaminated by schizomycetes, whose growth is associated with processes of acid fermentation
39 Medical Officers of the Army of India. is not at all likely to be favourable to the development or continued existence of those forms which require an alkaline or neutral environment. The very con- tamination of the fluid comes to render it an unfavourable medium for organisms which, were it pure, would find conditions extremely favourable to their growth and multiplication in it. But, if this be so, unless it were clearly proven that the normal schizomycete population of the milk contains species which are capable, directly or indirectly, of giving rise to disease when they come into relation to the human organism, it can only be regarded as a protective arrangement tend- ing to render the medium unfavourable to the development of other and possibly noxious organisms. It is no doubt unpleasant to realise that the milk supply in India is so highly impure as it unequivocally is, but it does not follow that the contamination is an unmixed evil. For example, if Comma-Bacilli really be the specific cause of cholera, there can be no doubt that the common impurities in milk must tend to render the latter an unfavourable vehicle for the communication of the cause of the disease, and as it is one to which there can be no doubt that Comma- Bacilli are very likely to gain access in any locality in which the disease prevails, those who see in them the essential cause of the disease must regard the normal contamination, or, in other words, the normal schizomycete population of the milk, as playing a beneficent part. The evidence, in so far as it goes, seems to indicate that the ordinary milk supply in this country is an unfavourable me- dium for schizomycete organisms requiring alkalinity or neutrality in their en- vironment in order to their successful propagation and continued existence apart from the presence of spores, and, this being so, all those who ascribe the development of any disease to the influence of pathogenic schizomycetes may fairly be called on to demonstrate that these are capable of surviving the con- ditions to which they must normally be exposed on gaining access to milk, ere blaming the latter as a means of communicating the disease. In any case it must be a comfort to realise that if the population of India be condemned to the use of impure milk, the very contamination is likely to act more or less in protective fashion, and is normally due to the presence of organisms which, with the exception of the harmless Bacillus subtilis, may be completely destroyed by simple boiling.
Description of the Plate illustrating the Paper. The negatives from which the Photographs in the Plate were derived show the appearances presented by cultivations of milk under a magnifying power of a little over 11 diameters. The figures on the left side of the Plate show the numbers of colonies of common lacteal Schizomycetes in cultivations of milk in the state in which it was ob- tained; those on the right side, the numbers of colonies of Bacillus subtilis occurring in cultivations of milk which had been boiled. Figures 1 and 5 are derived from cultivations of the same sample of milk before and after boiling, all the colonies in figure 5 consisting of Bacillus subtilis. Figures 3 and 7 correspond in similar fashion. Figures 3 and 4 are again from a single sample of milk, which was that which had been procured under special precautions. They show the relative numbers of colonies present in a cultivation set immediately after the milk was obtained, and in a second one of a like bulk of the fluid set 24 hours later, and indicate the excessive multiplication of Schizomycetes which had occurred during the interval between the two cultivations. Figure 8 shows the abundance of colonies of Bacillus subtilis which developed in a cultivation of milk which had been twice boiled.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000397.tif] 1 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000397.tif] 5 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000397.tif] 2 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000397.tif] 6 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000397.tif] 3 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000397.tif] 7 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000397.tif] 8 CULTIVATIONS OF UNBOILED AND BOILED SAMPLES OF MILK IN CALCUTTA Photo-etching. Survey of India Offices, Calcutta. September 1889.
On the pathological histology of Rhinoscleroma. BY SURGEON-MAJOR G. BOMFORD, M.D., BENGAL MEDICAL SERVICE. An opportunity has occurred during the past year of examining microscopically the affected tissues in five cases of this rare disease. One of them was under the care of Surgeon-Major Raye at the Medical College, Calcutta, and the other four were treated at Indore, Central India, by Surgeon-Major Keegan, the Residency Surgeon. The latter officer has published an account of his cases in the Indian Medical Gazette for January 1889, and it is sufficient therefore for the present purpose to state that the diagnosis appears to be unquestionable, as the characteristic clinical phenomena were well marked in all the cases. Mr. Jonathan Hutchinson, on receipt of some sketches of the cases sent to him by Dr. Keegan, writes, "I shall put the sketches in the Museum of the College of Surgeons. They appear to me to be good examples of the disease." The first specimen received for examination was a portion from the upper lip of Dr. Keegan's first case, preserved in alcohol. That some change had occurred in the tissue was at once evident, for it had a waxy consistence and was wanting in the leathery toughness and tendency to creak under the knife that characterises healthy skin when so preserved. Over the greater part of the surface the epithelium was not obviously changed in its details, but appeared as a whole to be thinned and flattened out, with few and shallow interpapillary processes and scanty interstitial cement substance. There were occasionally, how- ever, distinct projections of the epithelium downwards into the true skin, but this condition was not nearly so frequent nor so pronounced as it often is in Delhi Boil, Elephantiasis, Syphilitic and other inflammatory growths in the skin. In some places also the epithelium had been entirely destroyed by ulceration. There was nothing to be seen at all resembling epithelial nests. The essential change had evidently occurred in the true skin, which was profusely infiltrated with cells of rather a peculiar character and converted into a dense, finely granular, but semi- transparent kind of fibrous tissue. The whole had rather the appearance of fibro-elastic cartilage, and was traversed by dilated vessels, of which the walls were in many cases thickened and hyaline, while the lumen was often packed G
42 Scientific Memoirs by with leucocytes. The cells were particularly numerous and thickly clustered round the vessels, for which they formed a dense sheath, and, though the majo- rity of them were of small size, 1/2000 th of an inch in diameter, they had an endo- thelioid appearance, being made up of a fair-sized plum-looking nucleus, attached to a highly transparent oval or circular, apparently flattened, body or plate. Some were, however, of larger size, and a few exceeded 1/1000 th inch in diameter, but these were generally more opaque, and the body of the cell was in them either finely granular or broken up into coarse, angular segments, while the nucleus was disc-shaped and pushed to one side. Many of the smaller cells had a double nucleus, but there were no multi-nucleated giant or myeloid cells. The fibrous material was in part true fibrous tissue, the remains probably of the normal constituent of the skin, but the mass of it appeared to be composed of very much extended hyaline plates, firmly pressed together, except when they were separated by the cells, and devoid of the elongated nuclei and the lustrous trans- parency of true fibrous tissue. Besides the above, there were in places islands of still smaller cells, granulation cells, in which the nucleus was either vesicular and filled almost the whole cell, or else was broken up into three or four ovoid shrunken fragments, as is often seen in pus-corpuscles. Subsequently, further specimens were received, including portions of tissue scooped out of the nostril of all five cases, and these differed considerably, at first sight, from the first specimen, as the whole tissue was infiltrated with the small granulation cells, and it was only in places that the endothelial appearance of the cells and the peculiar fibrous tissue could be distinguished. Large areas of every section made from these specimens were so entirely composed of un- differentiated cells that it could be readily understood how the disease has by some pathologists been classified as a sarcoma. The first specimen from the lip would appear to be an example of the more mature growth in a situation where it has been bound down and restricted by the density of the normal tissues, while in all the other specimens we have to do with the free ebullition of the growth on the yielding surface of the interior of the nostril. In all the specimens there could, however, be no doubt of the ultimate tendency to the formation of the peculiar endothelioid cells and pseudo-fibrous tissue, and the large form of the cell was invariably present. Several of the specimens from the nostril included portions of cartilage which did not appear to be altered in any way, and in all of them there were numerous cells of large size, with a faintly staining nucleus and very distinct, coarse reticulum throughout the whole of the mass of the cell. These had much the appearance of siliceous cells, and are believed to be the result of retention of the siliceous secretion from occlu- sion of the siliceous ducts. The above may be considered a fairly complete description of sections of the growth, stained with carmine or hæmatoxylin, but when aniline stains are used two other forms of cell become very conspicuous, especially with methyl-
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 43 or gentian violet. The first are remarkably large plasma cells, protoplasmic bodies with a clear, comparatively transparent central region, which includes the nu- cleus and sometimes a vacuole, surrounded by a thick coating of coarse granules, so that when the cell is seen in a contracted state and deeply stained with violet, it appears as an inky-black granular mass. These plasma cells are particu- larly noticeable in sections treated by long immersion in methyl-violet and sub- sequent washing out withalcohol alone; but, on the other hand, if treated by the Gram process with iodine they lose the stain almost completely. With safranin their granular coat stains of a reddish-brown colour, which again renders them very distinct from the surrounding cells. The unequal size of the granules in these cells, their evident density, and the above-mentioned fact that they lose their stain under iodine treatment, is sufficient to prevent them being mistaken for bacteria. Then, in the second place, there were to be seen in all the speci- mens numerous examples of the hyaline, or colloid, globular bodies described by Cornil and other writers as characteristic of rhinoscleroma. There are bodies composed of one or more, sometimes numerous, perfectly transparent non- refract- ing globules, associated in most, and possibly in all, cases with a nucleus, and held together by a thin membrane, which is sometimes very indistinct and some times certainly appears to be wanting entirely. The globules are not stained at all by carmine (when pure and free from aniline adulteration, which is not always the case) or by hæmatoxylin, but take a yellow stain with picro-carmine, a rather brownish red, but deep, stain with safranin, and, last of all, a very deep stain with any of the aniline violets. They are most effectively shown by staining the sections in either gentian or methyl violet, the former by preference, and then wash- ing out in iodine solution in the manner known as the Gram process. By this pro- cess the globules remain deeply stained, when everything else in the section has been washed clean; and the iodine must have the effect of fixing the stain in them, for, if the sections are washed in alcohol alone, without first passing through iodine solution, the hyaline globules are apt to part with the stain in great measure. If, therefore, of two sections of the same tissue, one is washed in alcohol alone and the other "grammed" with iodine, the first will show the plasma cells as above described, while the second will show only the hyaline globules. It is remark- able though that in almost all sections a very careful search will detect some hyaline globules free from stain. With safranin many more of the globules avoid taking the stain than with violet dyes, so that if two sections are taken from a specimen and one is stained with safranin and the other with gentian- violet, on the Gram principle, the latter will always appear at first sight to con- tain more of the hyaline bodies than the former, the unstained globules escaping detection, except under a very careful examination of the slide. The number of distinct globules associated in each body varies enormously. There may be a solitary globule which is then generally of comparatively large size (as much as 1/1000th of an inch) with its nucleus flattened out like a half. moon on one G 2
44 Scientific Memoirs by side; or there may be two globules of equal or unequal size, and the nucleus pressed between them into a triangular or cocked-hat shape; and so on until we come to groups of 30 or 40, which are then almost always of small size, very little, if at all, larger than a blood corpuscle, and either adhere closely together round a central nucleus to form a mulberry mass or are only loosely connected, and it is in this last case sometimes impossible to demonstrate either a nucleus, or any limiting membrane. Occasionally the component hyaline particles are not globular, but wedge-shaped or polyhedral, which is evidently the result in many cases of mutual pressure, but not always, for a very remarkable form is sometimes met with, viz. a solitary hexagon of large size, surrounded by a thin membrane and provided with a nucleus on one side, just as in the case of the largest globular forms. The nature of these hyaline bodies is a mystery, but they are certainly not peculiar to rhinoscleroma. Identically the same bodies were described in 1885 by Surgeon-Major D. D. Cunningham in Part I of these Memoirs, as occurring in Delhi Boil. He was at that time inclined to look upon them as organisms of some kind, and this view was confirmed by the remarkable discovery that bodies of similar form and showing the same re-actions with aniline violets, are found in certain encysted amæboid organisms; these being possibly the same as the globular bodies found by Nothnagel in monads, vide Ziegler's Pathology, para. 479. It has recently, however, been found by the writer that precisely similar forms are constantly present in Elephantiasis arabum, in small number and of small size it is true in the ordinary fibrous condition of the disease; but abundant and of every variety and form, just as in rhinoscleroma, in some unusually cellular specimens of elephantiasis excised from the female genital organs at the Ripon Hospital, Simla, where this disease is frequently met with in women. They were also undeniably present, although they were not very conspicuous, in two dis- tinct cases of carcinomatous tumour from the same hospital, one of the face, the other of the breast; and Dr. Gibbons, of the Medical College, Calcutta, has found them in a papilloma at the orifice of the urethra. Dittrich also, of Prague, who calls them "Mikuliczsche Zellen" states that they are found, not only in rhinoscleroma and oriental sore, but also in leprosy and glanders. Under these circumstances the view that they are organisms of any kind seems hardly tenable, as it is difficult to imagine a special organism in- habiting so many different kinds of growth. Another view, upheld particularly by Dittrich, that these bodies are the result of the action of bacteria upon the cells of the tissue, cannot be said to have ever had much foundation, for no- body seems ever to have seen bacteria actually within the hyaline masses, and it is effectually disposed of by the fact, to be presently discussed more fully, that there were no bacteria present in any of these cases of rhinoscleroma, and that bacteria were also wanting in the Delhi Boil examined by Dr. Cunningham
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 45 in the above mentioned carcinomata, and the papilloma, as well as in most of the cases of elephantiasis examined by the writer at Simla. That they are the result of some colloid or hyaline change in cells, not necessarily always of the same variety of cell, and perhaps in some cases even of the blood corpuscles seems probable enough; but as yet no thoroughly satisfactory transitional form can be discovered. Some of the large cells, with excentric nucleus and granular or fragmentary contents, would, as far as mere form goes, answer well enough as a transition between the endothelioid cells and the hyaline globules; and some of them particularly, in which the contained fragments are wedge-shaped or poly- hedral, are almost exactly similar in form to some of the hyaline bodies, but they show no special tendency to stain, with aniline violets, and, on the contrary, stain, often deeply, with carmine. The number of the hyaline bodies varied considerably in the different speci- mens. In Dr. Raye's case there were very few, while in one of the Indore cases they were not only very numerous, ten or even more in one field of the micro- scope, but of remarkably large size. A large proportion of them are situated just below the epithelium in the papillary region of the true skin, but they are never apparently included in the epithelial layer. There remains to be discussed only the question of the presence or otherwise in these cases of the so-called rhinoscleroma bacillus or any other schizomycete. Investigations on this point were carried on independently by Surgeon-Major D. D. Cunningham, Surgeon Gibbons, and the writer, with an entirely barren result in every instance. The most approved methods of staining with gentian and methyl violets, with long immersion in the staining fluids, and washing out with iodine solution, or with alcohol alone, as recommended by Cornil, all failed to demonstrate anything which could be considered a bacillus. The conclusion therefore is inevitable that we have to do here with five un- doubted cases of Rhinoscleroma in which the disease is not even associated with a bacillus, and accordingly the claim of the form hitherto described as occur- ring constantly in Rhinoscleroma to be the cause of the disease may be safely dismissed. It is satisfactory to learn that a similar negative conclusion on this point has been arrived at by a distinguished bacteriologist in London, for Mr. Jonathan Hutchinson, in the same letter to Dr. Keegan that was quoted above, saysA. List of Laccadive Plants. BY SURGEON DAVID PRAIN, M.A., M.B., BENGAL MEDICAL SERVICE. West of the Malabar coast, between Lat. 10° and 14° N. and Long. 71° 40' and 74° E., and distant 12048 Scientific Memoirs by marked, appears to point to the fact that the people were present in the islands as Hindus before they became Musalmans. These two considerations have to be borne in mind in investigating the problem with which this paper proposes to dealMedical Officers of the Army of India. 49 by both these gentlemen. In every case exact localities are given, and the mark of verification (!) added when the specimen is present at Calcutta. The list is probably by no means complete, since of the 80 species that it includes Dr. Alcock only reports 38, while of these 38 Mr. Hume omits 16. At the same time it pro- bably represents fairly accurately the nature of the flora. The objects of its pub- lication are, first, to afford a means of comparison between the present flora and the flora that may be observed after some considerable interval, and second, to provide a basis for the determination of the sources from which it has been derived and the means by which its constituents have been conveyed to the islands50 Scientific Memoirs by MoringeæMedical Officers of the Army of India. 51 Compositæ52 Scientific Memoirs by ConvolvulaceæMedical Officers of the Army of India. 53 Labiatæ54 Scientific Memoirs by ScitamineæMedical Officers of the Army of India. 55 Gramineæ56 Scientific Memoirs by uninhabited islands, as well as the inhabited. On the other hand, if man did not settle on the archipelago on account of its coco-nut trees, it is difficult to conceive what he went there for at all. The surface is not adequate nor are the conditions favourable for cereal cultivation; and fishing is exactly the occupation that may be said to be neglected by the Laccadive Islanders. It is true that they may not always have neglected their opportunities of fishing; but the fact that in islands where they are well-to-do the inhabitants now-a-days do not fish, taken in con- junction with the evidence derived from the facts of coco-nut distribution else- where, makes it almost certain that the coco-nut has reached the Laccadives in- dependently of man's agency. Of the 17 cultivated species then, man has cer- tainly introduced 15, and probably 16. But these do not exhaust the number of species intentionally introduced. Three others:Medical Officers of the Army of India. 57 As, however, it is probable that many of these have reached the islands independently of man's agency, while others, though introduced by man, may have been brought unintentionally, it becomes necessary to analyse this list in detail. The Poon-spar, or Alexandrian Laurel, is (along with Barringtonia speciosa) about the earliest species to appear on newly emerged uninhabited coral islets, and primâ facie therefore might be looked upon as an ocean-distributed plant. But on closer consideration the case is less clear. The tree is much cultivated in India and is planted by the Laccadive Islanders, as it is by the people on the opposite coast, to provide them with masts and spars. Then, not only is it planted where it occurs, but it does not seemto occur on every island (e.g. Dr. Alcock did not observe it on Anderut, which is moreover the island nearest India), and the species that elsewhere is so intimately associated with it (Barringtonia) , does not appear to have reached the archipelago. So far then as the Laccadives are concerned, it seems necessary to look on the Poon-spar as a species introduced intentionally by man. The case of the Portia tree (Thespesia) is identical. It also is a shore species; its fruits occur in eastern tropical ocean-drifts, and it is widely distri- buted on eastern tropical shores. But it is, on the other hand, a favourite tree and is much planted, especially in Madras and in Ceylon, both on account of its showy flowers and because of its tough and durable wood used in boat- building. It only occurs on one island58 Scientific Memoirs by a wide-spread species that probably only occurs in India as a cultivated plant, and is very generally planted throughout the Malay Archipelago, North Australia, Polynesia and Africa,1mainly for the dye-stuff yielded by its roots. But the Laccadive plant is not true M. citrifolia, but that variety which Dr. Roxburgh considered a distinct species and named M. bracteata. This plant is confined to India, Ceylon, and the Andamans, is perhaps oftener wild than cultivated, and was, where Mr. Hume found it, certainly wild. Unless then it be assumed that this plant has here escaped from cultivation, and that its cultivation has been at the same time given up, the species must be looked on as an example of a sea-introduced plant. Mr. Hemsley ("Challenger " Reports; Botany, Introd., p. 43) contends for an ocean-distribution for true M. citrifolia, and the evidence from this variety certainly supports his view. Plumbago zeylanica is a common plant in indian gardens,and, besides being grown for its appearance, is used in Indian domestic medicine in skin diseases. It has therefore probably been introduced intentionally. At the same time it is a plant that readily throws itself out of cultivation, and it may have reached the Laccadives only as a weed. Calotropis gigantea may have been intentionally introduced. Its milky juice is medicinal, and it yields an excellent fibre used along the western coast of India. At the same time it is a common road-side weed everywhere on the mainland, and it may be as a weed that it has reached the islands, while there is nothing to have prevented its seeds from having been brought from the mainland by winds. Then both Cynanchum and Tylophora may have been introduced on account of their juice, since they too are Milk-weeds; it is, however, far more pro- bable that they have reached the islands with the assistance of wind. The large-flowered IpomMedical Officers of the Army of India. 59 Stachytarpheta indica is a common and favourite flower in Indian gardens, and may have been intentionally introduced. But it is also (like Plumbago) a plant that readily throws itself out of cultivation, and is nearly as likely to have been unintentionally conveyed. Premna integrifolia may possibly have been introduced because of its medicinal properties. It has, however, more probably arrived independently of man. Mr. Hume found it wild, and in dense thickets; it is a common tree on Indian coasts; it is perfectly capable of distribution by ocean-currents (fruits almost certainly belonging to this genus occur in various ocean-drifts); it is also probably capable of dispersal by means of frugivorous birds, as seeds of appa- rently species of P remna have been found in the crops of such. On the other hand, Gloriosa is more likely to have been introduced; not only is it a showy plant, but natives of India believe that its roots possess powerful poisonous properties. It must be pointed out, however, that its seeds are capable of dispersal by winds, though it may be doubted whether they are capable of being carried so far as 130 miles, which is the distance of Anderut from the mainland. But it was not being cultivated where it was gathered, nor was it in cultivation elsewhere. Pandanus odoratissimus may have been introduced because of its sweet scent. But it is very general in the archipelago; it is not cultivated by the islanders, and they do not make any use of it; species of Pandanus are amongst the most usual of ocean-distributed plants elsewhere; and it may be held as almost certain that it has been introduced by ocean-currents. The grass that Mr. Hume took to be the common dubh-grass may have been introduced purposely, since some of the islanders have a few cattle; but it is far more likely, even if it was dubh, which it is extremely probable it was, to have been introduced as a weed. While, then, all 16 may have been intentionally introduced by man, it is more probable that 7 (C60 Scientific Memoirs by Some, however, for which other modes of distribution have been observed or claimed require discussion in detail. The list is as follows:Medical Officers of the Army of India. 61 to collect birds' eggs. The presence of shelter-huts on the island indicates that these visits are of some duration, and altogether the conditions necessary to explain the presence of these three weeds without having recourse to the hypothesis of ocean-dispersal are abundantly fulfilled. The grasses too suggest at once the possibility of wind-distribution. But none of those in the list are adapted (as an Imperata or a Saccharum would be) for this method of distribution. Some species of Panicum have been supposed to be distributed by the sea, but the Oplismenus and the Setaria, whose general resemblance to the Panica suggests for them this possibility, are most distinctly not coast plants on the mainland, and the hypothesis can hardly be applied to them. The Apluda and the Andropogon are, however, both coast and inland plants; for them therefore, though it is by no means probable, a sea-dispersal is just possible. Then any, or all, of them may conceivably have been distributed by marsh birds if their grains had happened to fall on the mud where these birds were wading. But it is far more probable that all the grasses mentioned here are, as Eleusine 62 Scientific Memoirs by lity of bird-introduction is greater, for Premna the probability is in favour of introduction by the sea. Herpestis and Oldenlandia are marsh plants with small seeds that might easily be conveyed in pellets of mud attached to the feet of wading birds. They clearly may owe their introduction to this agency, and are the only Lac- cadive species for which this mode is the only conceivable one. But this agency may possibly account for the introduction of some of the grasses as well, and by no means improbably explains, at least in part, the distribution of one of the sedges. The spores of both ferns are almost certainly wind-introduced; the wind probably also explains the presence of Cynanchum and Tylophora, not impro- bably the presence of Crepis and Calotropis, and possibly, though this is less likely, the presence of Gloriosa. The other twelve are coast species, and have almost certainly been all intro- duced by the sea. They areMedical Officers of the Army of India. 63 TABLE I.64 Scientific Memoirs by The subjoined table exhibits the distribution of the various species that compose the flora (species that are purely cultivated are markedMedical Officers of the Army of India. 65 TABLE II.66 Scientific Memoirs by which is characterized by ocean-distribution.1Two others (Vernonia and the herbaceous Phyllanthus ) are excluded from Polynesia also, but both of these are simple weeds of cultivation. One coast species that extends both to Australia and Polynesia (Euphorbia Atoto ) does not reach America, and at the same timé appears to be absent from the African coast. Five species extend from Asia to Africa only. One of them (Peristrophe bicalyculata ) is a very common Indian weed that extends into Assam and into Burma, but, though it appears in the Laccadive islands, it has not hitherto been reported from Ceylon. Another (Launea pinnatifida ) is a coast species much less extensively distributed than species of this class usually are; it appears to be confined to the coasts of India and Ceylon, to Mauritius, and to the eastern coast of Africa.2.Three species that are characteristic of Continental Asia appear in Mauritius. These are Tylophora asthmatica, Barleria cristata, and Leucas aspera; their distribution as weeds probably accounts for the presence there of all three.3The other 15 are con- fined to Asia.4 The following table shows more compactly the constitution of the Laccadive flora:Medical Officers of the Army of India. 67 The distribution of the 15 species confined to Asia varies somewhat in different instances. This is more easily understood when the facts are tabulated68 Scientific Memoirs by the vegetation on this island was destroyed by the great eruption of 1883, and the factor of human interference in its refloration is eliminated, as it is quite un- visited by man and is quite uninhabitable. On the shore Dr. Treub found seeds or fruits ofMedical Officers of the Army of India. 69 highly specialized, and which prepares the way for a more highly specialized phanerogamic flora. But the larger proportion of the phanerogams that do reach such islands are ocean-distributed and littoral species that cannot ascend beyond a certain height, those whose fruits or seeds are adapted for very dis- tant wind-conveyance being comparatively few in number, and the proportion of such fruits or seeds that escape from perishing in the ocean en route being very small. Hence, in such islands the proportion of cryptogams to phanero- gams always remains high, and is increased in a direct ratio with the distance of the island from adjacent land, and in an inverse ratio with the suitability of the surface of the island for the support of vegetable life. The conditions that prevail in newly emerged coral islets are very different. Their low elevation in itself diminishes the chances of wind-conveyed spores alighting on them, and is in itself unfavourable for the germination of many of the spores that do alight. Then, for those that have succeeded in alighting and that have germinated the struggle for existence is intensified by the simul- taneous arrival of another class of species, independently conveyed, more highly specialized, with its individual species more largely represented, and for which the same physical conditions are in the highest degree favourable. These conditions appear sufficiently to explain the difference of the proportions in Krakatau and in the Laccadives. In concluding, the writer wishes to acknowledge his great indebtedness to Dr. Alcock for much information concerning the present flora of the Lacca- dives and to Dr. King for numerous valuable suggestions while analysing its constituents.
On the Life History of a Himalayan Gymnosporangium (G. CUNNINGHAMIANUM, NOV. SP. ) BY SURGEON-MAJOR A. BARCLAY, M. B. BENGAL MEDICAL SERVICE. I had long suspected that the Aecidium on the wild pear (PyrusPashia, Ham.), which is in certain years very common in the neighbourhood of Simla (Western Himalayas), was related to a Gymnosporangium on Cupressus torulosa, Don., and I noted the probable connection in a paper submitted to the Asiatic Society of Bengal in 1887,1and incidentally in a paper on Caeoma Smilacis in these Memoirs, Part IV; but it was not until the spring of 1889 that I succeeded in proving this by experiment. The wild pear is abundant in Simla, but the cypress is not. The Aecidium is consequently by no means common, except in the neighbourhood of affected cypress trees. An occasional aecidial patch may, however, be found at a con- siderable distance from any cypress tree. In the following paper I propose first to describe the characters of the fungus as it occurs on its two hosts, and then to pass on to a consideration of its title to be considered a distinct species. I. Teleutosporic stage on Cupressus. The teleutospore beds are hemispherical dark brown compact bodies during dry weather, and are found on the ultimate small branches, as well as on older twigs of 4 to 5 mm. in diameter. Their appearance during dry weather is re- presented in Fig. 1, Plate I. During very moist weather these beds swell up en- ormously into gelatinous masses, and soon assume a yellow ochre colour, due to a plenteous formation of sporidia. The swelled condition of the teleutospore beds is shown on Fig. 2, Plate II. During heavy rain the gelatinous masses fall off from the tree. Teleutospore beds may be found during the greater part of the year. I have missed them only during August to November. The mycelium producing these spores is perennial, and causes some slight, but by no means conspicuous, thickening of the parts involved. It ramifies between the cells of the bark tissue, and penetrates down to the central woody tissue, but does not apparently enter the latter. Near spore beds the mycelium is 1ournal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, Vol. LVI, Part II, No. 3, 1887.
72 Scientific Memoirs by extremely abundant, but, as we recede from this area the amount of mycelium quickly diminishes. Where abundant near beds of teleutospores the hyphae con- tain orange-red oil globules; but elsewhere the mycelium is colourless. It never appears to enter the cells, and there are consequently no haustoria. The stimulant effect of the mycelium on adjoining cells is shown in their increased size. The bark cells, just below the outer sub-epidermal palisade-like cells, as seen in transverse sections of the youngest twigs, are normally about 30Medical Officers of the Army of India. 73 and very frequently all these are on one side of the promycelium, i.e. in a row one above another (Fig. 3, Plate II). This is not invariable, but usual. Each sterigma bears a sporidium (Fig. 4, Plate II), and therefore four such are formed by each promycelium. The sporidia are orange-red and oval, and measure from 15 X 9µ to 22 X 14µ. When all the four sporidia have been formed, the promy- celium is almost colourless. When many spores are germinating in a very small quantity of water, only those which have germinated earliest proceed to the normal development of sporidia: those which germinate later (48 hours) usually exhibit the abnormal process first described by Kienitz-Gerloff, and which I have elsewhere1described as characteristic of Caeoma Smilacis, and a Uromyces on Solidago Virgaurea; that is to say, after the end of the promycelial tube has divided into four cells, the cells round off and become detached (Fig. 8, Plate II). This abnormal growth is not confined to spores of any peculiar form, for, as I have already noted, there is only one kind of spore. I have not seen such detached cells germinate. In connection with the germination of these spores I may draw attention to another curious and interesting variation. In water cultivations I have occa- sionally seen the condition represented in Fig. 10, plate II, in which a terminal cell of the promycelium has developed a very long slender tube, in every respect resembling the germ tube of a sporidium. Such growth obviously suggests the suppression of sporidial formation. The sporidium germinates very quickly, after ripening (Fig. 6 c, Plate II). The formation of secondary sporidia in water cultivations is not uncommon. II. Æcidial stage onPyrus Pashia, Ham. This stage of the life history of the fungus I have already described in the Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal,2, in order to complete the present paper I will describe it again. It is remarkable that this member only of the several species of allied fruit-trees occurring in this region harbours the parasite. I have frequently looked in vain for it on other species. Another noteworthy feature is that, whilst in some years the Æcidium occurs abundantly, in others it is rarely found. As the teleutospores are formed abundantly every year, this can only be accounted for on the assumption that certain well-defined atmo- spheric conditions must concur to enable the sporidia to attack the leaves. In 1885 the Æcidium was very common; in 1886 it was remarkably rare; in 1887 it was again fairly abundant, though not nearly so common as in 1885; and now, in 1889, it is again common (I was absent from India during 1888). Mr. W. L. Dallas, Assistant Meteorological Reporter to the Government of India 1 These Memoirs, Part IV. 2Vol. LVI, Part II, No. 3, 1887. L
74 Scientific Memoirs by has very kindly furnished me with meteorological data for the months April to August during these years. In 1885 the rainfall was in every month, except July, above the average, and relative humidity was likewise above the average in every month except June. In 1886, a year in which the æcidia were rare, the rainfall was deficient in all months except July, and relative humidity was defi- cient in April and June, and excessive in May, July, and August. In 1887, rain was below the average in all months, and relative humidity in April to June, and excessive in July to August. In 1889 rainfall was deficient in April and May, but excessive in June and July. But perhaps the number of days on which rain fell during the months April to June, when attack usually occurs, has a more powerful influence in this respect. In 1885, during these three months rain fell on 40 days, in 1886 on 27 days, in 1887 on 26 days, and in 1889 on 31 days. The æcidia were much more abundant in 1885 and 1889 than in 1886 and 1887. The fully developed æcidia appear usually during July to September, i.e. during very wet weather; but the spermogonial stages are often met with earlier, even as early as April, the rains not setting in until the end of June. A considerable interval of about a month, or even more, intervenes between the eruption of spermogonia and the appearance of the æcidia. So far as my observations extend, the parasite occurs only on the leaf blades and never on the petioles or young fruit. The first foliage of the year is put forth very early in spring, whilst a subsidiary foliage occurs during the rains but generally only the older leaves of the first foliage are attacked. This, however, is probably due to the exhaustion of the supply of teleutospores, as in my arti- ficial inoculations I have always found the young paler leaves very susceptible to attack. The two sets of leaves are easily distinguished during the time the æcidia are present, as the older leaves are much darker green in colour. Well-defined patches, orange-red above and yellowish below, are formed on attacked leaves (Figs. 1,2, Plate II). At first spermogonia only are formed, all invariably apparently on the upper surface of the leaf blade, and at this time he at tacked parts are slightly thickened, the depth of the tissues being about 0.41 m.m., whilst normally it is about 0.17 m.m. to 0.19 m.m. After a consider- able interval æcidia are produced on the lower surface of the leaf blade, and then the attacked areas are considerably swollen, the depth of the tissues being about 0.90 m.m. This hypertrophy is due to a peculiar proliferation and transformation of the spongy tissue cells, and not to any variation in the pali- sade cells, of which there are two layers. The mycelium, which ramifies mainly throughout the spongy tissue cells, causes them to enlarge very considerably, and especially at right angles to the surface of the leaf, forming long oblong cells, as seen in transverse section of the leaf, closely applied latterly (Fig.3, Plate III). These long cells are from 65 to 107µ in length, by 20 to 30µ in beadth, while the true palisade cells are about 44µ in length. Some of these
75 Medical Officers of the Army of India. long cells stain deeply with all ordinary stains, as will be seen in the figure, whilst others do not take the stain so readily. The76 Scientific Memoirs by blue, the spermatia assume a brick-red colour. The spermatia are large and oval, measuring 8 x 4µ. On several occasions I placed these spermatia in weak solutions of sugar, but never observed any yeast-like germination. This completes the description of the fungus, and I now proceed to de- scribe briefly the experiments I made to establish the connection between the two phases of existence of the parasite. During March and April I frequently applied the sporidia obtained from the teleutospores on Cupressus to the leaves of Pyrus, and in most cases saw spermogonia developed in ten to fourteen days. The exact method of procedure was as follows. Small twigs of Pyrus were cut off under water, and then placed for a day or two under a glass shade in my laboratory, means being taken to keep the air within moist. In the meanwhile some dry teleutospore beds were scraped off from Cupressus, and put into a watch-glass containing water, the whole being kept in a moist atmosphere. In a very short time these beds swelled up extraordinarily into light tremulous gelatinous masses, and in 24 hours were covered with light yellow sporidia. These sporidia were then transferred with a sterilized glass rod to the leaves on the twigs of Pyrus under the glass shade, and left there until the earliest sign of attack was apparent. They were then put into an ordinary gardener's forcing-box. If kept too long under a glass shade, the leaves soon withered. Even in the forcing-box the leaves did not remain alive long enough for the production of æcidia, although numerous char- acteristic spermogonial patches were produced. As I found it impossible to keep such twigs long enough alive to allow of the formation of æcidia, I tied some twigs of Cypress, on which there were teleutospore beds, on to three bushes of Pyrus in my garden, after the wet weather had set in. On each bush, after about a fortnight, many of the newly unfolded leaves exhibited bright orange-red spermogonial patches, and these went on to the formation of æcidia about a month later. The photograph, reproduced in Fig. 1, Plate 3, represents a twig taken from one of these bushes in my garden. These experiments show quite conclusively that thePyrus 77 Medical Officers of the Army of India. existed there. The measurements of his æcidiospores are 25.4 x 28.6, on an average. The whole length of his peridial tube is about 2 m.m., of which the sub- merged portion measured 0.5 m.m., leaving 1.5 for the projecting free gray part. In diameter the peridium measured 0.25 m.m. He represents in a figure, which I do not reproduce, a few spermogonia as occurring on the lower or æcidial sur- face. I have never myself seen spermogonia on the lower surface. The sper- matia measured 3.17 x 6.35µ. These figures are sufficiently near mine to render it probable that the fungus is identical. It is quite possible, however, that the Almora species is distinct, more especially as there is some doubt whetherCup- ressus torulosa exists there. It now remains for me to consider whether this Himalayan Gymnosporan- gium is identical with any of the hitherto described species. In the paper above referred to in the Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, I tentatively named the speciesG. clavari78 Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army of India. differences. This species has two forms of teleutospore, with four pores to each cell; it has longer æcidia, opening in a different manner, and the æcidiospores are somewhat smaller than in the Himalayan species. The Himalayan species is therefore distinct from all these. I have also carefully compared the Himalayan species with Farlow's description of the American species,1and feel persuaded that it is distinct from any one of them. There can be no doubt whatever that it is quite distinct fromG. Ellisii (Berk.) andG. biseptatum, Ellis, both of which are characterized by the teleutospores being usually divided into more than two cells, and both of which, curiously enough, are the only other Gymnosporangia borne on species of Cupressus (C. thyoides ). A new name is therefore wanted for the Himalayan species, and I propose calling itGymnosporangium Cunning hamianum, after my accomplished friend Dr. D. D. Cunningham, F.R.S. 1The Gymnosporangia, or Cedar Apples, of the United States: W. G. Farlow, 1880.
Description of the Plates. [Except where otherwise noted all x 350.] PLATE I.PLATE I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000523.tif] Fig. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000523.tif] Fig. 2. Photo-etching. Survey of India Offices,Calcutta. October 1889. GYMNOSPORANGIUM CUNNINGHAMIANUM. From photographs by A.Barclay.
PLATE II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000529.tif] 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000529.tif] 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000529.tif] 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000529.tif] 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000529.tif] 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000529.tif] 6. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000529.tif] 7. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000529.tif] 8. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000529.tif] 9. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000529.tif] 11. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000529.tif] 12. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000529.tif] 1/1000" x 1/188 13. Barclay. GYMNOSPORANGIUM CUNNINGHAMIANUM. No.2692. San.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000535.tif] Fig. 1. GYMNOSP
PLATE III. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000538.tif] Fig. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000538.tif] Fig. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000538.tif] Fig. 3. Survey of India Offices, Culcutta. December 1889. GYMNOSPORANGIUM CUNNINGHAMIANUM. A. Barclay
On a Chrysomyxa on Rhododendron arboreum, SM. (CHRYSOMYXA HIMALENSE, NOV. SP.) BY SURGEON-MAJOR A. BARCLAY, M.B. BENGAL MEDICAL SERVICE. This is an extremely conspicuous, and very widely distributed Uredine in the Simla region, where Rhododendron arboreum is most common. The mycelium is, for the most part, perennial, and attacked shoots are, year after year, so arrested in growth that a conspicuous clump of leaves ("witches' broom" or "Hexenbesen") is produced, by which attacked trees are readily distinguished at any time of the year. Were it not for this the presence of the parasite in any tree would be recognizable only from early spring to the end of May, during which time the remarkably striking fructification has com- menced and ended. This has its seat especially on the petioles, and along the midrib a short distance into the leaf blade. When ripe, the fruit bodies clothe the petioles so densely as to hide it completely (Fig. 2, Plate I). Each separate fruit body is very prominently club-shaped, or mushroom-shaped. The ex- panded upper part measures on an average 2 m.m. in diameter, and the whole body about 1.5 m.m. in length from its base on the petiole. Some are, of course, a little larger and some smaller. But, although the fruit bodies are characteristically situated on the petioles and on the lower portions of the midribs, they are also occasionally found on the main axis of the shoot (Fig. 1, Plate I), and as isolated groups on the leaf blade. During dry weather, or if they be kept a few hours in a moist atmosphere, they become pure yellow, due to rapid sporidial formation. This change in colour is very striking. Very early in spring (March) the petioles of the leaves which were unfolded in the previous spring, but which are usually much smaller in size than normal leaves on healthy shoots, are seen to be uniformly orange red, while as yet there is no swelling or distortion of any kind. Although smaller, the leaves are not in any other respect different from normal leaves. Later, small wart- like projections are formed on the petioles, and these grow gradually until, towards the latter part of April and early May, they attain their maximum size and shape. While this maturation of the fruit bodies is proceeding, the Rhododendron trees are putting forth their new shoots and leaves, and the shoots which are invaded by the parasite, and on whose old leaves the
80 Scientific Memoirs by fruit bodies are maturing, form no exception. The only difference is that, whilst normally the new shoots are elongated, and bear large leaves, those arising from an attacked shoot remain stunted, and put forth smaller leaves. Now, it is a significant fact that these newly unfolded leaves, whether on healthy shoots or not, although unfolded during the scattering of sporidia from the neighbouring fruit bodies of Chrysomyxa, never present any outward sign whatever of attack: they remain perfectly natural in appearance, though, as I have already observed, those arising from infected stems are usually smaller (Fig. 1, Plate I). This fact, of which I have convinced myself by repeated observ- ation during the last three years, appears to render it extremely improbable that the fungus is autMedical Officers of the Army of India. 81 the fruit bodies may readily be seen in leaves, and consists in the formation of a series of long septate upright cells, arranged at right angles to the surface of the leaf and in close contact with one another (Fig. 2, Plate II), These long cells measure about 14µ in diameter and 50 to 80µ in length. This initial body is formed in the middle of the leaf tissues, between the inner palisade row and the spongy cells, and is gradually pushed downwards by ever-increasing mycelial formation until it is ultimately pushed through the lower epidermis in its mature form. B.82 Scientific Memoirs by The cells composing the stalk of the body are long, narrow and septate. Higher up, in the expanded head, these primary stalk cells give rise to a series of large cells, three to four in number, which are usually branched or forked (Fig. 1 b, Plate II). The cells of this series, which practically make up the expanded head of the sporophore, are about 25 x 13µ, but vary considerably in size. These large cells again give rise, apparently successively, from above down- wards, to narrow tubular prolongations towards the upper surface of the fruit body. These are about 80µ long and 4µ in diameter. When the end of this projection reaches the surface, it expands slightly, and then divides into four cells by transverse septa, forming a regular promycelium (Fig. 1 a, Plate II). Each cell of the promycelium then gives rise to a long narrow sterigma, bear- ing an oval or round sporidium at its end, orange red in colour, and measuring from 9 x 9 to 12 x 10µ. The sporidia are thrown off forcibly by some mecha- nism probably like that of Coprinus, just as they are said by de Bary to be thrown off in C. Rhododendri. The force by which this is accomplished is, however, feeble. Hence four sporidia are formed by each promycelium. Thus, four distinct parts may be distinguished in the sporophore, (a ) the primary lowermost stalk cells, (b ) the large central cells which give rise to the promy- celia, (c ) the secondary stalk cells, of the promycelia, and (d ) the promycelia proper, with sterigmata and sporidia. The sporidia germinate at once, throw- ing out the usual germ tube, and this may give rise to a secondary sporidium (Fig. 4, Plate II). The promycelia measure about 50µ in length by 10µ in breadth. B.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 83 I have searched in vain for such spores, both at elevations below and above that of Simla. A third important difference may be found in the structure of the fruit bodies, and in the way in which sporidia are formed. A comparison of Fig. 5, Plate II, representing a section through a teleutospore bed, with de Bary's figure, as reproduced, for example, in his-text book, 1will at once reveal the striking differences. Among subsidiary points of difference may be mentioned the form of the teleutospore beds, which are sometimes long in C. Rhododendri, but always round in the Himalayan species: the larger size of many of the beds in the latter: the golden red colour of the teleutospore beds in sporidial formation in C. Rhododendri against a pure yellow in India: the almost invariable division of the promycelium into four cells in the Himalayan species, each cell forming an oval or round sporidium at the end of a long sterigma. These differences appear to me to be sufficiently great to warrant its separation under a new name, and I propose calling it Chrysomyxa Himalense. I will now offer a few remarks with reference to its possible connection with the æcidia on the Coniferæ occurring here. Of these there are four, namely, one on Pinus longifolia, one on Pinus excelsa (these two are, I believe, specifi- cally distinct), and two distinct species on Picea Morinda. 2The two first named are exceedingly common in Simla; one of those on Picea is rare, whilst the other does not occur in Simla itself, though it is not uncommon at some little distance from the station. It seemed extremely probable that one or other of the aecidia on the two species of Pinus, so abundant in the forests where the Rhododendron is largely and universally attacked with this Chrysomyxa, must be related to it, although I am aware a different life-history has been disco- vered for Peridermium Pini in Europe. I refer, of course, to the connection with Coleosporium Senecíonis, Per (Wolff) and Cronartium asclepiadeum (Willd.) on Vincetoxicum officinale (Cornu). Neither of these teleutospore forms occurs in Simla, nor indeed any allied form, so far as my observations as yet extend. 3If the Indian Æcidia in question are heter84 Scientific Memoirs by Chrysomyxa. But, although my attempts to reproduce either Æcidium on the two species of Pinus have failed, I am not so confident that one or other may not be caused by the Chrysomyxa, because their abundance runs parallel with the abundance of the Rhododendron affection. Again, if I am correct in regard- ing the two Æidia on the two species of Pinus as distinct, then, for the follow- ing reasons, I think that on P. excelsa is more likely to be the one so related. The natural history of the P. longifolia Æcidium runs thus:Medical Officers of the Army of India. 85 already given reasons for excluding the idea that the fungus is autDescription of the Plates. PLATE I.PLATE I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000574.tif] FIG. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000574.tif] FIG. 2. Survey of India Offices. Calcutta, November 1889. CHRYSOMYXA HIMALENSE. From Photographs by A.Barclay.
PLATE II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000580.tif] 1 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000580.tif] 2 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000580.tif] 1 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000580.tif] X 580 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000580.tif] X 580 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000580.tif] 4 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000580.tif] 3 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000580.tif] 5 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000580.tif] 6 Photo-etching. CHRYSOMYXA HIMALENSE. A. Barclay. Survey of India Offices. Calcutta, January 1890.
On the Life-history of a Uredine on Rubia cordifolia, Linn. (PUCCINIA COLLETTIANA, NOV. SP. ) BY SURGEON-MAJOR A. BARCLAY, M.B. BENGAL MEDICAL SERVICE. In this species we have an interesting, and experimentally proved example of the complete exclusion of æcidial fructification. The natural history of the fungus led me long ago to believe that it was a complete aut88 Scientific Memoirs by When the host bears young leaves the sporidia attack them, as well as the green petioles and stems, producing slightly paled areas, on which groups of very pale spermogonia are developed, very inconspicuous to the naked eye. Soon after this, primary uredopustules are produced, immediately outside the group of spermogonia. On the leaf-blade these primary pustules generally assume a markedly circinate arrangement. Both the spermogonia and the primary uredo- pustules are produced on both surfaces of the leaf blade, most numerously how- ever on the lower surface. The pustules on either surface of the leaf-blade are often exactly opposite one another. On leaf-blades immense numbers of such pustules are usually formed. Each separate area of invasion is usually about 3 m.m. in diameter; but such areas frequently coalesce. The uredospores con- tained in these pustules germinate, as usual immediately, and distribute the fungus largely. A straight germ tube, about 6µ in diameter, is usually formed, into the end of which the colourless granular contents wander (Fig. 1, Plate I). These uredospores produce vast numbers of secondary uredopustules, without, however, any foregoing spermogonia. These secondary pustules do not, as a rule, assume the circinate arrangement so common in the case of the primary pustules. They are, indeed, usually isolated scattered minute brown pustules, also on both surfaces of the leaf, and also mainly on the lower surface. These uredospores are morphologically identical with the primary uredospores. As the vegetative period of the host approaches an end, immense numbers of teleutospore pustules are formed, thus completing the whole cycle of develop- ment. The same mycelium which produced secondary uredospores produces these teleutospores, but mostly apparently in distinct pustules. At any rate, from the fact that the teleutospore pustules are usually borne on the upper leaf surface, whilst the uredopustules are mainly borne on the lower surface, the great majority of the former must be distinct in origin from the latter. I have, how- ever, found a few uredospores in teleutospore pustules, and some teleutospores in secondary uredopustules. There is no vestige of æcidial fructification. With regard to the experimental evidence that the above life-history is com- plete, I will give the details of some experiments I made with this view. On the 24th April, I placed some sporidia, obtained by floating scraped off teleuto- spores on water in watch-glass (kept in a moist atmosphere to prevent evaporation) on the leaves of a twig cut off under water, and kept in my laboratory under a glass shade. On the 9th May (15 days later) I noticed a large patch of paled tissue on one leaf, with several spermogonia; but on the 21st May many leaves bore spermogonial patches on numerous paled areas. Again, on the 25th June, two plants were similarly inoculated with sporidia: they were then placed in a closed glass gardener's box outside; one (a) was again covered there by a glass shade, and the other (b) was left uncovered. On the 4th July, 9 days later, I observed very numerous points of attack on many leaves of each plant. On the
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 89 10th July, the plant (a ) displayed 25 leaves covered with spermogonial patches, whilst plant (b ), though also very largely attacked, was not so greatly involved as plant (a ). The latter was in a moister atmosphere, which must account for the slight difference. These plants produced later an abundant crop of ure- dospores, and on the 25th July, exactly a month after the primary inoculation, I took off some uredospores, and, placing them in water, found that they germinated freely and normally (Fig. 1, Plate I). I then made inoculation experiments with primary uredospores on healthy leaves. For example, on the 22nd August, I placed some uredospores upon some drops of water which I had previously placed on young healthy leaves. I then placed the inoculated plants (which were cut twigs with their ends in water) in a glass box outside, within which the air is always very moist. On the 2nd September, I noticed several pustules just breaking through the epidermis, and although I searched both then and later carefully for spermogonia, I could find no trace of them. Spermogonia appear therefore to be formed only by the mycelia produced by sporidia, and not by the mycelia produced by uredo- spores. Unfortunately all my experiments were made upon cut twigs, and none of them survived long enough to produce teleutospores. But the evidence already given is quite sufficient to establish the fact that the species is complete, as I have described it. I marked numerous leaves in nature in the secondary credo stage, and found them bearing teleutospores towards the end of August. This fungus would come under Schröter's group Brachypuccinia, and is allied to such forms as P. suaveolens (Pers.), P. Oreoselini (Strauss), P. Vinc90 Scientific Memoirs by re-appear, and that on the assumption that this fructification is a sexually de- veloped one, the male organs are retained for occasional sexual reproduction, as in P. fusca, and perhaps also in P. Taraxaci. There is, however, no sign of im- maturity as yet in the development of spermogonia; on the contrary, they form a prominently characteristic feature; and during the four years I have watched the fungus, I have never seen an occasional æcidium. On the other hand, this fungus also negatives the view that the spermatia may exercise a sexual function in the production of teleutospores, as most, if not all, of these are formed by mycelia produced by primary uredospores, which bear no spermogonia, and even the teleutospores that may be borne by mycelia producing spermatia are formed long after the spermogonia have withered. (I must confess that I only assume that the mycelia produced by sporidia bear teleutospores after a sufficient number of uredospores have been shed; I have no direct evidence that this is actually the case, as I unfortunately did not think of the matter in time. My impression is that teleutospores are not borne by mycelia bearing uredospores and spermogonia.) Lastly, it is obvious also that the spermatia have no causal connection with the production of uredospores. The secondary uredospores are morphologically undistinguishable from the primary, and the latter alone are accompanied by spermogonia. The sporidium differs from the uredospore physiologically in producing a mycelium, which bears spermatia as well as uredospores. The cycles of development may be shown graphically thusMedical Officers of the Army of India. 91 UREDOSPORES: (a ) the primary on mycelia produced by sporidia; pustules mainly hypophyllous, mostly circinate: (b ) the secondary on mycelia produced by uredospores; pustules mostly hypophyllous, not circinate. Both brown, be- set with prominent spines, not however very closely aggregated; round to oval, varying considerably in size, from 22Description of the Plate. 1. Primary uredospore germinating, x 350. 2. Upper end of promycelium, x 350. 3. Typical teleutospore, x 350. 4. Three-celled teleutospore in outline, x 350. 5. Germinating sporidium, x 350. 6. Germinating teleutospore showing curiously regular septation, x 350.
PLATE I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000610.tif] 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000610.tif] 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000610.tif] 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000610.tif] 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000610.tif] 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75000610.tif] 6. A. Barclay. PUCCINIA COLLETTIANA. Reg. No. 2692, San.SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY MEDICAL OFFICERS OF THE ARMY OF INDIA. EDITED BY SIR BENJAMIN SIMPOSON, M.D., K.C.I.E., SURGEON-GENERAL WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PART V. 1890. 1.