IP/QB 10 m. 91. 6 SCIENTIFIC MEMORIES BY MEDICAL OFFICERS OF THE ARMY OF INDIA. EDITED BY B. SIMPSON, Esq., M.D., SURGEON-GENERAL WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PART II. 1886. 1.SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY MEDICAL OFFICERS OF THE ARMY OF INDIA. EDITED BY B. SIMPSON, EsQ., M.D., SURGEON-GENERAL WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PART II. 1886. 1.On the Effects sometimes following injection of Choleraic Comma- bacilli into the Subcutaneous Tissues in Guinea-pigs. BY SURGEON-MAJOR D. D. CUNNINGHAM, M.B., SPECIAL ASSISTANT TO THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. (With Plate I.) During the course of the past few weeks I have met with a series of phe- nomena in certain experiments on the subcutaneous injection of choleraic comma- bacilli into the bodies of guinea-pigs which appear to be sufficiently remarkable to merit special record. I propose, therefore, in the present paper to give a detailed account of these experiments and their results, along with a few brief notes regarding their apparent significance. I.2 Scientific Memoirs by sisting of sterilised 0.8 % salt solution full of commas derived from a pure tube cultivation of commas of four days' standing. The site of the injection was the inner surface of the left thigh. Every precaution was taken to avoid any acci- dental contamination. The syringe which was employed had been immediately beforehand soaked in strong carbolic acid and then thoroughly washed in recti- fied spirit and in freshly boiled, distilled water. The site of injection was cleared of hair and carefully washed with solution of corrosive sublimate and with spirit, and the skin was drawn aside ere the introduction of the point of the syringe so as to secure a valvular action on its subsequent release. On the 10th of February the animal appeared to be unaffected, save that it was slightly lame in the injected extremity. On the 11th of February at 9 A.M., however, it was conspicuously affected. It was lying down, and constantly uttering peculiar sharp cries as though of pain. It evidently felt cold and its respirations were very rapid. There were constantly recurring peculiar twitching movements of the abdominal and aural muscles, and evidences of pain on any pressure of the abdominal walls. In the afternoon at 4 P.M. it was still alive. The general symptoms were much the same as in the morning. It was unable to stand or walk, the eyes were much sunken, the surface of the body sensibly cold to touch, and it was constantly squeaking feebly. It died during the course of the night, and the body was examined at 10 A.M. on the 12th February. The total body weight was 429 grammes, 'so that there had been a loss in weight of almost exactly 11 % since the operation. The weights of the body and of various organs are shown in the following table:Medical Officers of the Army of India. 3 there was slight diminution in the relative weight of the liver, and increase in the weights of all the other organs and specially in that of the spleen. On removing the skin a large patch of sanguineous effusion became visible, thickest over the site of injection and spreading up thence over the lower half of the abdomen on the same side. On opening the abdominal cavity the sur- face of the peritoneum was found to be coated with a thin stratum of sticky secretion, very similar to that present in many cases of cholera. This caused the surfaces of the viscera to adhere more or less to one another, but there was an absence of fluid, of congestion, or of adhesions of a characteristically peri- tonitic character. The stomach was pale, and contained a mixture of gelatinous, transparent mucus, and brown grumous matter. The small intestine was empty, the mucous surface being pale and very moist, and here and there covered by patches of brownish mucus. The cæcum contained a considerable quantity of soft, pale umber contents, which seemed to be rather dryer than normal. The reaction was neutral. The rest of the large intestine was pale and empty, save towards the lower end, where one or two formed fæcal pellets were present. The liver was rather pale and the gall-bladder distended with pale- yellowish bile. The spleen was dark red and the kidneys were congested. On opening the thoracic cavity the lungs were found to be pale pink and free from congestion or extravasations. The right side of the heart was distended with blood. A series of preparations of the materials of the subcutaneous sanguineous effusion, of the peritoneal secretion, the cardiac blood and the contents of the large and small intestine, was made with the following results:4 Scientific Memoirs by In such cases it was clearly evident that one was dealing with bodies parallel to those described by Drs. Klein and Gibbes in connection with the small straight bacilli which they have pointed out as a characteristic feature in choler- aic materials. The mucus from the large intestine also contained small commas, but not in at all such large proportion, and the large curved forms normally pre- sent there occurred in relatively very small numbers only. Various cultivations were carried out with the following results:Medical Officers of the Army of India. 5 The weights of the principal abdominal and thoracic organs were as follows:6 Scientific Memoirs by tionMedical Officers of the Army of India. 7 Fresh preparations of the remains of subcutaneous effusion and of the perito- neal secretion and blood failed to show any commas, and tube cultivations of cardiac blood, of the subcutaneous effusion and the peritoneal secretion, did not produce any. Experiment 4. A healthy guinea-pig inoculated on the 8th March. The weight of the animal was 776 grammes, and 1 c. c. of fluid full of commas from a pure tube cultivation of the original choleraic commas of forty-eight hours' growth was injected subcutaneously in the left thigh. No conspicuous results followed, but as usual there was a considerable loss of weight. On the 12th March, when the weight was 700 grammes, about 1 c. c. of fluid full of commas belonging to the series of cultivation of the original choleraic material was injected into the peritoneal cavity. No apparent effects were produced and the animal was accordingly killed on the 15th March. The total body weight was then 720 grammes, and the weights of various organs were as follows:8 Scientific Memoirs by intestinal contents. In not a single case could any growth of commas be detected among the comparatively limited number of colonies of any kind which were developed. Experiment 5. A small healthy guinea-pig weighing 300 grammes was inoculated with about 1 c. c. of fluid containing commas from a cultivation of the original choleraic series of six days' duration. The material was injected into the subcutaneous tissue of the inner surface of the left thigh, and all the details of the operation were carried out as usual. On the following day the animal was lively and apparently quite unaffected. On the 20th of March, 48 hours after the operation, it was in the same condition. On the following morning, however, it was decidedly affected. The abdomen appeared to be somewhat swollen and it was suffering from diarrhMedical Officers of the Army of India. 9 Immediate examinations were made of the subcutaneous effusion, the peri- toneal secretion, the cardiac blood, and the intestinal contents. The subcutane- ous effusion was full of characteristic commas. The peritoneal secretion was also crowded with them. Many of them here were of large size and abnormal form, many of these being evidently connected with the process of multiplication by longitudinal division10 Scientific Memoirs by We have here five cases of the subcutaneous injection of choleraic commas in three of which fatal results ensued. There can, I believe, be no reasonable doubt that the commas exerted a specific pathogenic influence in these cases. The general uniformity of the lesions present in all of them, together with the fact of the general systemic diffusion of the commas, appears to be conclusive in regard to this point. The results are such as would appear to prove conclusively that subcutaneous injections of commatous media are not unattended with possible risks. When, however, we come to consider the matter further, we encounter two questions calling for separate consideration. These are, 1st: How far are these results con- firmatory in a belief in the causative relation of the comma-bacilli to cholera ? and, 2nd: How are we to account for the exemption of two of the animals experimented with ? The fact that the choleraic commas are under certain circumstances patho- genic is one thing, that they are the efficient cause of cholera is quite another. In dealing with the symptoms manifesting themselves in any such experiments as the above, we are at the outset encountered by doubts as to the extent to which we are entitled to expect any exact uniformity of symptoms in animals of unlike nature and habits, and how far we are justified in tracing parallelisms in symp- toms of differing characters. The same holds good, to a certain extent at all events, in regard to the lesions revealed by post-mortem examinations. Allowing all this due weight, there were apparently in these cases of disease following the subcutaneous introduction of choleraic commas into the system certain points of similarity to, or even of close agreement with, cases of cholera. So far as the symptoms are concerned, there was in the first case unquestionably consider- able depression of surface temperature with frequent muscular twitchings, if not actual cramps, and, both in it and the next one, there was marked sinking of the eyeballs. In the third case, on the other hand, there was distinct diarrhMedical Officers of the Army of India. 11 blood. The condition of the serous surfaces of the peritoneal cavity was also so far similar to that present in cholera in that they were covered with a thin layer of peculiar adhesive secretion. On the other hand, this secretion is sharply defined from that normal to cases of cholera owing to the presence of abundance of commas in it. The results of cultivations of the cardiac blood, moreover, differ from those in cholera, as, al- though no commas were ever recognisable in the fresh blood, cultivations always gave pure crops of such bodies. In regard to this point, however, it is just possible that the commas were really derived from the serous surface of the peri- cardium and not from the interior of the heart. The materials for cultivation were always obtained by passing the end of a freshly drawn and hermetically sealed capillary pipetti through the walls of the auricle and subsequently breaking off the closed lip within the cardiac cavity. Now, as the external surface of the heart was in no case disinfected previously, it remains possible that the results of the cultivation were due to commas derived from the pericardium and adhering to the exterior of the pipette. The extensive subcutaneous effusion of sanguineous material full of commas which formed such a characteristic feature in all three cases is unlike any phenomenon normal to cases of cholera. The condition of the spleen, too, is, if anything, rather adverse to the acceptation of the choleraic nature of the affection, as there appeared to be a decided tend- ency to splenic enlargement in two of the cases, at all events, and such a con- dition is suggestive rather of septicæmia than of cholera. Taking everything into, consideration, however, there yet appears to be a considerable probability that the disease in these cases was in many ways closely related to cholera. The points of agreement between the two morbid conditions seem to me to be very noteworthy, and the deviations may possibly be as- cribable to the nature of the animals experimented with, the quantity of the pathogenic medium introduced, and the site of its introduction. One thing is very clearly demonstrated by the results of these experiments, and that is that the sites in an organism in which pathogenic schizomycetes are ultimately to be encountered in greatest abundance by no means necessarily correspond with those of primary invasion of the system. In all these cases comma-bacilli of identical nature with those originally introduced were ultimately present in great, and in one case in excessive abundance, within the cavity of the intestinal tube, whilst in all cases alike the site of primary invasion was the subcutaneous tissue. It must, I think, be granted that the commas present within the intestinal cavity were the descendants of those which were introduced into the subcutane- ous tissue, and, from the abundance of similar bodies present in the peritoneal secretion, it would appear that the path which they followed in their systemic diffusion was from the subcutaneous lymphatic spaces to the great peritoneal one, and thence by direct penetration of the walls of the intestinal tube to its cavity. C 2
12 Scientific Memoirs by All direct evidence of such a process of penetration is, however, wanting, for the most careful examination of numerous sections of the intestinal walls failed in every instance to show any evidence of special accumulations of commas in their thickness. It is, of course, possible that the period of transit may have preceded that at which death took place, or that transference only occurred in the case of a very few commas which subsequently by processes of multiplication gave origin to the multitudes ultimately present within the cavity of the intestinal canal. There remains, further, the possibility that the transit may have taken place, not by a process of general diffusion, but by the agency of special carrier-protoplasts, which, after taking up the commas by ingestion while within the peritoneal cavity, subsequently traversed the walls of the intestinal tube and died within its cavity, freeing their bacillar contents in a condition fit for processes of rapid growth and multiplication. That such a process of transit actually did occur, to some extent at all events, in these cases is rendered probable by the phenomena presented by the iliac mucus in Experiment 1. In this, as previously mentioned, numerous bodies, similar to those pointed out by Drs. Klein and Gibbes as occurring in choleraic media, were present. These consisted of large nuclear bodies, with more or less evident remains of cell protoplasm around them, in which numbers of small bacilli were present. These were, however, in this instance unequivo- cally minute commas and not straight bacilli as in the choleraic media. (Plate I, fig. 3.) The results of the experiments in any case appear definitely to deter- mine that by some means or other, actual transit of schizomycete organisms from the tissues outside the intestinal tube to the interior of it may take place so as to give rise to conspicuous effects there without it being possible to obtain any direct evidence of the occurrence of the process. But another important fact is established by these experiments for all those who assume that the choleraic commas are the actual cause of cholera. The ex- periments clearly show that pathogenic effects may arise as the result of the access of these bacilli to the lymphatic system, and that therefore the site of primary infection in cases of cholera need not necessarily be the digestive tract. It may, of course, be urged that spreading lymphatic invasion, such as was present in these cases, is not a phenomenon normal to cholera, and that it is therefore one aside of the question as regards the invasion of the system in that disease. This objection, however, ceases to carry any weight when we recollect that as an ultimate outcome of this lymphatic invasion we have the access of commas to the interior of the intestinal canal and their extensive multiplication within it; for, even granting that the true choleraic condition is only initiated by such processes, the fact remains that they may be due, not to direct invasion of the interior of the digestive tract by the ingestion of materials from the external world, but to invasion from the surrounding tissues. The question regarding the cause of the immunity of two of the animals experimented with must in the meantime remain a subject for conjecture only. The immunity must clearly have been due either to special conditions in the
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 13 inoculated animals or to special conditions in the material which was introduced into their system. If the phenomenon were due to any subjective peculiarity in the animals there was, at all events, no direct evidence of its existence, unless we are to regard the fact that the exempt animals were somewhat larger than those in two of the fatal cases and were not pregnant as the animal in the third fatal case was, as equivalent to this. The actual weights of the animals and the amount of commatous fluid injected in each case are shown below:14 Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army of India. The only phenomenon which was in any way noteworthy in reference to it is that, in all the cases in which pathogenic results presented themselves, the cultivations from which the materials for injection were obtained had very conspicuously passed on into the stage characterised by the occurrence of vacuolation and other deviations from the normal form in the commas, and that in one, at all events, of the cases of exemption, the material belonged to a very recent cultiva- tion in which such phenomena had not begun to manifest themselves. CALCUTTA; The 16th April 1886.
On the Life History of a new Æcidium on Strobilanthes dalhousianus, Clarke. BY SURGEON-MAJOR A. BARCLAY; M.B., SPECIAL ASSISTANT TO THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. (With Plates II and III. ) I.16 Scientific Memoirs by the season itself was unusually backward, so that a fresh spring vegetation had not yet sprung up to hide these spore-laden dry grass leaves. I placed some of these teleutospores on a few young leaves of one branch of a Strobilanthes plant I had gathered during the previous autumn, and which I had since kept in my verandah. In nature these plants were still without leaves thus early in spring, and but for the forced plants I had in my possession, collected and housed during the previous year, I should have had no opportunity then of ascertaining whether these teleutospores were related to the æcidium in ques- tion. Most of these leaves became infected, and as soon as this indication was afforded of the further life history of the Strobilanthes æcidium, numerous other experiments were instituted, many of which are detailed below, and which I think prove beyond doubt the genetic relationship between the puccinia-bearing fungus on Pollinia and the æcidial parasite on Strobilanthes. The method of inoculation*I pursued was usually as follows, and, unless otherwise stated, all the following experiments were made in this way. Into a few drops of distilled water held in a watch-glass, a large number of teleutospores scraped off their beds were placed. This water was then applied by a clean glass-rod or other instrument to the leaves or other parts which it was desired to infect. But before proceeding to a description of these experiments, it is desirable to note the general characters of the æcidium as it occurs on Strobilanthes. The affection is especially prevalent on young plants some time before flowering. The leaves present from one to a dozen or more circular discoloured patches on their blades, measuring on an average 4Medical Officers of the Army of India. 17 in a pot, was kept uncovered in my laboratory; but on the 19th it was protected still further by being placed under a glass shade. On the 23rd April nine leaves in all displayed in the same paling in spots or patches. In most cases each leaf presented several paled areas, and minute, yellowish, differentiated points could now readily be detected in several of these, which promised to develope into mature spermogonia. The anticipation was fulfilled a few days later when these points developed into minute pustules with pellucid summits, and micro- scopical examination left no further doubt as to their being mature spermo- gonia. On the 3rd May, several ripe æcidia were found in most invaded areas with well-developed æcidiospores. Experiment II .13 Scientific Memoirs by under surfaces, and upon those of the other (B) upon their upper surfaces, and they were then kept under a glass shade in 4my. laboratory. Unfortunately all the leaves of (A) died early without any sign of infection. On the 17th May, three of five leaves on one shoot of (B) and five of eight on the other shoot showed distinct foci of infection with young spermogonia already developed. On the 2 1 st, of the ten leaves still remaining (three had withered and fallen off), all were attacked, five showing single centres of infection, three with three centres each, one with four centres, and one with five centres, of infection. The leaves withered before any æcidia were formed. Experiment IV. Medical Officers of the. Army of India. 19 on 8th May, and of these three became affected, producing a number of sper- mogonia. But the leaves withered before the production of æcidia. Experiment VII. 20 Scientific Memoirs by II.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 21 Experiment X. 22 Scientific Memoirs by same glass box, for the plants were protected from external influence. It might, however, be urged that my protection against-external influence was not sufficient to exclude Such minute bodies as sporidia. This is true, but as I have shown that newly-formed teleutospores germinate immediately after ripening, and that they are then also fully capable of at once attacking. Strobilanthes (Experiment X), it is not reasonable to invite a remote cause for the continued attack of the leaves of this Strobilanthes, when a fully sufficient proximate cause for it lies at hand. With an increased production of æcidiospores, there resulted also an in- creased production of teleutospores, until at last, by successive reciprocal attacks, the leaves both of Strobilanthes and Pollinia presented an immense number of infected centres far more numerous than ever occurs in nature. Some idea of the extraordinary propagation of this fungus within the glass box-may be gained by the following statements. Originally about 30 leaves of this Strobilanthes plant were inoculated. They produced an abundance of æcidiospores which falling on Pollinia, produced a first crop of teleutospores. One month later still the Strobilanthes had grown greatly, throwing out new shoots and leaves. The whole plant had its leaves sprinkled uniformly over with yellow æcidial patches. I plucked one small branch of this plant, and of the 63 leaves it bore 58 were attacked in all stages of development, from commencing attack to final dis- integration of old affected areas. Two of these- leaves presented over 90 centres of. attack. It was difficult to count the number of centres of attack on all these 58 leaves, since many centres originally distinct had coalesced, leaving little or no indication of the number of coalesced centres. But count- ing-all undoubtedly separate centres of attack, I found that these leaves presented no fewer than 730 such centres ! Experiment XIV. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 23. depth, the upper halves remaining in lateral contiguity. The mycelial filaments are colourless, measure 4 µ in diameter, and for the most part do not penetrate the mesophyll cells, though occasionally haustoria may be seen within the cells of the spongy tissue similar in character to those which exist more abundantly in other tissues, and which will be described below. Affected areas are consider- ably thickened, but the thickening is due almost entirely to the increased dimen- sions of the spongy tissue elements, although the palisade cells are also hyper- trophied to some extent. The average thickness of a normal leaf varies from about 0.129 m.m. to 0.145 m.m., whilst at invaded parts the thickness averages from about 0.315 m.m. to 0.340 m.m. The following table will show roughly the parts taken by the palisade and spongy tissue cells in giving rise to this thickening:24 Scientific Memoirs by within the parenchymatous cells surrounding the vascular bundles (bundle sheath ?). C.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 25 IV.26 Scientific Memoirs by promycelia. The terminal ends of the promycelia containing the granular colour- less matter divide into four compartments by four transverse septa (figs. 6 and 7), and from each compartment a sporidium is found at the end of a short pointed sterigma. Sometimes the sterigmata attained abnormally long dimensions, but these never, as far as my observation reached, produced sporidia. An exag- gerated instance of such deformed sterigmata is shown in figure 7. The sporidia measure from 10 x 6 µ to 12 x 7 µ (figs. 5 and 6). I noticed that when the germination of the teleutospores was slow in cold weather, the sporidia were smaller than when germination was quicker in warmer weather. In a cultivation started on 7th April, when the temperature of the room was about 50° F., sporidia were formed on the11th, and these measured 10 x 6 µ; whilst in another cultiva- tion started on the 9th June, when the temperature of the room was about 65° F., germination ensued rapidly, sporidia were found in twenty-four hours, and these measured 12 x 7µ. The sporidia germinated readily in the usual way by throw- ing out slender short tubes (fig. 6). I never observed the formation of second- ary sporidia. Conclusion. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 27 irregularly round and usually faceted, 18 x 16 µ, smooth, pale orange-yellow. On Strobilanthes dalhousianus, Clarke. II.Æcidium Urticæ, Schum., var. Himalayense. BY SURGEON-MAJOR A. BARCLAY, M.B., SPECIAL ASSISTANT TO THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. (With Plates II, IV, and V.) I was not aware, when during 1885 I traced the life history of the very strik- ing æcidium which occurs abundantly on the nettles about Simla (Western Himalayas), that a similar, if not identical, one is well known in Europe, and had been described by Schröter.*Upon learning this I decided not to publish the results of my own observations; but, on reconsideration, I have thought that it would not be uninteresting to those interested in these fungi were I to do so, as the Himalayan variety differs in some respects from its European congener, and is of peculiar interest in regard to its geographical isolation or at any rate remote- ness. The traveller on the Himalayas is frequently struck by the presence there of flowering plants very closely allied to, or even identical with, European species; but the occurrence of a similar heter30 Scientific Memoirs by greatly that the whole leaf becomes extraordinarily deformed. When the veins are attacked in their continuity, they curve while swelling very greatly with their convexities usually downwards; but when the fungus attacks the branching point of smaller veins, the most irregular contortions arise, some curving with their convexities upwards, whilst others are twisted in the opposite direction. Some idea may be gained of the extraordinary amount of hypertrophy produced by the following actual measurements. The petiole of a leaf which was mon- strously hypertrophied measured 12.7 c.m. in length and 2.2 c.m. in diameter at its thickest part, and was curled round in a complete circle. When the petioles are invaded their whole tissue is uniformly hypertrophied; but when the main stem is attacked (Fig. 1, Plate IV) the mycelium is strictly localised, and the hypertrophied part appears in the form of an excrescence or well-defined tumour. Such an excrescence, may or may not cause the stem to be bent towards the opposite side. An extreme amount of such bending is shown in Fig. 1, Plate IV. These tumours are often of great size; one, by no means the largest that could be found, measured 2.8 c.m. in length, 2 c.m. in breadth, and 1.2 c.m. in depth. These extraordinarily hypertrophied parts contain an abundance of nutritive starchy material, which the hill natives eat with relish, selecting them just before the æcidia ripen. It is called by them khiri , a cucumber, on account of the resemblance of its taste to that vegetable. Generally, during the middle of June, the upper surfaces of the leaves of the nettle present small circular patches of pale-yellow discoloration. Each patch is usually much arched upwards with a corresponding concavity below. At this time a leaf may have from one to five such patches. The upper surfaces of these patches are densely studded with spermogonial papillæ, a few only occurring on the lower surfaces. A fortnight or three weeks later the æcidial fructification makes its appearance on the same patches, which have by this time increased in area and thickness. Now, during the earlier part of July, large thickenings and tumours occur plentifully; but as soon as the rains have well set in, these hypertrophied parts disappear, due to their rotting, mainly the result of invasion by a white silky mould. But although at this season large hypertrophies are not to be found, except in sheltered places, yet infection continues, for young leaves even then show the earliest stages of attack by the parasite. Towards the latter end of the rains, however, after the middle of August, the fungus dis- appears entirely, and will not be found again until the following summer. The nettle flowers towards the end of the rains (during the latter part of August), and. I have in several other cases observed that when a flowering plant is attacked by an æcidium before it flowers, the fungus disappears entirely just before the flowers begin to open. For example, this is the case also with Æci- dium Strobilanthis described in the preceding paper. The above seasonal cha- racteristics of the fungus relate only to its appearance in Simla. At lower elevations it appears earlier, for during May 1884, whilst at Rampur and other
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 31 places in the Sutlej Valley at elevations of 3,500 to 4.,000 ft., I found this fungus already in full æcidial fructification. Having given a brief description of the general characters of the æcidial stage of this fungus, I will now describe some of the experiments made to show that it is produced by teleutospores from Carex setigera. Experiment I. On the 21st June 1885, some teleutospores scraped off from their beds on Carex were placed on the leaves of a nettle gathered some weeks previously from a locality in which the fungus was not observed, and which, had since remained unaffected in a small glass house in my garden. About a fortnight later there were distinct evidences that the plants had become infected, as several minute yellow spots were observed on the marked leaves which had been inoculated. These spots gradually inscreased in size, and on the 10th July 'bore numerous ripe spermogonia. In the same glass house were several other nettle plants which had not been inoculated, and these as well as the unmarked leaves of the plant partially inoculated remained unattacked. The affected parts continued to increase in area and thickness, and ultimately yielded charac- teristic hypertrophies densely studded with ripe æcidia. Experiment II. A pot containing three seedlings raised from seed I had collected the previous year and sown on 29th March 1886, offered 16 leaves in all for inocula- tion. Upon 12 of these, scraped-off teleutospores were placed on the 6th June, and the pot was then placed in a glass house outside. On the 26th June only two leaves were affected, and no more became subsequently attacked. On the 4th July, a vein of one of these leaves was largely swollen, and under the epidermies some æcidia were observed which a few days later came to maturity. Experiment III. A pot containing three similar seedlings had the terminal pairs of leaves of each inoculated on the 6th June. The plants were then kept in my room under a glass shade.. On the 14th three leaves showed commencing invasion, and on the 26th five of the six inoculated leaves were attacked, and some bore ripe spermogonia. The plants were not vigorous and had not grown since inocula- tion. They did not form æcidia. Experiment IV. Seven similar seedlings had their terminal pairs of leaves inoculated on the 6th June, and were then placed, like those just described, in my room under a separate glass shade. None of them became affected. Experiment V. Another pot also containing seven seedlings was treated in an exactly
32 Scientific Memoirs by similar way on the same day, but instead of being, then kept in my room was removed to a glass house outside. On the 26th four leaves were found attacked, and on the 4th July five of the seedlings had each its pair of inocu- lated leaves attacked, whilst the remaining two seedlings showed each only one leaf attacked. These plants had grown more vigorously in the glass house than those similarly treated in my room (Experiments III and IV), for each plant had unfolded two additional pairs of leaves above those inoculated, and these new leaves remained quite free of the fungus. I think the small success attending Experiment III and the entire want of success in Experiment IV may therefore be ascribed to the unfavourable surrounding circumstances in their cases. Experiment VI. On the 7th June four leaves of a seedling were cut off, and their cut ends placed under water. These were inoculated with teleutospores which had been scraped off their beds, and which had thereafter lain 20 hours in water, by which time numerous sporidia had been formed. Three of these became infected and produced ripe spermogonia, but did not go on to the formation of æcidia. Experiment VII. On the 13th April some scraped-off teleutospores were placed on the leaves of a young, uprooted, vigorous nettle gathered in my garden, and then placed with its roots under water in my room under a glass shade, On the 24th I observed that infection had undoubtedly occurred with paling of the leaf tissues and bulging in all the inoculated leaves, and in one the formation of spermogonia had commenced. Later several leaves formed spermogonia, but they all withered before any æcidia were produced. Experiment VIII. I sowed some nettle seed gathered during the previous autumn in two pots on the 29th March. On the 17th May these pots were crowded with seedlings which had unfolded from one to two pairs of foliage leaves. They were then sprinkled with a little water into which a large number of teleutospores were in- troduced. On the 3rd June a great many leaves were attacked, and many had produced ripe spermogonia. Later some æcidia were produced on a few leaves, but most of the affected leaves withered early. In every case in which æcidia were produced, the veins running across the affected areas were largely swollen, Experiment IX. Six of these seedlings were uprooted prior to the commencement of Ex- periment VIII, and having been placed with their roots under water, were inocu- lated with the same material as was used in Experiment VIII, and then kept
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 33 under a glass shade in my room. Only one of these plants became infected, and all withered early. In reviewing the results of these experiments, some explanation seems called for to account for the numerous cases in which infection did not follow inoculation in experiments made upon seedlings. In the first experiment made upon a fully grown plant, not only did all the inoculated leaves become attacked, but all produced numerous æcidia; whilst in the case of inoculated seedlings, even when infection resulted, the growth of the parasite often advanced only to the production of spermogonia. Two reasons may be given for the compara- tive insufficiency of result in these cases. The first is that the seedlings were very delicate from having been grown under artificial conditions: they were mostly elongated and etiolated, and in some cases, as in Experiment VIII, too densely crowded together. They were thus not robust plants, and could do little more than nourish themselves. In the second place, we have seen that this fungus requires considerable aid from its host for its own complete de- velopment, as the ripe æcidia are always borne after the attacked parts have swollen very considerably and amassed a large reserve of nutritive material. In nature æcidia are never found except on very considerably hypertrophied parts; hence the seedlings were unable to nourish a parasite that demanded so much of them in their enfeebled condition. These reasons, I think, will be considered sufficient to account for the several failures in my experiments with seedlings, more especially as they are indirectly supported by the complete success attending my inoculations upon vigorous and fully developed plants, many of which I have not thought it necessary to record here. I will now proceed to describe the fungus as it occurs on Carex setigera. This is a very widely distributed plant in Simla. Uredo pustules may usually be found, though not abundantly, on its leaves, and sometimes on its stalks, during the time the æcidia on the nettle are ripe,34 Scientific Memoirs by I made a few attempts to produce uredo pustules on Carex leaves in my room by inoculating them with æcidiospores, but without success. The leaves withered quickly in the room. I succeeded, however, in producing very numerous pustules on tufts outside my house by dusting them with æcidiospores; but it is of course quite possible that the resulting infection may have been due to natural attack, for the plants were not protected in any way. Still, as the plants which Were in a naturally sheltered nook had been dusted very profusely with æcidio- spores and bore many mote uredo and teleutospore pustules than are usually to be found on naturally attacked specimens, the greater probability is that the leaves in question became attacked by the æcidiospores I had dusted over them. I did not consider it necessary to make further efforts to artificially re- produce the Carex effection, as this had been done in Europe by Magnus as related by Schröter in his work already quoted. MICROSCOPIC CHARACTERS. General. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 35 tinguished from other elements of the tissue. by their crimson-red colour. They are also quickly soluble in water, for in sections cut in Water they are generally missed, whilst they are always very abundantly present in sections cut and examined in glycerine. These granules vary very greatly in size from about 16 µ in diamater to 4 µ (Figs. 2 and 3, Plate IV). The smaller ones are more abundant than the larger, which appear to be compounded of several smaller ones (Fig. 3, Plate IV). The central hypertrophied pith cells do not contain these large grains, but with Schultze's solution a number of fine, minute, deep- blue granules may be seen throughout them. Spermogonia. 36 Scientific Memoirs by With chlor. zinc. iod., the upper riper spores become greenish brown, whilst the younger spores and basidia assume a pale-sherry colour. As many as 24 spores may be counted in a detached row. They have no intercalary cells. The spores are very pale yellowish-white by reflected light, and when dry are usually faceted. In water and by transmitted light, they appear as yellow round bodies with finely granular contents. Externally they are beset with very deciduous tuber- cles (Fig. 6, Plate IV, and Fig. 8, Plate V). The moistened spores measured on an average 15.6 X 13.1 µ and these measurements were very uniformly maintained. In germinating, the æcidiospores throw out curved germinal tubes, which contain pale yellow oil globules as well as clear watery parts and granular protoplasm. The tubes measured 4 µ in diameter. Frequently these æcidiospores refused to germinate, and then after lying a few days in water, the spores generally lost much of their colour, and their contents were resolved into a number of round colourless globules mostly double-contoured and of various sizes (Fig. 7, Plate IV). Uredospores. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 37 placed in water in a growing cell, these teleutospores germinate quickly, each compartment throwing out a colourless germinal tube or promycelium, the upper one usually preceding (Figs. 12, 13, 16, and 17, Plate V). Teleutospores are generally formed about the beginning of August, and are germinable from the time they are ripe until the following July, but thereafter they are no longer capable of germination. During August I several times collected old teleuto- spores from the preceding year's dried-up leaves and new ones from fresh green leaves, and placed them in growing cells in water under exactly similar conditions, and whilst the new teleutospores germinated freely, the older ones refused to do so absolutely. This power of immediate germination of teleuto- spores may account for the few uredospores formed, as explained in the preced- ing paper on Æcidium Strobilanthis. The promycelia are sometimes short curved tubes uniformly granular in contents, or long straight tubes with the granular protoplasm partly collected at the ends and partly broken up into narrow septa or beads dividing off long clear spaces of the tube filled with fluid. Some of these long promycelia measured 0.2 to 0.4. m.m. in length and 5 to 5.5 µ in diameter, whilst the shorter curved promycelia were somewhat stouter, measuring 6 to 6.5 µ in diameter. The pro- mycelium of the upper cell emerges from the apex of the spore body, whilst that of the lower protrudes from a point near the septum (Figs. 12, 13, 16, and 17, Plate V). The distal ends of the promycelia are divided into four compartments by transverse septa, and from each of these a sporidium is usually formed at the end of a short pointed sterigma about 12 µ in length (Figs. 14, 15, Plate V). The sporidia are oval, pyriform, or slightly kidney-shaped, measuring about 12 X 8 µ The sporidia germinate in the usual way by throwing out a slender tube. As a rule secondary sporidia are not formed, but I once saw a secondary sporidium produced which measured 6 x 5 µ Conclusion. 38 Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army of India. parellel rows, but in the Indian variety they are isolated, small, circular beds. The teleutospores in both forms are of about equal total length; but whilst in the European form the lower cell is often-longer than the upper, the reverse is the case with the Himalayan variety. The stalks of the European form are about 20 µ long; in the Indian variety they are about 56 µ long. The sporidia in the European form measure 10 x 6.6 µ, whilst in the Indian variety they are 12 x 8 µ; and whilst the former appear usually to form secondary sporidia, the latter do so very exceptionally. PUCCINIA URTICÆ, nov. sp. P.S. On the Phenomenon of Gaseous Evolution from the Flowers of Ottelia alismoides. BY SURGEON-MAJOR. D. D. CUNNINGHAM, M.B., SPECIAL ASSISTANT TO THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. (With Plates VI, VII, and VIII.) Ottelia alismoides is a plant very abundant in the tanks in and around Calcutta, and, along with Vallisneria spiralis, stands out conspicuously as an important source of oxygen supply to the water. Certain peculiar phenomena connected with the gaseous evolution from the plant have not, in so far as I know, been specially described, and in the present paper I propose to give a brief account of them, founded on observations which were in greater part carried out in the early part of the year 1885. During the greater part of the time in which any plant of Ottelia is in full vigour the evolution of gas from it is not of a character to attract casual attention, as it is carried out by means of an abundant ascent of minute bubbles from the edges, and, to a slight degree, from the upper surfaces of the large, broad leaves. The great site of discharge of gas from the tissues is at this time the inferior surfaces of the leaves. The large amount of gaseous evolution actually occurring under such circumstances becomes, however, at once evident on removing a plant from its natural site and introducing it into a glass jar full of water and exposed to sunlight. A continual stream of small bubbles is then seen ascending from the foliar sur- faces. Such phenomena continue to present themselves unaltered during the period of growth of the scapes and early development of the flower-buds, but during the single day in which any flower matures and blows they are to a great extent replaced and masked by others. The gaseous evolution at this time becomes ex- tremely conspicuous owing to the constant discharge from the flower of a stream of bubbles of such considerable size as to be readily observable whilst the plant remains in its normal site, and the flowers deeply submerged, as the majority of them are, beneath the surface of the water. The general sequence of events in the blooming of the subaqueous flowers of Ottelia (Plate VI, Fig. I) is as follows: The actual flower-buds, up to the day on which they expand, are completely enclosed by a continuous sheath of fused bracts, forming a tube around the elongated ovary and arching over the young calyx and
40 Scientific Memoirs by corolla. Up to this time, too, the calyx is closed, the three sepals composing it adhering to one another marginally, so that the cavity of the flower is completely separated from the surrounding water by two continuous coveringsMedical Officers of the Army of India. 41 for determination is whether any special evolution of gas takes place during periods of flowering in excess of that evolved at other times. Experiments of various kinds (vide note B) agree in indicating that no special evolution occurs. In the first place it can be shown that in plants from which all the leaves have been carefully removed hardly any evolution of gas manifests itself through the flower. In the second place it appears that the amount of gaseous evolution from the flower varies in direct proportion to the number and size of healthy leaves on the plant. Finally, it is demonstrable that, allowing for this, the total gaseous evolution from both the flowers and general surfaces of flowering plants closely corresponds in amount with that from the general surfaces alone of non-flowering ones. Such a peculiar phenomenon might on a priori grounds lead to a belief that it was connected with some important end in the life history of the plant, and on examining the subject more closely from this point of view, it becomes evident that this is actually the case. The great end which is attained by the large liberation of gas from the floral organs is that fertilisation is securely carried out in the submerged flowers which come to maturity while far beneath the surface of the water. The majo- rity of the strongest plants of Ottelia grow in such deep water that none of their flowers have a chance of ever reaching the surface, and, even in plants growing in shallower water, very many flowers remain permanently submerged. Were no special provision at hand a very large proportion of flowers, and all those of the most vigorous plants, would fail to produce any seed, as the pollen grains are affected by contact with water in the ordinary fashion, swelling up, bursting, and discharging their contents without germinating. Owing, however, to the constant evolution of gases taking place in the dif- ferent parts of the flower at the period of maturation of the essential organs, these are kept continuously free from contact with the surrounding water, and germin- ation of the pollen grains and penetration of the stigmatic tissues are accordingly permitted to proceed without any obstacle. The flowers of Ottelia, whether aerial or subaqueous, are essentially de- veloped so as to secure self-fertilisation. The anthers and stigmas mature simultaneously and at a period when the flower is still in bud. The filaments and styles are in close apposition and are arranged alternately, and the anthers are closely applied to the stigmas in such a fashion that, as a rule, each of the anther lobes is on opening in direct relation to one of the stigmatic lobes of a separate stigma connected with a separate style. The precise arrangement and relations of the anthers and stigmas varies naturally to some extent in different instances (vide Note B), but in any case the relation is one of direct apposition, and the pollen, on dehiscence of the anther lobes, is directly applied to the stigmatic surfaces in large quantities. The pollen grains, moreover, germinate at a very early period, many of them beginning to do so whilst still within the anther lobes and apart from contact with the stigmas. G
42 Scientific Memoirs by The germinating tubes push their way inwards through the hairy tissue of the edges of the stigmas, to reach their smooth central surfaces, and then pass vertically down these and the stylar canal which is continuous with them. The number of pollen grains which have germinated in situ within the anther lobes is sometimes so great as to cause the anthers to adhere to the stigmas, and the mass of tubes traversing the stylar canal is so great as to form a thread readily distinguishable by the unaided eye if the style be carefully divided and the distal and proximal portions gently separated from one another (vide Note D). All these processes of maturation of anthers and stigmas, germination of pollen grains, and ingrowth of pollen tubes, take place ere the flower-bud has ex- panded, and at a time when in submerged specimens its cavity is constantly occupied by gas distending the floral chamber and discharging its excess in the form of a continuous stream of bubbles, which force their way out between the margins of the floral envelopes. The evolution of gas seems to take place from all parts of the flower, but mainly from the internal surfaces of the sepals, the external surface of the petals, and the tissue of the upper extremity of the centre of the ovary at the bases of the styles and continuous with the very open tissue which holds the central ex- tremities of the ovarian follicles in relation to one another. When the petals of an unexpanded flower are gently removed, the constant accumulation of gas under the influence of sunlight within the floral cavity can be very clearly ob- served. As the mass of gas increases, the sepals are gradually more and more separated from one another, the gas gradually protrudes more and more between their lateral edges or tips, and, when the tension has risen beyond a certain pitch, is partially discharged in the form of bubbles, with proportionate collapse of the calycine cavity. Similar phenomena appear when the petals are retained and the sepals removed. Pulsatory distension of the floral cavity and emission of bubbles here also manifests itself, although not with such intensity as in the pre- vious case. Where both sepals and petals are removed a continuous discharge of small bubbles from between the bases of the styles and filaments becomes evident. As previously mentioned, after the corolla has expanded, which only happens after the occurrence of fertilisation, the amount of gaseous evolution rapidly diminishes, and little further discharge appears to occur, save for a time, from the external surfaces of the petals, which are usually thickly coated with large adherent bubbles, and the water now descends freely into the cavity of the flower. Taking all these facts into account, there can, I think, be no doubt that the excessive gaseous evolution taking place from the flowers of Ottelia during the earlier part of their period of maturation has arisen in connection with the exter- nal conditions to which the majority of the flowers are exposed, and serves the end of securing the fertilisation of the flowers of the most vigorous plants by pre- venting the access of water to their essential reproductive apparatus until the processes of fertilisation have been effectually carried out.
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 43 The process of gaseous evolution, in fact, plays the same part in the case of Ottelia as is attained in Vallisneria by the detachment and ascent of the un- expanded male flowers and the continuous upward growth of the female ones. In both cases means are provided to prevent the access of water to the mature reproductive organs: in Vallisneria this is effected by means of their travelling to the surface of the water; in Ottelia by the provision of a special localised at- mosphere developed by the plant itself. It remains finally to consider how far it is. possible to explain the occurrence of such a phenomenon,44 Scientific Memoirs by ordinary circumstances these are mainly represented in the delicate tissue of the inferior foliar epidermis, and the excess of gas is accordingly forced out between the delicate cells there. Under other circumstances, however, the point of least resistance may come to be situated elsewhere; for example, if the petiole of a leaf freely exposed to sunshine be carefully divided by a sharp knife, a very considerable continuous discharge of gas manifests itself from the end of the laminar portion of the petiole, while a certain amount also frequently appears from the end of the axial portion. On the other hand, if the scape of a. flower which has already blown be similarly treated, a large continuous discharge of gas occurs from the axial extremity, while none appears from the floral one. The floral apparatus during the earlier stages of maturation appears merely to represent the temporary point of least resistance in a system exposed through- out to high gaseous tension. That it should do so is readily accounted for by the special delicacy and open characters of the tissues composing it and directly continuous with those of the scape in which, as the experiment just cited shows, conditions of high gaseous pressure are present. But these conditions can be experimentally shown (vide Note B) not to be dependent on processes of local manufacture there, but on processes of gaseous manufacture in the leaves, the pressure originating there being propagated along the continuous system of petiolar stem and scape intercellular spaces. In Ottelia, then, we have a great continuous system of intercellular spaces, which under the influence of sunlight becomes highly charged with gaseous contents. As there are no permanent special openings, such as stomata, pro- vided for discharge, the gaseous tension within this system goes on increasing until discharge is effected at the weakest points in it. Under ordinary circum- stances these are mainly situated in the leaves, and specially in the under surfaces of these. When, however, the flowers are maturing,Medical Officers of the Army of India. 45 NOTES. Note A.46 Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army of India. and here the tendency, of course, is to pollination of both edges of one of the stigmas of the styles, the other stigma being protected by its internal situation. This arrangement is comparatively rare. It is to be understood that the above statements are to be taken generally. They refer merely to the two types of arrangement. In almost every case neither one nor the other is thoroughly carried out throughout any flower, and a certain amount of pollination of almost every stigmatic surface occurs. The number of styles and anthers in individual flowers varies very considerably. The following table shows the numbers of them present in 9 flowers examined in regard to this point at different times:The Fertilization of Ficus hispida: A Problem in Vegetable Physiology. BY SURGEON-MAJOR G. KING, M.B., SUPERINTENDENT, ROYAL BOTANIC GARDEN, CALCUTTA. (With Plates IX and X.) The exact way in which the flowers of the genus Ficus are fertilized has long been a matter of uncertainty. Much of this uncertainty is no doubt owing to the fact that the structure of these flowers has not been properly understood. With the view, therefore, of inviting the attention of medical officers in this country to the study of a most interesting physiological problem, I propose here to describe the structure and arrangement of the flowers in one of the common- est Indian species, the Ficus hispida of the younger Linnæus.*This forms a bush or small tree, and frequents by preference shady and damp spots, although it is often enough to be met with in open, sunny situations. The leaves of this plant are sometimes alternate, but as a rule they are opposite. In shape they vary from ovate or ovate-oblong to obovate-elliptic; the edges are usually dentate in young leaves, but in old leaves they are often entire; the texture is always membranous, and both surfaces are more or less scabrid and covered with stiff, harsh, white hairs. The figs are borne sometimes in the axils of the leaves (Plate IX), and sometimes in small fascicles on the stem or larger branches (Plate X, Fig. I); while, occasionally, they are arranged in long leafless racemes (Plate X, Fig. 2) which originate from the stem near its base. The ripe figs are about as large as a small nutmeg, but in shape many of them are unlike a nut- *To facilitate the identification of this plant, I subjoin its synonymy:- Ficus hispida, Linn. fil., suppl. p. 442; Bl.Bijdr., p. 469 (cum syn. Rheede); Benth. Fl. Hong-Kong, 329, Fl. Austr. VI. 176; Bedd. Fl. sylv. 224; Brandis, F. Flora, 423; Kurz, Fl. B. Burma, II. 460; Miq. in Ann. Mus. Lugd. Bat. III. 282, 296. F. oppositifolia, Willd. Spec. IV. p. 1151; Roxb. Corom. P1. n. 124, Fl. Ind. III. 561; Wight, Ic. 638; Griff. Ic. P1. As. t. 56o (Sub Covellia) ; Gasparrini Rich. p. 85; Dalzell & Gibson, FL Bombay, 243. F. scabra, Jacq. Hort. Sch48 Scientific Memoirs by meg, being of a depressed-spheroidal form something like that of an early Dutch turnip. Until quite ripe their colour is green, but as they approach maturity the colour changes to a pale dirty yellow. On their sides there are occasionally to be seen small pale warts and larger, brownish, scarious scales. This species is common over a large part of India. It occurs also in Ceylon, Burma, the Malayan Peninsula, Hong-Kong, and Australia. Its Sanscrit and Bengali name is Kaho Dumbara; in Hindi it is known as Kagsha, Gobla, or Konea Dumbar; while in the Punjab the plant receives the local names of Daduri, Degar, and Rumbul; and in Oudh that of Kat Gularia. The Telugu-speaking people of the Peninsula call it Boda-mamadi; in the neighbourhood of Bombay it is named Gan Dumbar. The Burmese call it Kadot. What the Tamil name for it is I have not been able to find out with certainty. Before proceeding further, it will be necessary to give a short sketch of the structure of the kind of inflorescence known familiarly as fig, and botanically as receptacle or c49 Medical Officers of the Army of India. Each of these flowers (see Plate X, Fig. 5) consists of a simple perianth, con- sisting of three rounded, concave, hyaline pieces which surround a single stamen. The stamen consists of a broad two-celled anther, with a short filament. There is no trace in the male flower of any female organ or pistil. The anther pro- duces pollen, and, when this pollen is mature, the loculi of the anther open by longitudinal dehiscence to allow it to escape. The male element in these antheriferous flowers is therefore perfect. The whole of the remaining space on the inner walls of the cavity below the zone of male flowers is occupied by pseudo-female or gall flowers. These gall flowers (see Plate X, Fig. 6) are borne on rather long, thick, fleshy pedicels, but they have no obvious perianth. Each pedicel has, near its apex, a small sub-globular ovary, from one side of which, just under the apex, there arises a short, smooth style. The style bears at its apex a stigma, which, however, is in many cases destitute of the loose, viscid, papillose parenchyma so characteristic of the true stigma. On opening the ovaries of these flowers, no ovule or seed is discovered. They are either empty, or they contain the pupa of an insect, a species of Blastophaga or a species of so-called Ichneumon. These flowers, fashioned like females and shut up in a closed cavity with a number of perfect males, are all absolutely barren. The pollen of the males is shed for them in vain, and in the ovaries where one would expect to find an embryonic fig, there is either an empty space or the pupa of an intruding insect. The second set of figs is externally undistinguishable from the former, and on making a vertical section of one of them the general internal arrange- ments are seen to be similar. The mouth is closed by the same kind of inter- locking scales, so that the cavity of the flask is completely closed. But, in figs of this second sort, no trace of a male or gall flower is anywhere to be found. The whole area of the inner walls is occupied by perfectly formed female flowers, each of which produces a single seed. In general appearance these fertile females (Plate X, Fig. 7) resemble the pseudo-female or gall flowers, and, like these, they have no obvious perianth. These fertile female flowers differ, however, from the galls in having a longer, more lateral style, which is hairy, not smooth, and which is crowned by a cylindric stigma formed of true stigmatic parenchyma. But, above all, the fertile female flowers differ from the gall flowers in having larger ovaries, in each of which there is produced a perfect seed and never the pupa of an insect. We have thus the extraordinary phenomena presented of a set of female flowers, functionally barren, associated in the same receptacles with a number of functionally fertile males; while in the cavities of a different set of receptacles there are enclosed a set of perfectly formed female flowers associated with which there is not a single male! And yet these females, with apparently such poor opportunities of becoming fer- tilized, are all fertile; while those shut up with the males are all barren! Or, to state the matter in another way,50 Scientific Memoirs by flowers is conferred on a set of females which, by reason of certain peculiarities in their structure, are incapable of receiving advantage from the companionship, and these pseudo-females produce insects: while the structurally perfect females are shut up in receptacles from which males are excluded, and to which their pollen cannot to all appearance get access; and yet these perfectly formed females produce fertile seeds. The problem to which I have to invite attention is therefore this51 Medical Officers of the Army of India. the walls of the ovaries of the gall flowers will be found to have become reduced to thin membranes which have ruptured and from which there have escaped a number of little insects. These insects are of two kinds,52 Scientific Memoirs by Such are the structure and arrangement of the flowers in Ficus hispida, and this species is the type of a great number of the species of this large genus. There are, however, other modes of arrangement, as, for example, in the group to which the Peepul and Banyan belong, where the male, female, and gall flowers are all included within the same receptacle.
Note on Eggs of Distoma (Bilharzia) Hæmatobium found in transport cattle, Calcutta. BY SURGEON-MAJOR G. BOMFORD, M.D., BENGAL MEDICAL SERVICE. (With Plate XI. ) The eggs, which are the subject of this Note, were found on microscopical examination of the large intestines of two bullocks belonging to the Transport Department and destroyed at the cattle lines, Hastings, Calcutta, in September and October 1885, because they were believed to be suffering from rinderpest. In one bullock (branded O27) there were numerous eggs in a small portion of the cæcum which had been preserved in absolute alcohol with a view to a search for bacteria. They were most numerous within, or between, the tubular glands of the mucous membrane, but were also present in considerable numbers in the sub-mucous tissue below the muscularis mucosæ. Owing to the alcohol, the contents of the eggs were in this case shrivelled up into a granular shape- less mass, but the external form of the shell was preserved and the characteristic spine very clearly seen. In another bullock (branded O72) similar eggs were found in some piles (polypi or papillomata) removed from the margin of the anus. These piles were composed of hypertrophied mucous glands and dilated vessels, covered externally by skin, and internally by mucous membrane. The eggs were imbed- ded, generally in groups, either in the mucous membrane and epidermis, or in the sub-mucous tissues and corium. As in this case the tissues had been hardened in Müller's fluid, the contents of many of the eggs were fairly preserved and the form of the embryo distinguished. The figure represents the appearance of some of the eggs of a group in a section of one of these piles, stained with picro- carmine and logwood, and magnified 400 diameters. They are ovoid in form, broader and more rounded at the armed end, narrower and more tapering at the other, and when perfect and unruptured about 17 mm. long and 08 mm. broad. The spine varies considerably in length, and may be straight, gently curved, or sometimes hooked. In some cases its situa- tion is eccentric (i.e ., not on the extreme pole of the egg), and indeed in almost
54 Scientific Memoirs by all is slightly so, but could never be described as lateral. In a group of several there is often one egg which appears to have no spine. The contained embryo is a mass of nucleated cells, granular matter and vacuoles, covered with a thin cuticle, and resembles the egg in general shape, being broader at the end towards the spine and narrow and tapering at the other. A small rounded prominence can often be demonstrated at the broad end, and behind this, on what may be described as the shoulders, an indistinct appear- ance of cilia in some cases. The mass of the embryo was always stained more or less by the carmine, while the nuclei were made more distinct by the logwood. The cavity of the egg is not filled by the embryo and is continued into the spine for some distance, and within this spinal cavity there are often, but not always, two or three black dots. These ova exactly resemble those of Distoma (Bilharzia) Hæmatobium, which has hitherto been found only in man, or a monkey, and is supposed to be confined geographically to Africa, north and south, the west coast of Arabia, and the Mauritius. Sonsino has described (in the proceedings of the Royal Academy of Physical and Mathematical Science, Naples, May 1876, p. 84) a parasite of the same genus found in Egyptian cattle, and which he has named Bilharzia Bovis. This differs from Bilharzia Hæmatobium in the shape of its eggs, of which he gives a figure, and which are spindle-shaped, broad and rounded in the middle, tapering at either end, and have a short, broad, cordate spine. As it was thought possible that these two bullocks had been on service in Egypt, the Transport Officer was asked to make enquiries about their previous history, which he very kindly did. He reports that the bullock O27 was born in Hansi and came to Calcutta from Ferozpore in 1883, and has not been out of India since then. Its history previous to 1883 cannot be traced, but bullocks of its class55 Medical Officers of the Army of India. Sonsino's description, too, of the ileo-cæcal valve in cases of Bilharzia Bovis as being so congested and swollen that it formed a dark cushion-like ring, exatly corresponds with the condition of this valve in the Calcutta bullocks. Trans- port cattle, both at Calcutta and Dum-Dum, frequently suffer from hæmaturia,Description of Plate. PLATE I. FIG. 1.PLATE I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003846.tif] INTESTINAL TISSUES AND COMMA-BACILLI FROM THE BODY OF A GUINEA-PIG KILLED BY SUBCUTANEOUS INJECTION OF COMMAS. Lithographed at the Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, August 1886.
Description of Plate. PLATE II. FIG. 1.PLATE II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003858.tif] Lithographed at the Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, September 1886.
Description of Plate. PLATE III. FIG. 9.PLATE III. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003870.tif] 9 x 220 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003870.tif] 10 x 350 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003870.tif] 11 x 350 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003870.tif] 12 x 350 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003870.tif] 13 x 400 Lithographed at the Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, September 1886.
Description of Plate. PLATE IV. FIG. 1.PLATE IV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003882.tif] 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003882.tif] 2x340 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003882.tif] 3x580 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003882.tif] 4x340 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003882.tif] 5x340 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003882.tif] 6x122 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003882.tif] ax340 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003882.tif] 7x340 Lithographed at the Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, September 1886.
Description of Plate. PLATE V. FIG. 8.PLATE V. 8. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003894.tif] a x 340 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003894.tif] b x 200 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003894.tif] 9 x 340 10. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003894.tif] a x 350 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003894.tif] b x 340 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003894.tif] 11 x 340 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003894.tif] 12 x 340 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003894.tif] 13 x 340 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003894.tif] 14 x 350 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003894.tif] 15 x 340 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003894.tif] a [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003894.tif] 16 x 340 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003894.tif] 17 x 340 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003894.tif] 18 x 350 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003894.tif] 19 x 340 Lithographed at the Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, September 1886.
Description of Plate. PLATE VI. FIG. I.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003906.tif] Fig. 5 x 220 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003906.tif] Fig. 4 x [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003906.tif] Fig. 2 x 130 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003906.tif] Fig. 3 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003906.tif] Fig. 1. FLOWER, FOLIAR EPIDERMIS, AND GERMINATING POLLEN-GRAINS I Lithographed at the Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, August 1886.
PLATE VI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003909.tif] Fig. 5 x 220 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003909.tif] Fig. 4 x 130 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003909.tif] Fig. 2 x 130 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003909.tif] Fig. 3 x 130 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003909.tif] Fig. 1. FLOWER, FOLIAR EPIDERMIS, AND GERMINATING POLLEN-GRAINS IN OTTELIA ALISMOIDES. Lithographed at the Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, August 1886.
Description of Plate. PLATE VII. FIG. 1.PLATE. VII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003921.tif] Fig. 1 x 130 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003921.tif] Fig. 2 x 130 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003921.tif] Fig. 6. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003921.tif] Fig. 4 x 220 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003921.tif] Fig. 3 x 130 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003921.tif] Fig. 5 x 220 TISSUES OF LEAVES AND STEM IN OTTELIA ALISMOIDES. Lithographed at the Survey of India offices, Calcutta, August 1886.
Description of Plate. PLATE VIII.PLATE. VIII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003933.tif] Fig. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003933.tif] Fig. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003933.tif] Fig. 3. TISSUES OF OTTELIA ALISMOIDES, FROM CHATIN'S "ANATOMIE COMPARÉE DES VEGETAUX." Lithographed at the Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, August 1886.
Description of Plate. PLATE IX. Branch of Ficus hispida, Linn. fil., with axillary receptacles.
PLATE IX. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003945.tif] Lithographed at the Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, January 1887.
Description of Plate. PLATE X. FIG. I.-A fascicle of receptacles from the stem: fig. 2, a whorl of immature recep- tacles from a long aphyllous branch proceeding from the stem; figs. 3 & 4, vertical sections through a receptacle; fig. 5, a male flower; fig. 6, a gall flower; fig. 7, female flowers; fig. 8, larvæ found inside receptacle; fig. 9, male Blastophaga bent; fig. 10, head of the same seen from below (much enlarged); figs. 11 & 12, female Blastophagas; fig. 13, female of so-called Ichneumon; figs. 14 & 16, males of the same, seen from above and below; 15 & 17, heads of males of the same (further enlarged) seen from above and below. Figs. 5 to 17 are all enlarged.
PLATE X. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003960.tif] Lithographed at the Survey of India Office, Calcutta, January 1887.
PLATE XI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75003963.tif] x400 EGGS OF DISTOMA (BILHARZIA) HÆMATOBIUM, Found in Transport Cattle, Calcutta. Lithographed at the Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, November 1886.
SCIENTIFIC MEMORIES BY MEDICAL OFFICERS OF THE ARMY OF INDIA. EDITED BY B. SIMPSON, Esq., M.D., SURGEON-GENERAL WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PART II. 1886. 1.