IP/QB.10 m.91.b. SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS .BY MEDICAL OFFICERS OF THE ARMY OF INDIA. EDITED BY W. R. RICE, ESQ., M.D., SURGEON-GENERAL WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PART VII. 1892. 1[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001089.tif]
SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY MEDICAL OFFICERS OF THE ARMY OF INDIA. EDITED BY W. R. RICE, ESQ., M.D., SURGEON-GENERAL WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PART VII. 1892. 1.Some observations on the life-history of Sclerostomum tetra- canthum Diesing, and on Sclerostomiasis in equine ani- mals; in connection with a so-called outbreak of "Surra" at Shillong. BY SURGEON G. M. J. GILES, M.B., F.R.C.S., MEDICAL OFFICER, LAWRENCE MILITARY ASYLUM, SANAWAR. FOR some eighteen months past there has been present, among equine animals at Shillong, an epizootic, which has resulted in the loss of a large number of valuable animals. Though by no means confined to them, this outbreak was especially severe among the transport mules attached to the regiment stationed there; and I understand that, from first to last, between sixty and seventy of these have either died or had to be destroyed. When first the mortality became serious, a veterinary surgeon was sent to investigate the nature of the outbreak, and his diagnosis was, that the disease was "Surra." His recommendations consisted in the removal of the lines to a new site, and in various sanitary improvements, the adoption of which have undoubtedly gone far to diminish the severity of this epizootic. The disease cannot, however, be said to have been stamped out, as cases have continued to occur ever since; and it is these later cases that have come under my own observation, some six having been examined during the period of about five months that have elapsed since my attention was first directed to the matter. These latter cases, I am told, are in every way identical with those that ap- peared before them, and it is on this account that I have spoken of the cases as "Surra." As to what sort of cases are called by this name elsewhere I am unable to say, and whether the cases I am about to describe should be properly called "Surra" at all must remain entirely a matter of opinion. All that can be said is that the cases I have seen formed part of a continuous epizootic the earlier cases of which were diagnosed as "Surra" by competent veterinary authority, and that there can be no practical doubt that the earlier and later cases were of the same character.It is likely enough that a good many, quite distinct, communicable diseases may be included under this term, and, from the analogy of what we find in human medicine, it may be expected that nothing but confusion can arise should any one attempt to pin down a loose vernacular term such as "Surra" to some one definite pathological condition. The cases
2 Scientific Memoirs by I have personally examined were undoubtedly instances of helminthiasis, and, whatever may be called "Surra" elsewhere, that these animals died from the action of nematode parasites, and from no other cause, is a matter which admits of not the slightest doubt; and it is equally certain, whatever may be the correct vernacular name of the disease, that such cases are a source of very heavy mortality in Assam; and I have collected some information tending to show that the same is the case in Burma. As will be seen in the sequel, the disease is one which can hardly spread to any great extent in a dry climate; but, as it is by no means unknown in Europe, a tropical temperature is by no means essential. Most of the animals I have examined were perfect museums of parasites; but, of the various species found, only two1can be considered as effective in producing the mortality, and these are two strongyloid mematodes, closely allied to each other and to the well known Dochmius duodenalis found in the human subject, which latter parasite has of late been causing a terrible mortality among human beings in Assam, and the life-history of which it has lately been my special business to investigate. These two parasites are Sclerostomum tetracanthum Diesing and S. equinum (Rudolphi), and, though the latter not unfrequently determines the sudden death of animals, it is more especially the former which is the efficient agent in the present epizootic, and it is its life-history only that it is proposed to discuss in the present paper. In it I have preferred to adhere to the generic name Sclerostomum , as the worm agrees in all its characters with the definition of the genus, and I can see no advantage in forcing it into the already unwieldy genus Strongylus . The first case that was brought to my notice was that of an officer's charger, which was sent to me by Dr. Hall as a case of "Surra," and, knowing the interest I take in epidemic disease, he believed would interest me. I was at. once struck with the extraordinary resemblance which the case presented to one of anchylostomiasis in the human subject. There was the same weakness and wasting, and the same characteristic deadly pallor of the mucous membranes; indeed, the similarity was so striking that I at once proceeded to examine the dung microscopically: nor was my astonishment diminished when I found that it contained countless numbers of ova, absolutely identical in general appearance with those of Dochmius duodenalis . A reference to the micrometer, indeed, showed them to be considerably larger than the ova of the latter; but, in all other points, the resemblance is so close that it would be quite impossible to distinguish them by any other test than measurement. Shortly after, the animal's recovery being obviously hopeless, its destruction was decided upon by a board of survey, and I obtained the opportunity I had been hoping 1I have since found that, under the name of S. equinum, I included two closely allied species, S. equi- nun , and another, which appears to be new to science, and which I describe in a note, following the present paper, under the name of S. robustum , sp. n. Hence three species were concerned in the mortality.
Medical Officers of the Army of India . 3 for of seeing the actual parasites which produced the eggs, and of whose exact nature I could only give a guess, as none of them could ever be found in the animal's dejecta. As a matter of convenience, the animal was destroyed, and the examination made, at the mule lines, as I could then have the assistance of the transport conductor, and of the salutri, who were necessarily more accustomed than I to dissecting such huge subjects. While walking to the spot with Mr. J. Brown, the transport conductor, I explained to him what I expected to find, and to my surprise he replied, "I know you will find exactly what you expect then, Sir, for I have found worms of the sort you men- tion, sometimes absolutely in buckets-full, in all the cases we have lost here, and we have had some 60 either died or destroyed; but I was only laughed at when I said I thought they were the cause of death:" and he added that it was in the stomach and large intestine that they would be found. On opening the animal's c4 Scientific Memoirs by while the males, which scarce exceed half an inch in length, have a large copula- tory bursa. These larger specimens, of both sexes, were almost all adherent to the mucous membrane in exactly the same way as Dochmius duodenalis is found in the human duodenum, and so firm is the grip with which they attach themselves, that it was often not altogether easy to detach them without dam- aging them, and the mucous surface would be pulled out into a conical pro- jection by the effort. The large amount of blood which they habitually abstract was shown by the frequency with which long tails of clotted blood would be found hanging from the anus of the worms, and by the numerous streaks of blood to be seen amongst the intestinal contents. Although very numerous, for many thousands must actually have been present, the number of these larger specimens was quite insignificant in comparison with that of the smaller specimens forming the second category. These latter, however, proved to be all sexually mature, and large numbers (at least a quarter of the whole number) were found actually in copula . The main difference was that they were rarely, if ever, found adherent to the mucous membrane, and that it was quite exceptional to find any evidence of their containing blood. Apparently the smaller ones do not indulge in the habit of blood-sucking, at any rate as regu- larly as the larger kind. These smaller worms were present in such enormous numbers that the term "buckets-full" is no exaggeration to apply to the quan- tity: it would be impossible to make an even approximate calculation of the actual numbers; but the figure could certainly not run to less than six digits. Alike large and small specimens were confined to that portion of the large in- testines in which the contents are semifluid, and still undergoing digestion. In the lower parts of the bowel, their numbers steadily diminished, and in the rectum, where the dung was quite formed, not a single specimen could be found. On closer examination these parasites proved to be Sclerostomum tetracanthum Diesing. The whole of the mucous mm brane was closely spotted with the marks of recent and old bites inflicted by the parasites, from 10-20 being counted on an average square inch. In addition to these lesions, the bowel, when held up to the light, was seen to be studded with opaque spots about the size of a lentil; and, on feeling these spots between the finger and thumb, a distinct sensation, as of an imbedded small shot, could be made out. Dissection of these spots under the simple microscope revealed the fact that each contained, coiled up within it, an encysted worm, the largest of which were about the size of the smallest of those found free in the intestines, and a closer examination brought to light a number of small undercut ulcers, from which encysted worms had evi- dently but recently escaped, The small intestine was free from parasites; but the stomach contained im- mense numbers of the smaller parasites, and was dotted with cysts in exactly the same way as the cMedical Officers of the Army of India. 5 closely resembling thoe found in human anchylostomiasis, only in an exaggerat- ed manner. There were the same irregular, petechial markings, and the same leathery appearance along the greater curvature, the same dull, slaty blue tint from chronic inflammation, All the other organs were healthy, except the liver, which was dotted throughout its substance with small whitish tubercles. These are probably cestode tubercles; but I have not as yet had sufficient leisure to deci e the point with certainty. Now, in this case, there is absolutely nothing to account for the horse's con- dition except the presence of the parasites, and, when their immense numbers, and the serious nature of the lesions they cause are considered, it is difficult to understand how any one can consider the cause inadequate to the effect, espe- cially when it is remembered how much more serious in degree the injuries pro- duced are than those effected by Dochmius in the human subject, about the fatality of which few now entertain a doubt. There seems, however, a sort of hostility to recognising the pathological importance of entozoa, alike among the medical and veterinary professions, and most of us can remember the diffi- culty with which the perfectly obvious connection between anchylostomiasis and the pernicious anæmia which it causes gained general acceptance. In the case of the particular parasite which we are now discussing, its fatal importance seems to have been generally overlooked in India; but in Europe its adequacy to cause widely-spread mischief has been clearly recognised, at any rate by such as are best fitted to judgeof such a matter. Speaking of Sclerosto- mum tetracanthum , Cobbold says: "Second only in clinical importance" (to S. equinum ) "is the little four-spined strongyle (S. telracanthus ). The sexes, often seen united, are nearly of equal size, the largest females reaching nearly three-fourths of an inch. They infest the c6 Scientific Memoirs by The facts recorded in this extract comprise, practically, all that is said about the development of the parasites; and it is the gap left between the depo- sition of the ova in the dung of the one host, and the entry of the young para- sites into another that I have been able to fill up, and which forms the essential part of the present paper. To return, however, to the clinical aspect of the disease. The second case was that of a transport mule, which was in a dying state at the time of the de- struction of the horse, The animal was too weak to stand and lay helpless on its side, but was perfectly conscious and fed quite greedily when grass was given it by hand. The breathing was deep and laboured, but the breath sounds were normal (apnMedical Officers of the Army of India. 7 could not be the least doubt that the cause of illness was mainly the presence of Sclerostomum tetracanthum, though, no doubt, its ravages were assisted by other parasites, and especially by S. equinum. In addition to the parasites already enumerated, the last case examined harboured, in the stomach, large numbers of Spiroptera microstorna Rudolphi; but a separate account of the other cases would only involve useless repetition, and take up needless space. Before quitting the clinical side of the subject I may remark that, from what I have seen, I am inclined to think that the colicky pains described in Cobbold as symptomatic of the presence of S. tetracanthum did not form by any means a prominent symp- tom of the cases I have witnessed. In these, recurring feverish attacks, followed by profound anæmia, wasting and exhaustion, with, at the end, dropsical symptoms, formed the most prominent features of the clinical picture. I am inclined to think that, when colic occurs, it is due to the associated presence of S. equi- num. It must be remembered that Cobbold's information on this point is second- hand. The pressure, however, of my legitimate work prevented my being able to bestow much time to the observation of still living animals, and also prevent- ed my ascertaining, as I had intended to do, in how large a proportion of appa- rently healthy animals fewer or more of the parasites might be harboured. I have no doubt that a very large number of not only apparently, but of really, healthy animals do harbour a certain number of the worms; for, unlike S. equinum, where a very few may indirectly cause sudden death, the severity of a case must be directly proportional to the number present, and, up to a certain limit of number, it is probable that no symptoms would result from their presence. Such, then, being the circumstances under which these parasites were met with, I will now proceed to describe their free, or Rhabditis stage, as far as I have been able to observe it. The term Rhabditis stage is used because it has come into general use to denote the intermediate free stage of certain alternately para- sitic nematodes. As a matter of fact, in this particular instance, the term is ra- ther a misnomer, as the free S. tetracanthum I am about to describe, correspond much better to Rudolphis genus Liorhynchus than to Dujardin's Rhabditis. When my first equine patient was brought to me, but before its destruction enabled me to identify the parasite, I started cultivations of the ova contained in the dung, working on the same lines as those which experimentation with Dochmius ova indicated as most likely to succeed. Several cultivations accord- ingly were started with the diluted dung spread over sand; others with the dung simply placed in a covered crystalising glass; and others with the dung spread over patches of garden soil enclosed within four planks. In all of these experiments the ova hatched out on the third day after deposition, the mean temperature of the air being a little below 70°F., and development proceeded to a certain extent in all; but in no instance did it proceed to the adult Rhabditis stage. Some condition, necessary to the welfare of the embryos, was clearly
8 Scientific Memoirs by wanting, and, for some time, I despaired of getting any further success. About nine days after the start, a chance seed spouted up within the cultivation in the open, and, on the young leaves, was found a Rhabditis much further developed than any that had been hitherto obtained, a fact which seemed to show that plants formed, as it were, the intermediate host of the parasite. About the same time I made the disagreeable discovery that one of my own horses was affected with the disease. For some time, in spite of liberal feed, he had been getting out of condition, and at last he became obviously ill and unfit for work, and an examination of his dung showed that he, too, harboured large numbers of the same parasite as that which had brought about the destruction of the officer's charger first seen. Now the stable sweepings were thrown on to a heap near the stable which the conservancy carts persistently avoided clear- ing away; and, as it was placed on a sloping piece of ground, the drainage from the heap ran down on to the grass below; so, following out the hint given by the stray seedling, I examined first the dung heap, and then the herbage near it. The dung heap, like my cultivations, swarmed with immature Rhabdites, and plenty of such were found also on the grass; but here, in addition, completely mature specimens of both sexes, and less mature ones of all grades were found; so that the whole question of the life-history of the parasite was solved, it being evident that, while earlier phases of development of the free stage take place in horse-dung, the Rhabdites can only attain maturity by crawling out of their original home on to grass or other forage plants. No one special species or class of plants appeared to be particularly affected by them, and they were found indifferently on grass, and upon leguminous, and other dicotyledinous weeds, that flourished near the heap, the greatest numbers being naturally found close to it, though a few could be discovered, as much as 15 feet from the centre of infection. Thus, wherever dung is dropped by an infected animal, an area of herbage, varying in extent with the slope of the ground and the amount of rainfall, will become so infested with rhabditic sclerostomes in various stages that the infec- tion of any equine animal feeding on the grass is perfectly inevitable, and as the Rhabdites appear to be capable of continuous reproduction and multiplication, there is obviously, in damp climates, no possible limit to the period during which any given area may remain in a dangerously infective condition; for, as far as I can make out, all the conditions for repeated generations are found on forage plants, once the embryos hatched out from the parasitic eggs have escaped from the dung of their birthplace. Having thus traced out briefly the various steps in the investigation, I will now enter upon the description of the free, or Rhabdites, stage of this very destruc- tive little nematode. The number of eggs produced by the entozoic worms is enormous, and, coupled with the immense numbers of worms often present, renders the diagnosis
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 9 of the disease by microscopical examination of the dung so easy a matter that an inspection of even the most cursory character usually suffices. The ova when deposited measure 1/231" 10 Scientific Memoirs by observed yesterday in the tray of water, in which latter, however, no further advance has taken place. May 3rd.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 11 measure about 1/80" (0.34 mm.) in length by rather less than 1/1000" (0.025 mm.) in diameter. Although I have frequently examined embryos just escaped from the egg, I could never make out any pulsatile action of the pharyngeal bulb, such as is seen in all the embryos of Dochmius duodenalis, but only irregular slow contractions of the pharynx. They grow with great rapidity, so that in a few hours they have attained a length of 1/50" (0.5 mm.), and have increased considerably in thickness. By this time the outlines of the internal organs have become distinct, the intestine being marked out as a distinct granular mass, between the lining cells of which the lumen of the tube pursues the serpentine course characteristic of young ne- matodes. A relatively large share of the body length is taken up by the pharynx and its bulb, a third of the body proper being so occupied, the pharynx being exceptionally wide and strong, and rather widening out at its aboral end than forming a distinct bulb. The portion of the body length occupied by the intestine proper is relatively short, only exceeding that of the pharyngeal portion by about 1/800" (0.034 mm.), the anus being placed rather far forward, so that the intestine does not extend into the long tapering tail. They change skin frequently, and any specimen containing many of them will be sure to exhibt a considerable number engaged in the process of getting rid of their old integuments, the long empty chitinous tube, still attached, giving rise to all sorts of queer appearances. The development of the generative organs and of the lemniscus is exactly similar to that of Dochmius duodenalis; so that to enter into the details of the process would necessarily be merely a repetition of the description of the development of the Rhabditis of that parasite given in my recent "Report on the diseases known in Assam as Kala azar, and Beri beri;" and I will therefore proceed at once to the description of the mature Rhabditis, which presents such considerable differences from Dochmius that there would be no difficulty what- ever in distinguishing the two species, even were they to be mixed together in a single tray. As far as I could make out, the emigration from their original home in horse-dung, on to plants generally takes place just before the distinc- tion between the sexes first appears, that is to say, at a stage when the genera- tive gland has already attained considerable dimensions, but at which the future sex cannot yet be determined. The most distinguishing character of the Rhabdites, after their migration from the dung in which they were born on to forage plants, is the possession of a peculiar mouth armature, specially suited to subserve their needs in this new situation. This consists of a sharp, protrusible, chitinous style, which appears to be hollow, and to consist essentially of a prolongation of the pharynx. With this structure they are doubtless able to pierce the delicate cuticle of the plants that harbour them, and so to extract the nutritious juices contained in the cells beneath. The pharyngeal bulb, at no stage very distinct, is reduced to a mere widening and thickening of the posterior third of the pharynx, and shows no sign C 2
12 Scientific Memoirs by of the peculiar armature seen in the Rhabditis of the closely-allied Dochmius duodenalis. This thickened posterior portion communicates with the mouth by means of a very delicate wavy tube, the musculature of which is comparatively weak. Its hinder end is encircled by the great central nerve ganglion, from which proceed forwards a number of fibres, beaded with smaller ganglion cells; the whole structure of the nervous system differing,,in fact, in no way from the arrangements found in closely allied species, and therefore scarcely meriting any special notice. The mature male Rhabditis attains or even exceeds 1/16" (1.7 mm,) in length, of which 2/9ths is occupied by the pharyngeal portion of the digestive tube, the remainder being occupied by the intestine, testes and lemniscus. The anterior extremity of the body is much attenuated, while the caudal is so abruptly conical as to be almost truncate, all trace of the long lash-like tail of the earlier embryos having disappeared. The copulatory spiculæ and the common opening of the spermatic ducts and intestine are placed very close to the end of the body. There is no copulatory bursa or expanded membrane of any kind; but, in place of this, the worm is provided with a powerful clasping apparatus, consisting of four recurved hooks placed along the sides of the aboral extremity of the body. The hindmost pair of these is much the largest, measuring about 1/800" (0.034 mm.) long, and being placed just in front of the copulatory spicules and about 1/250" (0.1 mm.) from the caudal extremity. The other three pairs are subequal, and only about half the length of the hindmost; the second being placed only about 1/800" (0.034 mm.) in front, while the other two pairs are placed fully 1/400" (0.068 mm.) apart. The fully grown females measure from 1/12Medical Officers of the Army of India. 13 details, as to do so not only should I have to repeat much of what I have recently written on the subject of Dochmius duodenalis, but, after all, beyond a few measurements, no descriptions of organisms such as these can equal fairly executed plates, and several drawings of various stages of the free stage will be found appended to this paper, which, being made with the camera lucida, can be vouched for, at least as to accuracy of outline. Considering that ordinary grasses and other forage plants form the habitat of the Rhabdites, the method by which they gain access to the intestinal canal of herbiverous animals is perfectly obvious, as the worms cannot fail to be swallowed along with the infested plants. Once the embryos have so invaded a suitable host their remaining life-history is already fairly well known, and is described in some detail in Cobbold's "Parasites," page 374, et seq. 1As therein described, there can be no doubt that the worms, as the first act of their parasitic life, bore into, and encyst themselves in, the intestinal submucosa, and there acquire the peculiar four-spined mouth armature, and undergo the initial stages leading up to sexual maturity. Cobbold (1879) states, on the authority of Leuckart, that these cysts are limited to the c14 Scientific Memoirs by portion of each section was seen to be occupied by cicatricial tissue, often placed so superficially as to entirely block up the openings of the peptic glands. When first I met with these gastric worms, the wide difference of their habitat from those first met with in the lower bowel made me suspect that I might have to do with a distinct species; but a subsequent close comparison of specimens from each situation convinced me of their specific identity, and, though it is extremely rare to find any of them in the small intestine, I have since met with a few specimens apparently on their way from stomach to colon, and also a few stray, scattered worms encysted in the submucosa of this portion of the bowel. While, however, this latter occurrence serves as a connecting link between the two commoner situations, it is so exceptional that it must be considered abnormal. Although the submucosa of the stomach, and occasionally of the small intestine, serve as localities for the encystment of the young parasites, the condi- tions met with within the lumina of these viscera do not appear to be suitable to their prolonged residence when they have escaped from their cysts. None of the worms found free within the stomach had attained their full growth, and as, to all appearance, they do not take up the habit of blood-sucking until quite fully grown, no worms will be found adherent to the wall of the stomach, even in a body opened immediately after death. In the great intestine too, besidesf ully grown worms gorged with blood, and still adhering to the mucous membrane, much greater numbers of smaller ones will be found free in the bowel, whose intestines show no evidence of blood- sucking propensities. These smaller worms seem to subsist on the nutritive fluids with which they are surrounded, and are never, so far as I have seen, to be found adherent to the mucous membrane. Though not fully grown, these small worms are sexually mature, and may so often be found in copula that it is rather the rule to find them so than otherwise, and the adhesion between the couples is so firm that hardly a doubt can be entertained that their union is assisted by some viscid secretion. Indeed the fact that it persists long after the death of the worm, when all muscular contrac- tion must have ceased, almost proves this to be the case. All worms met with, free in the intestine, whether full-grown or otherwise, are sexually mature, though it is possible that they may not begin to lay their eggs until, with complete growth, the power of gaining a more abundant supply of nourishment is acquired. It is while encysted that the changes that lead up from the already de- scribed Rhabditis progeny to sexual maturity take place, and hence the statement in Cobbold's " Parasites" (fide Leuckart ) that " The development of the sexual apparatus had not yet commenced is a mistake, arising probably from the limited material for observation at his command. So far from this being the case, it is rare to find an encysted worm in which the sex cannot already be made out, provided attention be paid to the position of the rudiment of the
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 15 generative gland; and all stages, from indeterminate Rhabdites still provided with the hollow styloid mouth armature, to sexually mature parasites, just ready to escape with a nearly complete dental apparatus are to be found. The speci- men figured for example, though far from sexually mature, is quite clearly a female, the generative aperture being already clearly discernible about the middle of the body, though the generative gland itself, as far as its histiologi- cal elements are concerned, might be either testis or ovarium. In spite of this, taken as a whole, the sex of the animal might be diagnosed from an exami- nation of the gland alone, for the most advanced cells are placed in the middle of the organ and not at the aboral extremity, as would be the case in a male histologically indeterminate gland. While encysted, the little worm undergoes several changes of skin, and, by the time it is ready to escape, is fully equipped with the peculiar mouth arma- ture of the adult. The buccal cup first appears as a quite unarmed cavity. Next, the circlet of minute denticles, that comes behind the circlet of fimbriæ in the adult, is developed. The four labial spines next appear, but are rather papillæ than spines at this stage; and, finally, the circlet of fimbriæ and the ring of plates round the pharyngeal opening, made their appearance. Probably more than one ecdysis is undergone by the worms after escaping from encystment, for specimens undergoing the process are not hard to find, though I was unable to satisfy myself of the occurrence of the so-called cocoons de- scribed by Cobbold. Appearances that might be interpreted somewhat in this fashion I have indeed met with; but they appeared to me to be better explicable as acci- dental accumulations of fæcal matter round a worm undergoing ecdysis. Nematodes undergoing this process are always in a very sluggish state, and so would more readily serve as the nuclei of such concretions than the actively moving creatures they are when not so engaged; but I must repeat that I look upon the occurrence as purely accidental, as worms changing their skins were far more commonly to be found without any such encumbrance than with it. Thus it will be seen that, during the life-history of this worm, it inflicts two serious lesions on the intestine. First, it bores its way into, and encysts itself within the substance of the mucous membrane, setting up changes which result in the certain impairment, and often entire loss, of functional activity in the little patch of digestive mucous membrane affected; and secondly, it, with the powerful teeth of the fully grown worm, gnaws into the mucous membrane and continuously sucks its victim's blood, and, as the period of sexual vigour during which the worm exhibits this blood-sucking propensity is probably a tolerably long one, this second class of lesion is one which must be again and again inflicted by the same worm. In the face of these facts it appears difficult to understand how any one can doubt the ability of this parasite to bring about a fatal result.
16 Scientific Memoirs by No one now doubts the ravages wrought in the human subject by Doch- mius duodenalis, and yet the equine parasite is absolutely much larger, and, even relatively to its larger host, at least as large as the human scourge; added to which, it is generally present in numbers which put the worst cases of anchylostomiasis into the shade. Cobbold, indeed, recognises that it has caused " virulent epizootics " in Eng- land; but, in spite of his teachings, the pathological importance of the worm appears to be but little recognised, at any rate in India. Shortly after I had made out that the so-called " Surra " among the transport animals at Shillong was really sclerostomiasis, I wrote a short letter to the " Pioneer " with the view of ascertaining whether or not similar cases had been met with elsewhere. My object was to collect information through ordinary correspondence, and nothing was further from my intention than to enter into a public contro- versy, at any rate in the columns of an ordinary newspaper, which, though well suited for a notice of enquiry on any subject, is recognised as hardly a suitable medium for a discussion of so essentially technical a character. In place, however, of sending me the results of his experience in letter form, Mr. Steel, the well known and learned head of the Veterinary College at Poona, replied in the columns of the "Pioneer " in a way that showed he entirely mis- understood me, for he was clearly under the idea that I had propounded the thesis that all " Surra" was sclerostomiasis, whereas all I had asserted was that certain cases which had fallen under my own observation, and were shown me as instances of that disease, were of that nature, and had asked for information as to the prevalence of the parasites elsewhere. I have no desire to re-open a controversy based entirely on a misconcep- tion of my views, nor should I allude to the incident here were it not that Mr. Steel's letter may, I presume, be taken to fairly represent current veterinary opinion on the subject, and he definitely commits himself to the assertion that the strongyles in question are " inadequate to explain the phenomena of Surra." Now, as I gather from Veterinary Surgeon R. W. Burke's excellent little work on " The tropical diseases of the Horse," the characteristic phenomenon of "Surra" is an inexplicable pernicious anæmia; in fact, his chapter on the subject is headed " Surra, or pernicious Anæmia," and the adequacy of these strongyles to bring about a pernicious anæmia is a matter on which incredulity is difficult to understand. It may be, however, that Mr. Steel's meaning is that the existence of the strongyles will not explain the presence in a large proportion of cases of the so-called " Surra parasites" (Trichomonas Evansi ), and of course there can be no possible connection between the two organisms; but, until these monads have been cultivated apart from their host, and a pernicious anæmia produced in a healthy animal by infection with a pure cultivation, the connection between monad and disease must remain a mere matter of opinion.
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 17 As is well known, these monads are congeneric, and more than probably conspecific with certain morphologically identical organisms found by Crook- shank and others in the blood of healthy rats, and if they be really so harmful to horses, the immunity of the rats is very hard to explain. So that whatever pro- portion of the group of cases popularly called " Surra " may be attributable to sclerostomiasis (and it is very probable that several distinct causes of pernici- ous anæmia may contribute to the total), I should personally prefer to look upon the coincidence of the presence of monads in the blood as accidental, until a rigid demonstration of a causal connection be forthcoming. The most that can be said of the researches of Evans, Steel, and others on this point is that they are suggestive of the possibility of a causal connection between the monads and the particular set of cases under their observation. This applies especially to their inoculation experiments, which, being con- ducted with blood, might bring about deaths by some form of septicæmia; and, putting this aside, it must be remembered that such a fluid, besides the monads, might contain some unsuspected bacterium which might yet be the true cause of the fatality in the group of cases they were observing. I regret to say that I got but few communications in reply to my query in the "Pioneer "; but those I did receive are sufficient to show that the strongyles in question are very common in Burma. Of especial interest were two letters I received from Dr. Hendley, who was associated with Dr. Evans in his researches on "Surra " in Burma. Dr. Hendley is, of course, strongly predisposed to the view that the fatality in the cases he observed was referable to the Trichomonas Evansi ; but the following passages are remarkable, as they clearly show that entozoa were present in some at least of their cases. He says: " In the first cases examined we noticed large numbers of small, round, whitish worms, from half to one and half inches long, imbedded in clusters in cyst-like spaces in the stomach and associated with them, but often without them, ulceration of that organ. These conditions were found in old standing cases, and at first led us to believe that they might be the cause of the disease. However, we discarded the idea when they were not found in cases killed earlier in the course of the complaint. At this lapse of time I cannot say that the whole length of the intestine was slit open in each case; but the examination was generally fairly thorough." Elsewhere Dr. Hendley remarks: " The stomach and liver appear to be the organs most affected in the body, and ulceration, due to progressive anæmia in the former organ, is one of the most important post mortem appearances in long standing cases." Now, the condition of the stomach here described is thoroughly characteris- tic of sclerostomiasis; and that worms should be found actually in the stomach in only a small proportion of cases coincides exactly with what I have observed at Shillong, while marks of their previous presence were found in every case D
18 Scientific Memoirs by examined. The worms he describes were, it is true, possibly not S. tetracan- thum, but either Spiroptera megastoma Rudolphi or Strongylus Axei Cobbold, but the ulceration and other appearances correspond exactly with those produced in the stomach by undoubted S. tetracanthum at Shillong; so that I cannot but think that, had the cMedical Officers of the Army of India. 19 Of the prevalence of the parasite in parts of Assam outside the Khasia hills, I obtained evidence in a very interesting letter from Dr. Rudduck of Meesa. Some years ago he had lost several horses from " Surra " and, on making a thorough examination, he found the only obvious cause of death was the presence of immense numbers of small worms in the c20 Scientific Memoirs by by the parasite should be viewed with suspicion, and measures taken to ascer- tain its presence or absence, and owing to the immense numbers of ova produced by them, the determination of this point, by microscopical examination of the dung, is a perfectly easy matter. Owing to the large size of the ova, the lowest powers suffice for the purpose, and the readiest way of making the examination is to stir up a little of the dung in a shallow glass tray containing water, by which means a comparatively large quantity can be searched over in a short time. The measurements and microscopic characters of the ova have already been described, and so need not be repeated here. It is probable that each successive invasion of parasites, in other words, each infected meal that the animal consumes, will be followed by a feverish attack, and some temperature charts which I saw at Shillong, as well as one supplied me by Dr. H. Hendley as illustrative of the outbreak of " Surra " observed by him in Burma exhibit just such traces as one might expect from a necessarily irregular cause of pyrexia such as this. In Dr. Hendley's chart, reproduced below, dates of observation as to the presence or absence of Trichominas Evansi are carefully noted; but I confess I am unable to trace in it any relationship whatever between the pyrexia and the presence or absence of the nomads in question. Taking the positive observations we find they are placed as below:Temperature Chart of one of Dr. Hendley's cases of "Surra", in which the animal died on the 53rd day of the disease, eighteen days after the last recorded observation of Trichomonads. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001167.tif] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001167.tif]
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 21 be expected to exercise any effect on the encysted worms, and hence, until they return to the lumen of the intestine, all attempts at their expulsion must be hope- less. So far as I know, we have no data at present at our disposal for esti- mating the duration of the period of encystment; but, practically speaking, worms in both stages will be present in the majority of cases, and treatment must hence resolve itself into the prevention of re-infection, combined with the periodical administration of anthelmintics in order to expel any worms that may have escaped from encystment before they have time to attain complete maturity, and with it the habit of sucking their victim's blood. In the case of my own pony I administered 1½ oz. thymol in three doses of ½ oz. each, and the result, as I afterwards found, was to expel nearly every free worm, Ova, however, soon re-appeared in the dung, and believing at the time that this was due to inefficient action of the remedy, owing to its having to reach the lower bowel before it could exercise its action on the worms, I determined to make an attempt to introduce the remedy direct into the colon. I accordingly made an emulsion of thymol by adding it, in spirituous solution, to water, and injected it directly into the colon by means of an aspirator needle. Further, suspecting the original dose might have been too small, I increased the quantity to 2½ oz. The animal seemed in no pain, and grazed naturally for some time after the operation; but within a few hours toxic symptoms appeared and the animal died, the phenomena presenting a general resemblance to those of carbolic acid poisoning. Post mortem, it was only after considerable search that the puncture could be found; but it was quite obvious that the whole of the emulsion had passed into the colon. There was not the least sign of the characteristic smell of the drug to be detected in the peritoneal cavity, and the neighbourhood of the puncture was quite free from redness. In the bowel, enormous numbers of the worms were found in the encysted stage, but only a very few free. There were, however, large numbers of amphistomes, and all these, as well as the few sclerostomes present, were dead for a considerable distance from the point of injection, as far, in fact, as the remedy might be expected to be carried by peristalsis during the time that had elapsed between administration and death. The fatal result was there- fore clearly traceable to the largeness of the dose, and not to its method of administration, and, in suitable doses, I still hope that the direct action of the remedy so administered might be taken advantage of, though there can be no absolute need of it, as the result showed that the original dose, administered by the mouth, had acted quite efficiently; and it seems to me that our best hope lies in the repeated administration of this most catholic of all vermifuges, com- bined with generally supporting treatment, and the administration of easily digestible articles of diet.
22 Scientific Memoirs by Owing, however, to the process of encystment being by far the most formi- dable source of harm, and the impossibility of touching this by any drug, remedial measures are of quite secondary importance compared with those of prevention; and here the course to be pursued is perfectly obvious, though our success in following it must depend entirely on the means at our dis- posal. As it is perfectly clear that infection can only be spread through the agency of the dung of affected animals, the exclusion of all equine animals from the land from which our fodder is derived will alone suffice to stamp out the disease. Hence, in large establishments, the acquisition of grass reserves on which this measure can be carried out is of primary importance; and, for large stables, the establishment of cinerators, in which the dung of all animals may be destroyed by fire, is a further measure that must suggest itself to all who consider the question. Again, I have experimentally ascertained that temperatures exceeding 140°F. are fatal to the Rhabditis, and hence, where the establishment of protected grass reserves is impossible, immunity may be secured by the exposure of all articles of food to this very moderate temperature. For the private owner an apparatus like the ordinary domestic " hot case " for warming plates and dishes would suffice, while a moderately-sized room fitted so as to be well closed and provid- ed with a furnace and flue would suffice for even large establishments. Such a chamber would cost but little either to construct or to maintain, and would amply repay the cost and trouble, in any country where large losses are refera- ble to this disease. It is, by the way, a notable matter that Dr. Hendley informs me that they found that cooking all the food, even to the grass of their equine patients, by far the most effectual agent in treatment, and the fact of their having been able to carry out the system, shows that the difficulties are by no means insuperable. I must now bring this paper to a close, and fear that I have already tres- passed too much on the reader's patience, my only defence being that, though it has run to a larger number of pages than I at all intended, I have done my best to convey my meaning as briefly as possible. Quite recently I noticed in the columns of one of the daily papers a notice that the question of " Surra " was under examination in the new Bacteriological Laboratory at Poona, and that their investigations had resulted in the discovery of a " bacillus." I await with interest the publication of the results of this investigation, which, if correctly reported, must imply the discovery of a class of cases under the common designation of " Surra " of quite a different character from those affected either by strongyles or by the Trichomonas Evansi, assum- ing the latter, for the moment, to have a causal connection with some of the cases so called. I hope, however, the investigators will be careful to entirely exclude the
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 23 action of macroscopic parasites, by a systematic examination of the intestinal canal and its walls. G. M. GILES, M.B., F.R.C.S., Surgeon, I.M.S., In Medical Charge, Lawrence Military Asylum, Sanawar. SANAWAR; The 31st January, 1891.
Explanation of Plates. FIG. 1.PLATE. I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001194.tif] 5 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001194.tif] 1 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001194.tif] 2 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001194.tif] 3 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001194.tif] 4 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001194.tif] 6 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001194.tif] 7 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001194.tif] 8 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001194.tif] 9 G. M. G. de nat del. Reg. No. 333, San., India.PLATE II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001197.tif] 10 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001197.tif] 12 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001197.tif] 14 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001197.tif] 13 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001197.tif] 11 G. M. G. denat del. Reg. No 333, San., India.PLATE III. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001200.tif] G. M. G. de nat del. Reg. No 333. San., India On a new Sclerostome from the large intestine of mules (a postscript to the preceding paper). BY SURGEON G. M. GILES, M.B., F.R.C.S., INDIAN MEDICAL SERVICE. SINCE writing the above, a more careful examination of the materials ob- tained from the mules that died in the so-called epizooty of " Surra " at Shillong, has resulted in the discovery that the larger worms, found so abundantly in company with Sclerostomum tetracanthum, are not, as I supposed, all large specimens of that species, or of Sclerostomum equinum (Rud.), but examples of a species which has not, so far as I can discover, been hitherto described. Although they never rivalled S. tetracanthum in abundance, they were yet so numerous that reflection should have shown that no large proportion of them could be examples of S. equinum, as thousands must have been present in several of the cases, and, to account for so large a number, the mesenteric arteries should have been a mass of aneurisms; whereas, in only one case, were these found, and in this only two small ones, which could hardly account for the presence in the intestine of more than a score or so of the mature parasites. The species I am about to describe is intermediate in size between S. equi- num and S. tetracanthum, averaging scarce half the length of the former, but is proportionally very stout, and the characters of the mouth armature, and of the bursa copulatrix are quite sufficient to establish its specific distinctness. As, however, the three species are closely allied to one another, I append descrip- tions, with original figures, of the other two, in order that their differences and resemblances may be the more exactly appreciated. The new species is a vicious blood-sucker, and was always found gorged with blood, and generally firmly fixed to the mucous membrane. A very large proportion are always to be found firmly joined together in pairs in copula, the grip of the male hood being assisted by a glutinous secretion, so that it takes some little careful dissection to separate them. As, in size, it bears at least as large a proportion to the bulk of a horse or mule as Dochmius duodenalis does to that of a man, and as it is often present in even larger numbers, it must be capable, by mere depletion, of doing incalculable harm to its host, and it may be doubted whether the caseous infiltration of the intestines brought about by E
26 Scientific Memoirs by S. tetracanthum, combined with its weaker depletory efforts, had more to do with the death of some of the animals examined than the loss of blood occasioned by this larger species. It is likely enough that this species too encysts, as all met with were mature; but the Trichonemes would probably be indistinguishable from those of S. tetracanthum, which was always associated with it, and it would require a case in which this species was alone present to establish this point, and to make out any differences that may exist between their Trichonema stages. Their free stage life-history is also probably similar; but from the size I have recorded for the ova, I am satisfied that it was at any rate mainly with S. tetracanthum that my cultivations were concerned. Description.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 27 front of it. Ova very large, of regularly elliptical outline, 0·152 mm. in length X 0.082 in breadth; laid as a morula. Sclerostomum equinum (Rud.) I will first quote the description given in Diesing,1and will then add some fuller details derived from the examination of a male specimen, from a verminous aneurism of the mule:28 Scientific Memoirs by notch between the dentations, and broadening out below, where it meets the circlet of denticles guarding the actual entrance of the pharynx. These last consist of a circlet of chitinous plates, rather larger than those of the triphine, but of very irregular shape, especially those on the side opposite to the great tooth. The male bursa copulatrix is, as will be seen from the figure, markedly trilobed, the lateral lobes being rounded, while the median lobe is pointed, though somewhat abruptly so. The ventral and ventro-lateral costæ form a group almost exactly similar to that formed by the corresponding costæ of the preceding species. The dorso-lateral consist of one large and one small branch, which embrace between them the notch between the median and lateral lobes; while the dorsal costæ are also represented by two branches, the inner of which has a small rudimentary branch on its inner margin, rather nearer its root than its point. Sclerostomum tetracanthum Dies. Descriptions. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 29 "Then follows a broad muscular pharynx (p in the present figure), through which the narrow, chitinous cylinder of the lumen (sic ) glimmers distinctly, leading down to the somewhat broader posterior bulb, which also displays thick dental plates." This description deals only within the mouth parts below the level of the " straight denticles " (f in my figure) described by Diesing, Schnieder's series of bristles being that marked (b ) in my figure. Thus we have from without inwards- First. 30 Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army of India. other members of the group in size. Between the dorso-lateral and lateral costæ are deep and broad semi-circular hollows, which are occupied, on either side, by a single large granular cell, probably of glandular character. I can find no previous notice of this gland cell, which is very easily seen in many speci- mens, and can only with difficulty be made out in others, its variable prominence probably corresponding to various stages in its secretive functions; the cell full of secretion being easily visible, while that which has recently dis- charged its contents being with difficulty so. In connection too with variations in the bursa, it may be mentioned that Cobbold (loc. cit. ) mentions the occa- sional presence of an additional branch to the dorsal costæ, which may be nearly as long as the primary branch itself. The figures given in the plates are all from original camera lucida draw- ings, and can therefore be trusted for the purpose of obtaining measurements of the various parts represented. Combined with the foregoing descriptions I do not think that any difficulty need be found in distinguishing the three species; nor do I think that any doubt can be felt of their specific distinctness. At the same time, while to minute examination the differences are suffi- ciently obvious, it is by no means easy to distinguish between the three species by mere naked-eye examination. Between full-sized specimens of S. equinum on the one hand, and small specimens of S. tetracanthum on the other, S. robustum is easily distinguishable; but, in all three species the range of size is so considerable that it is extremely difficult to separate large specimens of S. tetracanthum, and immature intestinal S equinum from the newly described species: indeed, short of absolute dissection and microscopical examination, I believe it to be impossible to do so. As a good naked-eye method of distinguishing between S. robustum and immature S. equinum, I may mention that the latter are usually much darker in colour, the small deve- lopment of the generative organs permitting the blood filling the intestinal canal to be seen more easily through the skin than is the case with the mature S. robustum of the same size, where the intestinal canal forms but a very small proportion of the bulk of the body. It is doubtless owing to its close external resemblance to the two species so commonly associated with it that it has not hitherto been recognised as a distinct species; and I shall not be surprised to hear that, now that attention has been directed to the point, it will sooner or later be found that its distribution is by no means confined to India. G. M. GILES, M.B., F.R.C.S., Surgeon, Indian Medical Service. SANAWAR: The 21st November 1891.
Explanation of Plate. The three sclerostomes found in the equine large intestine. I.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001236.tif] 3 x 70 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001236.tif] 5 x 440 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001236.tif] 2 x 6 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001236.tif] 4 x 30 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001236.tif] 11 x 440 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001236.tif] 9 x 70 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001236.tif] 8 x 440 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001236.tif] 10 x 70 12 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001236.tif] 7 x 170 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001236.tif] 15 x 30 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001236.tif] 13 x 70 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001236.tif] 14 Reg. No. 698. San., I.On nodular disease of the intestine in Sheep. BY SURGEON G. M. GILES, M.B, F.R.C.S., INDIAN MEDICAL SERVICE. IT is an unfortunate fact that the rearing or keeping of sheep is next-door to impossible, either in Assam or Burma. In both these localities mutton is a sort of exotic luxury, obtained at much expense by importation from India. The supply of Rangoon, for example, is regularly brought over in the weekly B. I. boats, and, in Assam the butchers march sheep up from Bengal in comparatively small batches, and dispose of them as quickly as possible. Naturally, owing to the animals being slaughtered immediately after so severe a march, good bazar mutton is practically unobtainable; and hence, wherever the European population is sufficiently numerous, "mutton clubs" are formed, which import sheep, and fatten them up as rapidly as may be, for the table. Not unfrequently, however, these co-operations fail owing to large losses of their sheep. It is needless almost to say that these losses are always ascribed to that favourite scapegoat for hazy sanitarians32 Scientific Memoirs by helminthological museums. The leading fact brought out by my investigation of Dochmius duodenalisi 1in the human subject, of Sclerostomum tetracanthum in horses, and of the present investigation, is that the persistently endemic presence of the diseases to which these parasites give rise is owing to the circumstance that all these species are capable of living and breeding freely, indifferently as entozoa or as free living animals; and, further, that these free-stage nematodes possess wonderful powers of resistance to adverse conditions. Their great enemy is drought. It is true that they are capable of passively resisting it; but they can only oppose it by retiring to a sort of condition of suspended vitality, and cannot flourish and multiply as they do when favoured by damp surroundings. The free-stage "rhabditis" of Dochmius duodenalis cannot, for example, resist prolonged exposure to the full heat of the sun, but they can remain dried up, but still alive, in moderate shade for an indefinite period; and it is probable that the same is the case with the free-stage generations of allied species, though I have no direct observations to adduce in their case as I have in the case of the Dochmius rhabditis. Periods of drought are, however, periods of suspended vitality, if not of in- fectiveness. The chances of infection for the host depend entirely on the oppor- tunities of multiplication enjoyed by the free generations; and, in the case of those of Sclerostomum tetracanthum, recently described, and of those of Medical Officers of the Army of India. 33 Shillong is as badly off for mutton as other parts of Assam, the bazar supply being often uncertain, and uniformly poor. Under these circumstances, a mutton club of some sort is a necessity, and during the season of 1890 a sort of Proprietary Club for the purpose was started by Mr. Fenton, the enterprising Manager of the Shillong Hotel; the "Club " element being, however, represent- ed only by a number of residents undertaking to take the mutton, while he in- curred all risks. Grazing being abundant and excellent, he got up from Bengal a consider- able number, and, by a liberal supply of grain, succeeded for a while in supply- ing excellent mutton. After about six weeks, however, the quality began to fall off, till, in another month, he was obliged to suspend his supply, no sheep remaining in a fit condi- tion to. kill. Then the sheep began to die off, not in numbers at a time, but one by one. The animals did not appear to be in any suffering, but were feeble and de- jected looking, though they eat greedily till nearly the end. The supply of grass was unlimited in quantity and good in quality, and, in addition to this, they were given a liberal ration of grain. They were well housed, at night, in a large shed, the floor of which was raised on poles several feet above the ground. Their water-supply was above suspicion. Yet, in spite of such exceptionally favourable conditions, the leading symptom of the epizootic that was frustrating all Mr. Fenton's efforts to supply us with good mutton was a slow and progres- sive wasting. In advanced cases an examination of the mucous membranes of the conjunction and mouth showed them to be singularly bloodless, though, perhaps, hardly so markedly so as in the case of the horses affected with sclero- storniasis described in the preceding paper. Death was usually ushered in by scouring; but this symptom was characteristic only of the end of the case, and was by no means invariably present. Sometimes the wasted animal would Le only "off its feed" for a day or two, and then be found dead in the morning. My attention having been so forcibly drawn to helminthiases as a cause of mortality among men and mules, I naturally suspected that such similar symp- toms among sheep might be due to a similar cause, and accordingly I proceed- ed to examine the droppings of the affected flock. The specimens were taken at random from the floor of the hut, and, without exception, every nodule was found to contain immense numbers of characteristic strongyle ova. It was clear that more than one species was present; but the dominant species was one which produced somewhat oblong ova, intermediate in size between those of S. tetracanthum and D. duodenalis, and measuring, in fact, about 0.082 mm. in length by 0.047 mm. in width. From nodules selected as containing only the ova of what I may call the dominant parasite, I instituted some cultivations. These were conducted by F
34 Scientific Memoirs by simply breaking down and slightly damping the nodules, placed in a crystalizing glass, and covered to prevent evaporation. I succeeded in following their de- velopment under these conditions further than I was able to in the case of Scierostomum tetracanthum, as they had advanced well on to the sexually mature condition, and had developed the peculiar styliform mouth armature before the conditions became too unfavourable for further development. It would be a mere waste of expensive lithography to figure these, as they are almost identical in appearance with the free stage of S. tetracanthum already described and figured, and differ only in some minute details, which pressure of work at that time prevented me from minutely noting. There can, however, be no practical doubt that, in order to attain complete sexual maturity, they require to gain access to the forage plants which supply them alike with food suitable for their free-stage life, and the opportunity of infecting new hosts for their para- sitic generations. Under these circumstances I urged Mr. Fenton to send me the carcases of some of the dead sheep for examination; but, one way and another, it was not until July that I obtained the opportunity I required. I extract from my diary a brief account of the examination. Carcase, poor; flesh, watery; mucosa, pale. Lungs, some congestion at bases (mainly hypostatic), freely crepitant throughout. In bronchi I found four specimens of Strongyius fiiuria, Rud. (a number inadequate to do any parti- cular harm). Heart, liver and spleen healthy. Intestinal canalMedical Officers of the Army of India. 35 The scanty literature I possessed contained no reference to it, and I was just going to write to my long-suffering friends at the Indian Museum, to beg them to search out for me any references there might be to new ovine nematodes that might have been described, with the view of describing it under the name of S. orientale, should it prove to be new, when I met with, in the current "Journal of the Royal Microscopical Society," a notice of a work by Dr. Curtice, of Washington, United States of America, monographing the animal parasites of sheep, and determined to hold my hand till I could obtain a copy. The work is published by the United States Bureau of Agriculture, and I had some diffi- culty in getting one. It is as well, however, that I delayed, as I found my worm described in it as a new species, which would have had a priority of several months to any description I might have published. Nodular disease of the intestine had been, it seems, known as a widely-spread and fatal disease among sheep in America for many years, but investigators had wasted their energies in fruitless searches for the tubercle bacillus; and it was reserved for Dr. Curtice to demonstrate the true cause of the disease, an achievement which he looks upon as the most important outcome of a long and exhaustive investigation into the ovine helminthology of North America. His descriptions and observations generally coincide exactly with my own in every particular, except that he is unaware of the existence of a free stage to the worm, and assumes that sheep are directly infected by swallowing the ova. My measurements of the ova give a somewhat smaller figure than his; but I notice that this is the case also with the ova of other parasites which we have both measured; so that it is probably due, not to any difference in the material observed, but to some error in the methods employed by one or the other of us. My own measurements were taken by comparing the size of a camera lucida drawing of the ova with that of a micrometer scale, the two drawings being made under abso- lutely unchanged conditions, the micrometer being merely substituted for the slide, and its divisions drawn beside the outline of the preparations. The ac- curacy of the micrometer employed was also tested by comparing a drawing of it under a low power with those of an actual full-sized engineer's scale; so that I see little room for error in my determination, and am inclined to prefer them to those of Dr. Curtice, who may have employed merely the eye-piece micrometer, an instrument which is apt to give only approximate results, small differences in the focussing of the eye-piece scale leading to perceptibly discrepant results. The description below is taken from Curtice, but with some minor additions. 36 Scientific Memoirs by 0.056mm. in female; 0.44mm. in male. Head usually bent down, often into the form of a hook. Papillae six, of which two are dorsal, two ventral, and two lateral the latter are more obtuse, and are the openings of the lateral canals. Mouth, terminal, provided with a chitinous armature, consisting of an annular ring, sup- porting two systems of 24 teeth each (Curtice). My own observations lead me to believe that the armature is more complex than this, and that there are three rows of differently-shaped "teeth." The complexity of the object, however, ren- ders its resolution, even with high powers, a very difficult matter, especially as the images of the various rows of teeth are further confused by a radiate ribbing of the chitinous lips, so placed that each rib is opposite a set of "teeth." The innermost row have a very characteristic bidentate form, while the second are long and slender, and have the form of a linear-lanceolate leaf, with the proximal portions of the margins rolled in towards the midrib. These fimbriæ, by their convergence, form a sieve, exactly similar to that de- scribed in the equine sclerostomes, and, external to them, and corresponding in position to the trephine circlets of S. equinum and robustum, I make out a circlet of short teeth, with semi-lunar margins. The circumference of the mouth is curiously ribbed, the ribs being equal in number and opposite to the tooth systems, and it is, I think, from confusing the image of this ribbing with the overlying triphine teeth that this circlet has been overlooked by Dr. Curtice in his description. Immediately beneath the ring supporting the bidentate teeth is the triradiate opening of the Medical Officers of the Army of India. 37 nearly to the vulva to form yet another loop. Ova laid as a gastrula; length, 0.082 by 0.047 mm. (0.09 by 0.05 mm., Curtice). Life-History. 38 Scientific Memoirs by quite possible that this may be the case; but it appears a priori improbable, and I should rather be inclined to attribute the absence of large tumours to their having been re-absorbed, a process which would naturally take place with excep- tional rapidity in so young an animal. An examination of sundry specimens of grass, not known to be infected, has led me to the suspicion that many of the free living nematodes which may be found in such situations and which have hitherto been regarded as dis- tinct species, may be but free-stage examples of certain parasites. In the determination of this point, I believe that a comparison of the ova of mature specimens will be of the greatest value, as in the two examples I have hitherto investigated the one point of resemblance between the free and parasitic generations was the absolute anatomical identity of their ova. It need not, of course, follow that because the normal method of infection is, by the ingestion of embryos, indirectly descended from parasites, that the swallowing of direct descendants would be unattended with risk. Indeed, the more I consider the mat- ter the more I am led to the conclusion that it is a matter of absolute indifference to the just hatched embryo whether it finds itself in free or in parasitic surroundings, or whether it be the direct progeny of the parasitic or of the free stage. The ova probably, however, cannot hatch out in the absence of oxygen as, for example, would be the case if swallowed. The only difference would be that, by affording these different surroundings, two brother emrbyos might be made to develop respectively into the widely different free and parasitic mature adults. The actual demonstration of this by experiment would be fraught with difficulties, and could only be accomplished on an experimental farm. One would have, to begin with, to raise some stock absolutely free from parasites, and widely distributed as these now are, one would have to take lambs as soon they were dropped, and to artificially feed them, throughout their life, with milk, and afterwards with fodder which had been raised to a sufficient heat to destroy all parasitic life. That this is no exaggeration is shown by the fact that I have never, in India, thoroughly examined the carcase of any mammal without finding entozoa. It is obvious that this power of being able to live and breed indifferently, either as free nematodes or as parasites, adds immensely to the power of the species to perpetuate itself. Pathology. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 39 Place the morsel of tissue in a shallow glass tray of water under a simple microscope. Then slit the tumour with a fine knife under water, and press out its contents with the flat of the blade. By a little teazing of the cheesy mass, it is then quite easy to separate the little worm, which is quite large enough to be easily visible under a power of eight or ten diameters. I he tumours will be found scattered over the whole length of the intestine but become more numerous as one descends, and are most plentiful of all in the c40 Scientific Memoirs by G. M. G.), and a well-formed, chitinous, cup-shaped oral aperture; also six cephalic papillæ, and at the neck two papillæ, and a well defined fold." I am inclined to believe that the observation as to the absence of digestive apparatus is erroneous. I have watched many embryos of this species as they issued from the egg, and have always been able to make out an already well- developed digestive tract, with a double bulbar apparatus, even in those that had but just wriggled out of the egg-shell. One often sees similar notices with regard to other nematodes, and I have met with specimens where, at first sight, I could make out no digestive organs, but by careful examination and the use of suitable re-agents have always been able to prove my first impression to be wrong. I believe most of these false observations arise from the unchecked examination of balsam and glycerine mounted specimens, media which quite obliterate fine details for thick specimens. They are best examined in water, and the addition of a little suspended carmine to the water containing living speci- mens will often show up the intestine. Failing this, the addition of a small pro- portion of alcohol may be tried, or tear up a specimen with needles and stain with borax carmine or picrocarmine. Without previous slitting or tearing, it is useless to attempt to stain, as the impermeable chitinous cuticle entirely prevents the stain from reaching the organs which it is desired to differentiate. If the newly-hatched embryos have well developed digestive organs, it is a fortiori, highly improbable that the much older encysted worms should have these organs undeveloped, and I certainly have not met with any such. His minimum measurement too appears to me curiously small. Embryos fresh from the egg are larger than this. The adult worms are found exclusively in the large intestine, and, so far as I have seen, their favourite residence is some distance along the colon, but few, as a rule, being found in the cMedical Officers of the Army of India. 41 tremely grave. The lesions produced are practically identical with those of intes- tinal tuberculosis, and, from our experience of human pathology, we well know how dire a disease is that. It must be remembered that the worm makes its puncture from a cavity full of various septic germs, and hence that the wound so produced must always be a septic one. Witness the foul character of all suppurations that take place in the neighbourhood of the digestive tract. Further, the resorption of the cheesy matter is certain to be attended with further sepsis, and recovery can only be gained by its absorption. In this, as in most other helminthiases, it must be remembered that the element of number is most important. Short of some accidental septic infec- tion of the punctures by some poison of exceptional virulence, it is inconceiv- able that any perceptible harm should be caused by a dozen or so of encysted worms; but, on the other hand, it is equally impossible to imagine that any con- siderable number can be present without gravely affecting the health of the host; or that, beyond a certain limit of number, determined by individual resisting power, the continuation of its life should be possible. The sheep I examined at Shillong, e. g., had passed that limit, while those I have examined at Sanawar were carcases taken at random from the ration stand, and were not affected to a fatal extent. The ration mutton here is extremely poor, and it is by no means easy to obtain really prime meat, even by paying a high price for so-called gram-fed mutton. In the carcases, moreover, that I have examined, the poorness of the carcase was distinctly proportional to the severity of the infection, while the full maws of the animals further showed that this poorness was not to be accounted for by scantiness of food supply; and it is to be noted that the examinations were made just after the end of the rains, when the grazing had been for months plentiful. Now, as it is impossible to believe that such grave lesions can exist without seriously affecting the health of the animals, I think it may be taken as proved that the poorness of the meat is mainly caused by the parasite under discussion. At the same time it must be remembered that other parasites help in producing this wasted condition, and, in some cases, have more to say in the causation of the leanness of the meet supply than 42 Scientific Memoirs by expansa in some, and another smaller tape worm, which I have not yet been able to identify, in nearly every case; and these too no doubt help to swell the mischief. At the same time, making all allowances for the influence of these parasites, it is, I am convinced, to the ravages of Medical Officers of the Army of India. 43 the fodder be obtained from localities over which sheep are not allowed to range, without which precaution it would be obviously useless. Where expense and trouble is not so great an object, as in the case of mutton clubs, this expedient, combined with disinfection of the fodder by heat, might be tried, and would be specially worthy of trial in localities like Assam, where mutton is a nearly unobtainable luxury, as I believe, mainly owing to this disease. Conclusion. 44 Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army of India. Post scriptum. Explanation of Plate. A FIG. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001350.tif] 1 x 280 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001350.tif] 8 x 25 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001350.tif] 7 x 0 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001350.tif] 10 x 440 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001350.tif] 9 x 28 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001350.tif] 5 x 70 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001350.tif] 2 x 280 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001350.tif] 3 x 70 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001350.tif] 4 x 440 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001350.tif] 6 x 0 Reg. No. 698, San., I.A description of two new nematode parasites found in sheep. BY SURGEON G. M. GILES, M.B., F.R.C.S., INDIAN MEDICAL SERVICE. Strongylus colubriformis and Trichosomum verrucosum. sp. n. With a note on S. ventricosus, (Rud.?) As already noted in the preceding paper on nodular disease of the intes- tine, during that investigation, I met with two nematodes which appear to be new to science. It is probable that both are innocent of doing much harm, beyond abstracting a certain amount of nourishment; but it is nevertheless desirable that a sufficient description of them should be placed on record. Strongylus colubriformis, sp. n. Description. 46 Scientific Memoirs by carcase examined completely. It attaches itself to the mucous membrane in exactly the same manner as is done by the Trichocephali, the head tunnelling just below the epithelium for some little distance, while the tail hangs free. It is almost impossible to detect it in the primary examination of the intestine; requiring careful examination of the mucous membrane under the simple micro- scope. The easiest way to find it, however, is to wash a certain length of intestine which has soaked for some hours in carbolized water, rubbing it well between the fingers and to examine the washings by transmitted light. From the numbers I have obtained by washing a comparatively small portion of intestine, I should say that they are often present in enormous numbers. Its close resemblance, in all save size, to S. contortus, the common sheep maw-worm, cannot be overlooked. Dr. Curtice1gives an excellent description and plate of S. contortus, but neither figures nor describes the cervical alæ de- scribed by Diesing in his diagnosis of the species. It is, however, present in a large proportion of the specimens in my own collection, though it is seldom wide enough to merit Diesing's epithet of "semi-elliptical." Its presence, how- ever, adds a new resemblance to S. colubriformis, the minute species at present under consideration, though I am by no means sure that it is uniformly present in that, even in females. The determination of this point is rendered difficult by the fact that they are only visible when the worm is lying, so that they project; when half turned round they cannot be seen at all; and this is the very position in which the worm naturally lies. It might therefore be suggested that the present species is merely a younger stage of S. contortus, but the circumstance that all the specimens examined were sexually mature tells strongly against such a supposition. Their habitat again is different, and no specimens of intermediate size could be dis- covered, either in the stomach or intestine. The present species too wants the peculiar flap guarding the vulva, so characteristic of S. contortus. Another, and I think conclusive, point is that the ova of the smaller species are considerably larger than those of S. contortus and also differ somewhat in shape, those of S. colubriformis having an elongated elliptical outline, with almost symmetrical poles, while the ova of S. contortus, though about the same width, are stouter and ovate, one pole being distinctly blunter than the other. The size of nematode ova is very constant for the same species, and seems constant through all adult stages of the same worm, so that it forms an excellent specific character. This is very noticeable in the cases of Dochmius duodenalis, and Sclerostomum tetracanthum. In dimensions and appearance the free, or rhabditis, stages of these species, which I have recently described, are about 1Loc. cit.
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 47 as dissimilar from their entozoic stages as any two nematode species can well be. In each case, however, the ova, whether produced by entozoic, or free-stage worms, are microscopically identical. I think, therefore, that there can be no doubt that S. colubriformis will be found to be a good species; and I have little doubt that it will be ultimately found to have a tolerably wide distribution, as I believe that it is entirely owing to its minute size that it has hitherto escaped recognition. Although it certainly attaches itself by penetrating the intestinal mucous membrane, it may be doubted if its presence can have any great pathological significance, the small size of, and absence of, armature to the mouth being against the supposition that it has any leech-like propensities, though, at the same time, its dark colour would somewhat countenance such a view. The possibility of it working much harm seems to me to depend entirely on this point, as, if it be a blood-sucking species, very large numbers might quite com- pensate for its small size, and rapidly produce a destructive anæmia. In the probable absence, however, of any such habit, the most it can be credited with is an aggravation of the dyspeptic symptoms brought about by the presence of other and more formidable species. Before quitting our consideration of this worm, I may as well note the very peculiar structure of the female generative ducts. The vulva opens into the middle of a sort of cylindrical sac, which extends for a short distance for- ward and backward from the vaginal opening. The peculiar point is that the connection between this vagina and the uterine canals is effected by means of a thick, chitinous, valvular apparatus, which closely resembles the 48 Scientific Memoirs by position is uncertain. It is even possibly a strongyle, the ova possessing the broad transparent external zone so characteristic of most members of that family; but, on the whole, I prefer to refer it provisionally to the genus Trichosomum, more specially as I found attached to one of my specimens a portion of the male generative organ; and this had a curiously echinate sheath, such as is characteristic of many members of that genus. Description. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 49 character is the marked ventricosity of the neighbourhood of the vulva, which, however, is differently placed in its relation to the length of the body. It is obvious then that Dr. Curtice's species is distinct from S. ventricosus, Rud. Might I suggest that it should be named S. Curticii? It is obvious that this species is very closely allied to that I have just described as S. colubriformis. At first I thought that they might be identical, but the absence of alæ and the cylindrically inflated head, it seems to me, should be sufficient to distinguish them. Moreover, the male bursæ, though very much alike, differ in certain particulars, and I have not been able to find any trace of the peculiar dotted appearance of the skin, which is prominently noticed alike in his description and figure. Further, I have never met with a single female which, by any straining of terms, could be said to be ventricose. At the same time I do not consider the question can be considered as quite settled until actual specimens are compared. G. M. GILES, M.B., F.R.C.S., Surgeon, Indian Medical Service. SANAWAR: The 26th November 1891. H
Explanation of Plate Strongylus colubriformis, sp. n. FIG. I. Male x 30 diameters. " Ia. " natural size. " 2. Female x 30 diameters. " 2a. " natural size. " 3. Male bursa spread, x 170 diameters. " 4. " copulatory spicula x 170 diameters. " 5. " bursa viewed somewhat obliquely, from the ventral aspect x 17 diameters. " 6. Anterior extremity of female x 440 diameters. " 7. Vulvar portion of body of female x 130 diameters[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001380.tif] 1 x 30 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001380.tif] 6 x 440 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001380.tif] 8 x 170 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001380.tif] 4 x 170 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001380.tif] 5 x 170 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001380.tif] 7 x 30 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001380.tif] 2 x 30 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001380.tif] 9 x 440 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001380.tif] 3 x 170 Reg. No 696. San., I.A Contribution on the Life History of the male Filaria med- inensis founded on the Examination of specimens re- moved from the abdominal cavity of man. BY SURGEON R. HAVELOCK CHARLES, M.D., M.CH., F.Z.S., BENGAL MEDICAL SERVICE, PROFESSOR OF ANATOMY AND COMPARATIVE ANATOMY, MEDICAL COLLEGE, LAHORE; SURGEON, MAYO HOSPITAL, LAHORE; FELLOW OF THE PUNJAB UNIVERSITY. THE specimens of which the accompanying sketches are fairly faithful representations were removed from the sub-peritoneal tissue of "subjects" un- dergoing dissection in the Anatomical Department of this College. Figures 1, 2 and 3 represent the calcified remains of specimens of Filaria medinensis in various stages of development. These came from one "Subject," and were found in the neighbourhood of the R. Ext. Iliac Vein. The largest was lowest down, the smaller ones being near the R. Sacro Iliac Art. The length of Figure 1 I compute to be about 266 mm. and its diameter 1.8 mm. The smallest specimen, Fig. 3, did not measure, previous to undergoing calcifi- cation, more than 30 mm., and its diameter is 0.5 mm. It may have been on its migration from the alimentary canal some time, so that its size on escaping from the intestine was probably very much less than the foregoing measurement. The cellular tissue around was thickened as if it had been the seat of old inflammation. The calcified remains are each surrounded by a sort of boundary membrane, which evidently, on the subsidence of the in- flammation, closed them severally off from the general economy. Why the worms died it is impossible to say. It is probable that, if the host suffered from continued fever of a high temperature, their vitality may have been inter- fered with and their destruction ensured. Enlarged spleen was present, thus showing that the host had in his time been a malarial subject. The worms having died, the deposition of lime salts in their tissues is easily understood. This calcification has left beautiful casts of the worms, demonstrating well the rounded shape and the calibre of the body. Neither head nor tail can be made out. I consider there is no doubt that the specimens represent imma- ture guinea-worms. My reasons for considering them so are52 Scientific Memoris by (3) The Eustrongylus Gigas has a similar length, but its calibre is much greater, and, moreover, it is very rare in man: the kidneys also of the "host" were not diseased; (4) The finding of uncalcified specimens (Figures 4 and 5) of guinea-worms in another "subject" a few weeks later confirmed the suspicions I already had of the affinity of the calcified parasites. Figures 4 and 5 are drawings of Nematoda taken from near the attached portion of the mesentery from out of the sub-peritoneal tissueMedical Officers of the Army of India 53 female, and hence cannot be seen; otherwise, the characters of his body are similar to those of hers. I shall now briefly trace the life history of the guinea-worm. Beginning with the female, heavy with young, drawn from the body of the human host by the itinerant barber, who ignorantly casts the extracted worm on the ground, where the decomposing body gives issue to thousands of living embryos. These, gaining water by means of the wind or rain, migrate (according to Fedschenko) into the body of a cyclops, upon which they become parasitic, becoming coiled up within its limbs ("as many as 6 or even 12 of the parasites being occasionally found within the body of a single crustacean host"), and reaching there full larval growth. A human being drinks the water containing the infected cyclops. The juices of his intestine, digesting the Entomostracan, liberate the matured larvæ 54 Scientific Memoirs by Claus (Sedgwick's Translation, 1889) says, "Whether they first escape" (i.e., from the body of the cyclops) "and copulate in a free state is not known." Cobbold (1879) says, "It is probable that sexual maturity is next acquired within the human stomach, copulation following." Granting that the specimens found by me are male and female guinea-worms, Cobbold's view would be correct. This learned Helminthologist a little further on says, "The females migrate to the situations in which they are found beneath the skin of the human bearer, whilst the male perishes and passes out with the fæces. "The italics are mine. This, however, is not so. The female pierces the wall of the intestine accompanied by the male, which remains attached to her body till impregnation be fully accomplished. Then dying, his body, gradually shrivelling up, would not be discovered when the female had reached her host's skin. Copulation in this instance is a slow process. The male is, as it were, a parasite on his paramour, and being attached to her genital aperture (as in parallel cases amongst the lower Crustacea) gradually wastes away in the delights of love! This explains why the male has not been discovered with the adult female on her arrival at the body surface. Although no sexual orifice has been found on the adult, yet such an opening may be seen on the young form after it leaves the intestine, as, at that time, its uterine organs are not distended with crowds of microscopic embryos, causing almost an obliteration of the perivisceral cavity. The Vulva is small in comparison to the size of the worm, and is only used for impregnation, not parturition: there- fore, as development proceedsMedical Officers of the Army of India. 55 In conclusion, I may suggest the possibility and probability of cases of Psoas and Iliac abscess and obscure pains in the post-abdominal and pelvic regions being at times due to the irritation of this parasite. The neighbourhood of the Pelvis where the calcified specimens were found showed, as I have pre- viously stated, signs of old inflammation, and the 'remains' were walled off from the system by the usual protective membrane. Explanation of Plates. Figures 1, 2, 3. Calcified remains of Filaria medinensis, corresponding to three separate worms, 56 Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army of India. peritoneal tissue of the attachment of the mesentery to the post-abdominal wall, or in the same tissue a little further down[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001410.tif] Fig. 1 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001410.tif] Fig. 2 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001410.tif] Fig. 3 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001410.tif] Fig. 5 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001410.tif] Fig. 4 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001410.tif] Fig. 6 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75001410.tif] Fig. 7 Reg. No.742, San., India.ADDENDUM. A recent fresh find of the species described in these memoirs as Trichoso- mum verrucosum sp. n., including a number of males, has enabled me to deter- mine definitely its generic position. It is undoubtedly a Spiroptera, and should therefore stand as Spiroptera verrucosa sp. n. The males, which appear to be much less numerous than the females, are much smaller than the latter, measur- ing only 4.2 c. m. in length, and are about half their thickness. The favourite habitat of the worm appears to be the reticulum and psalterium and most com- monly it burrows the whole or the greater part of its length into the submucosa. The present find was in the zelu and not in sheep, and its prevalence appears seasonal, as none could be found in the winter, whereas it now appears to be tolerably common. Sanawar, the 23rd May 1892. G. M. GILES.
SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY MEDICAL OFFICERS OF THE ARMY OF INDIA. EDITED BY W. R. RICE, ESQ., M.D., SURGEON GENERAL WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PART VII. 1892. 1.