IP|QB.10 m.91.b. SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY MEDICAL OFFICERS OF THE ARMY OF INDIA. EDITED BY SURGEON MAJOR-GENERAL J. CLEGHORN, M.D., SURGEON-GENERAL WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PART IX. 1895. 1.SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY MEDICAL OFFICERS OF THE ARMY OF INDIA. EDITED BY SURGEON MAJOR-GENERAL J. CLEG HORN, M.D., SURGEON-GENERAL WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PART IX. 1895. 1.CALCUTTA: GOVERNMENT OF INDIA CENTRAL PRINTING OFFICE, 8, HASTINGS STREET.
The Physiological action of Snake-venom. BY BRIGADE-SURGEON-LIEUTENANT-COLONEL D. D. CUNNINGHAM, C. I. E., F. R. S. IN the course of a prolonged series of experiments, which were primarily undertaken with a view of testing the efficacy of various reputed remedies for cases of snake-bite, certain phenomena have presented themselves, appearing to justify some conclusions in regard to the nature and physiological action of the venom of Colubrine and Viperine snakes, which appear to be of sufficient interest to merit publication, and it is accordingly proposed to draw attention to them in the following pages. Certain of the conclusions are by no means new; but they are, at the same time, not in accord with currently-accepted opinion, and, there- fore, appear to be worthy of renewed discussion in the light of newly-recorded facts, and, in any case, they have not been arrived at hastily, but as the result of much experimental work. Any course of experiments on ordinarily reputed remedies for cases of snake-bite is somewhat heartless work from the monotonously futile results which it yields when regarded solely in the light of a quest for practical means of contending with the action of snake-venom; but it possesses one great advan- tage in enforcing the constant employment of minimal lethal doses of the latter and, therefore, in affording opportunities for the accurate study of the precise sequence of events occurring in the course of the intoxication,which are not present in cases where relatively large doses enter the system, and where, consequently, the progress of the symptoms is much more accelerated. Various factors would appear to have co-operated to give rise to misconcep- tions in regard to the precise nature and the physiological action of snake-venoms. The employment of excessive doses has, in many cases, served to obscure details in the course of the intoxication by hurrying on the symptoms so rapidly that their sequence could not be accurately followed; confusion has arisen from comparing the results of the action of the venom in different cases in which no precautions had been taken to secure any accurate parallelism in the proportions of the doses to the weights of the recipient animals; the use of fresh venom, and specially its introduction in the natural fashion by means of bites, has, probably in some instances, led to the effects of the specific toxins being con- founded with those of pathogenic organisms which may enter the system along with them; and, finally, in so far as Viperine venom is concerned, errors have A
2 Scientific Memoirs by crept in from a failure to recognise and discriminate the presence and action of two distinct toxic principles. As it has been possible to study the action of the venom of the cobra (Naia tripudians, Merr. ) and of Russell's viper (Vipera russellii Strauch ) most closely, and as these snakes may fairly be taken as the most lethal representatives of the families of Ophidia to which they belong, the data and conclusions regarding them naturally form the first subject for discussion, leaving the question of the extent to which similar conclusions are applicable in respect to the poisons of other venomous Colubrine and Viperine snakes for subsequent consideration. 1.3 Medical Officers of the Army of India. ficient loss in respiratory property to cause death, may still be liable to undergo very conspicuous changes in colour according to the degree to which it is de- prived of, or exposed to, the influence of atmospheric oxygen, and, as a matter of fact, we find such changes occurring in the case of CO-blood. For example, in the case of a fowl, which had just been poisoned by exposure to an atmos- phere highly charged with CO, the blood when first removed from the heart was of a peculiar, brick-red colour, very similar to that which is so frequently present in the blood in cases of poisoning by Daboia-venom, but, after a brief exposure to the air, the surface became of an extraordinarily vivid scarlet. The original colour of the blood in this case must have been dependent on the mixture of that of CO-hæmoglobin with that of reduced hæmoglobin, whilst that which it subsequently acquired was the result of a mixture of CO-hæmoglobin with oxyhæmoglobin. The alteration in colour could not have been con- nected with any change in the relatively stable CO-hæmoglobin, but must have been dependent on oxidation of the residual hæmoglobin which had under- gone general reduction in connection with the antecedent failure and final aboli- tion of respiratory movements. Now there can be no question that in cases of CO-poisoning we have to deal with asphyxia, primarily induced by loss of respiratory property in the blood, and yet conspicuous changes in the colour of the latter are liable to attend exposure to atmospheric oxygen. The changes in the blood primarily caused by the CO imply diminished respiratory property, and this in its turn finally leads to diminution and cessation of respiratory movements and thus to a cessa- tion of exposure of the blood to the air, and with this, a secondary factor of blood-change comes into play, The CO reduces the respiratory property by replacing unstable oxyhæmoglobin by relatively stable CO-hæmoglobin, and the ultimate result of this is to occasion diminution and finally cessation of the ex- posure of the yet unaltered hæmoglobin to the atmospheric air, and therefore to its reduction. It is clear, then, that the change in colour which the blood in cases of death from cobra-venom ordinarily undergoes on exposure to air is no satisfac- tory and conclusive evidence that the poison has not occasioned alterations in respiratory capacity in the fluid of sufficient magnitude to give rise to fatal results. All that the phenomenon does show is that a total loss of respiratory property has not occurred when death takes place; but, as we have just seen, it is quite unnecessary that such a loss should happen in order to induce death. It will be presently shown that cobra-venom does produce most conspicuous effects on the respiratory property of blood; but, in the meantime, assuming that it may do so, and knowing that a reduction of 30 per cent. in respiratory property is sufficient to cause death by asphyxia, the colour of the blood after death in ordinary cases of cobra-poisoning may be taken to be dependent on the presence A 2
4 Scientific Memoirs by of two-thirds of blood containing reduced hæmoglobin with one-third of blood the respiratory properties of which have been abolished without the development of any bright red colouring matter like that of CO-hæmoglobin; and, if this be so, it is quite clear that the exposure of the two-thirds of reduced quality to the influ- ence of atmospheric oxygen must be followed by conspicuous changes in the colour of the fluid. As will be presently shown one action of the venom on the blood is to give rise to intense and permanent darkening in the colour of the latter, and the mixture of blood which has undergone such change with blood of highly reduced quality must imply the presence of very dark coloration, but of a coloration liable to be very considerably brightened on exposure to air in consequence of absorption of oxygen by the hæmoglobin. Under ordinary cir- cumstances, then, we should naturally expect that such a change of colour should occur even if the venom have the power of reducing the respiratory property of the blood to a fatal extent, because, under ordinary circumstances, the amount of venom which enters the blood is relatively small, and the entrance is only gradually effected by absorption; but, as will presently be shown, no such change takes place when death follows the direct introduction of relatively large quantities of venom into the circulation. In the one case, death takes place long before the respiratory property of the blood has been entirely abo- lished, and consequently exposure to air is followed by change of colour; in the other, the direct introduction of a large quantity of venom determines immedi- ate and total loss of respiratory property, and with this loss of capacity for change of colour under the influence of atmospheric oxygen. Taking all the facts into consideration, it is clear that they are of such a nature as to deprive the first argument for the belief in the primarily neurotic action of cobra-venom of all conclusive value. On proceeding to consider the second foundation on which this belief rests, it can, I think, be shown to be of an equally unsatisfactory nature, and here again the data regarding poisoning by CO come in to afford very valuable in- formation, because they show that nervous symptoms of a nature very closely similar to those characteristic of intoxication by cobra-venom may be developed in connection with the establishment of decreased respiratory property in the blood. On referring to the most recent works on physiology and legal medicine, we find that the characteristic symptoms attending intoxication by CO are of the following nature: *The initial stage is marked by increased lachrymal, sali- vary and nasal secretion, headache, giddiness, accelerated respiration, and occa- sionally nausea and vomiting. This is followed by the paralytic stage with stag- gering gait and paralysis, especially of the lower or hinder extremities, Finally * 1. " Ueber die Kohlenoxyd vergiftung vom medicinal and sanitäts polizeilichen Standpunkte." Von Dr. Med. Robert Stoermer, Arzt in Berlin. Viertel jahrschrift für gerichtliche Medecin. Jahrgang, 1895, 2, Heft s. 367. 2. Lehrbuch der gerichtlichen Medicin. Dr. EduardR. von Hofmann. Wien u. Leipzig, 1893.
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 5 comes the stage of asphyxia with infrequent, primarily deep, subsequently brief gasping respirations, anæsthesia, coma, and death, which, in acute cases, is pre- ceded by violent general convulsions, a phenomenon which is generally absent in chronic cases. Turning now to the symptoms attending intoxication by cobra- venom, we again find a preliminary acceleration of respiratory movement, in- creased nasal, lachrymal and salivary secretion, nausea and vomiting, paralysis, especially of the lower or hinder extremities, slow and shallow respiration, coma and death, preceded by general convulsions in acute cases and ordinarily occur- ring without them in chronic ones. But in the case of poisoning by CO, there appear to be no good grounds for doubting that the primary and essential action of the gas is to induce a gradually progressive diminution in the respiratory pro- perty of the blood owing to the gradual substitution of CO-hæmoglobin for oxyhæmoglobin, and that the nervous symptoms are dependent on this and not on any direct action on the nervous apparatus. But, if this be so, it is clear that in the case of poisoning by cobra-venom the parallel series of nervous phenomena which are present may have a like origin, and that their occurrence affords no conclusive evidence that the toxin possesses any direct neurotic properties. The mere presence of nervous symptoms does not prove that they are dependent on any direct action of the venom on the nervous apparatus, and the majority of those which are present are such as can be unequivocally shown to arise in connection with progressive loss in the respiratory property of the blood, so that the evidence in place of giving any decisive support to the theory of a direct and primary neurotic action, is rather in favour of that of primary blood change. But it is fortunately unnecessary to rest satisfied with such theoretical considerations, as it can be readily demonstrated that cobra-venom does con- spicuously affect the respiratory properties of the blood both within the body and outside. It was long ago pointed out by Boag that the mixture of relatively large quantities of snake-venom with blood produces an immediate effect on its colour and coagulability, but, as Richards justly remarks, the value of this observation as evidence for the occurrence of primary blood-change as the essen- tial cause, of death in cases of poisoning by cobra-venom is minimised by the fact that in the latter the proportion of venom to the mass of blood with which it mingles is always very small and ordinarily excessively so. The average quan- tity of dried material to be obtained from the venom ejected by a cobra at any one time is only about 0.254 gramme, but this is amply sufficient to secure the death of a man of 70 kilos in weight and whose blood probably amounts to between 4,000 and 5,000 grammes, or 16,000 to 20,000 times the weight of the dried venom. The results of the following series of experiments, however, in some of which only fractional quantities of venom acted upon relatively large masses of blood, clearly show that the potency of the former as a factor of blood change is such that the amounts which are liable to be introduced by a single
6 Scientific Memoirs by bite are quite sufficient to affect masses of blood of sufficient magnitude to account for the death of even very large animals in consequence of the bites of cobras. Experiment I. 7 Medical Officers of the Army of India. a. The blood coagulated at once. 11 A.m. 8 Scientific Memoirs by At 10-46 A.M., 29.9 grammes of blood from the throat of a fowl were intro- duced into a, and 29.1 grammes into b, and in both cases the vessel was shaken so as to mix the blood and water thoroughly. a. The blood coagulated rapidly. At first the surface of the coagulum was of a deep red, but in place of brightening on exposure to air, it speedily darkened. 10-55 A.M. 9 Medical Officers of the Army of India. On the following morning the surface of the coagulum was dull scarlet and the substance plum-coloured. When turned out of the vessel the edges of the clot became dull scarlet. The bodies of the red corpuscles were well pre- served and 3.5 c.c. of limpid bright red serum were present. Experiment VIII. 10 Scientific Memoirs by effected outside the body, but in the following ones it took place within the body as in cases of snake-bite. Experiment IX. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 11 11-20 A.M. 12 Scientific Memoirs by blood is fractionally minute. It is evident from the results of experiment VIII that a unit of dried venom is capable of affecting a mass of blood weighing at least 52,000 times as much to such an extent as to practically abolish its re- spiratory property entirely, which, as we have already seen, is by no means neces- sary in or der to induce death by asphyxia. A loss of 30 per cent. of respiratory property is sufficient to do this, and, consequently, the experimental data go to show that a unit of dried venom is capable of affecting at least 156,000 times its weight of blood to such an extent as to interfere with its respiratory property to a fatal extent. But the average amount of dried material to be obtained from any individual cobra as the result of a single ejection of venom is 0.254 gramme, an amount sufficient according to these data to produce fatal change in about 40 kilos of blood, and, consequently, on the ordinarily accepted estimate that the blood of an animal contributes one thirteenth part of total body weight, sufficient to cause the death of an animal weighing 520 kilos, or about seven times the weight of any average human subject. This estimate, moreover, may understate the potency of the venom very considerably, as the experimental data do not necessarily indicate its maximal ferment-power. The data go to show that cobra-venom, not only affects the respiratory property of the blood, but likewise its coagulability, and at the same time acts on the red blood corpuscles in solvent fashion. The observations which have been frequently and quite correctly recorded regarding the absence of any apprecia- ble change in the microscopical features of the blood of animals which have died under the influence of cobra-venom, may appear to be in direct conflict with these data, implying that it possesses a solvent property on the bodies of the red corpuscles; but it is very doubtful whether they really are so. There can be no question that the presence of a solvent property appears very conspicuously where a relatively large amount of venom acts on a limited bulk of blood, or where smaller quantities are given full time to produce their ferment effects upon relatively large bulks; but it does not necessarily follow that they should manifest themselves equally clearly in the blood of animals which have died in consequence of the introduction of the venom into the system in ordinary quantities and in the normal fashion, more especially in cases where the red corpuscles are non-nucleated and where, consequently, free nuclei are not present as an index to the occurrence of processes of solution. In the first place, death must necessarily take place long before the blood has undergone such profound alteration as that which is present when a limited amount of venom has been allowed time to produce its full effects on it; and, secondly, an amount of venom quite capable of producing fatal changes in the respiratory properties of the blood may be insufficient to occasion much solution of the red corpuscles, even if it be allowed time to exert its ferment action to the utmost. The presence of a solvent action may readily escape notice, because the examination of the blood has been conducted ere sufficient time has elapsed to render its effects conspicuous,
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 13 or the evidence of any considerable solvent effect may be permanently absent, because, in order to effect the occurrence of any readily appreciable solution, it may be necessary that an amount of venom much in excess of that sufficient to produce death should be present. The data regarding the effects produced on coagulation show that when a relatively very large proportion of venom comes into contact with a mass of blood, coagulability is at once entirely abolished, and that smaller proportions, although incapable of entirely preventing the occurrence of coagulation, delay its onset, and affect the normal processes of contraction of the clot in degrees varying in direct ratio with their amount. Here there is no even apparent con- flict with the phenomena recorded as present in cases of death from cobra- venom. In experiment XI, in which a relatively large quantity of dried venom was directly introduced into the circulation, coagulation was excessively delayed and extremely imperfect, and according to Richards the blood of the lower animals normally remains permanently fluid "when a large quantity of cobra- poison has been directly injected into the circulation, as, for example, into an artery or vein."*But from the experiments it is also quite clear that the re- spiratory properties of the blood may be profoundly affected by amounts of venom which are quite insufficient to prevent the occurrence of coagulation, and thus that there are no good grounds for expecting that the blood after death from cobra-bite should invariably be incoagulable, On the other hand, it is on record, first, that the blood of animals generally is incoagulable where death has followed the direct introduction of relatively large quantities of venom into the vascular system; and, second, that that of the human subject is normally incoagulable after death from cobra-bite. The first of these two phenomena is clearly in complete accord with the results obtained by causing cobra-venom to act on the blood outside the body, and which demonstrate that large proportions of venom imme- diately abolish both respiratory property and coagulability, whilst smaller pro- portions give rise to excessive loss of respiratory property without apparently proportionately affecting coagulability. From the data we should naturally be led to assume that coagulability should, as a rule, be present after death from cobra- bite, but absent where excessive quantities of the venom have come into play. The fact that in cases of death from cobra-poison in the human subject the blood should, as a rule, be incoagulable appears at first sight to be anomalous as there are no good grounds for believing that a bite normally introduces a larger amount of venom into the human body than it does into that of any of the lower animals. There appears, however, to be a possible explanation of it; for, in very many instances at all events, life is more or less artificially prolonged in the human subject after the injection of the venom into the system, by means of various methods of treatment calculated to delay the onset of the comatose *Report of the Indian Commission for the investigation of Snake-poisons, page 45.
14 Scientific Memoirs by stage of intoxication, and hence there is not merely a chance of a larger, absorption of venom into the vascular system before the occurrence of death, but more time is given for that which has been absorbed to produce its effects on the blood. It is very unfortunate that there should be no satisfactory record of the condition of the blood in the case of lower animals in which life has been prolonged by means of artificial respiration, but in the only case in which I can find any note regarding the subject it is stated that partial incoagulability was present.* There are thus no satisfactory a priori grounds for denying that cobra- venom acts by producing changes in the blood, and there is positive experi- mental evidence that it has the power of causing important changes, and specially respiratory changes in it, and that, owing, apparently, to the action being of a ferment character, such minute amounts of venom are capable of profoundly affecting such relatively large masses of blood that there is no difficulty in accounting for the death of even very large animals from cobra- bite as essentially dependent on blood-change. On the other hand we have seen that the evidence on which the belief in the primary neurotic action of the poison is founded is not of a conclusive character, as the phenomena which are regarded as indicative of such action are not in any way in conflict with the theory that the primary action is a hæmic one. Experiment unequivocally demonstrates the presence of a powerful hæmic action, and the nervous phenomena which present themselves in the course of the intoxication are of a nature parallel to that of those which we find arising in cases of poisoning in which there can be no question that a loss in respiratory property of the blood is the primary factor in the production of disease, why, then, should it be affirmed that the venom acts essentially as a primary and direct nerve-poison? Wall goes carefully into this question, and it may be well to consider the value of the arguments which he adduces in order to justify his conclusion that, "though cobra-venom is a nerve-poison of surpassing deadliness, as a blood poison it is not an agent of much power."Medical Officers of the Army of India. 15 if it is to be regarded as an evidence of the absence of blood-change in cases of cobra-poisoning, it must hold the same place in regard to cases of CO-poisoning in which, as a matter of fact, we know that important blood-change is present. The second one has no weight whatever in the absence of proof that the nerv- ous symptoms are dependent on a direct action of the poison on the nervous apparatus. It is only an argument if it be assumed that such an action is present, for, if the nervous symptoms be dependent, as they probably, in greater part at all events, are on defective respiratory property in the blood, their dis- appearance implies the disappearance of the abnormal hæmic condition caus- ing them. If the damage to respiratory property caused by a dose of venom falls short of causing death, the blood must naturally gradually regain its normal properties, possibly in part as the result of the recovery of respiratory property by red corpuscles which have only, partially suffered, and, in any case, certainly owing to the constant addition of new red corpuscles, and when it has regained its normal respiratory properties the symptoms must naturally disappear. Exactly the same thing occurs in many cases of intoxication by CO in which the blood has not been so far affected as to cause death. After removal from the atmosphere containing the gas, nervous symptoms continue to be present for some time, but they gradually wear off and then no symptoms of blood- change present themselves because no blood-change is present. The results of the following experiment very clearly illustrate this. Experiment XII. 16 Scientific Memoirs by Wall's third argument is of much the same quality as the second one, for until it has been definitely shown that the nervous symptoms are not induced by blood-change, the absence of other evidence of such change is of no con- clusive value. As regards the next point, the absence of renal evidence of blood- change, we find that in cases of CO-poisoning there is no constant renal evidence of the blood-change which is unequivocally present, and, on the other hand, that in many cases of poisoning by cobra-venom there is clear evidence of either abnormal increase or decrease of renal secretion. Finally, in respect to the microscopical evidence, it has already been pointed out that the blood derived from the bodies of animals which have just died of intoxication by cobra-venom may very likely show no appreciable signs of alteration in its formed constituents, because death occurs at a time when the venom has not yet exerted its full action, and may be caused by an amount of venom, which, though incapable of producing conspicuous solvent effects on the corpuscles, is amply sufficient to induce a fatal depression of the respiratory property of the blood. None of the above arguments, then, appear to be of any really conclusive value in demonstrating the absence of any important hæmic change in cases of intoxication by cobra-venom, and I am not aware of the existence of any of greater cogency. On the other hand, there are a whole series of phenomena which appear to be unequivocally adverse to the belief in the primarily neuro- tic action, of the poison. Wall himself, in spite of his belief, adduces a very important one when he points out that a latent period normally intervenes between the entrance of a lethal dose of venom into the circulation and the appearance of any nervous symptoms, and quite correctly affirms that this shows "that the mere pre- sence of the poison in the blood, even in sufficient quantity to kill, is not capable of producing directly a physiological effect."*But, if it be incapa- ble of producing a direct "physiological effect" on the nervous apparatus, what becomes of its action as a direct nerve-poison? When a lethal dose of any direct nerve-poison enters the circulation it manifests its presence at once and produces its fatal effects with great rapidity. Minimal lethal doses of the salts of strychnia or of one of the toxins which are present in Daboia- venom on entering the circulation cause almost immediate death, but this is not the case with minimal lethal doses of cobra-venom, for their entrance is followed by a prolonged latent period during which no appreciable symptoms whatever are present, and those which subsequently appear follow a very slow and gradually cumulative course ere they terminate in death. The contrast between the phenomena presenting themselves in such cases is illustrated by the results of the following experiments in all of which the poisons were directly *Op. cit., p. 43.
Medical Officers of the Army of India. I7 injected into the jugular vein, and were, therefore, placed in like circumstances as regards the production of their specific effects. Experiment XIII.18 Scientific Memoirs by The phenomena characteristic of the action of minimal lethal doses of cobra-venom are not those of the action of any material which when present within the system at once manifests its presence by producing its maximal effects, but are those of one acting in the manner of a ferment and producing a gradually cumulative effect. The extreme disproportion between cause and ultimate effect in cases of fatal intoxication by minimal lethal doses of the venom, and the fact that fractional doses are capable of ultimately producing the same results as very much larger doses produce within a very short time, also point to the presence of a ferment action, which it is hard to conceive of as coming into direct play upon the nervous apparatus, but which may well ultimately affect the latter by primarily inducing changes in the blood. Again, it is apparently universally admitted that the immediate cause of death in cases of intoxication by cobra-venom is asphyxia. Those who regard the venom as a direct neurotic poison ascribe this solely to gradual paralytic cessa- tion of respiratory movements, but there are at least two good grounds for doubting the correctness of this conclusion. These are supplied by the pheno- mena following the direct introduction of relatively large masses of venom into the circulation, and those attending treatment by means of artificial respiration. The result of the introduction of relatively large quantities, of venom directly into the circulation is not as is very clearly shown by the data of Experiment XI, the immediate induction of paralysis, but the immediate induction of respiratory symptoms and of asphyxial convulsions accompanied by profound changes in the blood as evinced by permanent abolition of respiratory property and defective and retarded coagulation. The occurrence of asphyxial convulsions is a normal terminal phenomenon in all cases of acute fatal intoxication by cobra-venom, and they are ordinarily credited solely to the gradual, antecedent failure in respiratory movements, but in cases, like that recorded by Wall in which "violent and irre- gular contractions of the respiratory muscles" suddenly replaced normal res- piration thirty seconds after the injection of 1 c.c. of fresh venom into the saphena vein of a dog,*there is no such antecedent failure to account for the phenomenon and it can only be interpreted as indicating the effects of sudden and excessive diminution in the respiratory property of the blood upon the res- piratory centre. The results of the direct introduction of relatively large quan- tities of venom into the circulation are precisely those which might logically be expected to occur on the theory that the material acts as a blood-poison, but are quite inexplicable by that which regards it as a direct nerve-poison induc- tive of paralysis. The phenomena which are present in cases in which treatment by means of artificial respiration is employed are no less suggestive. There appears to be no question that the venom produces no appreciable special effect on the circula- *Op. cit., p.36.
Medical 0fficers of the Army of India. 19 tion. Wall states that "cobra-poison cannot be said to produce a very great effect on the circulation. The heart can be kept acting; and the blood circula- ting for very many hours after the rest of the functions of the body have been suspended, if only artificial respiration is continued. In ordinary cases of cobra- poisoning the heart can generally be felt acting for a short time after respiration has ceased."*But if this be so and death be due to asphyxia purely depend- ent on diminution and cessation of respiratory movements, how does it happen that death invariably ultimately occurs in spite of the continuous application of artificial respiration? The entire failure of artificial respiration to do more than delay the occurrence of asphyxia is surely sufficient to suggest that the latter cannot be purely dependent on failure of respiratory movements, and, when taken along with the demonstrable effects of the venom on the respiratory pro- perty of the blood, leaves little room to doubt that the fatal asphyxia which normally occurs in cases in which artificial respiration is not applied is only par- tially dependent on defective exposure of the blood to atmospheric oxygen. Under normal circumstances such defective exposure does come into play to hasten the fatal event, but, even where it is not present, as in cases where artificial res- piration is applied, asphyxia occurs although after a longer interval. The phe- nomena appear clearly to indicate that in the one case two factors productive of asphyxia, defective respiratory property in the blood and defective exposure of the latter to the air, are present, whilst, in the other, the former alone comes into play. Artificial respiration apparently acts by giving the residual respira- tory property of the blood an opportunity of securing the addition of fresh sup- plies of oxygen from the air, but it in no way affects the progressive ferment- action of the venom. The latter goes on steadily diminishing the respiratory property of the blood until it falls below the limit which it must attain in order to supply the respiratory demands of the system, and then death naturally occurs in spite of the continued exposure of the fluid to atmospheric oxygen. Another argument in favour of the belief in the presence of blood-change as the primary result of the action of the venom and the essential cause of the characteristic symptoms is afforded by the results attending treatment by repeated injections of solutions of salts of strychnia. Were the primary action of the venom, as is ordinarily supposed, one directly affecting the nervous centres and giving rise to depression of their functional activity and conse- quently to paralysis, it would be somewhat hard to explain why it is that treat- ment with strychnia should have no appreciable effect whatever on the course of the intoxication. But there can be absolutely no question that it has none, and, more than this, that whilst this is the case20 Scientific Memoirs by extent repressive of the normal manifestation of the symptoms connected with the action of strychnia on the nervous apparatus, as is clearly indicated by the results of the following experiment. Experiment XVIMedical Officers of the Army of India. 21 place in the blood. The effects of the action may be temporarily and partially masked by those induced by strychnia, but there is no evidence whatever of the existence of any true physiological antagonism between the two poisons, and, if this be so, the phenomena certainly afford no support whatever to the view that the venom acts as a direct nervous depressant, whilst they are readily accounted for by that which regards it as a primary blood-poison. The older advocates of the theory that the venom acts as a primary blood poison laid much weight on the phenomena of variations in suscepti- bility which are presented by different kinds of animals, and to a certain ex- tent they were right in doing so. Their data were certainly not always ab- solutely correct, but the same holds good for those which have been advanced by their opponents. For example, Boag affirms that "the poison of the ser- pent has most power over those animals whose blood is the warmest and the action of whose heart is the most lively; while, on the contrary, it is not a poison to the snake itself, nor in general to cold-blooded animals," and Richards, in commenting on this statement, says: "Mr. Boag observes that a poisonous snake is protected from the effects of its own poison by its physical conformation, which enables the animal to live with a very small amount of oxygen. Unfortunately for this argument, however, venomous and non- venomous snakes do not differ anatomically, and yet the venom of the former will kill the latter."*Now Boag was no doubt in error in supposing that all snakes are absolutely exempt from the action of venom, but Richards is equally wrong in implying that non-venomous snakes as a rule, are as susceptible to the action of venom as animals with more active circulation and respiration and consequently demanding a greater supply of oxygen. Had he shown that non-venomous snakes are normally as susceptible to the action of venom as animals possessing more active respiration and circulation are, his position would have been a strong one, but the mere fact that they are liable to be killed by venom is no argument whatever against Boag's theory, whilst any evidence showing that they are characterised by minor susceptibility is a perfectly valid one in its support. The theory assumes that the essential action of the poison is to diminish the respiratory property of the blood, but it certainly does not imply that such a change ought not to occur in the case of non-venom- ous snakes. Boag's error lay in generalising on the phenomena presented in the case of venomous snakes in which we have to deal with an immunity which is certainly not dependent solely on minor respiratory requirements, but also on the presence of a factor interfering with the ferment-action of the poison. In the case of non-venomous snakes and other harmless reptiles with low respiratory requirements the theory does not demand the presence of any absolute immunity but only of a minor degree of susceptibility. It is clear that *Report of the Indian Commission on snake-venom, page 8.
22 Scientific Memoirs by a reduction in the respiratory properties of the blood sufficing to cause death in animals of high respiratory requirements will not be sufficient to kill others of much lower respiratory requirements, but it does not necessarily follow that the latter should possess any absolute immunity, for, if the amount of venom be increased in proportion to the defect in respiratory requirement, there can be no reason why a fatal effect should not be produced. All then that the theory requires is that non-venomous snakes and similar animals should be relatively insusceptible, and there is good ground for believing that they are so and that degree of susceptibility, so far, runs parallel with that of respiratory require- ment. In the first place it can be readily shown that certain unequivocally harm- less reptiles possess an extraordinarily high power of resistance to the action of cobra-venom. Those in regard to which this has been most conclusively demonstrated are Zamenis mucosus, the common. "Rat-snake" or Dhamin of India, and Varanus salvator, the large water-lizard, which abounds in moist regions in the peninsula. Sir Joseph Fayrer was the first to point out that Zamenis mucosus possesses at all events a very high relative immunity, and was perfectly correct in doing so in spite of the imperfection of his data in regard to the actual quantity and quality of the venom which failed to produce a fatal result and the weight of the snakes to which it was administer- ed, and of the fact that, as a rule, the snakes were not kept long enough under observation to show conclusively that the exemption was a permanent one. The following experiments, the results of which are entirely confirmatory of his conclusions, were, however, free from such sources of error. Experiment XVII .Medical Officers of the Army of India. 23 In the first of the above experiments the snake received an amount of venom sufficient to kill 20 fowls, in the next three an amount sufficient to kill 100, and in the fifth enough to kill 200 fowls of I kilo in weight without show- ing any morbid symptoms either at the time or for several months subsequently. There can therefore be no doubt whatever of the presence of very high relative insusceptibility in this species of snake of the absolute harmlessness of which there can be no doubt. The next question is, how far does this coincide with low respiratory requirement? The following experimental data satisfactorily answer this by showing the results attending the exposure of fowls and speci- mens of Zamenis to like conditions calculated to affect the respiratory proper- ties of the blood. Experiment XXII. 24 Scientific Memoirs by The evidence of the coincidence of minor respiratory requirement with relative insusceptibility to the action of cobra-venom is thus quite unequivocal in this instance, and that which is afforded by the experimental data regarding Varanus salvator, which are given below, is quite as clear. Experiment XXIV. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 25 the defect of yielding no accurate data in regard to relative susceptibility. They have all been devoted to determining whether it is possible to kill harm- less snakes with venom26 Scientific Memoirs by five feet in length, whilst the length taken as the standard in the cal- culation was only five feet. Working on this principle it appears that the total weight of the snakes in Waddell's experiments must have been approxi- mately 5,188 grammes, and the data regarding the weights of venom show an expenditure of about 1.049 gramme. The average weight of the snakes according to this must have been 324 grammes and the average dose of venom 0.065 gramme. But the average duration of life after the administration of the venom was apparently about six hours, and this clearly shows high relative resistance to the action of the poison seeing that a dose of 0.05 gramme of dried venom of good average quality is sufficient to kill a fowl of one kilo in about half an hour. In other words, an amount of venom more than sufficient to kill fowls of one kilo within half an hour only sufficed to kill snakes of less than half that weight in about six hours, or the average dose administered to the snakes taken in relation to their weight was equivalent to one of at least 0.2 gramme to a fowl of one kilo in weight, and yet death did not follow for about six hours. These results are only to be taken as roughly approximate ones, but, such as they are, they afford very conclusive evidence of the existence of relative insusceptibility in snakes generally. Whilst snakes as a group appear to be relatively insusceptible to the action of cobra-venom, this is certainly not the case with Lacertilia in spite of the fact that certain species, such as Varanus salvator, enjoy a relative immunity. This comes out very clearly from the results of the following experiments on the effects following the administration of venom to Calotes versicolor. Experiment XXVIII.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 27 Varanus, whilst great susceptibility replaces it in Calotes. But there are other very conspicuous coincident differences present in the two cases, for Calotes is a purely terrestrial and very active animal, whilst Varanus is essentially aquatic and sluggish, and whilst a submersion of nine minutes' duration serves to render a Calotes motionless and insensible, one of more than three hours is required to produce a similar effect on a Varanus salvator. The evidence of the coincidence of susceptibility or relative immunity with high and low respiratory requirement is consequently just as clear in this instance as it is where the phenomena occurring in fowls are compared with those occurring in snakes as a group. The data obtained from the following series of experiments indicate the presence of relative insusceptibility in Batrachia. Experiment XXX.28 Scientific Memoirs by vouch, but both Waddell's and Wall's results afford confirmatory evidence of the existence of relative insusceptibility in Batrachia generally. Waddell's table showing the results which he obtained includes eleven experiments on five distinct species.*The amount of dried venom which was employed was about 0.638 gramme which gives an average of 0.058 gramme per dose. But the average weight of fair sized toads and frogs only amounts to about 76 grammes so that the average dose to the average weight of the recipient animals may be fairly taken as equivalent to one of 0.754 gramme to a fowl of, one kilo in weight, and yet the average duration of life subsequent to the treatment was about eight hours even although the venom was directly introduced into the dorsal lymph-sac, and hence practically directly into the circulation, whilst the intro- duction of equivalent doses directly into the circulation of fowls or other warm- blooded animals would inevitably be followed by almost instantaneous death. Wall's experimental results*in regard to Rana tigrina equally clearly indicate the presence of high relative insusceptibility in Batrachia, as in one case death did not occur until, five hours after the injection of a solution of 0.01 gramme of dried venom into the dorsal-sac, and in another, in which no less than 0.05 gramme was similarly introduced, it did not take place for more than an hour. There is little really definite information in regard to the relative suscep- tibility of invertebrate animals to the action of cobra-venom, but the data which were obtained from a series of experiments on cockroaches afforded little evidence of the presence of any specific effects, for although a large mortality attended the injection of venom, the mortality following the injection of equal quantities of human saliva was also very considerable. The evidence is not of any great value but, such as it is, is rather in favour of the view that the specific action of cobra-venom is one which is exerted upon the blood and which acts by reducing hæmic respiratory property, seeing that in the case of most tracheate animals the blood has no special respiratory function and cannot, consequently, afford the venom a fair field for action. The entire body of evidence relative to the degree of susceptibility to or exemption from the action of cobra-venom in various kinds of animals thus affords very considerable sup- port to the theory that the poison is primarily and essentially a hæmic one, and is at the same time quite inexplicable on the hypothesis of any primary neurotic action. The principal points of evidence in favour of the theory that cobra-venom acts as a primary blood-poison may be summarised as follows:Medical Officers of the Army of India. 29 blood within the body in cases where large doses of venom are introduced directly into the circulation, or where life is artificially prolonged so as to give time for the ferment-action of smaller doses to he fully exerted. III. The nervous phenomena which are present in cases of intoxication by cobra-venom are closely parallel to those occurring in cases of intoxication by CO, and the fact that the colour of the blood does undergo alteration on exposure to air is no proof that it has not sustained a lethal alteration in respira- tory property. IV. The fact that, whilst the poison produces no appreciable effect upon the circulation, artificial respiration, although protracting life, is powerless to avert an ultimate fatal result, shows that the asphyxia which causes death cannot be simply dependent on defective exposure of the blood to air. V. Where minimal lethal doses of cobra-venom are introduced into the system by direct intravenous injection, a prolonged latent period ensues before any specific symptoms manifest themselves, and, when the latter do appear, they follow a gradually progressive, cumulative course, whereas whenever minimal lethal doses of primarily neurotic poisons have entered the circulation they give rise to immediate effects. VI. Were the phenomena of nervous depression attending intoxication by cobra-venom dependent on a direct action upon the functional activity of the nervous centres, the administration of salts of strychnia ought to produce some appreciable effect on their progress, whereas in fact it produces none whatever. VII. Were the asphyxial termination of ordinary cases of intoxication by cobra-venom dependent on a gradual, direct depression of the activity of the nervous centres leading to paralytic cessation of respiratory movements, the injection of large quantities of venom directly into the circulation ought to be followed by sudden general paralysis, the quality of the blood remaining un- altered, whereas it is actually followed by sudden general convulsions and loss of coagulability in the blood. VIII. The theory of the direct action of the venom upon the nervous system is quite incapable of affording any explanation whatever of the conspicu- ous differences in the degree of susceptibility exhibited by different kinds of animals, whilst that which regards the action as primarily affecting the blood, and specially the respiratory property of the blood, is capable of explaining them so far in a very satisfactory fashion. The neurotic theory might, of course, explain the phenomena of the coincidence of minor susceptibility with minor respiratory requirement, were the former indicated merely by minor mortality, which might be interpreted as owing to the fact that a paralytic decrease in respiratory movement which must necessarily prove fatal in animals with high respiratory requirement, will by no means suffice to do so where the latter is much less. But, as a matter of fact, minor susceptibility is not evinced merely
30 Scientific Memoirs by by minor mortality but by minor tendency to the development of nervous symp- toms. The Dhamins in Experiments XVIIMedical Officers of the Army of India. 31 weight; that doses of 0.000125 gramme in the former, and 0.00025 in the latter, although incapable of causing death gave rise to well marked symptoms; and that smaller doses were followed by no appreciable results. The results attending the administration of doses of 0.0005, 0.00025, 0.000125 and 0.0001 gramme of the stronger stock of venom were as follows:32 Scientific Memoirs by the floor, save when the head was thrown up with each deep, gaping and gasping inspiration. During the afternoon, however, the symptoms began gradually to diminish in intensity, and from this time onwards recovery steadily progressed, so that, on the morning of the next day, the bird was seemingly almost quite well. The phenomena in this case were almost ludicrously like those succeeding a non-fatal exposure to an atmosphere highly charged with CO. Experiment XXXIX.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 33 Experiment XLI. 34 Scientific Memoirs by of this group come out very clearly when they are stated, as below, in tabular form :Medical Officers of the Army of India. 35 Two other distinctive properties of cobra-venom are, first, that the power of even minimal lethal doses is in no way appreciably affected by dilution; and second, that the same results ultimately follow the repeated, cumulative introduc- tion of quantities of venom, quite incapable individually of producing any appre- ciable effects, as those which attend the administration of quantities of lethal amount at one time. That this is the case is illustrated by the results of the following experiments. Experiment XLIV.36 Scientific Memoirs by venom, for the normal lethal doses of all the samples of dried venom of the best quality which have yet been tested have ranged from 0.003 to 0.006 gramme, whilst those of potent cobra-venom are only 0.00025 to 0.0005 gramme, or twelve times smaller. But, whilst this is the case, minimal lethal doses of Daboia- venom of the best quality are far more rapidly fatal than minimal lethal doses of the best cobra-venom. The results of the following experiments illustrate the effects following the administration of various amounts of dried venom of potent quality. Experiment XLVII.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 37 (b ) 10-56 A.M. A fowl received a subcutaneous injection of 0.003 gramme of the same dried venom in 3 c.c. of water. Strong muscular action occurred at the site of injection. The bird sat down motionless and for a time seemed to be very drowsy. At noon the drowsiness had entirely passed off and it now sat "still as a stone" and watchful, like the birds in the earlier experiments. As in these experiments these symptoms persisted until about 4 P.M. when recovery gradu- ally set in. Experiment LI.38 Scientific Memoirs by 0.0056 gramme of dried venom in 1c.c. of distilled water. Excessive local muscular action attended the injection. For a short time the bird remained standing, and seemingly somewhat excited, judging from the jerky character of the movements which it made. 10-39 A.M. It sat down, making slight mandibular movements. 10-41 A.M. Furious general opisthotonic convulsions set in, the body revolving back- wards on its transverse axis, the wings being at the same time widely expanded. Loud screaming occurred coincidently, and death took place a minute later. Experiment LIV.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 39 The bird remained sitting perfectly motionless, and after a time the respira- tion was somewhat hurried and the beak kept permanently gaping. There were throughout no signs of the peculiar laboured gasping respiration so characteristic of cases of intoxication from cobra-venom, and the head never tended to droop forward. The symptoms continued unchanged until 3 A.M. of the following morning when death occurred. In this case 0.008 gramme of dried venom, when cumulatively introduced entirely failed to give rise to any symptoms of centric nervous irritation, although a dose of 0.003 gramme would certainly have induced fatal general convulsions within the course of a few minutes had it been introduced at once in 1 c. c. of distilled water. Experiment LVI.40 Scientific Memoirs by injections had been administered the bird became absolutely motionless. It remained standing for a short time and then sat down, still and watchful. After sometime a tendency to permanent mandibular gaping manifested itself. On the following day it remained sitting absolutely motionless, with the neck retracted, the eyes open, and the back somewhat elevated. There were no symptoms whatever resembling the specific symptoms of chronic intoxication by cobra-venom. It remained in the same condition for the three next days, and on the morning of the following one was found dead and rigid, still retain- ing the same position. The results of these and similar experiments clearly demonstrated the impossibility of inducing general convulsions and rapid death by means of cumulative administration of the venom, and that in order to the occurrence of such phenomena the latter must enter the system at once in certain quantity and with a certain degree of concentration. With the most potent samples of dried venom the introduction of 0.003 gramme sufficed certainly to induce violent general convulsions and death when introduced simulta- neously and in solution in 1 c. c. of water, but a like amount was powerless to do so when in solution in 3 c. c. of water, and the same held good of the cumulative introduction of much larger quantities by means of repeated injections of fractional doses. The latter are capable of inducing phenomena of local nervous irritation followed by symtoms of local nervous exhaustion, but they fail either individually or cumulatively to give rise to any appreciable signs of centric irritation. The condition of local nervous exhaustion following the primary irritation in certain cases seems to be of a transitory nature, as in some instances in which local muscular action entirely fails to make its appearance in connection with injections of venom repeated at intervals of twenty minutes, it will again begin to manifest itself if the period of the intervals be doubled. The general phenomena attending the cumulative administration of normal Daboia-venom in doses too small or too dilute to induce violent general convul- sions and death within the course of a few minutes, are of precisely the same nature as those attending the action of relatively large quantities of venom in which the nerve-irritant toxin is deficient in amount or entirely absent, as it frequently is in samples which have been kept for any length of time, and as it certainly is, as Wall first pointed out,*in specimens which have been heated to boiling. All evidences of direct centric nervous stimulation are absent and are replaced by an excessive immobility and by indications of the occurrence of blood-change, but of blood-change of a nature absolutely distinct from that attending the action of cobra-venom, and manifesting itself in a great tendency to the occurrence of sanguinolent effusions, and in a peculiar brick-red colour and absence of coagulability in the blood when removed from the vessels. *Op. cit.
Medical,Officers of the Army of India. 41 During life sanguinolent evacuations very frequently are conspicuous symptoms, and on post-mortem examination sanguinolent effusions will constantly be found, not merely in the immediate neighbourhood of the site of introduction of the venom but extending thence in diffuse fashion over wide areas. In the case of fowls which die in consequence of repeated injections of venom into the subcutaneous tissue of the thighs, sero-sanguinolent effusions are ordinarily present, extending thence over the whole flanks and up as far as the origins of the wings; the phenomena being, in fact, almost precisely identical with those which attend the subcutaneous injection of relatively large quantities of virulent comma-bacilli in similar sites. From the results of the foregoing and similar experiments it is quite clear that, whilst in the case of any sample of cobra-venom we are dealing with a ma- terial in which we can readily determine that the amount constituting a mini- mal lethal dose bears a simple relation to weight, in that of any sample of Daboia-venom, it has always to be taken into account that we are dealing with one in which the relation of lethality to quantity is more complicated, not mere- ly because of the presence of two distinct toxic principles, but because the pro- portions which these bear to one another may vary very considerably, and because the action of one of them is liable to be affected by the manner in which it enters the system. In the case of any sample of cobra-venom we have only to ascertain the weight constituting a minimal lethal dose; in that of Daboia- venom we have to ascertain the weights containing the minimal lethal doses of two perfectly distinct toxic principles, and, further, under what conditions one of the latter is capable of producing its maximal effects. Having once ascertained that a given amount of cobra-venom is lethal we know that, however it be intro- duced into the system, it will cause death; in the case of Daboia-venom we have in the first place to ascertain what amounts of it contain lethal doses of two distinct toxins, and then, in regard to one of these, to determine how it must be introduced into the system to produce its full effects. It now remains to consider the phenomena attending the immediate intro- duction of relatively large doses of the venom into the system as compared with those which have been previously shown to follow the introduction of large doses of cobra-venom. Experiment LVIII. 42 Scientific Memoirs by 10-48 A.M. Dead. Comb and wattles bright red. Death occurred in tetanic spasm with the wings widely expanded and curved, and the legs rigidly ex- tended, and this position was permanently retained. Experiment LIX. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 43 The following experiment illustrates the phenomena attending the direct introduction of minimal lethal doses, of Daboia-venom on the one hand and of cobra-venom on the other, into the circulation. Experiment LXIII. 44 Scientific Memoirs by clot and serum brightened considerably in colour on exposure to air. Many red corpuscles were still well preserved. Experiment LXV. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 45 b. The blood rapidly formed an even, firm, coagulum the surface of which soon became bright scarlet but presently after wards began to darken rapidly. 11-23 A.M. The surface of the coagulum was dark red and its substance deep plumcoloured. No free serum was yet present. 1 P.M. The surface and substance of the coagulum were almost black, from the intense darkness of the red colour which they possessed. There was a little, limpid, dark-red serum present, but the clot was every where closely adherent to the sides of the vessel. 2 P.M. The characters of the specimen remained as before. The bodies of the red corpuscles were almost universally dissolved, leaving their nuclei free. On the following day the clot was throughout of such an intensely deep lake colour as to be apparently black, and was everywhere closely in contact with the sides of the vessel. Only 1 c. c. of serum was present, transparent and of a deep lake colour in thin layers but in mass appearing black and opaque, only the nuclei of the red corpuscles remained recognisable. The above experimental data are surely sufficient to demonstrate that Daboia-venom is entirely unlike cobra-venom in its nature and action and that the two poisons differ from one another in the following respects:46 Scientific Memoirs by give rise to any thing save local effects, and, hence, in so far as the lethal proper- ties of the venom are concerned, it is of no practical importance. 5. The phenomena attending the administration of sub-lethal doses so long as these are capable of producing any appreciable effects, of minimal lethal doses, and of excessive doses of cobra-venom are essentially alike, but in the case of normal Daboia-venom this is not the case, as sub-lethal doses, where they produce any appreciable effect, are followed by symptoms indicative of the action of one toxic principle, and minimal lethal and excessive doses by symp- toms indicative of that of another. 6. In the phenomena normally attending the action of cobra-venom there is no distinct evidence of the action of anything but a single toxin, whilst in the case of Daboia-venom there is the most unequivocal evidence of the presence of two distinct lethal toxins, one acting as a direct nervous irritant and the other giving rise to septic changes in the blood. 7. The toxin in cobra-venom acts cumulatively; in the case of Daboia- venom the toxin which causes nervous irritation cannot act cumulatively whilst that which induces septic phenomena does so. 8. Dilution of minimal lethal doses of cobra-venom in no way affects their potency, whilst dilution of minimal lethal doses of normal Daboia-venom ordinarily renders them incapable of causing death because it renders the ner- vous irritant toxin incapable of acting upon the nervous centres, whilst the septic one, as a rule, is only lethal when it enters the system in relatively large amounts. 9. The symptoms attending the action of the septic factor in Daboia-venom, although it is capable of acting cumulatively and is apparently unaffected by dilution, are perfectly distinct from those attending the action of cobra-venom, for, whilst in cases of intoxication by cobra-venom respiratory and nervous symp- toms indicative of defective oxygen-supply constitute the characteristic pheno- mena, in cases of chronic Daboia-poisoning such phenomena are entirely ab- sent and are replaced by symptoms indicative of a tendency to abnormal escape of blood-constituents from the blood-vascular system. Farther, in the case of death from the action of cobra-venom the blood is characterised by its intense- ly dark colour and by the fact that it coagulates rapidly and firmly unless ex- cessive doses of venom have been directly introduced into the system, or life has been artificially prolonged so as to give the ferment-action full time to operate; whereas in the case of death from the action of Daboia-venom it is of a peculiar dull brick-red colour and normally quite incoagulable, even when death has been induced almost instantaneously by the direct intravenous injec- tion of minimal lethal doses. There are certain points in connection with the action of Daboia-venom which appear to merit special consideration. These are, first, the phenomena
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 47 attending the dilution of minimal lethal doses of the constituent which acts as a nervous irritant; second, the fact that in certain cases the blood retains its coagulability after death; and, third, that the properties of the venom appear nor- mally to vary at different times of year. The only apparent explanation of the phenomena attending dilution of minimal lethal doses is that the material which acts as a direct nervous irritant is either very rapidly excreted or very rapidly decomposed, so that in the case of minimal lethal doses a delay in absorption may prevent the accumulation of enough of it within the circulation to occasion fatal irrita- tion of the nervous centres. When a minimal lethal dose is subcutaneously injected in 3 in place, of 1 c. c. of water it may be assumed that, other things being alike, the absorption of the total mass of venom will be propor- tionately delayed and, with this, the time for its partial excretion or decom- position proportionately increased. Whether the phenomenon is actually de- pendent on very rapid excretion or very rapid decomposition must in the meantime remain an open question, but it appears not to be inprobable that de- composition is the essential factor, seeing that there are various facts which clearly indicate an extreme instability in the constitution of the material. Dr. Wall's experiments unequivocally showed that an exposure to temperatures which in no way affected the septic potency of the venom was sufficient to render it entirely inert as a nervous irritant.*Indeed, as he was unaware that in any case the septic phenomena may be induced without the induction of any save purely local nervous irritation by means of the cumulant employment of minute doses, he regarded preliminary heating of the venom as an essential step to- wards their study uncomplicated by the others. But it is not merely exposure to excessive temperatures which alters the properties of the venom in this way; for, during the moist, warm weather which prevails in Calcutta during the rainy season, a similar loss of nerve-irritant property almost invariably occurs in any specimens of venom which are not most carefully protected from all exposure to ordinary atmospheric air. Even when kept in carefully stoppered bottles, un- less these be continuously retained in an artificially desiccated atmosphere they lose greatly in nerve irritant property, whilst retaining septic potency un- impaired. This loss of power came out very clearly in the case of a peculiarly potent sample of dried venom which had been employed in experiments during the course of the winter of 1894, and subsequently set aside in a stoppered bottle for some months. In its original state its potency was such that 0.003 gramme when administered in one 1c.c. of water invariably induced fatal general convulsions in fowls of about 1 kilo in weight within ten minutes subse- quent to administration, but when it was again tested during the course of the *Op. cit.
48 Scientific Memoirs by autumn, doses of 0.003 and 0.006 gramme failed to give rise even to any signs of local nervous irritation, and doses of at least 0.012 gramme were necessary in order to induce fatal general convulsions. The instabilty of the material is further indicated by the results which attended the following experiments on the action of the albumin and globulin which my friend, Dr. Warden, was good enough to separate from a sample of venom of ascertainedly high neurotic property, and which show that during the course of the treatment to which it had been exposed the venom had lost all power as a general nervous irritant. Experiment LXVII. 49 Medical Officers of the Army of India. cases, such as that of Experiment LXIII, in which death occurs immediately in consequence of intravenous injections of minimal lethal doses of venom, evi- dence of profound blood-change in the form of the characteristic alteration in colour and absolute incoagulability may be present. But it must be taken into account that in such experiments the poison enters the blood directly and that this may have an important modifying effect on the results, for, if the nerve-irri- tant toxin be more readily absorbed than the septic one, it is evident that under normal circumstances a lethal amount of the former may have entered the blood at a time when comparatively little of the latter has been able to do so; whereas in cases of direct intravenous injections the full amount of both toxins present in the dose of venom enter the circulation simultaneously, so that, although death is almost immediately induced by the action of the nerve-irritant one, the septic one has been present in sufficient amount to induce considerable blood-change ere its supervention. Taking every thing into account, then, it appears not to be improbable that the factor in the venom which acts as a nervous irritant is incapable of inducing any important changes in the blood, and that the variabi- lity in the evidence of the occurrence of such changes in different instances is connected with variations in the amount of the septic factor which has entered the blood and in the time which has been given to it to produce its maximal effects there. The occurrence of seasonal variations in potency is a phenomenon which is not peculiar to Daboia-venom for we find evidence of it in the case of cobra- venom also, but the results are more striking in the former case owing to the fact that, whilst immediately sub-lethal doses of cobra-venom cause profound intoxication, corresponding doses of normal Daboia-venom do not do so because the amount of the septic toxin normally associate with sub-lethal quantities of that which acts as a nervous irritant is too small to occasion any conspicuous effects. In the case of cobra-venom, samples collected during the hot and rainy seasons appear, as a rule, to be somewhat less potent than those ob- tained during the winter, the normal minimal lethal dose of the former for fowls of about one kilo in weight, amounting to 0.0005 gramme, whilst that of the latter is 0.00025 gramme. The same holds good in regard to Daboia-venom, the mini- mal dose capable of occasioning fatal general convulsions in fowls of 1 kilo in weight, amounting to about 0.003 gramme in dried samples collected during the latter part of winter, and rising to about 0.006 or even to 0.012 gramme in those obtained during the course of the hot and rainy seasons. Such variations in potency appear to occur in the venom of all snakes whether at liberty or in confinement, but are more uniform and marked in connection with the latter, for samples of venom of maximal or nearly maximal potency are occasionally ob- tained from freshly-caught snakes at seasons when those which have been in confinement for any considerable time are persistently yielding nothing but G
50 Scientific Memoirs by weak venom. The explanation of these variations was first suggested by an old and very experienced keeper who accounted for their occurrence as the result of the fact that during the course of the cold season the snakes become very torpid and entirely cease to feed for many weeks at a time, whilst during the rest of the year they are feeding freely and therefore frequently discharging their venom. Careful observations were made in regard to this point on the Daboias in captivity in the Calcutta Zoological Garden during the course of the past year, and there could be no question of the fact that their venom became more potent shortly after they had ceased to feed in the early part of winter, and deteriorated in quality again in spring after they had again begun to feed freely. There can be no question in regard to the coincidence of the pheno- mena, and the fact that the seasonal variations are more constant in captive than in free snakes seems to indicate that there really is a causal connection between frequency of discharge and quality of venom. Captive snakes are certain of obtaining their food regularly, whilst those which are at large may frequently be unable to secure any prey for considerable periods, and, if they be captured towards the close of any such period, the venom which they will then yield represents the product of a continued period offasting. The phenomena are, to a certain extent, parallel to those attending the bites of fresh and exhausted snakes; only in the latter case variations in quantity as well as quality of venom probably come into play, whereas in the case of the seasonal variations the differences are dependent on variations in quality only, and would appear to indicate that the fluid, after secretion and whilst still retained within the glands, undergoes certain maturative changes in the course of which its lethal properties undergo an increase. The results of detailed comparison of the phenomena presented by cases of intoxication by the venom of the Cobra and Daboia appear to warrant the following conclusions:51 Medical Officers of the Army of India. to this point are not of a very complete character, as opportunities of such full comparative investigation of the qualities of the venom of any other species have not presented themselves, and, indeed, it is only with the venom of one or two other species that any experiments at all have been conducted in connec- tion with the present investigation. Some experiments have, however, been tried in regard to the action of the venom of two colubrine snakes, Bungarus c52 Scientific Memoirs by less than that yielded by cobras of corresponding size, the average weight of dried venom obtainable on each occasion being only 0.0498 gramme, whilst the average for cobras is 0.245 gramme. Experiment LXXI. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 53 In none of the cases in which smaller doses were employed did any symptoms of general blood poisoning, resembling those described by Wall as occasionally presenting themselves in those of his experiments in which death did not rapidly follow the infliction of a bite, occur. This is probably to be accounted for by the fact that Wall's experiments were conducted by means of causing specimens of Bungarus fasciatus to bite animals; whereas in the present series of experiments dried venom was employed. The difference in the results may therefore have been owing either to the occurrence of some change in the specific constituents of the material during the course of desiccation, or, more probably, to the fact that desiccation serves to render certain extraneous elements, which are liable to be present in the fresh venom, inert. The sali- vary secretion of snakes, like that of animals generally, constantly contains numerous micro-organisms of various kinds, and it is quite possible that in certain cases these may possess pathogenic properties. Where, therefore, the venom is introduced in the fresh state by means of bites, there is always a possibility that results may follow which are in no way dependent on the spe- cific action of the essential toxins of the former. But where venom, which has been subjected to prolonged and thorough desiccation, is employed, the chances of the occurrence of any such complication must be greatly diminished. On the whole, therefore, it appears to be probable that the venom of Bungarus fasciatus does not in any way differ specifically from that of the cobra, but only differs in containing a smaller proportion of one and the same toxic principle. It is quite clear that Bungarus fasciatus, with its weak jaw, and a com- paratively small quantity of relatively feeble venom at its disposal, must be incapable of contributing to any important extent to the mortality from snake- bite. The largest amount of fresh venom which was obtainable from any specimen on any single occasion only yielded 0.102 gramme of dried material; but, as 0.01 gramme constitutes an approximately minimal lethal dose for fowls of one kilo in weight, it is extremely improbable that even this maximal yield would have been sufficient to cause death in any adult human subject. As the species is very difficult to obtain in Calcutta, and as its small size renders the amount of venom which can be collected from any individual excessively small, in the only experiments which have as yet been tried with the venom of Echis carinata the venom was administered by bites. The results, however, which were obtained were sufficient to show the essential identity of the material with Daboia-venom, and, consequently, that it is quite distinct in nature from the venom of the cobra and of Bungarus c54 Scientific Memoirs by It was seized with furious general convulsions after an interval of a minute and a half and died a minute later. Experiment LXXVII. 55 On Milula, a new genus of Liliaceæ from the Eastern Himalaya. BY SURGEON-CAPTAIN D. PRAIN, INDIAN MEDICAL SERVICE. The subject of this notice is one of the interesting plants which the botanical investigation of the Eastern Himalaya, conducted during the past twenty years on behalf of the Government of Bengal by Dr. G. King, Superin- tendent of the Royal Botanic Garden, Calcutta, has revealed to science. It was obtained by one of Dr. King's native collectors in Chumbi, the valley that lies immediately to the east of Sikkim. Politically this valley is Tibetan; geographically it forms part of the Himalayan region, since the stream that drains it finds its way southwards through Bhutan and Assam to the Brahma- putra. Its flora, however, indicates that though so near to Sikkim, it enjoys a comparatively dry climate. This is due to the fact that in place of lying open, as does the basin of the Tista which practically constitutes Sikkim, to the moisture-laden currents that sweep up from the Bay of Bengal to precipitate on the Sikkim-Himalaya the heavy rainfall which characterises this area, the Chumbi Valley has a narrow southern outlet, and the lofty ridges that enclose it practically deprive these currents of their moisture ere they reach the depres- sion beyond. The facies of this singular plant, which bears out to some extent the com- parative dryness of its habitat, is so completely that of an Allium that at first sight one feels inclined, in spite of its spicate inflorescence and its solitary bract, to treat it as the type of a somewhat aberrant section in that comprehensive genus. Both characters, repugnant though they be to our generic conception of Allium, might be looked upon as incidental. Already Allium includes species with heads of sessile florets, while in some other genera the passage from a head to a spike is of the simplest;*the difference, moreover, between one bract and two, among plants like the Allieæ where the bracteal variation is admittedly 256 Scientific Memoirs by is. A secondary reason for excluding the plant from Allium is that the speci- mens show no trace of the garlic odour so characteristic, even in dried examples, of most, if not of all the species of that genus. The localisation of the genus does not appear to be difficult; an over- whelming majority of characters indicate its tribal position to be among the Allieæ, (tribe xii of Liliaceæ in Bentham and Hooker's Genera Plantarum ). It is true that none of the Allieæ hitherto described have a spicate inflorescence or a solitary bract. But it must be remembered that both characters may be merely incidental; the main point is that, like the other Allieæ, the plant under review is bracteate under the inflorescence. The Scilleæ, with which it agrees in the single character of a spicate inflorescence, but whose facies it does not recall, have no involving bract. The secondary question of the subordinate position of the genus presents a little difficulty. Of the already recognised subtribes it clearly approaches most nearly the Euallieæ, and, if it must be located in a known subgroup, it is among these that it can with the least amount of dislocation be placed. The question really turns on the relative value for purposes of classification of characters derived from the inflorescence and from the individual florets. Already the Euallieæ include plants with a gamophyllous perianth and plants with 2-seriate filaments, so that the characters on which the generic rank of Milula largely depends favour the localisation of the genus in that subtribe. At the same time it must be recollected that, whether inci- dental or not, the characters of a spicate inflorescence and of a solitary bract are not shared by any other member of the Allieæ, and it seems more natural as well as more convenient to treat Milula as typical of a new subtribe to be inserted among the Allieæ immediately before the Euallieæ. The systematic definitions and descriptions required to indicate its position are as follows. NAT. ORD. LILIACEÆ. Tribus XII. ALLIEÆ (definitione parum ampliata ) Bracteæ 1Medical Officers of the Army of India. 57 Milula spicata sp. unic. Herba bulbo elongato dimidio inferiore squamis (foliorum veterum reliquiis) fibrosis vestito, radicibus numerosis; foliis lineari- lanceolatis scapum fistulosum bulbo duplo longiorem aequantibus excedentibusve; spica cylindrica bracteâ basali spathaceâ ovato-acuminatâ inclusa, floribus viridi- rubescentibus parvulis plurimis campanulatis, segmentis perianthii aequalibus margine undulato-fimbriatis; staminibus in seriebus duabus exterioribus 3 car- pellis alternantibus filamentis dimidio inferiore expansis petaloideis, interioribus 3 carpellis oppositis paullo brevioribus filamentis prorsus filiformibus, antheribus versatilibus omnibus perfectis; ovario subgloboso ovulis ad angulum loculi interiorem parum supra basin affixis; capsula globosa, ovulis in loculo quoque semper 1 nonnunquam ambobus abortis; seminibus nigris. In HIMALAYA ORIENTALI: Chumbi, apud Do-tho, Kingii mercenar. ! Bulbus " prasinus " 4Explanation of the Plate. Milula spicata, Prain. The specimen selected is the only one of the solitary gathering which shows 2 scapes; the others have but one. 1. Section of stem x 1/1. 2. Flower x 3/1. 3. Perianth laid open to show staminal insertion x 3/1. 4. Stamen of outer series from within and also sideways x 3/1. 5. Stamen of inner series Sc. Mem. Ind. Army, Part. IX. PLATE I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002610.tif] Drawn by D. Prain. Lith: by New Chitra Silpi C2. MILULA SPICATA, Prain.
59 An experimental investigation of the effects of hæmosta- tic and other drugs on the intravascular coagulability of the blood. BY SURGEON-LIEUTENANT LEONARD ROGERS, M.B., B.S. LOND., F.R.C.S., ENG. In December last I read a paper before the Medical Section of the Indian Medical Congress on " Some Clinical applications of the different methods of in- fluencing intravascular coagulability," which was based on the work of Dr. Wright of Netley*and on some experiments I have been doing on the effect of various drugs on the time of coagulation. As some of the latter had been carried out under somewhat disadvantageous circumstances whilst on a march, I have since repeated and considerably extended them, and propose to set forth the results obtained in the present paper. The method adopted is a very simple one. It consists in the determination of the coagulation-time of the blood both before and after taking a given dose of a drug by means of Dr. Wright's apparatus,60 Scientific Memoirs by this time varies with the temperature, as uniform a temperature as possible is advisable. " Half blood temperature," 18.5°C (65.°F) is recommended by Dr. Wright, is obtained by placing the tubes in small pockets of a bandage fitted around a metal vessel which can be filled with water of the desired temperature. One other fallacy has to be eliminated, namely, the effect of a full meal in slightly accelerating, and of a prolonged fast in retarding the coagulability of the blood. I made some preliminary observations to determine the extent of this influence. Thus one day I had tea and toast at 7 A.M., breakfast at 9-30, and then fasted until 8 P. M., taking two-hourly observations which resulted as follows: At 9 A.M. my coagulation time was 4 min. 15 sec., at 11-30 A.M. =4 min., at 1-30 P.M.=4 min., at 3-30 P.m.=4 min., at 5-30 P.M.=from 4 min. 15 sec. to 4 min. 30 sec., at 7-30 P.M.=4 min. 15 sec., and at 10 P.M. =4 min. Thus the greatest variation was less than half a minute, and by taking a light lunch at 2 P.M. even this difference may be lessened. Again, exercise might possibly influence the coagulation-time, but the following observation seems to show that it exerts no material effect on it. Thus a 14 mile march followed by being out shooting from 11-30 A.M. to 5-30 P.M. one day, and a 13½ mile march the next morning produced no alteration of my coagulation-time. Alcohol has been shown by Dr. Wright to retard coagulation, so throughout the 7 months over which my experiments have extended I have taken no alcoholic drinks. In fact from nearly 150 observations I have come to the conclusion that at a given temperature my coagulation-time is remarkably constant, and as no conclusions have been drawn from less than three experiments with the same drug, and from an acceleration of less than from a half to one minute, all known sources of fallacy may be fairly claimed to have been excluded. I now pass on to the consideration in detail of the results obtained, begin- ning with the class of so-called hæmostatics, as the main object of this investi- gation was to determine in what degree, if any, the power of these drugs in checking internal hæmorrhage depends on their effect in accelerating the clotting power of the blood, the rapidity of this action, and how long it continues. As yet I have only determined this for single doses. Calcium Chloride. This salt is the most powerful coagulation accelerator known, as has been fully shown by Dr. Wright,*with the exception perhaps of the inhalation of carbonic acid gas.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 61 time was 1¾ minutes, a day later it was 3½ minutes, and on the 4th day it had regained its former time of 5¼ minutes. I may just mention here that on three occasions I have seen severe hæmoptysis cease in from 10 to 20 minutes after a single gramme dose of calcium chloride, in two of which other drugs had previously failed to control it. That this very rapid effect was really due to the action of the drug and not to a series of extraordinary coincidences is borne out by the following observation. My coagulability-time being 3 minutes at 11-45 A.M. I took 1 gramme (15 grains) of calcium chloride at 12 noon. At 12-30 my time was 1 min. 30 sec. Thus in half an hour my coagulation-time was accelerated by 1 min. 30 sec., or by one-half. Calcium chloride has, however, one great disadvantage, namely, that if the dose be increased or frequently repeated, not only does its effect not increase proportionately, but is actually decreased until it has an opposite effect. It cannot then be used to keep up a definite increase of coagulability over a long period of time, as, for instance, in the treatment of aneurism. Turpentine. Experiment at 1062 Scientific Memoirs by On another occasion an acceleration of 55 sec. followed 4¼ hours after taking 30 grains of gallic acid. Experiment at 10Medical Officers of the Army of India. 63 Next day at 1064 Scientific Memoirs by tion-time being 3 min. at to-35 A.M., I took of acid sulph, dil. 3i at 11 A.M. At 1-30 P.M. and again at 4 P.M. my coagulation-time was 2 min. 30 sec., or a quickening of 3o sec. at both 2½ and 5 hours, respectively, after this dose. Sul- phuric acid has then only a slight accelerating influence when given in a full dose. Lead Acetate. Experiment at 10Medical Officers of the Army of India. 65 Thus single 20-grain doses of potassium iodide caused a marked accelera- tion of coagulation in from five to eight hours (in one instance preceded by a primary retardation) passing off in twenty-four hours. Its clinical use in cases of aneurisms thus receives an additional physiological basis. In addition to the above, I have also investigated the action of some of the vegetable acids which Dr. Wright has found to diminish the coagulability of the blood.*My results are, however, much more variable than his, as,will be seen from the data given below:66 Scientific Memoirs by coagulation-time had been previously accelerated to I min. 30 sec. by a dose of a persalt of iron taken the day before, so the decrease may have been due to the effect of the iron passing off. Here again my tartaric acid, which was obtained from a Calcutta chemist, may possibly not have been pure. Lime67 Is Mycetoma primarily owing to the action of the fungal elements ordinarily associated with its products ? BY BRIGADE-SURGEON LIEUTENANT-COLONEL D. D. CUNNINGHAM, C.I.E., F.R.S. To most pathologists it will probably appear to be very heterodox to retain any doubts in regard to the relation which the presence of the fungal elements in the morbid products of the disease bear to Mycetoma. The long recognised association of masses of large fungal elements with the black concretions of the one form of the disease and Mr. Kanthack's recent demonstration of the pre- sence of actinomyces-like structures in the roe-like bodies of the other*will. probably appear to most pathologists to be conclusive evidence that these consti- tute the essential and primary contagium vivum on which the affection is dependent. There appear, however, to be certain phenomena which still render this doubtful, and it is to these that I propose to call attention in the following pages. They are the following: 1st, that a certain number of cases occur in which, whilst all the other essential symptoms of the disease are present, there is an entire absence of any concretions of either the black or white variety and of the fungal elements ordinarily associated with them; 2nd, that the fungal elements which ordinarily occur in connection with the two varieties of the disease are of absolutely unlike character, those associated with the white variety resembling those of actinomyces, and those of the black variety forming sclerotia like those of the Sclerotiniæ and other allied ascomycetes; 3rd, that this very formation of sclerotioid bodies is a process which is normally indicative of a cessation of vegetative growth dependent on exhaustion of nutritive supply, and therefore one which could not occur were the normal tissues the proper site for the development of the parasitic elements. Were the normal tissues the primary site in which the latter establish themselves, there could be no reason for a cessation of the indefinite extension of mycelium and for the formation of dense sclero- tioid aggregates until they had been throughout affected and exhausted, where- as, as a matter of fact, we find the sclerotia isolated and surrounded by masses of tissue entirely devoid of fungal elements. Taking these points in detail, we have first to consider the question of the possible existence of the disease without the presence of any of the fungiferous *Madura disease (mycetoma) and actinomycosis. A. A. Kanthack, Journal of Pathology and Bacteriology, October 1892. I 2
68 Scientific Memoirs by concretions ordinarily associated with it. Of course, on the presumption that the fungal elements are the primary and essential cause, this is a question which is not open to discussion, but, when cases of disease are encountered which both clinically and structurally are essentially identical with typical cases of my- cetoma, save as regards an entire absence of concretions and fungal elements, it is one which naturally suggests itself to any unprejudiced mind and which must be determined by the nature of the evidence adduced in regard to the general identity of the two forms of disease and the absence of fungal elements in one of them. I have, however, as I believe, met with two cases in which both of these points were quite unequivocally demonstrable. They both occurred in patients who were admitted into the Medical College Hospital, Calcutta; in both cases the disease occurred in the foot; and in both the specimens reached me in the fresh condition immediately after they had been removed by amputation. In both cases the foot presented all the characteristic external appearances of mycetoma, being thickened and shortened, with extreme flattening of the plantar arch and with numerous mammilations of the surface, which in some instances presented orifices leading into the substance of the tissues. Sections revealed the usual and characteristic system of cyst-like cavities and intercommunicating sinuses, but the contents of these consisted entirely of fluid mucoid or oily materials, and, in spite of the closest scrutiny, failed to shew any traces what- ever of the presence of concretions of any kind. A specially strict search for such bodies was made, as the specimens had been procured in the fresh state for the special purpose of obtaining materials for attempted cultures of the fungal elements, but all attempts to detect any proved entirely futile. Here then were instances of a disease in which the lesions were precisely of the same character as those which are ordinarily associated with the presence of fungal concretions, and which clinically were regarded as cases of mycetoma, but which had seemingly arisen quite apart from the presence of any fungal elements, or, at all events, from the presence of any hyphomycete fungi. It thus became necessary to look for some other cause accounting for the morbid phenomena, and in doing so a very extensive series of preparations was made which certainly revealed the presence of no filamentous fungi, but showed clear evidence of the existence of widely diffused textural changes. The very peculiar character of the contents of the cavities and channels and, specially, the conspicuous evidences of the abundance of fungal elements in the concretions of the black variety of the disease, would appear in great measure to have diverted the attention of most observers from the study of the phenomena presented by the surrounding tissues. The accounts of these phenomena which have been recorded are extremely meagre and appear to leave one very important point entirely out of consideration. This is the evidence of very extensively diffused vascular disease of the nature of arteritis obliterans
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 69 affecting the capillaries and smaller arteries and making its appearance as the primary evidence of disease in areas which otherwise retain perfectly normal characters (Plates I and II). This phenomenon is common to both those forms of the disease in which concretions occur and to that form in which they are absent, and taking this into account along with the identity of the clinical and coarser structural features presented by all three forms of disease, I can see no satisfactory ground for refusing to recognise the third as the outcome of the same morbid process to which the other two are due, so long as the latter are regarded as mere varieties of one another. The nature of the concretions and of the fungal elements associated with them, which are characteristic of the two ordinarily recognised varieties, is absolutely unlike, and, if this is not to be re- garded as indicative of anything but mere variability in what is primarily and essentially a single morbid process, there can be no satisfactory reason for re- fusing to admit the existence of a third variety in which concretions are absent, so long as the remaining features of the disease are essentially identical. Allowing this, we have to deal with a morbid process which manifests itself in three distinct forms, two of which are characterised by the presence of two distinct forms of filamentous fungal elements in their products, whilst the third is distinguished by their entire absence, and, this being so, it is clear that the fungal elements cannot be the primary cause of the disease, and that we must look to something common to all three varieties as a guide to its true etiology. Proceeding next to the question of the specific identity or distinctness of the fungal elements which constitute such characteristic features in the morbid products of the two ordinarily recognised varieties of the disease, it must be noted in the first place that Mr. Kanthack is the only observer who maintains their identity on any grounds worthy of consideration, as Carter's assumption that the concretions of the white variety are the results of degeneration of those present in the black one is based on no evidence whatever save the general resemblance which the two diseases otherwise present. In other cases in which the fungal elements are described, the descriptions generally refer to those characteristic of the black variety only, and agree in describing them as consist- ing of mycelium of higher fungal type, and where those occurring in the white variety are referred to they are described as presenting quite distinct characters. In his very interesting paper on the subject Mr. Kanthack allows that, unless the fungal elements proper to the two ordinarily recognised varieties of the disease can be shown to be of like nature, it must remain improbable that they constitute the primary cause of it, and it is only because he believes that he has demonstrated their identity, or that at utmost they are mere varieties of one and the same species, that he regards the affec- tion as of primary fungal origin dependent on the invasion of the tissues by an organism which he proposes to denominate Oospora indica.
70 Scientific Memoirs by Now in regard to this, it must always be carefully kept in mind that Oospora is not a term of truly generic value at all, but a mere provisional one applied to a number of fungi which have not yet been definitely classified, because we are as yet only very imperfectly acquainted with their true nature. In many cases the mycelium alone has been as yet detected, and in those cases in which any fructification is present, it invariably consists of conidia or pos- sibly in some cases of chlamydospores, neither of which are of determinative value in questions of classification. When, therefore, we describe any fungal growth as an Oospora, we do not by any means imply that it necessarily has any really close affinity to any of the other fungi included in the same group with it, All that we mean is that it is a fungal organism whose precise nature we are not at present in a position to determine. But, if this be so, we are most assuredly not in a position to determine questions of the specific identity of the different forms which, as a matter of convenience, are included within the provisional genus. Even in those cases in which fructification is present, this still holds good, for the forms of fructification which occur are not of determinative value. This must at once be evident to every one when it is taken into account that the conidial fructification, which used formerly to be described as Botrytis cinerea is seemingly common to many distinct species of Sclerotinia. But in the case of the fungal organisms associated with my- cetoma we have no fructification of any kind to aid us, and hence any satis- factory identification becomes even more impossible. No one would dream of affirming that any two specimens of Zygomycete mycelium belonged to one and the same species of fungus, however identical in character they might be, in the absence of any fructification, and when we have not only no fructi- fication as a guide, but there is in addition no resemblance, but very conspi- cuous differences between two mycelia, as is the case with the two varieties of mycetoma, in place of having any satisfactory ground for affirming that they are specifically identical, we have very good ground for suspecting that they are specifically distinct. The mycelium discovered by Mr. Kanthack in the concretions of the white variety of mycetoma is practically identical in characters with that oc- curring in actinomycosis, but this most assuredly is not the case with re- gard to that which is normally associated with the black variety. Mr. Kan- thack apparently encountered a specimen in which the fungal elements, or some of them at all events, did resemble those normal to the white variety, but this must not be taken as indicating that as a rule they do so. On the con- trary, all the specimens of the black variety which have been studied by other observers from the days of Carter to those of Boyce and Surveyor are described as containing a mycelium presenting no resemblance whatever to that charac- teristic of actinomyces, which is characterised by the absence or extreme
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 71 rarity of septation, and presents the characters which led F. Cohn to regard his Streptothrix as a schizomycete organism. It is true that Sauvageau and Radais*have apparently unequivocally demonstrated that he was wrong in doing so, and that his Streptothrix is in reality a filamentous mycelium which may at present be included within the provisional group Oospora, but this does not in any way affect the question, seeing that, according to them, the species of Oospora associated with actinomycosis is characterised by an entire absence of septation. The observations of these authors alone are amply sufficient to demonstrate the purely provisional character of the genus Oospora, seeing that they make it include organisms with both septate and aseptate mycelium, and therefore presumably belonging both to the group of higher fungi and to the phycomycetes. A glance at the first figure in Plate II, which is taken from an organism occurring in a neutral salt-solution as the result of air-con- tamination, will show the characters presented by an Oosporic mycelium of the type of Cohn's Streptothrix, and on comparing them with figures 2-4 of the same plate, illustrating the fungal elements normal to the black variety of my- cetoma, it will be at once evident that the latter are of an entirely different type. In place of being aseptate the filaments are here built up of series of very short, relatively broad cells, and in place of presenting any resemblance to those of any filamentous schizomycete, they resemble those which enter into the constitution of the sclerotia of any of the higher fungi which produce such bodies ( Plate II, Fig. 3). Whilst then, in the absence of any demonstration of definitive fructifica- tion, the fungal elements characteristic of the two common varieties of myce- toma may, as a matter of convenience, be referred to the provisional genus Oospora, this does not imply that they are specifically identical or even related to one other in any way. On the contrary, in so far as mycelial characters go, the evidence goes to show that they are absolutely unlike. The mycological evidence, such as it is, goes to show that these two varieties of the disease are associated with organisms of totally distinct nature, and this being so, it can hardly be reasonably maintained that they constitute the specific primary cause of it. The general clinical features of the disease in the two varieties, and the structural details apart from the character of the concretions, are so precisely alike that it is hard to follow observers like Boyce and Surveyor,72 Scientific Memoirs by are concerned, are practically identical, are due to the action of two distinct fungal organisms which are not even remotely related to one another ! But if there be no satisfactory ground for believing that the fungal elements of the two commonly recognised varieties of the disease are in any way related to one another, and if a third variety is present in which fungal elements are entirely absent, surely the evidence for the primary fungal origin of the affection is hope- lessly defective. Even in Mr. Kanthack's specimens of the white variety of the disease fungal elements were absent from some of the concretions. Being con- vinced, as he was, of the identity of the fungi in both ordinarily recognised varieties, he not unnaturally ascribed this to antecedent degeneration of fungal elements which had been previously present, but such an explanation is not ap- plicable to cases where the disease is present and fungal elements are entirely absent. When it is taken into account that the fungal elements associated with the disease are of two perfectly distinct types, that those present in the black variety constitute sclerotioid masses, that fungal elements are not invariably present in the concretions of the white variety, and, finally, that a third variety exists in which concretions and fungal elements are alike absent, can it be logi- cally maintained that the disease has a primarily hyphomycete origin ? It may be primarily of parasitic origin, but there is assuredly nothing satisfactorily to de- monstrate that the recognised forms of fungal elements usually associated with it play the part of specific primary causes. Judging from the appearances present in a very large series of preparations, by the generally accepted fact of the essential differences in the characters of the concretions present in the two commonly recognised varieties of the disease, and by the entire absence of such bodies in what there appear to be good grounds for recognising as a third variety, I believe that the evidence points to the fol- lowing sequence of morbid processes in the development of the disease. At the outset we have to deal with morbid changes which are confined to the smaller arterioles and capillaries and which lead on to more or less complete obliteration of their lumina. In the capillaries an excessive proliferation of endothelium occurs, so that in stained preparations the course of individual branches may be traced almost as distinctly as though they had been injected owing to the accumula- tions of nuclei which they come to contain (Plate I, Figs. 1, 2, 5; Plate II, Fig. 6). As the proliferation of endothelial elements advances the cells no longer form a single layer, but become stratified, and ultimately form a plug which obstructs the lumen of the vessel and converts the latter into a solid cord. In the case of the arterioles similar processes go on and at the same time the muscular coat becomes abnormally thickened, whilst, with less uniformity and in minor degree, a certain amount of hypertrophy also takes place in the connective tissue of the outer coat (Plate I, Figs. 3, 6; Plate II, Figs. 5-7). Whilst these primary changes are advancing in the vessels other morbid phenomena begin
Medica1 Officers of the Army of India. 73 to make their appearance in their immediate neighbourhood. Accumulations of granulomatous tissue, frequently containing bodies similar to those which occur so abundantly in the morbid tissue in Rhinoscleroma (Plate I, Fig. 8), are gradu- ally formed at points along their course, in some cases forming more or less continuous sheaths and in others localised aggregates, which tend specially to make their appearance at points of bifurcation (Plate II, Figs 8-11). As time goes on these accumulations steadily increase in bulk, and as they do so, and as the normal formed elements of the adjoining tissues undergo progressive solu- tion, large areas come to be occupied by morbid vessels embedded in granuloma- tous tissue laid down in an intricate system of masses and intercommunicating bands. From the nature of the changes affecting the vessels, it is clear that the nutritional requirements of the morbid tissue must be very imperfectly met, and that the latter must consequently be specially liable to degeneration and necrosis. Such processes must almost necessarily be attended by reactive in- flammatory processes of like distribution, and ultimately leading to the develop- ment of a ramified system of spaces and channels bounded by more or less de- fined walls of fibrous connective tissue and occupied by degenerate and necros- ed products in various stages of alteration. The precise nature of the changes ultimately taking place in such products will naturally, not necessarily, be iden- tical in all instances. In certain cases processes of solution into oily or mucoid matter may occur followed by absorption or caseation, or by external dis- charge where a communication with the surface is established. Where the morbid products are discharged, little, save persistent elastic elements, may re- main behind (Plate I, Fig. 7), but where caseation takes place its ultimate pro- ducts may remain for long in a passive condition. Whatever course the pro- ducts pursue, however, they must necessarily represent accumulations of dead matter affording a passive nidus for the development of saprophytic fungi or other organisms capable of deriving nutrition from materials of animal origin, so that, if by any means the elements of these attain access to them, the normal course of the disease must be liable to be disturbed and its products come to contain fungal or other organised elements of extrinsic origin which do not repre- sent causes but consequences of the primary morbid processes. In the case of the black variety of Mycetoma which was recorded in 1888 by Bassini*as having originated in Italy, the patient had sustained a wound in the foot in which the black fungiferous concretions subsequently were present, and in India the frequency with which the disease is associated with fungal elements, and the fact that fungoid concretions occur so much more frequently in the feet than in the hands, is probably connected with the facts that the natives of the country in conducting agricultural operations ordinarily go bare-foot, and that at particu- *Un caso di micetoma ul piede o piede di Madura, Archivio per le scienze mediche, Vol. XII, p. 309. K
74 Scientific Memoirs by lar times of year facultatively saprophytic fungi occur in the soil and its con- tents in very great abundance. It is possible that the changes produced in the degenerate products of the primary lesion by the access of fungal elements may be of an injurious character in so far as the ultimate outcome of the disease is concerned; but, as the evidence at present stands, there is no satisfactory ground for maintaining that the latter is primarily of fungal origin. G. I. C, P. O.PLATE 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002664.tif] MYCETOMA. CONDITION OF THE VESSELS IN THE INITIAL STAGES &c. Photo-etching. Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, April 1891.
PLATE II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002670.tif] MYCETOMA. CONDITION OF THE VESSELS &c. IN THE INITIAL STAGES & CHARACTERS OF THE FUNGAL D.D.C. del ad. nat. ELEMENTS CHARACTERISTIC OF THE "WHITE" AND "BLACK" VARIETIES OF THE DISEASE: Photo etching. Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, May 1895.
SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY MEDICAL OFFICERS OF THE ARMY OF INDIA. EDITED BY SURGEON MAJOR-GENERAL J. CLEGHORN, M.D., SURGEON-GENERAL WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PART IX. 1895. 1.