IP/QB.10 29 sep 1880 m.91.G SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY MEDICAL OFFICERS OF THE ARMY OF INDIA. EDITED BY SIR BENJAMIN SIMPSON, M.D., K.C.I.E., SURGEON-GENERAL WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PART III. 1887. 1.SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY MEDICAL OFFICERS OF THE ARMY OF INDIA. EDITED BY SIR BENJAMIN SIMPSON, M.D., K.C.I.E., SURGEON-GENERAL WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PART III. 1887. 1.Notes from the Biological Laboratory attached to the Office of the Sanitary Commissioner with the Government of India. BY SURGEON-MAJOR D. D. CUNNINGHAM, M.B., SPECIAL ASSISTANT TO THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. (With Plate I. ) I.2 Scientific Memoirs by During the course of 1886 an epidemic prevailed among horses, ponies, and mules in Meerut which, according to Veterinary-Surgeon W. D. Gunn, A.V.D., was not of an anthracoid but of a typhoid nature, the symptoms during life differing slightly from those of anthrax in various respects, amongst others in the fever being of a relapsing in place of a continued character. The post- mortem appearances were described as "very similar to those of anthrax," with the exception that there were ulcerations in Peyer's patches. Dr. Gunn culti- vated a drop of blood in gelatinised chicken broth and obtained no Bacillus anthracis, but a crop of minute Bacilli and numerous small micrococcoid bodies which he believed to be spores. He does not appear to have observed the pre- sence of any spirilloid organisms in the blood. A difference in opinion prevailed among the veterinary authorities as to the nature of the disease, some agreeing with Dr. Gunn as to the specific distinct- ness of the disease, others holding that "both in its course and post-mortem results it resembled ordinary anthrax." Specimens of blood obtained from diseased animals were forwarded to Dr. Barclay for examination with a view to aiding a decision of the question, and some of these were sent on by him to me. The first samples which reached me consisted of two capillary tubes con- taining blood and closed at either end with common sealing-wax. The tubes were first carefully washed with a solution of corrosive sublimate and with spirit, and were then allowed to dry. The tip of one of them was broken off by means of a freshly-heated pair of forceps and the minute clot and serum intro- duced into a little freshly-sterilised salt solution of a strength of 0.75 per cent. A portion of the clot was used for preparations and the rest of it was broken up in the solution and used to inoculate a plate-culture of agar-agar peptonised meat-juice. The contents of the second tube were used for preparations. The preparations showed the presence of a few small straight Bacilli and Micrococci, and, in one instance, numerous large spirilloid bodies at a particular part of the clot. The cultivation yielded a few colonies of straight Bacilli of considerable size and innumerable colonies of micrococcus luteus. Subcutaneous injection of a solution full of the straight Bacilli into the bodies of guinea-pigs produced no appreciable result. The second set of samples consisted of four of the common microscopical glass slides with a central hollow on one surface. The hollows contained blood and were covered by cover-glasses. The contents were used for plate-cultures and preparations. In one specimen the clot was full of small straight Bacilli, in the others the characters agreed generally with those of the previous samples, but in none of them could any spirilloid bodies be detected. The results of cultivations were smilar to those of the cultivation from the first sample, and in no case was there any evidence of the presence of Bacillus anthracis. The spirilloid organisms in one of the first set of preparations presented the following characters. They were present in large numbers in the thin stratum
3 Medical Officers of the Army of India. of blood along a portion of the edge of a thick mass of clot among the blood corpuscles which had been pressed out of it in the course of preparation. They consisted of filaments of various lengths, some merely curved or sinuous, others; and specially the longer ones, showing one or two distinct spirals. Both extre- mities appeared to be pointed, but one was apparently thicker and somewhat blunter than the other. In some cases a slender flagellar process could be recognised continued for some distance from the more pointed extremity. The length of the larger specimens omitting the curves was about 25 4 Scientific Memoirs by were in the case of the dog into which they were introduced by inoculation, and as, at all events, similar organisms have been shown by Dr. Lewis to occur in the blood of healthy rats. It has further to be shown that they are invariably present in cases of the disease. In so far as thermometrical data go, the disease observed by Dr. Gunn at Meerut appears to have been identical with that studied by Dr. Steel in Burma, and yet the presence of such organisms in the blood was not apparently observed, and in so far as my own observations go was not constant. This may, no doubt, possibly be due to the specimens of blood having been taken at times when the organisms were absent or present in very small numbers in the general circulation, as it is recorded that their appearance is of an intermittent character, and, as regards the samples examined by me, may possibly have been connected with the length of time elapsing between the period at which they were taken and that at which they came into my posses- sion. The facts are, however, at least such as to render it additionally neces- sary that definite evidence should be forthcoming to show the constant association of the disease with the presence of the parasites. The fact of the occurrence of the disease in previously healthy animals and the appearance of the parasite in their blood after inoculation do not afford data of any conclusive value. They certainly show that the parasites can be transferred from the body of one animal to that of another, but that is all. There is nothing to show that they gave rise to the associated disease. No clean artificial cultivations have as yet been carried out, and all inoculations have been conducted by means of blood directly transferred from the diseased to the healthy animal; so that, fully granting that the disease has been shown to be inoculable and that the parasites are similarly transferable, there is yet nothing to show that the two phenomena hold any beyond a parallel relation to one another; there is nothing to show that the transplantation of the parasites was the cause of the development of the disease in the inoculated animals. Whilst, on the one hand, there is this entire absence of positive evidence of the pathogenic function of the parasites, there is, on the other hand, some evidence pointing in an opposite direction5 Medical Officers of the Army of India. not truly spirillar, the constituent elements really lying in one plane and the filaments having no tendency to assume a spiral arrangement, but consist- ing merely of a series of commas adhering to one another by their extremities in simple linear order. The character of such filaments varies according as the constituent commas present their convex and concave outlines throughout to the same sides of the filament, or as they are disposed, so that an alter- nation in the direction of their outlines is present, the convex and concave contours of adjacent commas being directed to opposite sides. The outline of the filaments in the first case presents a series of crescents with intervening depressions and prominent points running along the one side, and rounded elevations and angular inter-spaces on the other. In the second case the filament is alike on both sides and simply undulate. Whatever be the variation in detail, however, such filaments agree in their non-spiral character. So rarely does a truly spiral arrangement appear to be that I have only on one occasion met with unequivocal evidence of its presence. This was in the cultivation of materials which were derived from a case of cholera which was admitted into the Medical College Hospital, Calcutta, in the month of January. A primary plate-cultivation from it furnished no colonies of typical commas alone, but many which, while containing a certain proportion of isolated commas, were composed in greater part of peculiar filaments, many of which at one or other point in their course assumed a truly spiral character. Others were merely undulate and many S-shaped bodies were also present. In those specimens in which true spirals were present the filaments throughout the greater part of their length were merely undulate and in some cases almost straight, and it was only here and there at isolated points that abrupt spirals of from one to three turns were present. The numbers of such filaments were very large as compared with those of the other forms present in the colonies. In certain filaments, in place of actual spirals, sudden deep curvatures were present, the curved portions being considerably thicker than the rest of the filaments and closely resembling the larger varieties of curved Schizomycetes occurring so abundantly in the intestinal contents of healthy guinea-pigs. The protoplasmic contents of the curved portions were often distinctly vacuo- late. Attempts at the continued propagation of this peculiar variety of choleraic commas failed, as even in secondary cultivations true spirals were entirely absent and filamentous forms of any kind rare, while in tertiary ones the colonies consisted of typical commas alone. III.6 Scientific Memoirs by them occurred within the peritoneal cavity, numerous examinations and cultiva- tions of the peculiar adhesive peritoneal secretion in cases of cholera were made. In no instance were Schizomycetes of any form recognizable in any considerable numbers in the fresh materials. In some cases a very few long, straight filaments were present, in some a few patches of Micrococci occurred, and in one case, at all events, minute groups of small curved Bacilli, resembling choleraic commas, were present in small numbers. In no instance did choleraic commas appear in the cultivations, but in one a distinct and peculiar curved Schizomycete form was developed. The commas were larger and thicker than choleraic ones they did not liquefy the gelatine of the basis, but slowly formed thick, prominent, shining growths of a pale salmon colour. When subcutaneously injected into the bodies of guinea-pigs they produced no appreciable effects. IV.7 Medical Officers of the Army of India. choleraic commas, for in not a single case was there any evidence of the presence of any such phenomenon. V.8 Scientific Memoirs by VI.9 Medical Officers of the Army of India. they were found to present a spongy texture, and on teasing them out under a dissecting microscope they were manifestly composed of fibrous elements. When such teased material was subjected to higher microscopical powers, it was evident that it was composed of fungal mycelium, consisting of long, flat- tened filaments of very various diameters and of a colour ranging from strong yellowish-brown to pale greenish. They were septate, the septa in most places occurring at wide intervals, but here and there being comparatively close set. Branches were given off at varying, but always relatively remote, intervals, and there was frequently a slight swelling of the filament immediately beneath the point of origin of a branch. The filaments in the larger masses formed dense, felted masses, intermingled with portions of brown dead bark-tissue and particles of earth, and continuous with finer strands which penetrated the surrounding areas. On making sections of portions of bark in which the disease had not advanced far and in which the tissue still remained coherent, the bark and cambium down to the level of the wood was found to contain fine mycelial fila- ments forcing their way between the adjacent tissue elements. In these cases there was no evidence of any invasion of the wood at this period, but from the microscopic appearances presented by the latter in certain places in sites where the disease was more advanced there can be no doubt that such invasion eventually occurs. Numerous attempts have been made to cultivate the mycelium in order to determine the nature of the fungus, but hitherto the results have not been such as to yield conclusive data. Portions of the roots when kept in moist chambers invariably soon showed a dense coating of a vivid green mould over the diseased areas, but it has not appeared definitely whether any organic connection exists between this and the original mycelium. It certainly was not a form native to the laboratory in which the cultivations were conducted, but unequivocal evid- ence of direct continuity of the brown mycelium with the colourless filaments giving origin to the fertile threads of the mould has not yet been obtained. The mycelium of the mould is colourless and septate at frequent intervals. It gives origin to numerous fertile hyphæ. These also are colourless and septate, and either give off secondary axes or cells directly bearing heads of fructification. The latter consist of a series of short cells bearing from one to four sterigmata giving origin to chains of rounded conidia. The conspicuous colour of the mould is due to the latter, as, even when isolated, they have a distinct greenish tinge, and when in masses appear of a deep vivid green. They vary consider- ably in size, but the larger ones on an average have diameters of 4.1 10 Scientific Memoirs by mould, a small pink Stilbum, and an inconspicuous mucorine fungus, also appear- ed on some specimens of the bark, but neither with the same constancy nor in such profusion as the mould described above. In no case was there any attempt at the development of any Hymenomycete form of fructification. In some cases a distinct growth of the rusty mycelium occurred during the course of cultivation. The newly developed portions were characterised by their frequent septation and by giving off numerous erect filaments densely clothed with short branches tipped with numerous radiating processes. These suggested sterigmata, but in no case could any development of conidia from them be detected. Those portions of the mycelium where such growth occur- red came to present a dusty, bright orange-coloured surface due to the tufts of branched filaments. Owing to the failure of the cultivations in affording conclusive results in the form of fructification, it is as yet impossible to identify the nature of the mycelium producing such destructive effects on the bark tissues, and without experiments on artificial infection it is even uncertain whether the disease be really essentially of fungal origin or whether the presence of the fungal ele- ments is due to antecedent morbid conditions in the bark. There can be no doubt as to the destructive effect of the mycelium on the host tissues; the only doubt is whether the mycelium is capable of attacking perfectly healthy tissues. That it can, and that it is therefore the essential primary cause of the disease, is rendered highly probable by the general similarity in the distribution and charac- ters of the morbid changes to those present in the case of the root-blight which is so destructive in European coniferous forests and which has unequivocally been proved to be due to the invasion of the tissues by the mycelium of Agaricus melleus (Vahl.). It does not, however, appear probable that the latter is the destructive agent here, for the mycelium in the tea-blight does not show any tendency to assume a truly Rhizomorphic habit as that of Agaricus melleus does, and if the mould appearing in the cultivations really hold an organic relation to the mycelium, the latter cannot, of course, belong to any Hymenomycete, but must be of Pyrenomycete nature. These are questions, however, which call for further investigation, and all that can be safely stated at present is that in this blight we have to deal with a disease in which fungal mycelium plays an important, if not a primarily essential part, and that it is possible that an important agency in securing the diffusion of the disease lies in the conidia developed in such abundance on the morbid surfaces when these are exposed to damp air. Even with the confessedly imperfect data at present available, there can be no doubt as to the practical measures which should be adopted with a view to preventing the spread of the disease. All blighted plants should be at once and completely removed. The ground where they occur should be carefully and deeply dug over, and all portions of the roots as far as possible removed
11 Medical Officers of the Army of India. and, together with the other parts of the plants, at once burned. An area in which the blight has appeared should be left unoccupied for some time, and, if possible, should be isolated by means of encircling it with a trench excavated to a level below that to which the roots of the plants descend. By means of such measures a limitation to the spread of the disease may be looked for, but with- out isolation, and specially without careful removal and destruction of all portions of morbid tissue, the disease, once established, may be expected to go on continuously radiating over areas of wider and wider radius. On the Results of Cultivations of Choleraic Comma-Bacilli in Earth, in Cowdung, and in Human Excreta. One of the great objections to accepting the view that the choleraic comma- bacilli are really the essential cause of the disease is their apparent incapacity for assuming a resting condition and their apparent general feebleness in the struggle for existence. There were many phenomena on record regarding the occurrence of outbreaks of cholera within areas where the disease is only an occasional epidemic visitor which certainly appear to indicate that, if the morbific agent be of an organised nature, the causative organism must be capable of enormous multiplication under exposure to the prevailing local con- ditions at certain times, and that at others it must be able to pass for prolonged periods into a condition of dormancy. Within the endemic area, too, certain phenomena in the seasonal cycle of prevalence are very hard to explain, save as dependent on the alternation of periods of activity and of rest, or, at all events, of periods during which the local conditions favour or repress the multiplication of the exciting cause. During the course of the past season, a renewed attempt has been made to determine how far the choleraic comma-bacilli are capable of holding their own under external conditions such as those prevailing in Calcutta, and in media to which they are specially likely to gain access in large numbers under ordinary circumstances. The media to which choleraic materials are specially likely to attain access in bulk are, of course, water and soil of varying degrees of purity or organic contamination, and as it appears to have been clearly shown that the commas rapidly disappear from water without any attempt at the development of resting forms, attention was specially direct- ed to the subject of their behaviour in soil. A series of experiments was, there- fore, initiated in the middle of December, that is, just at the time at which the minor of the two annual periods of minimum prevalence of cholera in Calcutta normally begins to manifest itself, on the effects following the introduction of large masses of choleraic commas into portions of common garden soil. On the 16th of December two small glass beakers were filled with garden- earth which had been thoroughly triturated with a certain amount of fresh, nor- mal human excreta. The contents of five tube cultivations of cholera commas C 2
12 Scientific Memoirs by were then added to them, each receiving the contents of one and a half tubes of common gelatine and one tube of agar-agar gelatine mixed with a certain amount of freshly-sterilised salt solution and full of healthy commas. They were then set aside under a bell-glass on a table in the laboratory. Both beakers were allowed to remain thus until the 6th of January 1887. At this time the surface of the soil in each was still moist and showed scattered patches of greyish gelatinous matter, seemingly remains of the gelatine of the cultivations, together with a few heads of Pilobolus crystallinus. One of them was now set on the incubator to dry, and materials for cultivation were removed from the other. These consisted of portions of the gelatinous matter from the surface. Some of these were broken up in sterilised salt solution and used to start plate-cultiva- tions, while others afforded material for preparations. The material was faintly alkaline. It contained no active Schizomycetes, but numerous fungal cells and encysted fæcal am13 Medical Officers of the Army of India. cultivation had developed large numbers of yellowish, almost odourless colonies of considerable size, consisting of straight Bacilli. No commas ever appeared in it. Subsequent cultivations from this sample of soil also failed to produce any commas. In the above experiments we find that very large quantities of comma-bacilli introduced into fæcally contaminated soil and exposed to conditions similar to those to which the Bacilli entering the soil in Calcutta are normally liable during the period of year dealt with, failed to multiply, and, on the contrary, rapidly and completely disappeared. In dealing with any case in which the possibility of the existence of resting forms is present, it is, of course, necessary to exercise caution in concluding that an organism has finally disappeared because it fails to manifest its presence under conditions in which the active form flourishes. The resting stage by no means necessarily is replaced by the active one on the mere incidence of conditions favourable to the latter and at certain times cer- tainly serving to bring the resting stage to a close. The element of time is often an important factor in the result. This is very conspicuously evident in the case of many teleutospores of uredinal fungi, and also in the resting cells of some of the unicellular algæ. In the present case, however, it may, I believe, be safely assumed that the phenomenon of failure of appearance corresponded with actual death of the commas, because the period of observation was sufficiently prolonged to extend beyond that at which, if the phenomenon of temporary subsidence of the prevalence of cholera in the cold weather be so interpreted, there is a tendency to the assumption of a resting condition on the part of the Schizomycetes which are related to it. Allowing that the experiments seemed to show that the choleraic commas rapidly and completely died out in these portions of soil, the possibility remain- ed that this result was due, not to any incapacity on their part for continued life in soil apart from any adverse agencies represented by other organisms, but was due to the presence of the Schizomycetes and Fungi of the fæcal matter with which the soil was contaminated. This point was so far, at all events, settled by means of the following experiment, which was carried out sumultaneously with those which have just been considered. In it a beaker was filled with common clean garden-earth, and a considerable quantity of a fresh chole- raic evacuation was then poured over the latter, so as to saturate it thorough- ly. This was done on the 17th December 1886, and the beaker was then set aside beneath a bell-glass. The earth gradually dried up and soon was ap- parently nearly dry. On the 26th January 1887 a plate-cultivation was set of materials derived from it. An extremely abundant development of Schizo- mycete colonies of various kinds resulted, but no commas were to be found among them. On the 23rd March the earth appeared to be thoroughly dry throughout, and some freshly-boiled distilled water was poured over it, so as to flood it and form a surface layer of standing water. The earth was now
14 Scientific Memoirs by thoroughly stirred up with a sterilised platinum wire and a plate-cultivation set from it. A limited number of colonies, became developed in the cultivation, but none of them contained choleraic commas. The majority of the colonies consisted of straight Bacilli, and a few of them of peculiar, thick, slightly curved ones. Repeated cultivations of these were made, lest they might be a modified form of the choleraic comma-bacillus, but the result was to show that they were permanently and specifically distinct. Another plate-cultiva- tion of the earth was set on the 29th March. Numerous colonies, all composed of large straight Bacilli, were developed in it, but, as before, no commas appeared. The above experiments having clearly shown that choleraic comma- bacilli rapidly and permanently disappear from ortions of soil, whether pure or fæclly contaminated, exposed to the ordinary conditions prevalent in Calcutta, an attempt was made to ascertain whether any other materials to which they are likely to gain access were more favourable to their continued existence. The material selected for experiment in the first place was cowdung, which, from the extent to which it enters into the domestic economy of the lower classes of natives, is constantly at hand to receive choleraic contamination. Some fresh cowdung was procured on the 23rd of March 1887, and two separate portions of it were inoculated with masses of agar-agar full of choleraic commas. In both cases the portions of dung were set in sterilised watch-glasses in moist chambers, but while the dung in one case was set in its natural condition, in the other it had been previously mixed with distilled water and subjected to prolonged boiling. Five days later small portions were removed from each, at sites far removed from the sites of inoculation, and were used to start plate- cultivations. In both cultivations a great number of Schizomycete colonies were developed. In that corresponding to the boiled dung these, in so far as could be ascertained, all consisted of vigorous, well-developed choleraic commas. In the cultivation corresponding to the unboiled dung commas were also present. They were not, however, apparently so vigorous, but were slender and stained feebly, and they were accompanied by numerous colonies of large, straight, Bacilli. The boiled dung appeared, therefore, to represent a pure cultivation of vigorous choleraic commas, the unboiled dung a mixed cultivation of com- paratively feeble commas and of other Bacilli. The boiled dung was now removed from the moist chamber and was kept in the incubator for 72 hours at a temperature of 37°C. At the close of this period it was quite dry throughout and readily broke up into dust on being disintegrated. A plate cultivation was inoculated from some sterilised salt solution in which portions of the dried material had been allowed to soak for some time in a state of fine division. An abundance of colonies became developed in it, a few consisting of Micrococci, and the great majority of straight Bacilli. Not a trace of the presence of any commas could anywhere be detected in it. A second portion of fresh cowdung was procured on the 3oth March.
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 15 A mass of it was set in a sterilised watch-glass in a moist chamber, and a plate-cultivation was started at the same time. Numerous colonies appeared in the latter. They were of small size and yellowish colour, and were accom- panied by a faint odour quite distinct from that present in cultivations of cho- leraic commas. They all appeared to be alike and composed of very short, thick, almost micrococcoid Bacilli. On the 31st March the cowdung was inoculated with a mass of agar-agar full of commas. Numerous plate-cultiva- tions were carried out from time to time up to the 20th pril, but in no case did any commas make their appearance. Numerous colonies developed in all cases, but these never contained commas. The majority of them consisted of short, thick Bacilli, which, when in mass, had a peculiar greenish-yellow colour, and which imparted an odour to the cultivations very similar to that of cultiva- tion of commas. Repeated cultivations showed clearly that they bred perfectly true under conditions most favourable to the development of commas, and that they, therefore, were specifically distinct from the latter. On the 20th April a plate-cultivation was inoculated from the portion of agar-agar introduced into the dung on the 31st March, and which was now, curiously enough, absolute- ly crowded with the myceleum and zygospores, or, perhaps mote correctly, oospores, of a small mucorine fungus, apparently parasitic on Pilobolus crystalli- nus, which at this comparatively late period had begun to appear in abundance on the surface. There were no recognisable commas in the agar-agar, and the cultivation failed to produce anything save a few minute colonies of straight Bacilli. The above data appear to indicate that cowdung, apart from the organisms normally present in it and destroyed by boiling, constitutes a highly favourable medium for the development of choleraic commas, but that in its normal state the development is either entirely repressed or very much enfeebled, due to the influence exerted by other fungal and Schizomycete organisms. They also clearly show that in this medium also the commas have no capacity for the assumption of a resting condition. The first set of experiments had appeared to show that human excreta did not constitute a favourable medium for the growth of choleraic comma-bacilli, but it appeared desirable to endeavour to ascertain how far the results then attained were not due to the acid fermentation normally occurring in such materials in connection with the abundant development of fungi usually occurring in them during the earlier stages of decomposition. Some normal, fresh, almost neutral human fæces were accordingly diluted with distilled water and strongly boiled for some time, and a portion of the material was then set in a sterilised watch-glass in a moist chamber. On the following day the re-action was distinctly and permanently alkaline. A portion of agar-agar, full of healthy choleraic commas, was now introduced. Forty-eight hours later the material had a peculiar mawkish smell and was alkaline in re-action. From this, time
16 Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army of India. onwards repeated plate-cultivations were inoculated from it, but even when the inoculated materials included portions of the agar-agar, they yielded no commas, although producing an abundance of various other forms of Schizo- mycetes. It would appear from this that human fæces are even less favourable to the growth of commas than cowdung, the temporary repression in the growth of other organisms consequent on boiling of the medium failing to produce the effect that it does in the case of cowdung. All the data seem to indicate that the choleraic comma-bacilli are, under ordinary circumstances extremely feeble in the struggle for existence. In media, such as fresh cow- dung appears to be, which in themselves afford everything necessary to their continued vitality and multiplication, the presence of other organisms normally present in the medium is sufficient to repress or absolutely suppress further development, and in other media, such as human fæecal matter, even the aid of artificial measures calculated to place them at an advantage in the struggle are insufficient to be of any avail in securing their continued existence. Not only are they weak in the active struggle for existence however, but they are also apparently incapable of tiding over periods during which the media are in any way unfavourable by assuming a resting state. It is, no doubt, true that in many sterilised media in which they are not exposed to competition with other organisms they are capable of enormous and rapid multiplication, but under ordinary circumstances they do not gain access to sterilised media, but to media already occupied by their normal inhabitants. If the choleraic commas really be the essential cause of the disease, then the facts would lead us to regard their agency in the production of epidemics as entirely subordinate to the influence of local conditions securing the presence of media of peculiar quality favouring their continued development. Normal water, soil, and excreta, or the normal media to which choleraic commas are specially liable to gain access, do not seem to provide against their speedy extinction, so that it can only be where some very special medium is present, or where the common media deviate from their normal standard, that there can be sufficient provision to secure the multiplication and continued persistence of the commas to such an extent as to accord with many of the phenomena of epidemic diffusion of the disease. CALCUTTA, The 15th May 1887.
Note regarding certain characters in the Subsoil of Calcutta. BY SURGEON-MAJOR D. D. CUNNINGHAM, M.B., SPECIAL ASSISTANT TO THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. The scheme for the construction of a dock at Kidderpore, one of the suburbs of Calcutta, has afforded special facilities for acquiring information, both in regard to the nature of the subsoil and the extraordinarily incorrect ideas which are commonly entertained regarding it. When the question of the construction of the dock was still under consideration, it was authoritatively announced that the subsoil in which it was intended to lay the foundations consisted of "blue clay," that it contained no subsoil water, and that its im- permeability almost equalled that of cast-iron, so that no accumulation of water would ever occur in the excavations necessary for the construction of the dock beyond that due to direct rainfall so long as means were taken to exclude surface drainage. Having for many years had special occasion to consider the nature of the subsoil in Calcutta, I entertained great doubts as to the correct- ness of these statements, and accordingly tried a series of experiments with the view of obtaining actual data in place of "speculative opinions," as the advocates of the dock-scheme styled all views which tended to cast any doubt on the impermeable nature of the soil. The present note contains an outline of these experiments, the result of which was to show clearly that the so-called "blue clay" is not clay at all, and that, in place of being impermeable, it contains a very high proportion of air or water content according to the conditions to which it is exposed. The materials experimented with consisted of samples of the "blue clay," one obtained from a member of the Committee which was appointed to enquire into the sanitary aspects of the dock-scheme, the other procured by myself from the bottom of the initial excavations for the dock-walls. Both were precisely alike, consisting when first obtained of a slate-coloured, rather evil- odoured, dense, moist substance, permeated in many places by channels partly or wholly filled with soft brownish matter and corresponding with the sites at one time occupied by the smaller roots of trees, which formerly grew on the present subsoil, and whose remains occur in abundance in it. On keeping the material, it rapidly parted with its moisture, becoming, as it did so, of a pale grey colour and hard consistence. Specimens were submitted to analysis D
48 Scientific Memoirs by both in the laboratory of the Assay Department of the Calcutta Mint and in that of the Chemical Examiner to Government with the following results:Medical Officers of the Army of India. 19 3. Clay-soils, containing above 50 per cent. of clay. 4. Vegetable moulds (humus soils), containing more than 6 per cent. of organic matters or humus. 5. Marly soils, or soils in which the proportion of lime is more than 5, but does not exceed 20 per cent. of the whole weight of the dry soil, and that of clay is more than 20, but less than 5o per cent. 6. Loamy soils, or soils in which the proportion of clay likewise varies from 20 to 50 per cent., but which at the same time contain less than 5 per cent, of lime. 3. Clay-soils. 20 Scientific Memoirs by process of disintegration, the mass gradually crumbling down and ultimately forming a loose sediment at the bottom of the now turbid water. The mass of air displaced during the process is evidently very considerable, and the phenomenon at once does away with any belief in the impermeability of the material. Numerous experiments were carried out with a view of more accurately determining the air content of air-dried specimens of the material. The method employed was one of displacement. The portion of soil experi- mented with in any case was allowed to subside gently into a glass vessel which had been previously carefully filled with water just to the point of overflow. The entrance of the mass of soil of course displaced a mass of water corresponding to its bulk. The water was caught in a glass saucer in which the recipient vessel stood, and on being measured gave the necessary datum of the bulk of the material in the dry state. As evolution of air bubbles and disintegration advanced, the water in the recipient vessel gradually subsided, and when the process had been completed, in place of standing at the overflow point, was at some lower level. Water was now added from a finely graduated mea- sure until the overflow point was again attained and the amount necessary to do this taken as the index to the amount of air space originally present in the mass. Numerous experiments were carried out in order to test how far this method of determination was trustworthy. In these the amount of displacement caused by the introduction of impermeable bodies of ascertained bulk, such as accurately measured cubes of loaded wax, was determined, as well as the amount of addi- tion of water necessary to regain the overflow point on the removal of the dis- placing body, and it was found that with a little care the amount of error was trifling, amounting only to from 1 to 1·5 c.c. when a cube of wax of 27 c.c. was employed. Allowing for errors of like amount in the case of experiments with masses of soil, the specimens were found, as a rule, to contain from 22 to 32 per cent. of air space. A material of this character can certainly have no pretension to be regarded as impermeable, and this was further proved by direct experiment. A mass of the material was taken, and a block, measuring 14·6 c. in length, 13·0 c. in breadth, and 9·5 c. in thickness, carefully sawed out of it. This was easily done, as the mass had been kept in its original moist condition by means of keeping it constantly covered with a wet cloth. A cylindrical hollow was next excavated in one face of the block as nearly as possible 5 c. in diameter and 3·9 c. deep, which was the capacity of a glass vessel required to complete the observations; 75 c.c. of water were then introduced into the hollow and a like amount into the vessel, and the latter and the mass of soil set side by side on a table in the laboratory, the mouths of both vessel and hollow being covered by pieces of fine wire gauze. After the lapse of a period of 40 minutes the cavity in the soil was found to be empty and 50 c.c. of water were introduced. By the close of another hour this also had disappeared and 50 c.c. more were added. An hour later the cavity was almost empty and 50 c.c. were once more intro-
Medical Officers of the Army of India 21 duced. On the following morning the cavity was found to be quite empty, the surface being still moist, but with superficial cracks on it. During the course of the forenoon 175 c.c. of water disappeared from the cavity, and the experiment was brought to a close by one-half of the moist block, which was only supported centrally by an iron tripod, breaking away, due to its own weight. During the period of experiment 350 c.c. of water had disappeared from the cavity, and only 6 c.c. from the glass vessel as the result of evaporation, leaving 344 c.c. to be credited to the permeability of the soil. This amount does not fairly represent the entire loss possible for the entire period, as the block was only under observation during the hours from 7 A.M. to 7 P.M. daily and the cavity had evidently remained empty for a long time between the experimental periods of the two successive days. A second experiment of like nature was conducted as follows. The block of soil in this instance measured 19 c. in length, 12.7 c. in breadth, and 7.1 c. in depth, and was supported beneath on a piece of wire gauze, so as to avoid chances of breakage like that of the previous experiment. The cavity in it and the glass vessel used to determine loss by surface evaporation were of the same character as in the previous case. Daily additions of water were made to the cavity on all those days on which the laboratory was open during the hours in which it was under observation22 Scientific Memoirs by During this period 1,772 c.c. of water had disappeared from the cavity in the soil and 75 c.c. from the glass vessel due to evaporation, leaving a loss of 1,697 c.c. to be credited to the permeability of the soil. The entire cubic capacity of the block of soil minus the cavity was 1,635.5 c.c., and hence during the period a bulk of water had disappeared from the cavity due to percolation greater than the bulk of the entire block into which it was absorbed. The results moreover, as in the previous case, by no means represent the total absorptive power of the mass of soil for the period, as the cavity was almost always empty for a considerable period daily and on some occasions remained so for entire diurnal periods. A third experiment was now tried with the same mass of soil and only differ- ing from the previous one in that a glass cylinder open at both ends was fitted accurately into the interior of the cavity, any small interspaces between the glass and soil being filled with firmly rammed material, so as to secure accurate contact everywhere. The cavity in this case thus differed from those in the previous ones in having impermeable walls, so that water could only come into contact with the soil of the floor. The experiment lasted from the 1st to the 29th June with the following results:Medical Officers of the Army of India 23 The glass capsule registering loss by evaporation from a surface equal to that presented by the cavity had lost 60 c.c. of water during the period. The total loss from the cavity in the same time was 2,362 c.c. or 2,302 c.c. due to the permeability of the soil. The diminution in daily loss from the cavity coincident with the great increase in atmospheric humidity attendant on the onset of the rainy season comes out very distinctly. During the entire course of the previous experiment and in the early part of the present one the surfaces of the block of soil appeared continuously dry, but when the atmospheric humid- ity increased and the disappearance of water from the cavity conspicuously diminished, the surfaces became evidently and constantly moist. Another phe- nomenon, common to this and the previous experiments, but which came out most conspicuously here, was the gradual diminution in the capacity of the cavity due to the disintegrant action of the water on the soil. The floor of the cavity was originally flat and flush with the lower edge of the glass cylinder which formed its bounding wall. As time went on, however, it gradually swelled up and in place of consisting of the dense material of the mass in its original condition came to be composed of soft, loose mud derived from the disin- tegration of the soil at the base of the cavity and from beneath the edge of the cylinder, which ultimately, in place of resting on the firm soil, was suspended over this soft, incoherent substance. Another experiment of a different nature was tried. In it a long glass tube was rammed with some of the soil which had been previously dried over a gas flame and thoroughly triturated. The rammed soil occupied 66c. of the length of the interior of the tube. The tube was fixed in a horizontal position with one end connected with the lower extremity of a glass receiver full of water, and the other with an open U-tube containing fragments of chloride of calcium. The experiment was initiated on the 20th May by opening the tap at the bottom of the receiver and allowing the water to pass into the tube. The water advanced along the portion of the tube occupied by the soil at a rate shown by the following figures:24 Scientific Memoirs by Date. Extent to which water had evidently advanced along the soil. June 3rd.. 51.7c. " 4th.. 52.1c. " 5th.. 52.2c. " 6th.. 53.05c. " 8th.. 54.6c. " 9th.. 55.2c. " 10th.. 56.9c. " 11th.. 57.4c " 12th.. 58.9c. " 13th.. 59.0c. " 15th.. 61.4c. " 16th.. 62.9c. " 17th.. 63.4c. " 18th.. 64.2c. " 19th.. 66.0c. From the above figures it appears that the water took 30 days to traverse a stratum of soil 66.c. thick, and closed, save at its extremities, by an impermeable material. Subsequent to this slow percolation continued to occur as indicated by the gradual accumulation of a considerable quantity of water within the distal portion of the tube beyond the soil. The above experiments appear to demonstrate sufficiently clearly that the subsoil in Calcutta is just as little "impermeable" as it is "blue clay," and it now only remains to attempt to find an explanation for the erroneous ideas prevalent in regard to its nature. The peculiar colour of the material, its con- sistence when freshly excavated and moist, and its stony hardness on drying are perhaps enough to account for the popular description of it as consisting of "blue clay." It is, however, at first sight, difficult to understand on what the idea of its impermeable nature was founded, seeing that it must have been patent to the most casual observation that in its normal site it included a very considerable amount of water content and that it parted with this with great readiness on exposure to sunshine and dry air. The belief must apparently have been due to the fact that, whilst really containing a very large amount of air or water space, the soil is yet so fine as to prevent rapid transit of water under ordinary circumstances. Excavations made in a soil of this character will, of course, not be liable to contain conspicuous accumulations of percolated water so long as evaporation is taking place with any considerable activity from the exposed surfaces. The last of the experiments on the permeability of blocks of the soil affords a direct proof of this, for in it it was only with increased atmospheric humidity and diminished recipient power in the soil that the sur- faces became conspicuously moist. In the laboratory in which the experiments were conducted there was a regular daily loss of 0.125 of an inch in depth from
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 25 exposed surfaces of water until the rise of atmospheric humidity set in, although the water was never exposed to direct sunshine and for the greater portion of the diurnal period was in a closed room absolutely protected from the influence of wind. The evaporation from surfaces freely exposed to sun and wind must, of course, be much greater under otherwise like conditions. A series of experi- ments on bodies of water exposed on the roof of a house in the neighbourhood of Calcutta have indicated a loss of from 26 to 37 hundredths of an inch in depth daily during the month of April. Taking this into account, along with the fine texture of the soil, we have, I believe, arrived at an explanation of the idea that the subsoil of Calcutta is impermeable. Deep excavations can only be carried out in the locality during the dry season unless pumping operations are called into play, and hence it is in the dry season only that opportunities ordin- arily arise of seeing the subsoil. So long, however, as the air is dry enough and the temperature high, the daily loss by evaporation will be sufficient to do away with the amount of water constantly added by percolation, or, at all events, to do away with enough of it to prevent conspicuous accumulations of fluid, and when conditions alter, the appearance of water in the excavations is liable to be credited solely to direct rainfall and access of surface drainage. CALCUTTA; The 15th April 1887.
On a new Genus of the Family Ustilagineæ. BY SURGEON-MAJOR D. D. CUNNINGHAM, M.B., SPECIAL ASSISTANT TO THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. (With Plates I and II.) The parasite forming the subject of the present paper was first observed in the autumn of 1886 in the Botanical Garden in Calcutta. It occurred in the leaves of Nymph28 Scientific Memoirs by and the lamina may be described as consisting of two layers of epidermis kept apart by enormous numbers of large idioblasts and here and there con- nected by bands of parenchymal tissue (Plate II, fig. 5). In the upper half of the thickness of the lamina there is a dense, sub-epidermal stratum of parenchyma interrupted by comparatively small substomatic spaces (Plate II, fig 3) and by the thick shafts of the idioblasts. In the lower half parenchymal tissue is at a minimum, only appearing in the form of thin partitions traversing a series of enormous spaces immediately above the inferior epidermis and crossed by the lower extremities of the idioblasts. The latter consist of a shaft, the upper extremity of which is in contact with the under-surface of the superior epi- dermis, and of a series of terminal rays, the tips of which extend to the upper surface of the inferior epidermis. In NymphMedical Officers of the Army of India. 29 plasm, but as time goes on the latter disappears and, the cavity becoming filled up, the process is converted into a solid appendage of the dilatation. The latter becomes separated from the proximal portion of its parent filament by the formation of a septum after a great accumulation of protoplasm within it has occurred. The young spore which has thus been differentiated is at first entire- ly filled by a dense mass of granular matter. A gradual development of oil globules next sets in. The globules gradually fuse with one another, forming drops of progressively increasing size and diminishing number, and ultimately the process ends with the development of one great globule occupying a great part of the cavity and surrounded by a thin layer of finely granular protoplasm. Whilst these changes have been progressing in the contents of the spores, a very considerable thickening of the walls has also occurred and the mature spores appear as nearly spherical cells with thick walls, a projecting beak, and oily and protoplasmic contents. The ripe spores are colourless or have a faint brownish tinge due to a slight darkening of the thick epispore. The beak is always colourless. Where they become detached they not unfrequently carry a portion of the empty parent filament with them. They are of considerable size, measuring about 14µ , exclu- sive of the beak, in length by 10 or 11µ in breadth. The beak is about 1.8µ in length. As they accumulate in the substomatic spaces they frequently so fully occupy the cavities as to form dense masses in which the individual spores are closely pressed together and to the boundaries of the spaces (Plate II, figs. 1, 2). When stained with eosine alone the epispore takes a bright orange- red tint, whilst the contents become strong rose. Spiller's purple dyes the fila- ments and spores deep violet, apparently due to staining of the cell walls. The spores germinate in situ, and the long promycelia emerge on the surface of the leaf, not due to any rupture of the epidermis, but by passing out through the stomata (Plate II, fig. 15). Due to this the central darkened portions of the patches occupied by the parasite become covered by a series of tufts of colour- less filaments which are readily recognisable under examination with a simple lens. The phenomena attending germination of the spores in situ or in water are as follows:30 Scientific Memoirs by quantity remaining close to the upper extremity of it. The number of pro- cesses which thus come to form a capitulum at the end of the tube varies from four to six as a rule. They gradually elongate and assume a slender fusiform outline with a pointed extremity, and, as they do so, they become separated from the germinal tube by a septum and traversed in their length by two or three others (Plate II, fig. 7). Each process thus comes to consist of three or four cells. The terminal pointed one next gives origin to two or three minute sterigmata at its apex, and each of these in its turn develops a long slender sporidium (Plate II, fig. 16). These conjugate just as the sporidia of Tilletia or Entyloma, union as a rule taking place between sporidia of distinct processes (Plate II, figs. 11, 12, 13). Conjugation takes place both before and after de- tachment of the sporidia from the promycelium. The uniting tube usually is situated towards one or other extremity of the sporidia and is often of con- siderable length and curiously sinuous course (Plate II, fig. 14). The sporidia are full of finely molecular protoplasm and are extremely long and slender, measuring in many cases as much as 21 u. in length by 0.9 u in breadth. After conjugation has occurred the greater part of the protoplasm appears to pass into one or other of the united bodies which grows considerably longer, and at the same time transverse septa appear in it and in the other one. Finally, secondary sporidia are given off laterally from the primary ones, varying in form in different instances, in some cases being very short, in others elongated and very similar to their parents. When the spores are cultivated in a nutritive fluid, such as strong decoction of NymphMedical Officers of the Army of India. 31 dation to the parasite. In bodies of water containing Nymph32 Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army of India. corresponding to sporidia, but as portions of the promycelium, and the constant occurrence of conjugation in the bodies developed from them shows that these really are primary sporidia, and not secondary ones derived from such bodies. The promycelium is thus much more complicated than in either Tilletia or Entyloma, consisting not merely of a simple septate germinal tube, but of such a tube and a series of septate terminal branches. The peculiar rostrate cha- racter of the spores is also very distinctive, but it is of course a mere result of the fact that the spores are here developed subterminally, and not intercalarly, as they are in Entyloma. The above characters appear to entitle the parasite to be regarded as forming the type of a new genus which I propose to name and define as follows:On an Entophytic Alga occurring in the leaves of Limnanthe- mum indicum, with notes on a peculiarly parasitic variety of Mycoidea. BY SURGEON-MAJOR D. D. CUNNINGHAM, M.B., SPECIAL ASSISTANT TO THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. (With Plates I and III.) The Entophytic alga described in the following pages was first observed in the leaves of Limnanthemum indicum in tanks in the Botanical Garden, Calcutta, in October 1886. At that time it was extremely abundant in some tanks and caused very conspicuous effects in the leaves of its host. The infected leaves showed patches of yellowish discolouration of the upper surface, sometimes isolated, sometimes in groups and slightly elevated above the level of the surrounding normal tissue (Plate III, fig. 1). On removing the leaves from the water the discolouration was found to be confined to the upper surfaces of the leaves, and on examining the affected areas under simple lens, they were found to differ from the surrounding ones in containing great numbers of large, brilliant green rounded bodies situated beneath the epidermis. On making thin horizontal sections from the surface of the leaf and examining them under somewhat higher powers, these bodies were found to be large, oval or spherical cells situated in the substomatic spaces. In the discoloured patches such cells were present in immense numbers and so closely distributed that almost every substomatic space contained one and in some cases two of them (Plate III, fig. 2). They were not, however, absolutely confined to the conspicuously discoloured areas, as isolated specimens frequently occurred at wide intervals over the apparently normal surfaces around. The individual cells varied greatly in the character of their contents, some having a great, central, clear, colourless area surrounded by a clear pale green peripheral zone containing a few starch- like corpuscles, others being deep green and granular throughout, others also deep green, but with the contents presenting a mulberry-like nodulated appear- ance and still others in small numbers of various tints ranging from pale yellow to strong reddish orange and densely filled with large amyloid bodies. At first sight they presented so many features resembling those of Cohn's Chloro- chytrium Lemnæ that it appeared probable that they belonged to the same F
34 Scientific Memoirs by genus, but on a study of their life history it was evident that this was not the case, but that they were representatives of a closely allied and apparently as yet undescribed one. The leaves of Limnanthemum indicum in which they occur are charac- terised by the enormous number of stomata in the superior epidermis and by the presence of comparatively large substomatic spaces between the subjacent palisade cells (Plate III, fig. 4). Due to this the tissue immediately beneath the superior epidermis is of an extremely open, almost reticulate character (Plate III, fig. 6). The algal cells are absolutely confined to the substomatic spaces which they deform in various ways as they increase in size and press upon the sur- rounding tissue elements. Beyond the distortion arising in this way, the presence of the foreign bodies produces no appreciable effect on the tissues save causing a permanent wide patency of the stomatic orifices. There is no sign of injury of the surrounding palisade and ordinary parenchymal cells, which in general aspect and amount of chlorophyll content differ in no respect from those in areas which have not been invaded by the alga. Due to the mutual pressure of the algal and host cells many of the former in many cases gradually lose their originally evenly rounded contour and come to present irregularly lobed or even angular outlines. They naturally vary very considerably in size accord- ing to the stage of development, but mature green specimens give an average of 59 µ by 50 µ. On making vertical sections of the affected leaves the rela- tions of the algal cells to the surrounding elements appear very clearly. They press laterally on the neighbouring palisade cells and above are in close contact with the stomatic openings and the under-surfaces of their guard cells (Plate III, fig. 5). The cells differ greatly in appearance in different cases, as has been already mentioned, and this difference is connected with their age and with the ultimate developmental changes which they undergo in connection with seasonal influ- ences. Young cells have a delicate cell-wall surrounding a thin layer of pale green protoplasm within which is a great colourless area containing a single nucleus. Amyloid granules are present in gradually increasing numbers in the peripheral green layer (Plate III, fig. 3). The green colouring increases in inten- sity and extends more and more into the central portion, and the contents thus gradually become of a uniform deep green and of coarsely granular consistence. On removing the colouring matter with alcohol and subsequently staining the presence of a single nucleus is still demonstrable up to this stage. Repeated processes of nuclear division now set in and the contents are thus gradually converted into a continuous mass of protoplasm, including a very large number of distinct nuclei (Plate III, fig. 8). A differentiation of the cytoplasm now occurs and each nucleus becomes gradually invested by a separate layer proper to itself, the entire mass of contents as the process goes on coming to present a lobulated, mulberry-like appearance. The nucleated protoplasts which have
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 35 thus arisen are zoospores. They soon begin to show, movements and the cell becomes occupied with a dense mass of swarming bodies. Rupture of the cell- wall now occurs and the zoospores emerge in rapid succession and swim off actively in the surrounding fluid. The process of emergence does not seem to be limited to any special period, or, at all events, the period is an extended one, as emergence has been observed to occur from early in the forenoon to late in the afternoon. The zoospores are biflagellate, and on emergence are pear-shaped with the broader portion of the body bright green and the narrow anterior flagellate area colourless (Plate III, fig. 9). It is of course difficult to obtain accurate measurements of such active bodies, but, so far as could be ascertained, they measure about 7 to 8 µ in length and about 5 µ in breadth. They swim about very actively with a combined movement of rotation and progression. The body contains several large, refractive particles, probably of amyloid nature. Large numbers of them conjugate to form zygozoospores (Plate III, fig. II). In this process two of the zoospores approach one another closely, their anterior pointed extremities come into contact and a gradual process of fusion spreads backwards along the bodies until complete union has been effected. In ex- ceptional cases three, in place of two, zoospores unite in this fashion. The normal zygozoospores are, of course, considerably larger than the zoospores, and are generally more or less spherical, even from the outset. They are provided with four flagella and continue to move actively about for some time. The movements, however, soon decrease in energy, the body ceases to progress freely through the water; it settles down and after keeping up a tremulous move- ment for some time becomes quite motionless. Parallel phenomena of change of form and cessation of movement occur in those zoospores which do not conjugate. All the zoospores developed in a zoosporangium do not always effect an exit, but a certain number remain behind, and after swarming actively for some time gradually become spherical and motionless (Plate III, fig. 10). Such motion- less, retained zoospores measure about 7 µ in diameter. After settling down apart from leaves of Limnanthemum or on the general surface of the leaves the zoospores show no further developmental change. They never germinate like those of Chlorochytrium and soon lose their green colour and disintegrate. The actual process of invasion of new portions of leaves has never been observed, but from the appearances present in various cases there can be no doubt that the zygospores and probably zoospores also gain access to their sites of further development by direct transit through the stomatic orifices. In many cases the latter can be seen to be as it were plugged by bodies which have failed to secure entrance, while in others circular bodies, identical in characters with the still zygozoospores and zoospores, can be detected in the substomatic spaces. From the dense aggregation of large groups of zoosporangia which.so frequently occurs it would appear that, as a rule, the zoospores do not travel far, as it F2
36 Scientific Memoirs by is impossible to explain the grouping except as the result of invasion of an area close to the site of discharge of the zoospores. The phenomena which have just been described are characteristic of those periods of the year in which the alga is in full activity, during the rains and beginning of the cold weather. As the cold weather advances, however, more and more cells tend to assume a resting condition, and ultimately all persisting ones doing so, the alga disappears for the season from the leaves of the host- plant, the old leaves containing the resting cells gradually dying off and there being no source of infection for those which replace them. The passage of the cells from the active to the resting stage is attended by the following pheno- mena. A very great accumulation of starch takes place, and at the same time the colour of the cell-contents gradually changes from deep green to yellow, and ultimately to deep reddish orange. The character of the cell-wall also changes. It becomes greatly thickened and often very irregularly, so that it no longer presents an even outline, but is provided with a series of irregular projecting masses (Plate III, fig. 7). The contents appear to undergo a process of condensation and shrink away from the cell-wall, and as they do so they become invested by a separate bounding stratum of considerable thickness. In old resting cells there is frequently a more or less pronounced brown colour due to browning of the thick outer cell-wall. They vary very considerably in size, but have an average measurement of 34 by 38 µ. The details of measurement obtained from an isolated cell in the sediment deposited in a vessel containing infected leaves were as follows: length 55 µ, breadth 36 µ, thickness of the coats varying in different parts from 4.7 to 9 µ, diameters of the orange mass of contents 43 by 31 µ. In certain cases the development of resting cells is imperfect, and after a great accumulation of amyloid corpuscles has occurred there is no development of yellow or orange colouring matter, but a mere process of fading and disappearance of the chlorophyll, so that the cell is ultimately reduced to a sac containing a colourless mass of starch grains. After the resting cells have once been fully developed they remain unaltered for months, and as the leaves containing them die off and decay, they become free in the sediment of decomposing host tissues, During the cold-weather months they remain unaltered, and on the onset of the hot season only do they begin to change. The colour gradually changes from orange to green, the starch grains for the most part undergoing solution at the same time, and cells come thus, save in respect of the thickness of their walls, to resemble ordinary zoosporangia. A formation of zoospores next takes place, and on the emergence of these a fresh succession of active generations recurs, until the approach of the cold weather heralds in a gradually increasing production of resting cells. The alga, whose life history has just been described in certain points, very closely resembles Chlorochytrium, as originally described by Cohn1and subs- 1Beiträge zur Biologie der Pflanzen. Zweites Heft. 1872, S. 87.
37 sequently by George Klebs.1At the same time, however, it presents certain very distinctive features separating it from that genus. The most important of these distinctive points are, first, the fact that the zygospores and zoospores do not germinate as the zygospores of Chlorochytrium Lemnæ and the zoospores of Chlorochytrium knyanum do; and second, that the zoospores become free within the zoosporangium in place of being discharged from it in a common gelatinous investment from which they are subsequently freed, as is the case with those of Chlorochytrium. Taking these facts into consideration, I would propose to refer the present alga to a distinct genus, Stomatochytrium. The definition of the genus and species may stand as follows:38 Scientific Memoirs by superficial distribution of the intrusive elements and the permanent and wide patency of the stomatic orifices is taken into account, it appears to be very doubtful whether any diversion of nutritive materials takes place to any appre- ciable extent, and whether the nutritive processes are not carried out by the algal cells precisely as they are in the case of algæ attached to the common external surfaces of leaves in place of, as in the present instance, being located in what may be regarded as mere involutions of these surfaces. When dealing with this question of parasitism and entophytism of algæ, Klebs points out that Mycoidea parasitism affords the most striking example of apparently true parasitism in algæ which is yet known, and during the course of the past season I have met with a variety of the plant in which the parasitism appears to be unequivocal. It occurs on the leaves of Cinnamomum iners (Reinwardt), and is very abundant on the specimens of that tree in the Botanical Garden, Calcutta. The affected leaves show conspicuous circular black patches surrounded by narrow yellow areolæ and penetrating the entire thickness of the lamina (Plate I, figs. 5, 6). Such patches are present in small numbers on a large number of leaves, and now and then cover the greater part of the surfaces. There is little or no elevation of the surface of the discoloured patches above the general surface of the leaf, as there is in the case of com- mon subcuticular patches of Mycoidea. The size of the patches naturally varies greatly with age, ranging from 0.03 inch to 0.69 inch. As they increase in age the centres of the patches become greyish, dry, and friable, and ultimately disintegrate, giving origin to perforations penetrating the entire thickness of the lamina and surrounded by black and yellow rings. If the black areas of the patches be carefully examined during the hot weather or rains, they may fre- quently be seen to present prominent specks which on the upper surface of the patch appear reddish and on the lower one pale yellow, and by the aid of a lens these are resolved into tufts of fertile filaments of Mycoidea with the normal terminal zoosporangia. The filaments and zoosporangia emerging on the lower surface of the patches do not merely differ in colour from those emerg- -ing above, but are also considerably smaller. The difference in size and colour of these inferior elements is indeed so striking that were they alone examined, it would appear as though one were dealing with a new species of Mycoidea, but on examining the filaments and zoosporangia on the upper surface it becomes at once evident that this is not so. The filaments emerge from the surfaces of the patches in little isolated tufts, and there is no general rupture of the epider- mal tissue. In small, young patches the tufts are situated centrally, but as time goes on and the patches continue to spread peripherally, they no longer appear in the centre, but are arranged at intervals along a circular zone which gradually passes more and more outwards. It is a curious fact that in these leaves which are so abundantly affected by this peculiar form of Mycoidea, the common comparatively superficial variety of the alga seems very rarely to occur save to
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 39 a very limited extent in initiating the deeper affection. The leaves in some cases show an abundance of superficial primary discs like those from which the com- mon secondary discs originate. A certain number of secondary subcuticular discs may also occasionally be detected, but these are ordinarily of very small size, as the majority soon penetrate deeper to give origin to the characteristic patches. When they do so they remain for a time recognisable in relation to the patches, but soon dry up and entirely disappear. In determining the distribution of the algal elements throughout the affected areas, the principal difficulty lies in the fact that the dead host tissues are so darkly coloured that, unless sections are very thin, they are opaque, and so brittle that thin sections are extremely liable to break up into fragments. The results obtained from the examination of a very large number of sections were as follows:40 Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army of India. tissues it is hard to determine. At certain points in some specimens, however, continuous penetration of the lamina throughout the greater extent of its thick- ness by unequivocal algal elements connected with those of the superior sub- epidermal thallus can be recognised, the peculiar green or yellow colour of the contents distinguishing the parasitic from the host elements very clearly (Plate I, fig. 7). It appears that, as a rule, penetration of the deeper portions of the laminar tissue only occurs at isolated points by means of series of cells which serve to connect the inferior surface of the superior, subepidermal thallus with the scattered masses of cells above the inferior epidermis giving origin to the inferior tufts of fertile filaments. We have here to deal with intrusive algal elements which, both as regards their relation to the host tissues and the effects which they produce on them, clearly differ greatly from those of Stomatochytrium. The algal elements here do not occupy normal interspaces in the tissue, but force their way between normally closely adapted structures breaking up the continuity of the laminar structure. They produce effects on the tissues of the host not limited to mere distortion from mechanical pressure, but giving rise to such interference with the normal process of nutrition as to lead to death, and ultimate disintegration in masses of tissue in which mere mechanical distortion is entirely absent. The effects are certainly characteristic of parasitism as distinguished from simple entophytism. It is impossible to suppose that in this case the nutrition of the intrusive elements can be carried on without interfering with that of those of the host. They are not, like those of Stomatochytrium, so superficially situated as to have a direct relation to the outer world. On the contrary, they are, save where fertile filaments emerge, buried in dense masses of tissue. Due to their distribution they must at all events interfere with the nutrition of the host ele- ments by misappropriation of materials properly destined for the use of the latter. Whether the interference goes further than this, whether it advances to the stage of appropriation of organised products developed by the host tissues, remains uncertain, but the instances in which large masses of the intrusive elements appear to be almost or totally devoid of chlorophyll and yet in vigorous growth strongly suggest that such higher parasitism really prevail. CALCUTTA; The 15th April 1887.
The Fly-catching habit of "Wrightia coccinea." BY SURGEON A. TOMES, M.D., BENGAL MEDICAL SERVICE. (With Plate VI.) In a neighbour's garden at Midnapore are two fine shrubs of Wrightia coccinea. They were in full bloom in April and May, and their handsome deep red waxy-looking flowers were often observed to hold, entrapped, one or more living and struggling flies. Learning from Dr. King (who kindly identified the species for me) that the peculiarity in question does not appear to have been noted by botanists hitherto, I have been induced to investigate the mechanism of the trap with a view of discovering the meaning of the habit. The flowers of this Wrightia have a very strong attraction for insects. This is owing to their gaudy colour, to their possessing a peculiar heavy vinous smell, and to the secretion of a syrupy liquid which bathes their internal surfaces. So strong is the attraction that while I was engaged in the dissection of a specimen, a portion of the perianth lying on my table was promptly discovered, seized, and carried off by a hungry cockroach. The insects found entrapped were almost invariably common house flies caught by the proboscis, but occasionally a rather large species of ant caught by the neck, in a trap formed by the stamens (see Fig. I, pl. VI). On certain days dozens of flies would be caught thus, while on others not one would be seen. On one occasion a single flower had succeeded in imprisoning four flies all at once, while two flies were often to be found in the same flower. The insects after capture were not digested, but died a lingering death, and were devoured by red ants, which appeared to swarm over the tree. A fly which I released from the trap after a long detention seemed to be none the worse except for a bruised and swollen proboscis. The "trap" is formed by the andr42 Scientific Memoirs by For the upper half or two-thirds of their length they are closely in contact with each other, laterally, by means of their winged edges (see Fig. 3, pl. VI), but they are separated below by narrow slit-like openings, while at the base of the cone below the tips of the wings and between the stout filaments are left 5 quadrangular openings of considerable size, through which the nectary can easily be reached. In every cone there are thus 5 slits, each of which constitutes a separate trap for insects. If a thread, a fine straw, or a bristle, imitating the proboscis of a fly, be introduced into the interior of the cone through one of the basal openings and then gently withdrawn in an upward direction, it will readily pass into the slit, where, as traction continues, it soon becomes fixed. If now the hand be raised still higher, it will be found possible to extract the bristle very slantingly through the apex of the cone, where the points of the anthers give a little, and in the process of withdrawal it comes into contact, first, with the sticky stigmatic tissue, then with the pollen, some of the grains of which will be found adhering to its point. It seems to me that the action of the trap is purely mechanical. After repeated experiments I could not discover any appearance of irritability or sensi- tiveness of the stamens. Irritation of the interior of the cone had no effect in the closer approximation of the adjacent wings, the width of the slit remained the same even after capture of an insect. The slit-like interval between the wings narrows from below upwards until the sides actually touch. The wings them- selves are "set" somewhat inwards towards the long axis of the cone (Fig. 6, pl. VI). They thus tend to fall together valve-like and the whole arrangement is adapted to favour the wedging in of an impacted proboscis. There is plenty of room for an insect to withdraw its head or proboscis through the large open- ing at the base, and it is not easy to understand why entanglement should so often occur. Possibly while in the act of searching, the member becomes jammed, and once caught in the slit all efforts except in one direction, directly upwards, as has been shewn, only cause it to be held the tighter; so tight, indeed, does the trap hold that once the struggles of a captured ant were seen to result in its decapitation. The free edges of the wings are smooth and hard. A lens reveals no teeth or ridges, but they are seen to be finely ribbed longitudinally. The shrubs have now ceased to blossom and want of material prevents further enquiry at present. From the foregoing the plant clearly is not insecti- vorous, and there is a strong probability that the fly-catching habit is accidental, resulting from the arrangements to secure the fertilization of the species. In the two specimens to which I have had access all the flowers we-re hermaphro-
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 43 dite, with perfect male and female organs, but their construction is such that self-fertilization cannot easily take place. The anthers are introrse and dehis- cence apical, but the upper portion of the cone is so closely applied to and around the stigma, that pollen could scarcely fall spontaneously upon the stigma; in fact self-fertilization could only be effected at a mechanical disadvantage. On the other hand, all the circumstances of the case appear to favour the idea of fertilization by insect agency. But flies and ants are obviously not destined to be the agents; these are caught and perish, while stronger ones, such as bees for instance, or butterflies and moths, perhaps having a longer proboscis, may be able to release themselves (and a long proboscis would be an advantage for withdrawal through the apex of the cone) and so to carry away the pollen to the next flower they visit. The fact that the stigma must be reached before the pollen in the process of withdrawal supports this view. Pollen adhering to the tip of a proboscis after its extraction from one trap would certainly be wiped off upon the stigma of the next one in which it may chance to be ar- rested. Such are the points that I have observed in connexion with this ap- parently wanton destruction of insect life by the Wrightia , and the interpre- tation they appear to suggest, but I by no means claim to have finally solved the mystery, for I admit that I have never actually seen a bee or other larger insect engaged in the flower, or in the act of releasing itself from the trap. G2
Note on the Occurrence of a Minute Blood-Spirillum in an Indian Rat. BY H. VANDYKE CARTER, M.D., LOND., BRIGADE SURGEON, BOMBAY. (With Plate IV. ) The following memoranda relate to two separate subjects, either of which may be sufficiently interesting to warrant attention. One of these fresh data is the detection of a blood-parasite hitherto, I think, unrecognised; and the other is the demonstration of the possibility of introducing into the circulation of a monkey the hæmatozoon so often found amongst Indian rats46 Scientific Memoirs by may be obtained, without any more manifest alteration of its aspect than a slight thinning. The number of spirilla present was always moderateMedical Officers of the Army of India. 47 of a transition towards the flagellate, hæmatozoa of the rat; and on the other, undoubted micrococci did not appear in any of my specimens until after the lapse of 6-12 hours, and these were of diverse aspect and far less active amidst the red discs. Alongside such later oscillating coccus-chains this spirillum might be seen stretched and still, and obviously quite dissociated. Bacillar rods motile or quiescent were distinguishable readily enough, and the displace- ment of the blood-discs which they caused had not the peculiar thrilling charac- ter here noted. (See Plate IV, fig. 2.) From its special aspect, its movements and behaviour with re-agents, I infer that the organism in question is a bacterium belonging to the genus Spiro- chæte48 Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army of India. proceeding from the body: there was found serous inflammation of the pericardium and pleuræ, pyæmic infarcts in both lungs, most on right side with consolidation; liver large, pallid and infarcted with ova and a hydatid cyst; spleen large and pale, so the kidneys; the intestinal canal thin-walled; Peyerian glands unchanged, no entozoa here; blood from r. ventricle seemingly free of organisms; micrococci in the lymph and in the lung-nodules examined: in the intestinal mucus bacteria and ova of two kinds; no monads or spirilla seen: none of these data are peculiar. Lastly, as to infectiveness of this spirillar blood-contamination. Soon after its cap- ture (see the Chart) a drop of the infected blood of the rat was inoculated subcutaneously in a healthy rat (a ) and in a healthy monkey, Macacus (b ), whose temperature and blood were examined twice daily for six days continuously, with subsequent watching. The result of both these trials was negative: the monkey remaining well, and the inoculated rat only later becoming affected with gangrene of the hinder limbs (injured) such as other non-inoculated rats were liable to: its blood was found free from organisms the day before its death. Hence the inference that this particular form of blood-parasitism is not easily transmissible to the same healthy species, or to another animalOn the lately demonstrated Blood-contamination and Infective Disease of the Rat and of Equines in India. BY H. VANDYKE CARTER, M.D., LOND., BRIGADE SURGEON, BOMBAY. (With Plate V. ) In July 1877 the late lamented T. R. Lewis, soon after visiting Bombay to see the then newly-found relapsing fever organism of man50 Scientific Memoirs by and in more detail to belong to the genus Trichomonas of Leukart. It there- fore appears that not only is the morbid equine hæmatozoon of the Punjab the same as that of Burma (Poona in the Deccan may now be added according to Mr. Steel), but also that both of them correspond to the hæmatozoon of rats at large in Calcutta and Bombay, and, moreover, to a like organism common in London rats. I will only add here that in India the camel may spontaneously suffer along with horses and mules; also that in Europe, with rats, the hamster may be thus contaminated, and certain fishes (the mud-fish and carp) with organisms not unlike. Data from Bombay. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 51 often brought the evidence of an endemic source of infection was here less ap- parent, and valid inference regarding a possible seasonal influence could not be made. At the hotel alluded to the rats had finally become too wary to enter the traps, but some infected animals from the kitchens were caught together. Inclusive proportion showing the hæmatozoon nearly 12 per cent., which is less than one-half of the percentage found in Calcutta and London. A scrutiny of selected bi-daily records for 65 days did not reveal any pronounced or constant differences in the rectal temperature of infected rats as compared with the non-infected. And when it happened that the monads disappeared suddenly from the blood, there was never noted any striking cor- responding change of temperature; indeed, as the Charts I have show, no change at all might ensue surpassing the normal range so far as known. Pos- sibly under greater stringency some relationship of body-heat and this para- sitism of the blood may be revealed, but none such has yet come to light. I also failed to perceive any marked difference in the general state of the two sets of animals compared; both being equally liable to inconveniences or incidental hurt, either flourished or did not thrive in similar degree, for periods of several days or some weeks. If these data were not very numerous or rigidly exact, it was still clearly ascertained that the aspect of complete health was compatible with the presence of numerous flagellate organisms in the cir- culation. There was no evidence of a contagious influence. A common lesion amongst animals kept was atrophy or necrosis of the tail, then usually the feet became swollen, and finally there were signs of para- plegia and extreme debility. No animal kept in confinement lived longer than six weeks, and the majority not more than a fortnight; death usually superven- ing gradually as if from exhaustion, and a terminal febrile state never being wit- nessed. Mere confinement seemed prejudicial; and even if the diet were un- suitable, the signs of actual starvation were not noted. Occasionally death was sudden and unsuspected, during the night, and as if spontaneous. All these events were common to infected and non-infected animals, about equally. Fifteen special autopsies were made, of which 9 of rats showing the hæmatozoon, and in none of them did I see any peculiar coarse lesion of blood, or of viscera or tissues of the trunk. The brain was not examined. Microscopi- cally, the only changes noted was an increase of leucocytes; the spleen elements seemed normal. Some details are the following, which may be useful to future observers:52 Scientific Memoirs by many large ovoid ciliated monads ( ? Trichomonas) differing from the commoner form (Cercomonas). Larger infusorial species have been found in the cMedical Officers of the Army of India. 53 to the action of acetic acid or liquor potassæ; all the filaments present, by this method, becoming visible and readily counted. Often the number present in the field seems equal to or greater than that of the leucocytes, and occasional- ly comparable to a percentage of the red discs themselves; such a swarming may, however, be illusive, yet if the parasites were only 1/500 the number of red discs, their total in the circulation would amount to some millions. As to the movements exhibited, whilst it is possible such may be exaggerated outside the body under conditions abnormal and likely to prove irritative, still it may be assumed that during their stay within the blood-vessels, these organisms maintain a degree of activity curious to contemplate. As seen in the freshest blood, their move- ments are so rapid as to be followed with difficulty by the eye, certain optical im- pediments concurring thereto; yet evidently the chief one is that of progression more or less direct, and accompanied by a lateral lashing or sometimes an ap- parent rotation. Progression may doubtless be either backward or forward, and misled by the idea of the thicker end being the head of the organism, I (like Lewis) gained the impression that it commonly advanced; yet it is certain that when more tranquilly performed, progression is really with the flagellate extremity in front, as is usual in the other infusorial monads: this datum is important. In the fresh state, the substance of these organisms appeared under the higher powers to be homogeneous and translucent; yet, as described below, there presently appeared one or more bright spots in the thicker part. The very delicate lateral membrane became visible only in my osmic acid and stained specimens, and these serve to conform Dr. Crookshank's later observations to a considerable extent (see the figures in Plate V.) Aniline staining, which has proved so serviceable in Bacterial researches, did not seem to me equally trust- worthy here, on account of the inconstant degree and site of colouring which it imparted; at least by this means I did not become assured of the presence of internal organs, or of definite series of reproductive particles. Mr. Steel's specimens from Rangoon however, when stained with methyl-violet, showed distinct appearances of immature organisms or rudiments, such as I find Dr. Crookshank has also detected and figured in the rat's blood: they merit further attention. The next topic I would notice is the changes exhibited by these hæmotozoa in blood hermetically sealed, at rest and at a temperature of 70°54 Scientific Memoirs by After 3 hours, in the lateral open spaces movement less active, the thick end of the filaments seems to drag and bulge at intervals, showing a contractility of its substance which is still uniformly clear: blood-cells unchanged, the red forming rouleaux; some micrococci have appeared oscillating apart. As the monads become quiscent they seem more slender and flattened, the ribbon-like margin wavy or angular; and that this change is not due to simple dessication is evident from the red discs preserving their form and floating freely: next, a stiff crumpled aspect ensues, the body of the organism assuming a skate-like form, the flagellum being still round, flexible, and mobile. At 4½ hours a few bright dots appear in the motionless body, the flagellum still occasionally lashing spasmodically as it were and now it would be hard to recognise the monad. At 5 hours, the bright dots are distinct but not more numerous, the flagellum bent, clear and quiet: red discs unaltered. Another specimen shows that the bright specks might be due mainly to knots or foldings, but some resemble 'vacuoles.' Not every one of the organisms here presents identical changes at the same hour, nor are all the red discs precisely alike; therefore some difference of indi- vidual properties may be inferred. The above description applies to the parts towards the edge of the thin glass cover, whilst nearer the centre of the preparation where the blood- clot rests the changes are very much less marked and the organisms are still active; in the central part, appearances remain precisely as at beginning of the experiment. Shortly afterwards, the changed monads at the sides were but faintly visible; and on the following day (27 hours) no other changes indicative of development were to be seen in the specimens, which had then become clouded. In an experiment with blood diluted with aqueous humour of the rat, the monads had in the course of 4 hours become shrunken, bent, stiff, granular, and motionless: whilst in similar blood diluted with the salt-solution, they remained very active at a like interval. September. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 55 distinct with their granular contents. At 141 hours aspects the same, apparently some diminution of the granules in the body of the monads, with a clearness like those within the leucocytes present. Twenty-four hours later no change except that the parts are fainter. (See Plate V, fig. 6.) From my observations it might be inferred that at ordinary air-tempera- tures, in the absence of a continuous supply of oxygen and nutriment, these flagellated organisms do not grow in the blood: they do not, however, imme- diately dissolve and disappear, and the early drifting away from the centre, rigidity and quiescence, are phenomena which I know to occur with the febrile blood-spirillum of man prior to and consentaneous with a very decided growth in bulk. As to the significance of the shortening and dotting of the bodies of these monads, under the circumstances named, the alternative inferences of an incipient spore-production or of a mere plasmic degeneration would probably be decided in favour of the view of decay; yet this seems to be not absolutely certain. Inoculation experiments. 56 Scientific Memoirs by (c)EXPERIMENTS ON THE CAT:Medical Officers of the Army of India. 57 80 minims being injected at each site: at 2-20 P.M. temperature 101.9°, and no organism detectible in the horse's blood: next day there was observed a diffuse painful hard swelling at both sites of injection, and the patient seemed a little feverish and excitable: these symptoms subsided and the animal was subsequently lost sight of. (2) An aged horse had inoculated subcutaneously some infected rat's blood mixed with water: tumefaction occurred at the site of inoculation and no other result is mentioned. (3) The blood of a rat mingled with luke-warm water was injected subcutaneously in a mare and a pony. The mare received 80 minims in front of the right shoulder: on the following day marked swelling was perceptible at the spot, which however speedily declined until hardly perceptible on the ninth day: slight irregularities of the temperature were noted on two occasions, and up to the nineteenth morning, when observation ceased, no spirilloid could be found in the mare's blood, which had been daily inspected: some weeks later the animal continued in good health. The pony received at several punctures in the neck altogether about 90 minims of mixed rat-blood and water: and for the nineteen days ensuing there were noticed only some slight perturbations of temperature, slight swelling at the sites of inoculation subsiding on the fourth day, and an absence on each day of any visible contamination of the blood of the pony, which some weeks later continued in good health. (4) A chesnut pony mare in good condition received in each jugular vein about 65 minims of blood from a rat mixed with tepid water58 Scientific Memoirs by 99.8°, nil, e. t. 100°: sixteenth day m. t. 99.6°, nil; and for a few days longer similar negative results. (2) A small monkey (Macacus radiatus ) with healthy aspect and blood; m. t. 101° possibly not all the injected material reached the peritoneal cavity, as the blood had congulated and it may have been blood-serum chiefly which penetrated deeply. Second day m. t. 100°; 18 hours after experiment the animal seems well, no local swelling, but abdomen slightly tender at site of puncture to the right of the navel; in the first sample of blood taken from a digit 2 monads were detected very actively moving and otherwise presenting all the aspects of the hæmatozoon seen the day previously in the rat; they kept near to each other and were long watched: temperature at 1° P.M. was 100.6°; at 5 P.M.t. 102°; another active organism was seen in a fresh specimen of the blood from another digit: t. at 9° P.M. 100°: third day m. t. 101°; a specimen of the blood now taken showed a single active monad: at 1° P.M. t. 100°6; at 5 P.M. t. 102°; a flagellate organism like that of the rat was again found in the blood, as before: at 9° P.M. t. 100.2°: fourth day m. t. 101.4°; I failed to detect any parasite; e. t. 101.6°,; no parasite seen, but much plasmic matter? and many white cells; at 9° P.M. t. 99.6°: fifth day m.t. 100.4° nil, e.t. 102°; plasmic particles small, many: at 9° P.M. t. 100°: sixth day m.t. 100.6° nil., at 1° P.M. 100.4°, at 5 P.M. t. 101°, nil, at 9° P.M. t.: seventh day m.t. 100.4°, nil, e.t. 101.6° and later 99.6°: eighth day m.t. 100.2°, nil, but many plasmic particles, e.t. 101.4° and 99°: ninth day m.t. 100.4° nil. e.t. 101.4° and 99.6°: tenth day m.t. 100.2°, nil, e.t. 102°, nil, at. 9° P.M. t. 100°: eleventh day m.t. 100.8°, e.t.s. 101.6°and 99.6°: twelfth day m.t. 100.4°, nil, e.t.s. 101.6° and 99.4°: thirteenth day m.t. 100.4° nil , e.t. 102° nil; at 9°P.M. t. 100°: fourteenth day m.t. 101° nil, e.t.s, 102° and 99.6°: fifteenth day m.t. 100.4° nil, e.t. s. 101.6° and 99.8°: sixteenth day m.t. 100.4° nil, e.t.s. 101.6° and 100°: seven- teenth day m.t. 100.4° nil; and subsequently this animal long remained well. SUMMARY OF EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS:Medical Officers of the Army of India. 59 For valid inference it was obviously needful to ascertain the sameness of the things under comparison. This might be done either morphologically or biologically; and one striking feature of the present instance consists in its offering an apparent discrepancy in these two respects, which, so far as I know, is unique in the annals of experimental pathology. First, as to the morphology of the hæmatozoon. Judging from description, there can be no doubt that the organism found in Bombay is identical with that detected by Lewis in Bengal; such inference being confirmed by the micro-photographs appended to the Calcutta Memoir of 1879 and the remarks and drawings in Dr. Lewis' "Further Observations," London, 1884. Here I may note also the very close similarity (at least) of the Indian hæmatozoon with that of the German "hamster" described by Wittick and illustrated by excellent photographs, with a comment in Koch's well-known article Mittheill. a. d. Konigl. Gesund. amt. Band. I60 Scientific Memoirs by The several links in the above chain of identifications seem nearly equally strong and connected; for observers have been competent, and in itself the hæmatozoon is peculiar enough to be readily recognised, having in each of the instances quoted preserved a similarity of form, dimensions, structure and movements which seems never to have surpassed the limits of a possible normal or incidental variation. In both rodent and equines the numbers visible at a time, their relation to the ordinary blood elements, changes on keeping and behaviour with re-agents, have been also practically identical; the entire evidence being as valid as that commonly accepted when widely- separated observations are inter-compared. I doubt, indeed, if by simple inspection the infected rat's blood could be distinguished certainly from that of the "surra" mule, dog, or monkey. This is not to affirm that no visible differences actually exist, but that in each instance characteristics have been maintained amidst differences not more frequent or considerable than might be anticipated from the varying conditions of observation. Secondly, as to biological aspects. The vital properties of the blood-para- site as concerns the organism itself will be alluded to under the next heading; and respecting its influence upon the state of the infected hosts, both rodent and equine, the following remarks are offered. As regards rats, the testi- mony of Lewis and Crookshank has been concurrent with my own experi- ence narrated above, being to the effect that the health of the infested rodent does not seem impaired either generally or specially, as contrasted with that of other captured rats whose blood was free from visible contamination. I further ascertained that no alterations of temperature occurred with the presence, sud- den disappearance, and absence of the hæmatozoon. Apart from the general nutrition, no special function seemed disturbed; and at autopsies no particular organic lesion was noted. When infested rats died spontaneously, it was not differently or more obscurely than happened in the case of the non-infected similarly deceasing. On the other hand, the entire history of any individual not being known, it was not certain that a true normal standard of comparison had been available: moreover, the first entry of the parasites into the blood was never witnessed, and the influence of repeated infection was not learnt; in such small animals blood-observations were necessarily limited in number and volume, and much may have been overlooked: moreover, as to sickness and decease, the inevitable daily manipulations and punctures, added to injuries inflicted during capture, constraint, and change of diet, would of themselves cause a dis- turbance of the system possibly interfering with a correct diagnosis; and, in sum, I was not disposed to regard my own results as final. In his comment on the infested hamster, Dr. Koch, noting the occurrence of spontaneous sickness and death, with on autopsy no lesion in explanation, insists rather upon the contaminated state of the blood; nothing, however, is
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 61 said of comparison with non-infected animals dying in confinement, or of experi- mental inoculations. Results being so far negative, there is next to state that mere obscurity of symptoms and lesion does not preclude the possible existence of a veritable blood-poisoning; the biological proof of which would be the artificial infection of a healthy animal of the same or near species. As regards healthy rats, according to my experiments these did not suffer by inoculation with the tainted rat-blood hypodermically made; nor did cats, dogs, or monkeys; nor did the rabbit inoculated through the peritoneal sac; nor the horse as tested by Mr. Steel in both these methods and also by intra-venous injections. In not one of these instances was there any communication to the healthy animal of either visible or occult blood-contamination, as proved by the unaffected gene- ral state of the recipient and by the absence in its blood of an organism like the rat's hæmatozoon. Here the last of my experiments on the monkey by intra-peritoneal injection possesses a special significance, since it demon- strated that the hæmatozoon which seems innocuous to the rat is also harmless to the monkey, so far as may be judged from a single datum carefully acquired. Adverting now to the biological properties of the same blood-parasite as manifested amongst equine animals (also the camel), and in the dog and monkey when inoculated from equines, a notable difference becomes apparent. Thus it has been found by Dr. Evans and Mr. Steel (and since by Mr. Gunn, A.V.D. ) that in the horse and mule the presence of this hæmatozoon is con- stantly and exclusively accompanied by a serious general disorder which in its symptoms is more or less protracted and emaciating, at intervals febrile, icteric and hæmorrhagic, intractable by remedies, and in its termination fatal, without the production of any strictly pathognomonic lesion excepting that of the blood. Observers agree that this malady is not contagious or infec- tious in the ordinary sense: naturally occurring it is endemic, seasonal and limited, so far as appears, to the horse, mule, and camel; it may prevail, extensively, and has been popularly recognised by various names, of which "surra" is one, that of "equine relapsing fever" being a designation proposed by my friend Mr. Steel (see below). From the statements made it follows that the disease is a general one, not less characteristic in its symptoms than in its visible blood-contamination; and though not naturally communicated by contact or proximity, both these features may, I next note, be artificially reproduced by inoculation of the infected blood hypodermically and otherwise in other healthy animals. On this point the data are concisely as follows:62 Scientific Memoirs by list may be added inoculation of the dog (1) with reproduction of the hæmato- zoon, by Mr. Gunn, A.V.D., (Quar. Jour. of Veter. Science in India, No. 19, page 240, April 1887). In most of these instances details of experiment are given sufficient to show that adequate precautions against error were duly practised: seemingly the results were never of a doubtful character; and, lastly, it would appear that the inoculation experiments were invariably successful, so far as concerns repetition of the blood-organisms. As regards identity of the morbid state induced with that naturally acquired, not less ample proof is afford- ed in the instance of the horse and mule,Medical Officers of the Army of India. 63 after an interval of 4 days; and subsequently other febrile recurrences (parasites seen after a month) with emaciation and debility, feebleness in the limbs, ulcers and necrosis of the bones of the feet, and final exhaustion upwards of two months after inoculation: at the autopsy no marked positive changes, only some petechiæ on surface of lungs. This animal was brought from Rangoon to Madras during its illness, and may have suffered, as monkeys often do, from confinement and the voyage: its temperature chart for 30 days is given by Mr. Steel, blood-scrutinies being made for 13 days in succession at first and again later on. Some other inferences from the records, as they stand, are the following:64 Scientific Memoirs by regarded as either bacterial or infusorial forms, or less probably as zoospores or possibly as embryos of nemat helminths. Other analogues may exist.1 Comparison with the immature young of nematode worms is alluded to, because it happens that Dr. Evans once found numerous embryos of a filaria in the blood of a camel in bad health and associated with four other camels affected with genuine "surra;" and Mr. Steel also detected in the blood of a mule under experiment a nematode "worm;" the hæmatozoon under notice being, however, absent in both these instances. I never met with blood-filariæ in the rat, nor had Dr. Lewis. Micro-filariæ commonly present charac- ters wholly diverse, being much larger in dimensions, cylindrical or vermiform, non- flagellate, of granular aspect or showing traces of internal organs, and sometimes enclosed within a delicate sheath: besides, the direction of movement is not uniform; and it has not been shown that these temporary tenants of the blood can be reproduced through inoculation. As to comparison with spermatic elements, the late Dr. Lewis observed (in his second Memoir) that he was once inclined to think that the flagellated organisms of the rat might be the spermatozoa of some parasite hidden in the tissues of the animal; men- tioning their amazing similarity to the spermatozoids of a Tænia seen in the intestines of rat, whose blood, however, was at the time free from organisms. The lateral membrane of the hæmatozoon would also call to mind the similar appendage of spermatic filaments perhaps elsewhere present than in certain lizards. But all such filaments move the thick end foremost, their flagellum being a propeller; and, besides, they are not independent organisms capable of reproduction per se. The bacterial character of these blood-parasites is disproved by their non-cellular aspect, and by their contractile plasma in which rapid changes of length and thickness are seen wholly unknown amongst the algoid filaments: moreover, their prompt decay after a few hours' keeping, with entire absence of signs of reproduction by division or spores, would nega- tive such view. Perhaps the nearest approach to resemblance would be with the spirillum (or spirochæta) of human relapsing fever, which I mention because it has been alluded to by several observers as regards appearances in the fresh blood of rats and equines, and has in the latter instance led to the organisms being designated as "spirilloids;" Mr. Steel's term seeming the more warrantable, since he found a distinctly recurring pyrexia to attend the presence of the organisms in mules and in animals infected from them. I could myself compare directly the living human parasite with that of the rat, finding no other than an incidental similarity in a peculiar twirling displacement of the red blood-discs, caused by movements of the active organisms present; watching for a time, indeed, both kinds of organisms ceased to move, and becoming rigid drifted away towards the sides of the con- taining cell, when all resemblance ended; the spirochæta retaining its spiral form, speedily enlarging much and joining with other filaments to form a close network which at its nodes finally blends into a uniform granular, zooglMedical Officers of the Army of India. 65 distinct tendency of the bacterium towards a certain development, and not so of the hæmatozoon. I might add that it is only when the spirochæta Obermeieri in its most active state is, as it were, uncurled and variously twisting that it could be mistaken for the monad; since when more tranquil it appears as a much slenderer, shorter, and quite uni- form spiral thread, darting indifferently backwards or forwards and showing no flagellum at either of its equally obtuse ends. I also note that though morphologically apart, there sometimes obtains (e.g , as regards the "surra" organism) a biological resemblance66 Scientific Memoirs by probably also a distinct "seasonal'' variation of prevalence. Strict search on the lines now indicated seems to me promising as regards detection of the source or sources of these infections. An external origin of the parasite, direct or mediate, being in high degree probable, regarding its mode of entry into the circulation, the successful experi- ments of Veterinary Officers proving that the "surra" infection is directly commu- nicable by way of the stomach, have an obvious practical bearing; and so, too, the equally prompt success of hypodermic inoculation, which shows the suffi- ciency of minute wounds of the skin and, presumedly, of the mucous membranes generally, as a favouring local condition. The apparent absence of conveyance of the same morbid state through mere skin-contact, and through air-infection by way of the respiratory tract, should also be considered. It is not known if rats inhabiting the stables of infected horses or mules are primarily or specially affected; but Mr. Steel's negative experiments, quoted above, would tend to show that equines did not derive their disease from the bite of tainted rodents. The hæmatozoon of the rat seems more difficult of communication than the "surra" monad, yet I have shown that it or its germs may be introduced into the circulation, e.g. , of the monkey, by way of the peritoneal lymph-sac; my own impression from the data (see above)being that a certain limited development had taken place in the monkey's blood, though this is uncertain since entire blood-discs, while preserving their vital properties, can pass freely along the same lymph-channel (Dr. W. Murray in the Brit. Med. Jour., 29th Jan. 1887), and such are broader and less mobile structures than the full-grown parasite in ques- tion. Another conjecture arose from my finding in some rats, at the lower part of the ileum, many active monads apparently identical with species of Cercomo- nas, and in the duodenum amidst bile-stained mucus, numerous larger ones resembling Trichomonas sp. , whose proximity to the common bile-duct suggested the possibility of entry into the liver. (where C. has been met with), and thence into the circulation. As it happened there were no organisms in the blood of these rats, further remarks would be merely speculative; and I need only add that the concurrence of extraneous, intestinal, and blood monads, with a conceivable connection of the series, inter se , forms a topic analogous to that of such bacterial infection as the "spirillar" of human relapsing fever elsewhere alluded to by me. Equally cursory in the scarcity of relevant facts must be any comment on the growth and reproduction of this hMedical Officers of the Army of India. 67 Here what is known is, first, the co-presence in the blood with abounding grown organisms, sometimes clustering or blending, of numerous small motile particles and frequent cyst-like forms which have the aspect, at least, of reproductive elements at various stages of development, and which nearly all observers have noted (see Dr. Crookshanks figures and some of mine): add, also, that whilst obviously plentiful growth must take place somewhere in the rat and horse's body, hitherto outside the blood no parent-source of the parasite has been detected. Mr. Steel's successful inoculation with fresh blood, in which at the time no parasites were detectable, is quite noteworthy and corresponds with some experience of mine when studying the relapsing fever of man, the explanation being either that grown organisms had (as is possible) been overlooked, or that the new brood had sprung from germs contained in the blood (as also seemed likely in one of my cases). The second point to note is concurrent testimony regarding the advent of the hæmatozoon by intermittent succession of broods. I had not actually seen this in the rat, but apparently it was so in a healthy- looking dog in the possession of Dr. Lewis; and as regards the "surra" infec- tion Dr. Evans had noticed its probability, whilst Mr. Steel has furnished definite affirmative evidence in both natural and imparted disease. Analogous thereto are the events in the human recurrent spirillar infection; only here the malady tends to subside by diminution and delay of the relapses, whilst equine relapsing fever seems always to end fatally. Whatever prove the future explana- tion of this significant phenomenon, it will apply to both these kinds of blood- infection, and may apply also to the malarial, typhoid, and certain septic species. Lastly, I have to notice the fact that, so far as known, the hæmatozoon is not only limited to the blood-area, but is equally diffused throughout it, and the same datum was clearly ascertained for the spirillum of relapsing fever, by comparative scrutinies of blood taken immediately after death (of infected monkey) from each of the principal regions and viscera of the body. Before quitting this part of the subject, there might be mentioned certain seeming counterfacts to some of the propositions above surmised. Thus, as regards evanescent quality of the hæmatozoon, this would appear less marked than is stated of monads generally; Lewis in particular having remarked that the rat's organism was not very sensitive to the action of mercuric perchloride, whilst according to Leuckart this salt has in general such a prompt destructive action that its employment therapeutically seems to be indicated Again, Mr. Steel once failed to propagate the "surra" disease by administration per oram of the gastric and intestinal matters of a diseased mule: and, further, what seems adverse to the asserted persistency of monad-germs, the subcutaneous injection of dried tainted blood also failed. Dr. Evans, too, found on two trials no effect after the swallowing of a water-mixture containing infected blood which had been kept for 24 hours and without signs of putridity no longer K 2
68 Scientific Memoirs by showed traces of the parasitic organisms. Analogous hereto was the failure at my hands of dried spirillum-blood to infect, although traces of that bacterium could be seen in the material used; and this circumstance induces me to remark, briefly, that the conditions of infection must really be complex, since three separate factors are necessarily concerned, namely, (1) a certain state of the in- fecting agent, (2) a certain mode of transmission, and (3) a certain state of recipient or new host. The final topic I propose to glance at is the character and affinities of the equine disease which is associated with the hæmatozoon under review. The excellent descriptions published of "surra" as prevalent at the E. and W. extremes of India, do not differ more than might be anticipated from innate variability and incidental circumstance. From them it may be gathered that here is a sub-acute, febrile and usually fatal malady; presenting no other special lesion than that of the blood, arising endemically and not spreading by con- tagion or infection; commonest during and after the rainy season, with no other particular relation to atmospheric states or to the soil: in a given locality the distribution of disease may be irregular, and the outbreaks do not seem to last longer than a few seasons at a time, sporadic cases probably persisting or being introduced afresh. The entire clinical history is not fully known, on account of the non-continuous course of symptoms: at first were noticed fever, with jaun- dice, petechiæ of visible mucous membranes (eye and vagina), anasarca, some- times albuminuria, always great prostration of strength and rapid wasting; death by exhaustion alone at the end of a few weeks; and at autopsy so specific coarse lesion seen (Evans). Afterwards it was clearly made out that the pyrexia assumes the form of pronounced (max. t. 105°-7° F.) and well-defined exacerba- tions of 2Medical Officers of the Army of India. 69 the characteristic febrile relapses can be ascertained, and by the microscope the pathognomonic aspect of the blood (see below); a period of 10 days' watching may, however, be needful for certainty. In "anthrax" the temperature is per- sistently high and the blood contains bacilli, and in 9 cases out of 10 this disease is of acute character: whereas in "surra" the malady is more chronic, the pyrexia intermittent, and the blood then charged with "spirilloids" (Steel). Prognosis is unfavourable in the highest degree: and treatment, both general and special, having hitherto proved inefficacious, attention needs be directed to prophylactic and preventive measures. As to etiology, it is stated that though new to science, "surra" has long been recognised in its haunts, where as a rule enzootic it does sometimes as- sume an epizootic character (Evans). Adequately sustained enquiry made on the spot, concerning the predisposing and determining causes of the disease is still a desideratum; only occasional and non-exclusive conditions chiefly of mal- nutrition or mal-sanitation being as yet elicited, there remains to note such more direct agencies as in the popular opinion produce this disease, e.g. , the bite of a large brown fly the size of a small bee (classification unknown), the feeding on certain kinds of grass, and the drinking of fouled, stagnant, marshy water as mentioned by Dr. Evans, who himself found flukes in the liver of two "surra' cases examined post mortem. The Indian veterinary observers seem unani- mously disposed to regard the hæmatozoon as the immediate cause of the dis- ease; the arguments put forth in support of such view being those held in an- alogous instances, e.g. , the spirillum fever, and also like, but more elaborately con- clusive, in the anthrax infection; it is asserted that this organism is never found in healthy equines (a ), that it is invariably present in the diseased (b ), and that its occurrence is peculiar to the diseased (c ): further, there is, in the mule at least, the closest connection in time between its usual visible advent and the onset of febrile symptoms, with the additional feature of disappearance of the blood- organism just before the acme and decline of specific pyrexia (Steel); and again during the apyretic interval ensuing, it is said that immature growing forms of the parasite are with little difficulty detectable (Mr. Gunn, A.V.D.); lastly, the absence of a strict relationship between the apparent number of organisms and the intensity of clinical symptoms would be no valid argument against a real connection here, because such symptoms are really complex phenomena referable to a conjunction of influences and conditions. Judging from all the data, there is, I may add, ample evidence to warrant the assumption that the natural equine disease scrutinised by Dr. Evans and Messrs. Steel and Gunn was one and the same. The remarkable fact that "surra" is communicable by inoculation and even by imbibition of the tainted blood was determined promptly by its sagacious dis- coverer, and has been fully confirmed by the next observer, whose more elabo-
70 Scientific Memoirs by rated data are worthy of close attention. Mr. Steel has published three separate accounts, with charts, of inoculated mules and one of the pony, which on com- parison with others of the natural mule-disease appear so much alike as, in my opinion, to quite justify his statement that the "surra" blood-infection with all its attendants can be readily, exactly, and exclusively reproduced at will. I am assured that adequate precautions were taken to ensure the absence of a natural acquirement of the disease in these several instances, which therefore, along with Dr. Evans' experiments, will serve to establish a truly fundamental datum. To myself these observations were of particular interest because of the aggregate clinical and pathological facts embodied in them demonstrating, further, a striking similarity to the phenomena of the spirillum-infection with its attend- ants as seen in the human subject. This similarity Mr. Steel has the credit of first clearly making evident, whether or not in veterinary medicine his proposed cognomen of "equine relapsing fever" displace the indigenous term "surra": briefly, it consists (as regards inoculated cases) in the defined and but little shorter incubation-period of 471 Medical Officers of the Army of India. of man. Respecting the more prolonged illnesses naturally acquired precise information is as yet but scanty, consisting of three cases given by Dr. Evans in which the animals were destroyed, and of 6 examples detailed by Mr. Steel in which natural demise occurred; of these last 3 had been first entered under a provisional diagnosis of " gastric typhoid " (in allusion to the gastric ulcers sometimes found in Burma cases), dying on the 53rd, 59th, and 93rd day of disease respectively, so far as ascertained; and as the blood-parasites were present in all, there is here, too, evidence of the much longer persistence of the infection than ever was learnt by me as regards the human spirillum- fever. What may be the precise state of the blood and viscera in cases of surra lingering for 6 or 12 months does not appear to be ascertained: nor apparently have recoveries been ever watched throughout, and hence the ques- tion of immunity or of an increased liability cannot yet be raised. It is well known that no immunity against re-infection is imparted by an attack of " spirillum-fever." As to the character of the disease inoculable in animals of different species to the equines and man respectively, available data are but few. I found the spirillum-infection to be communicable only to a quadrumanous animal, in which the blood-parasites with their clinical attendants, are even readily reproduced, and, as sometimes happens in the human subject, the first outbreak of illness may prove fatal: it being also remarkable that after the more usual event of recovery, relapses were extremely rare. (if ever occurring) in the monkey. As regards the equine disease, Mr. Steel succeeded on first attempt in similarly com- municating this to a monkey of probably similar species, whose chart shows the animal to have at first and for 30 days at least truly acquired the specific recurring fever: numerous later relapses are also said to have occurred, but the state of the blood is not recorded, and the monkey died after two months or more with the complication of ulcers and necrosis of the foot, so that possibly (in my opinion) septic72 Scientific Memoirs by inoculated a dog on 20th September 1886 and on 24th found many parasites in its blood; the animal after that date, for a period not stated, continued playful and healthy-looking, nose cold, but yet the blood was " crowded more or less with the special organisms more or less numerous as indicated by the internal temperature "73 Medical Officers of the Army of India. In the course of comparing phenomena, I have noted as a similarity of the equine to the human relapsing fever the occurrence of a ravenous appetite in the sick during even the febrile state, and without much manifest benefit when gratified: also a tendency to intensifying of symptoms (e.g ., the jaundice and petechi74 Scientific Memoirs by " Le Progrès Médical", 1886-87). Thus, as to general features, anthrax may affect equines on a large scale, preserving there the characters it displays in bovines and sheep, its com- moner victims; it also is distributed endemically, being of telluric though not of miasmatic origin; and its severity is hardly less than that of " surra." Next, as to clinical and ana- tomical diagnosis, "anthrax fever" is the common natural form of the infection, in which the temperature may reach 105°75 Medical Officers of the Army of India. by Mr. Steel) must now be interpreted as in a special degree significant. To the best of my recollection, none of the hæmatophytes are harmless tenants of the blood, all being possessed Of pathogenetic properties and all, moreover, belonging to the fungus- (or alga-) group of schizomycetes: whereas no such uniformity of property, or of classification, obtains amongst the known haæmatozoa, and hence of these an important differentiation may and has now to be made. Thus, on the one hand, there are the familiar instances of high-grade vertebrates whose blood teems with large and active organisms, without for a time at least any very manifest prejudice to their own health,76 Scientific Memoirs by peculiarity of the present case rests on the conjunction of phenomena pre- sented rather than upon any single phenomenon, and therefore it may be most convenient to consider separately the pathological state involved and the organism concerned. As regards morbid symptoms, whilst in the horse and mule these become so marked, they are described as being very insiduous at their beginning and liable to apparently complete intermissions. Animals at work have been found to present a highly contaminated state of the blood; others have died suddenly or unexpectedly, and there are some natural variations of symptoms in different provinces and between the horse and mule. These facts are mentioned here with reference to the likely detection, or non-detection, of morbid signs in animals not domesticated and only casually inspected: even in the rat at Bombay, it was not clear to me that infected animals did not at some time and in some manner or degree suffer from their blood-contamination, the probability being that they did so suffer; and as regards the few instances reported of deer, frogs, and fishes in whose blood protozoa have been detected without the remark being made of illness associated therewith, this datum, too, is a negative one and similarly open to uncertainty. I think also that the " surra " data respecting inoculated dogs raise the question whether these animals may not sometimes suffer,77 Medical Officers of the Army of India from study of this equine " surra"disease: the original observers were distinctly of opinion that the virus of the disease is represented by the organism, but hitherto the evidence goes no further than was reached by experiment with another infective organism78 Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army of India. form of those so laboriously acquired for " anthrax;" and as for encouragement to work in India, it seems to me hard to conceive a more promising field of re- search than the one which has been the subject of the present remarks. NOTE.Observations on Bacteria in Cholera. BY SURGEON-MAJOR G. BOMFORD, M.D., BENGAL MEDICAL SERVICE. (With Plates VII and VIII.) The following is a brief statement of the results of microscopical examin- ation of the tissues in nine cases of cholera, which have died at the the General Hospital, Calcutta, during the past twelve months (June 1886 to June 1887), showing, in each case, the duration of illness, the stage the disease had reached, the tissues examined, and the bacteria, if any, found. The patients were all adult European seamen, and thepost-mortem examination was made in less than an hour after death in every case. CASE I.80 Scientific Memoirs by medulla oblongata. In a congested patch in the stomach there were abundant short straight bacilli, many of which presented deeply stained spots (spores ?) in their interior. No bacteria in the other tissues. CASE 7.81 Medical Officers of the Army of India. In cases of secondary fever it is not uncommon to find the lower lobes of the lungs 82 Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army of India. untwisted with all the sloughs, mucous, blood and other corpuscles accuratelyin situ, and, consequently, can be more satisfactorily examined for bacteria than when freezing or other methods of making sections are adopted. Three, four, or even more sections, according to their size, and either consecutive or otherwise, can be fixed upon a large cover-glass and thoroughly searched and compared. For staining the intestines alkaline methyl-blue (Schutz or Löffler's solution) or watery solution of Spiller's purple, has been used, while in the case of the other tissues either these or some stain by the Gram method. CALCUTTA, July 1887.
On the Phenomena of Propagation of Movement in Mimosa pudica. BY SURGEON-MAJOR D. D. CUNNINGHAM, M.B., SPECIAL ASSISTANT TO SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVT. OF INDIA. In one of the most recent English works on Vegetable Physiology1the author expresses himself as follows in regard to the question of the propagation of movements inMimosa pudica and similar plants:84 Scientific Memoirs by many cases inexplicable on any theory of continuous propagation of protoplasmic irritation, while it is readily explicable as the result of fluctuations in fluid tension acting upon masses of tissue of different structural characters and holding different relations to surrounding parts. Proceeding to the consideration of each of these in order, we have first to examine into the evidence in favour of the first. In doing so data might be derived from almost every table, but in the first place special attention is invited to those in Tables I to VII, showing the results following section and heating of distal pinnules, to those in Table VIII, showing the results of simple mechanical stimulation, and to those in Table IX, showing the phenomena attending mechanical obstruction to depression of the petiole on action of the primary pulvinus. Table I is a general table of the results of experiments carried out at different times of year and under various conditions of temperature and atmo- spheric and telluric moisture. It includes details in regard to 100 cases of section of the tips of distal pinnules. The movements resulting from the injury were in 94 cases limited to the injured leaf, and in only 6 did they extend to one or more other leaves on the axis. In regard to 84 cases it is recorded whether the leaf was exposed to direct sunshine or was in shade at the time of section. In the 45 cases in which the leaf was exposed to the sun, action extended over the entire leaf in 41 instances, and in some extended to one or more other leaves. In the 4 cases in which the extension was not complete the tip of one pinna failed to act in one, an entire pinna in two, and one pinna and the primary pulvinus in one. In the 39 cases in which the leaf was in shade at the time of section action failed to extend over the entire leaf in 38 cases, being in 31 limited to the injured pinna alone or to it and the primary pulvinus, in 6 cases extending incompletely to other pinnæ and in one case only extending completely throughout the entire leaf. Table II shows the results of section of distal pinnules of leaves in shade shortly after a fall of rain. It includes details regarding 20 experiments. In no single case was there any extension of movement beyond the injured leaf; in 10 cases action was limited to the injured pinna or to it and the primary pulvinus, and in the remaining cases it was never complete throughout the entire leaf. Table III shows the results following section of distal pinnules of leaves in shade after a continuous period of heavy rainfall. It includes data of 10 experiments. Here, again, in not a single instance was there any extension of action beyond the injured leaf. In 6 cases action was limited to the injured pinna or to it and the primary pulvinus, and in all of them the action in the cut pinna was incomplete. In none of the 4 cases in which action extended to other pinnæ than the injured one was it complete or even well developed in them.
85 Medical Officers of the Army of India. Table IV contains the results of 29 experiments on section of pinnules in different parts of pinnæ in leaves in shade. All of them were conducted on one morning, after a night in the early part of which there had been a heavy fall of rain. In none of them was there any extension of action beyond the injured leaf, and in none was the action in the latter complete. Table V shows the results in 15 experiments on dry1leaves fully exposed to direct sunshine. Here, in 13 cases, the action was complete throughout the injured leaf, and in one of them it extended to another leaf. In the two remain- ing cases it extended to all parts of the leaf, but was not complete. Table VI contains the details of results in 40 experiments, conducted under various external conditions, in which heat was applied to the extremities of distal pinnules. In only 6 of them was there any extension of action beyond the leaf primarily affected. In 34 cases it extended over the whole of the primarily affected leaf. In the remaining 6 cases in which the action was limited to the primarily affected leaf, action failed in the primary pulvinus in 2; in the others action occurred in the primary pulvinus but failed to extend com- pletely over the remaining pinnæ. Table VII shows the results obtained in a series of 10 experiments on the action of heat on the distal pinnules of leaves of dry plants.1Here, in 7 instances, action was extended to one or more leaves on the axis besides the one originally affected, and in the remaining 3 cases the action in the leaf was complete throughout in two and almost complete in the third. In Table VIII the results of 3 distinct sets of experiments on the effects of influences producing movement apart from any abnormal discharge of fluid from the tissues are detailed. It relates to 30 experiments. In 10 of these full depression of the petiole was induced by pressure on its upper surface, in 10 a similar effect was induced by impact on the undersurface of the primary pulvinus, and in the remaining 10 action in individual pinnules was induced by elevation or depression of their tips. In the first set of cases full depression of the petiole was unaccompanied by any further results in 9 cases; in one case slight action in the secondary pulvini occurred as a secondary phenomenon. In the second series slight action in the secondary pulvini occurred in two cases. In the third series the action was throughout purely local. In Table IX we have the results obtained in 24 experiments, conducted on one morning, on the effects of section of the tips of distal pinnules of leaves, in which in 12 instances depression of the petiole was mechanically obstructed, while in 12 it was fully carried out. In the 12 cases in which depression was mechanically obstructed, the action in 9 cases was limited to the injured pinna and the primary pulvinus, whilst in those cases where it extended further it was 1The term "dry" is here used to indicate that the leaves were free from any visible adherent dew or rain.
86 Scientific Memoirs by extremely limited in its distribution. In the 12 cases where depression of the petiole was fully and freely carried out, action extended in various degrees to other pinnæ than that primarily affected in no less than 10 cases. In regard to the two latter tables, it may possibly be affirmed that the limited number of the experiments detailed, and the fact that in each case they were conducted on a single occasion, detracts from the value of the data. To any such objection all that I can reply is, that the only reason why the details of a larger number of experiments conducted at different times have not been given is that it appeared to be undesirable to increase the bulk of the tables, already sufficiently cumbrous, by a mass of monotonous repetitions of identical results. It may, however, be as well to give a little further information in regard to the points specially dealt with in these tables. With regard to the effect of move ments induced by the purely mechanical agency of pressure or impact apart from anything causing abnormal discharge of fluid from, or abnormal obstruc- tion to, the access of fluid to the tissues, all that I can say is that, after having tried a very large number of experiments on the subject, I am fully convinced that they are invariably almost, if not absolutely, localised where the experiments are conducted under conditions such as those prevailing in Calcutta. By means of upward or downward pressure on the petiole or upward or downward pressure on the primary pulvinus, extreme petiolar depression may be certainly induced with an entire or almost entire absence of any further result.1By judi- ciously applied impulse, either all the pinnules of all the pinnæ alone, or all the pinnules of all the pinnæ and all the secondary pulvini may be caused to act without the faintest trace of action in the primary pulvinus. Finally, by applying upward or downward pressure to individual pinnules in a pinna, absolutely localised movement in them alone may be secured, and to such an extent is this the case that numerous isolated pinnules on both sides of one and the same pinna may he caused to act without any propagation of movement either centripetally, centrifugally, or transversely. With regard to the phenomenon of minor extension of action in leaves where there is a prevention or diminution of the petiolar depression conse- quent on action in the primary pulvinus, it may be stated that the experiments tabulated are merely given as showing the results constantly observed in other cases in which obstruction either occurred naturally due to the relation of the leaves and axes in dense masses of the plant, or was artificially induced by means of ligatures confining the petiole more or less completely to its erect position. So much for the general results of the tabulated experiments, but we have now to consider their bearing on the question of the cause of the propagation of movement from one part to another of the plant. At the very outset there is 1The phenomenon of further action where it does occur may be best considered in connection with the events recorded in Table IX.
87 Medical Officers of the Army of India. one thing which cannot fail to strike any one who is in any degree acquainted with the subject, namely, that in the experiments in regard to which details are here given, the extension of the action under the influence of so-called stimulant agencies, such as section and heat, is curiously limited as compared with what it would appear to be in Europe according to the ordinarily accepted authorities. Now, there can be absolutely no doubt that this limited extension is the normal phenomenon in plants grown in the, open ground in Calcutta under similar con- ditions to those to which the plants of the experiments were exposed. But if this be so, the difference in degree of propagation of movement in Calcutta and Europe must be due either to differences in the degree of irritability, conduc- tivity or contractility of the protoplasm of the tissues, or to the presence of differences in degree of conditions favouring the occurrence of fluctuations in degree of fluid tension throughout the tissues. According to the former view it must be assumed that in the plants in Calcutta growing in the open ground and under conditions so favourable as to lead them to run wild and assume the character of troublesome weeds, the protoplasm is less irritable, or less conduc- tive or less contractile than it is in pot-plants in European laboratories and conservatories. The necessities of the theory remain, however, the sole ground for any such assumption. On the other hand, on the view that the propagation of movements is essentially due to extension of fluctuations in tension of fluid in the tissues, an explanation of the phenomenon is ready at hand. In plants growing as they do in Calcutta, the facilities for rapid and extensive root ab- sorption must be much greater, and the tendency to loss by evaporation much less than in plants with roots confined within limited areas of soil in pots and exposed to the relatively dry air of laboratories or conservatories.1Any inter- ference giving rise to abnormal escape of fluid from the tissues either as the result of ruptured continuity as in cases of section, or of diminished capacity to retain fluid, such as is apparently present(vide page 95) in cases of heating, must almost inevitably give rise to movements, the extension of which over larger or smaller areas of the tissue will be proportionate to the facilities for rapid removal of fluid from the. site of escape and for a renewed supply to make good the loss. In plants under conditions such as those prevailing in Calcutta we should expect, then, to find, what we actually do find, that extensive propagation of movement is a rare phenomenon as compared with what it is in European plants. It appears thus that in this instance the theory of propagation of movement as essentially dependent on protoplasmic continuity fails to furnish an explanation of a phenomenon readily explicable by the other view, and that this phenomenon is one indicating that the extension of movement is propor- tionate to extension of fluctuations in fluid contents of the tissues. 1In Calcutta, as in the lower parts of the Gangetic delta generally, we have to deal with an area in which the soil is at all times saturated to within a few feet of the surface, the atmospheric humidity con- stantly high and frequently excessive, and the rainfall great.
88 Scientific Memoirs by Taking the data in the separate tables, we find additional evidence of this in the following phenomena. In Table I there is evidence to show that the extension of movement is related to exposure to sunshine or shade, the tend- ency to extension being, under otherwise like circumstances, much greater under the former than the latter condition. But exposure to direct sunshine is cer- tainly exposure to increased evaporative loss of fluid. This, of course, needs no demonstration, but if it did, an examination of the condition of the leaves of any mass of the plant, before and after it has been exposed to direct sunshine, ought to be sufficient to meet all requirements. In a vigorous mass of the plant growing under favourable circumstances, we find that it is in the early morning, and whilst the leaves are still moist with dew, that the condition of expansion is at a maximum. As the sunshine strikes on it, and as the leaves gradually lose their adherent moisture, we find that the expansion tends to diminish, and, under continued exposure, in many cases becomes very con- spicuously less than it was. Not only do we find slow, insensibly progressive movements taking place under the influence of the sunshine, but, under certain circumstances, rapid, large movements occur similar to those resulting from so-called stimulation of the tissues. If a mass of the plant be carefully watched just as it is struck by the sunshine, such movements can frequently be observed to take place in large numbers. Especially conspicuous are those taking place in the case of young, terminal and only partially-expanded leaves situated at the tips of axes. These are, as a rule, so long as the plants remain in the shade, in a condition of extreme erection, but after a brief exposure to the sunshine in many instances, quite apart from any other appreciable exciting cause, become suddenly depressed, due to action of their primary pulvini and depression of the petioles. Similar movements may also be seen to occur, under like circumstances, in other portions of the leaves. They appear often very conspicuously in the case of leaves in a condition of partial recovery from the effects of application of heat to distal pinnules. Recovery in such cases usually commences with elevation of the petiole, followed by divergence of the pinnæ, and gradual centrifugal expansion of the pinnules. In leaves in which recovery has advanced so far in the shade that the basal pinnules have begun to diverge, the access of direct sunshine is often followed almost immediately by movements of relapse in varying degree, in some cases confined to the pinnules or secondary pulvini, but in other cases complete and involving the primary pulvinus and leading to renewed petiolar depression. Similar phenomena present themselves in the case of the leaves on detached branches kept in a saturated atmosphere beneath bell glasses, if the latter be carefully removed and direct access of sunshine permitted. Exposure to direct sunshine implies increased facility for evaporative loss, and we find from the experiments that it also implies increased tend- ency to extension of movement, The theory that extension of movement is
89 Medical Officers of the Army of India. dependent on protoplasmic continuity must assume that the sun's rays elevate the irritability, conductility, or contractility of the protoplasm without affording any evidence that they actually do so, the other theory can point to direct evidence of increased facility for evaporative loss and therefore increased faci- lity for extension of fluctuations in fluid content of the tissues running parallel with increased tendency to extension of movement. The table not only contains evidence of the association of increased tend- ency to extension of movement with exposure to conditions favouring loss of fluid from the tissues, but further a certain amount of direct evidence of the association of special limitation of extension with the presence of conditions favouring supply of fluid to, and obstructive to loss of fluid from, the tissues. In experiments 54 to 57 inclusive we have a set of cases in which the phe- nomena of movement in leaves in the shade and exposed to rain at the time of experiment are detailed. In every one of these cases we find that the phe- nomena of movement were extremely limited in their extension. In none of them did they extend beyond the injured pinna and the primary pulvinus, in two cases movement was confined to a limited number of pinnules, and in two more to a limited number of pinnules and to the primary pulvinus. The next two tables (II and III) contain evidence of a like nature. They show the phenomena presented by leaves in the shade and after recent rainfall on section of distal pinnules. In both we have clear evidence of limitation of extension of movement, and there are even indications of a direct relation between the degree of limitation and the amount of moisture to which the plants were exposed. In the case of the experiments in Table II the plants had been exposed on the previous evening to heavy showers, while those in Table III were carried out after an evening and night of continued rain, involv- ing, at all events, a greater supply of soil moisture, and in association with this we find indications of the presence of greater limitation in them than in the others. In Table II we have 20 experiments with limitation of action to the injured pinna or to it and the primary pulvinus in 10; in Table III we have 10 experiments with such limitation present in 6 cases. According to the theory of the protoplasmic origin of extension of move- ment, we find now that it must be assumed, not only that sunshine raises the activity of the protoplasm in this respect, but that the addition of moisture lowers it. According to the other theory the phenomena differ from one another in the different instances, because of the presence of demonstrable differences in the facilities for loss and supply of fluid. Table IV contains evidence of a similar kind to that afforded by the two previous tables. The series of experiments, the results of which are embodied in it, was conducted on a morning following a night in the early part of which there had been a heavy fall of rain. The morning was cloudless, but slightly hazy and the direct sunshine had not yet reached the plants. The leaves were N
90 Scientific Memoirs by in a state of full expansion and had been thoroughly washed by the rain, but the amount of moisture adhering to their surfaces was trifling as compared with that present after any normal night of heavy dewfall. The extension of move- ment was in almost every instance very limited, in no case was it complete throughout the injured leaf, and in no case was there any extension beyond it. The data afforded by Table V are to be regarded as supplementary to those in Table I, complementary to those in Tables II, III, and IV. We have here to deal with the phenomena presenting themselves in 15 cases of section of leaves from which the sunshine had already completely removed the adherent dew, but which were still in a condition of full expansion. The results contrast strikingly with those in the three previous tables. The extension of movement was much more considerable, complete movement occurring throughout the entire leaf in 13 cases, movement extending to all parts of the leaf in the remaining two, and an extension to another leaf on the axis occurring in one instance. We have here, again, evidence of the association of increased extension of movement with increased facilities for the occurrence of extensive fluctuations in the fluid contents of the tissues. The data contained in Table VI show that the phenomena following the application of heat to distal pinnules only differ in degree from those following section. They show a distinct tendency to greater extension of movement, but that, under conditions such as those prevailing at the time of experiment, the extension was in any case comparatively limited, and in the great majority of instances was confined to the injured leaf. The 40 experiments, the results of which are embodied in the table, were, in the great majority of instances, conducted in the morning, and when the plants were still loaded with dew and not as yet exposed to direct sunshine, and, under these circumstances, we find that in only 6 cases was there any extension of movement beyond the leaf to which heat was applied. The results here contrast strikingly with those in the following table. In this, Table VII of the series, we have to deal with 10 experiments. These were all conducted on a cloudy morning between 8 and 9 A.M., but before there had been any direct sunshine. The plants were in a state of full expansion, but the leaves were quite dry, there having been a minimum of dew deposited during the course of the previous cloudy night and no rain having fallen for 10 days previous. Under these circumstances, we find that the ten- dency to extension of action was manifestly increased, as in 7 instances action extended beyond the leaf primarily affected to one or more others along the course of the axis, and in every case the action, at all events, extended over the whole of the primarily affected leaf. Here the influence of direct sunshine as influencing protoplasmic activity is directly excluded, and on the proto- plasmic theory we must assume that relative desiccation gives rise to augmen- tation of the protoplasmic activity of the tissues. As in the previous cases
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 91 however, there is no proof in support of this but the necessities of the theory; whereas the phenomenon is capable of serving as direct evidence in support of the other theory. It may possibly be objected here that in cases of application of heat to pinnules there is no evident reason for the occurrence of abnormal loss of fluid to an extent corresponding to the ensuing phenomena of action, and no such manifest occurrence of escape of fluid as that taking place in cases of section in which the exudation of drops of fluid from the cut surfaces can almost always be readily recognised. The evidence that an abnormal escape of fluid does occur under the influence of heating of the tissues is, however, clearly afforded by Table X, in dealing with the details of which a further reference to this point is made. The data contained in the next table, No. VIII, of the series are of a nature which it will be hard for the protoplasmic theory to account for. In them we find that where no abnormal escape of fluid from the tissues is connected with the so-called stimulation, there is an almost absolute localisation of movement to the area directly affected. The only exceptions to the localisation which I have observed are in certain cases where action of the primary pulvinus is primarily induced. In such cases a certain degree of subsequent action in the secondary pulvini or in the pinnules may occasionally be observed to occur. The occurrence of extension of movement in these cases, as the data in the next table will show, is, however, no evidence of the occurrence of any protoplasmic extension of activity, but is, on the contrary, to be accounted for as the result of obstruction to the normal fluid supply of distal parts connected with extreme flexion of conducting tissues. Advocates of the protoplasmic theory may possibly affirm that the extreme localisation of movement in cases of purely mechanically induced action is the result of a minor degree of stimu- lation of the tissues in such cases, pure mechanical impulses being less irritant than ruptures of continuity or thermal agencies. But are we to suppose that in cases where every pinnule and all the secondary pulvini have acted under the direct influence of pure mechanical impulse there has been less stimula- tion than when the tips of one or two distal pinnules alone have been divided or heated ? According to the protoplasmic theory we must do so, as no exten- sion of action occurs in one case and extension is the normal phenomenon in the other. Here, as in all the previous cases, the protoplasmic theory requires to be supported by the assumption of a hypothetical condition; whereas the other theory can point to the presence of an actual one to account for the phenomenon under consideration. The data, embodied in Table IX, have been already alluded to in dealing with those of the previous one. They are those obtained from a series of experiments which were all conducted on one morning, but the results agree with those obtained on many other occasions so closely in regard to the N 2
92 Scientific Memoirs by main phenomena that they may, I believe, be regarded as normal. They very distinctly indicate the existence of a direct relation between the degree of petiolar depression and the extension of movement. In cases where petiolar depression was fully carried out, we find that extension of movement was greater than in cases where petiolar depression was suppressed or obstructed. Now, it is very hard to see why the degree of petiolar depression should affect the protoplasmic activity of the tissue, so as to interfere directly with the extension of stimulation of the protoplasm. It is not as though the failure in petiolar depression in these cases had been due to failure in action in the primary pulvinus, for in all these cases the primary pulvinus acted and did its utmost to secure depression. But on the theory that extension of movement is a matter of extension of fluctuations in the fluid content of the tissues, we can readily explain the phenomenon, for in cases where full depression of the petiole is free to occur there is necessarily extreme flexion of the tissues of the primary pulvinus, and such flexion must imply obstruction to the onward flow of fluid from the axis in direct proportion to the degree which it attains. But in cases in which the abnormal facilities for escape of fluid induced by experimental interference are approximately alike, as they presumably were in the set of experiments referred to in the table, the resultant phenomena ought to be in proportion to the facilities for the supply of fresh fluid to the tissues. In those cases in which there is obstruction to such renewal of fluid, the extension of movement ought to be greater than in those where obstruction is absent, or is present in minor degree, and these are precisely the phenomena which we find actually presenting themselves to observation. The phenomenon of a certain degree of action in the secondary pulvini in some cases where action of the primary pulvinus and petiolar depression have been caused by means of purely mechanical agencies which are normally followed by purely localised action, finds its explanation here. Taking the data in the tables which have now been considered as they stand, I believe them to show that while the protoplasmic theory requires a continuous series of assumptions to bring it into accordance with facts, the other theory derives direct support from them, and that the thesis of the parallelism of extension of movement with facility for the extension of fluctuation in the tension of fluid in the tissues is amply supported. The evidence in favour of the second thesis, that the direction in which propagation of movement occurs is in many cases that in which the occurrence of fluctuation in the fluid tension of the tissues can be shown to occur, whilst it cannot be accounted for as the result of protoplasmic conduction, has next to be considered. It is principally contained in Tables X and XI, showing the phe- nomena occurring in cases of the application of heat to the course of axes and those following section of the tips of axes. Table X contains details regarding the effects following the application of
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 93 heat to axes, the application in some cases being carried out by means of flame, in others by contact of heated metallic surfaces, and, in still others, by means of focussing the sun's rays on the surface with the aid of a lens. The general results were not in any case alike. There was always a more or less extensive propagation of movement along the course of the axis, but while in all cases centrifugal propagation manifested itself and, as a rule, was extensive, in only 18 cases was there any centripetal action, and in these of very limited extension only. Table XI deals with the effects of section of the tips of axes in 38 cases in which the phenomenon of propagation of action manifested itself in va- rious degrees of intensity, the extension being sometimes very limited, at others very widely diffused. In dealing with this table it must be pointed out that phenomena of propagation of movement are by no means necessarily present in every case of such distal sections. They do not by any means occur with the same constancy with which those following heating of axes occur. The table, therefore, is to be taken simply as illustrative of effects frequently following distal section, and not as illustrating an invariable phenomenon. In proceeding to consider the bearing of the data in the first of these tables on the question of the causation of propagation of movement, the most striking phenomenon presenting itself to observation is that of the rarity and limitation of centripetal as compared with centrifugal propagation. In only 18 cases was there any centripetal propagation, and in 15 of these the action was limited to a single leaf, while in the remaining 3 cases it did not extend beyond two leaves. In the same cases centrifugal propagation manifested itself along the entire course of the axis beyond the point of application in 13 cases, and in the remaining 5 the amount of centrifugal extension exceeded that of centripetal action. In the remaining 50 cases in which centrifugal propagation alone manifested itself, movements took place in all the leaves along the axis beyond the site of application in 30 cases, and in the remaining 20 cases the propa- gation was, as a rule, relatively extensive, being only in 3 instances limited to a single leaf, and in the others manifesting itself in from 2 to as many as 14 leaves. Now, how far are these phenomena explicable by the theory of propagation as the result of conduction of impulses along continuous masses of protoplasm ? If they are to be explained by it, it is necessary to assume that the protoplasm has a greater conductive power centrifugally than centripetally, for it can only be as the result of this that propagation occurs so much more frequently and ex- tensively in the centrifugal than in the centripetal direction. This difference in conductivity must, moreover, be very great to account for the great general differences in the degree of extension and for the frequency with which centri- fugal action alone manifests itself, even where the site of application is very close to an inferior leaf and relatively remote from any superior one. But there is, so far as I am aware, absolutely no independent evidence in favour of any
94 Scientific Memoirs by such assumption, whilst there are many facts to show that it is quite un- tenable. In the first place we have the phenomena presenting themselves in cases, such as those which are embodied in the earlier tables, of the occurrence of ready and certain centripetal propagation of movement under the influence of agencies acting on the terminal portions of leaves. These tables, moreover, not only demonstrate the facility with which centripetal action occurs, they also show that, under certain circumstances, it takes place more readily and fully than centrifugal action. On consulting the statement of results in experi- ments 21 to 29 of Table IV dealing with the effects following section of the tips of the central pinnules of pinnæ, it appears that centripetal action, as a rule, both preceded and was more complete than centrifugal action. The number of the cases cited is, no doubt, very limited, but the results may cer- tainly be taken as typical of those occurring under like circumstances, and dis- tinctly prove that there is no general tendency to centrifugal rather than centripetal action. If it be now objected that these experiments refer to leaves and not to axes, and that therefore they cannot be fairly cited as evidence in regard to phenomena manifesting themselves in the latter, the data in the table which has next to be dealt with afford a sufficient answer. This table, No. XI of the series, contains details regarding 38 cases in which the tips of axes were removed by careful section, and clearly shows that very extensive centripetal action readily occurs under certain circumstances. In order, then, to explain the phenomena occurring in cases of the application of heat to axes, the protoplasmic theory must assume, not merely the presence of greater centrifugal protoplasmic conductivity, but also that the directional con- ductivity of the protoplasm is modified according to the nature of the in- fluence which gives rise to movement, section of pinnules, or of the tips of axes giving rise to a greater amount of centripetal conductivity than the appli- cation of heat to axes is capable of doing. Here, again, the facts do not sup- port the theory, but, on the contrary, necessitate the introduction of unfounded assumptions to bring them into accordance with it. It now remains to determine how far the other theory accords better with the phenomena of excess of centrifugal propagation in cases of heating of axes, and at the same time of extensive centripetal propagation in cases of terminal section. There can, I believe, be little doubt that it does so. In dealing with the axes, we are dealing with a series of conducting channels along which fluid is constantly passing, the current being kept up due to constant losses of large amounts of fluid from the leaves and other distal parts and constant additions of fresh fluid from the roots. If now any abnormal agency give rise either to obstruction of such channels or to abnormal discharge of fluid from them at some point in their course, fluctuations in the amount of fluid and, therefore, fluctuations in the tension in the system of channels must be induced.
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 95 So far as abnormal escape of fluid is concerned it must tend to fluctuations of depression throughout the entire system, but specially beyond the point of escape. So far as obstruction is concerned, on the other hand, it must tend to the establishment of negative fluctuations over all the area beyond the site at which it occurs and of positive fluctuations over all centrally situated areas. Now, in cases of application of heat there is reason to believe that both obstruc- tion and abnormal escape of fluid take place. The occurrence of an abnormal escape of fluid is readily appreciable in many cases, specially where the heating is effected by a condensation of the sun's rays on the axes. In all cases, what- ever the nature of the procedure be, the primary effect of the application of heat is a discolouration of the epidermal tissue, which loses more or less the reddish tinge normal to it and becomes greener than the surrounding parts. In many cases where the sun's rays are the disturbing agent, the change, however, manifestly does not cease with this, as a conspicuous exudation of fluid, some- times to the extent of forming a large drop, takes place, and a similar phenome- non occasionally manifests itself where the heating is effected otherwise. The tissue appears then to undergo such an alteration under the influence of heating as no longer to present sufficient resistance to the pressure of the fluids within it,96 Scientific Memoirs by fluctuations will be positive; where the latter prevail, negative, and, consequently, the effect on the leaves will not be constant as in the previous case, but in one case there will be an increased tendency to the maintenance of the diurnal position, in the latter a tendency to the assumption of the nocturnal one. According to this the tendency to centrifugal propagation of movement ought to be greater than that to centripetal propagation, and this is precisely what we find to be the case as a matter of experiment. In the case of section of the tips of axes the conditions are different. Here we have to deal solely with conditions favouring abnormal escape of fluid,Medical Officers of the Army of India. 97 dry leaves. There is, however, nothing to show us that any such special irritability or contractility in the protoplasm of the main pulvinus exists at all or is specially related toage and moisture of the leaves. When we come to consider the other theory we find that it can afford an explanation both of the occurrence of premature pulvinar action generally and of the greater tendency to such action in young and moist leaves than in old and dry ones. The primary pulvinus has more to contend against in maintain- ing the expanded condition than any other part of the leaf. The masses of tissue in it determining erection of the leaf have not merely to overcome the opposing thrust of those favouring depression, but have to overcome the down- ward leverage of the heavy pinnæ situated at the distal extremity of the long petiole. In the case of the secondary pulvini, which deal with lateral movements mainly, the resistance to be overcome is merely that of the opposed masses of tissue, in that of the tertiary pulvini, the action of the masses of tissue favouring expansion is aided by, not opposed to, the action of gravity. But under these circumstances the primary pulvinus must, under certain conditions, be liable to be affected by negative fluctuations in fluid tension incapable of giving rise to conspicuous effects elsewhere; or, in other words, the primary pulvinus, under certain conditions, is adapted to play the part of the most sensitive registering apparatus of the occurrence of fluctuations in the fluid tension of the tissues. Any conditions under which the thrust of the depressant pulvinar tissues is relatively excessive or the weight of the pinnæ abnormally great must tend to increase the sensitiveness of the apparatus. But in young and moist leaves such conditions are present in high degree. In the leaves of Mimosa pudica the tissue of the under-half of the pulvinus is relatively weakest when the leaves are young and becomes gradually stronger and more resistant with increasing age. So much is this the case in certain instances that it is not uncommon to meet with old but otherwise healthy leaves in which the primary pulvinus is rigid and petiolar depression accordingly impossible. This gradual increase in relative strength in the structurally weaker masses of pulvinar tissue is not peculiar to Mimosa pudica. Much more conspicuous examples of it are afforded by other plants, such as various species of Bauhinia and by Albizzia Lebbek, in which the young leaves exhibit highly-developed nyctitropic move- ments, which gradually diminish and ultimately absolutely disappear with increasing age and thickening and rigidity of the primarily passively weaker portions of the pulvinar tissues. The existence of such a change in the relative strength of the opposed masses of tissue accounts, then, for the greater preva- lence of premature pulvinar movement in old than in young leaves, and the action of adherent moisture in increasing leverage accounts for its greater prevalence in wet than in dry ones. The phenomenon of premature pulvinar action is not the only instance of discontinuity in propagation of movement presenting itself to observation. O
98 Scientific Memoirs by Other examples frequently occur both in individual leaves and along the course of axes. Examples of such occurrence are contained in several of the tables; for example, in cases 91 and 92 of Table I, we have examples of discontinuous order in the action of the pinnules of individual pinnæ, in cases 6 and 8 of Table VII we have action in secondarily affected leaves commenc- ing in the pinnæ before any action had manifested itself in the primary pulvinus, in cases 5 and 6 we have discontinuous action along the axis as the result of the application of heat, and in Table XI we have numerous examples of a similar phenomenon as the result of section of the extremities of axes. Especi- ally in these latter cases we see that in certain cases we have to deal, not merely with discontinuity in order of occurrence of action, but with absolute discontinuity of action due to certain intermediate parts failing to act at all when others both distal and proximal to them have acted in greater or less degree. A closely related phenomenon frequently presents itself to observation under certain circumstances in cases of heating axes or section of the extrem- ities of axes where spreading action extends along the axes for a considerable distance but is confined to the primary pulvini alone. In such cases the limitation of action to the primary pulvini is readily explicable as the result of the relatively excessive strain there already alluded to, and the same holds good in regard to the numerous instances in which section of distal pinnules is followed by action confined to the injured pinna and the primary pulvinus. The cases of pure discontinuity in action in the pinnules of a pinna or the leaves on an axis are more difficult to explain, but, in the light of the facts which we have just been considering, it appears certainly more justifiable to ascribe the phenomena to differences of structural power, or in amount of strain in the different parts, than to totally inexplicable and undemonstrated differences in conductivity, irritability, or contractility in the protoplasm. In dealing with the subject of discontinuity in action there is one thing more which calls for special note, and that is the frequency with which the secondary pulvini fail to act even where complete action has taken place throughout the whole of the rest of a leaf. This is specially the case in cases of action following section of the pinnules, for in such cases, under the con- ditions in which the experiments dealt with here were conducted, action in the secondary pulvini occurs so infrequently as to be almost exceptional. In cases of action due to the application of heat to pinnules, action in the secondary pulvini is generally well pronounced, but even here exceptions frequently present themselves. This is not the only difference in the phenomena attending heating as compared with section of the pinnules. A reference to the tables will show that premature action in the primary pulvinus is relatively very rare in experiments on heating, and that there is a distinct tendency to wider propagation of action in them than in cases of section. The phenomena of recovery, too, are different according to the exciting cause. In
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 99 cases of heating of the pinnules elevation of the petiole is the primary phenomenon of recovery; in cases of section expansion of the pinnules occurs first, and the pinnæ are more or less fully expanded long before the petiole has regained its erect condition, and the same order is followed in recovery after pure mechanically induced movement of the leaves. The precise causation of these differences is a subject calling for further investigation, and I would merely, in the meantime, suggest that it is probably to be found in variations in the amount of fluid discharged from the tissues in the different classes of cases, and in variations in rate of discharge, the phenomena in cases of section corre- sponding with the occurrence of rapid escape of a limited amount of fluid, those in cases of heating with slow, protracted escape of larger quantities. The theses originally propounded having now all been considered in detail, and the evidence appearing to support them having been adduced, I have merely to add a few words in regard to a question which has more and more forced itself upon me in the course of working at the subject of the propagation of movement in Mimosa pudica. This question is100 Scientific Memoirs by they are not merely areas in which disturbances in the fluid tension of the tissues have special facility in giving rise to movements due to structural peculiarities and to relations to other masses of tissue. The areas of special irritability are ordinarily affirmed to lie in the under surface of the primary pulvinus, the inner surfaces of the secondary ones, and the upper surfaces of the pinnules and tertiary pulvini. But these are all areas in which structural peculiarities of the tissues and the mutual relations of various parts must inevi- tably favour the occurrence of movements as the result of fluctuations in fluid tension incapable of giving rise to movement in other parts in which such adjuvant agents are absent or are replaced by positively opposing ones, as they are in the upper portions of the primary pulvinus, in the outer parts of the secondary ones and in the under parts of the tertiary ones. Where negative fluctuations in fluid tension take place in the so-called irritable areas, they act in favour of the structurally stronger masses of tissue which are constantly striving to establish the passive or nocturnal position of the various parts; where- as in the other areas they act in direct opposition to them. The tendency to more certain and ready occurrence of movement as the result of influences calculated to give rise to negative fluctuations in the fluid content of the tissues, when acting on the so-called irritable areas than when acting elsewhere, can be accounted for on purely physical grounds, and does not necessarily imply the presence of any special irritability or contractility of the protoplasm of the parts. According to the theory that the occurrence of movements is due to mere physical causes, we can account for the distribution of so-called irritability. According to the theory that it is due to special functional properties in the protoplasm of the various masses of tissue, we cannot do so save by the aid of pure assumption. Whether all the movements which occur in Mimosa ought to be regarded as mere mechanical results of fluctuations in the fluid tension, as the nyctitropic ones unequivocally are, remains an open question, but there are grounds for the belief that to a great extent, at all events, they are so. It appears probable that to a very great extent the so-called movements of irritation differ merely in degree, and not in kind, from common nyctitropic ones, the difference lying merely in the degree of rapidity with which the movements are carried out. In the case of the leaves of Mimosa pudica, just as in the case of leaves in which all conspicuous movements are of a purely nyctitropic character, the displacement of the various parts is due to the opposition of masses of tissue differing from one another in their structural strength and power of absorption of fluid, those which possess the greatest passive structural strength having the least capacity for absorption and vice versâ. Due to this the relative strength of the various masses differs at different times under the influence of different conditions, and corresponding changes take place in the position of the parts on which they work. During the night there is a general diminution in
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 101 the fluid content of the tissues and hence the structural stronger masses, although absolutely weaker then than during the day become relatively stronger, and therefore the nocturnal position of parts is always more or less that which they make for. Under the influence of light the structurally weaker masses attain their maximum of relative strength, because of the greater absorption of fluid which they are capable of due to the larger amount of active elements, and specially of chlorophyll containing elements which is present in them than in the opposed masses, and which determines excessive absorption either as a direct result of light stimulation, or as the result of the development of specially absorptive matters by the protoplasm under the influence of such stimulation. The position of the various parts is at any time one due to equilibrium between the opposing masses of tissue, and movements result whenever this equilibrium is disturbed by alterations in their fluid tension. In ordinary nyctitropic leaves facilities are not provided for the occurrence of rapid fluctuations of fluid tension in the tissues, and hence the movements are normally of a slow and insensible character only manifesting themselves under the prolonged influence of con- dition determining general changes in amount of fluid content of the entire plant. In the case of Mimosa the structural peculiarities in the opposing masses of tissue determining the position of the various parts are such as to permit of very rapid redistribution of large masses of fluid, and hence a possibility arises for the occurrence, not merely of movements of the ordinary nyctitropic type, but of rapid movements connected with fluctuations in fluid-content too slight and transitory to be capable of producing appreciable effects apart from such facilities. The equilibrium between the opposing masses of tissue in Mimosa is much more unstable than it is in common nyctitropic tissues due to the presence of structural peculiarities, and in connection with this we find corre- sponding differences in the character of the movements. The instability of diurnal equilibrium in Mimosa is further increased by the exceptionally high fluid tension, throughout the plant, which is maintained, in spite of the con- stant loss of large quantities of fluid, by the absorption of equally large quantities by the roots. In other words, the diurnal condition of the leaves in Mimosa pudica is determined by the equilibrium of opposing masses of tissue. But this equilibrium is extremely unstable, as it is only maintained as the result of extreme fluid tension in masses of tissue of very different structural power, in a system from which constant losses of fluid are taking place and in which the structural peculiarities of the parts directly concerned in maintaining the expansion of the leaves afford special facilities for the occurrence of rapid local redistribution of fluid. Under such circumstances we should expect to find that fluctuations in fluid tension incapable of giving rise to conspicuous movements in common nyctitropic leaves are capable of doing so here, and this we find to be actually the case. In fine, the position of expansion of the leaves of Mimosa [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75004329.tif]
102 Scientific Memoirs by pudica is one of exceedingly unstable equilibrium dependent on the opposed tendencies of different masses of tissue which tend in one case to establish the nocturnal, in the other the diurnal, position of the various parts. The excessive instability of the equilibrium is due, first, to the extreme fluid tension on which it depends, and which is only maintained so long as there is a constant supply of fresh fluid added to the tissues to make good the constant losses due to exces- sive transudation, and, second, to the presence of structural differences in the opposed tissues specially facilitating the occurrence of diminutions in fluid tension in those which make for the diurnal position. The conditions are such that very slight fluctuations in fluid tension are necessarily adapted to give rise to extensive displacements of the various parts of the leaves, so that it appears doubtful whether it be necessary in any case to assume the occurrence of any active protoplasmic contraction in order to account for the motorial phenomena. CALCUTTA; The 14th April 1887.
Medical Officers of the Army of India . 103 TABLES. TABLE I.104 Scientific Memoirs by TABLE 1.Medical Officers of the Army of India 105 TABLE 1.106 Scientific Memoirs by TABLE I.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 107 TABLE I.108 Scientific Memoirs by TABLE I.Medical Officers of the Army of India . 109 TABLE I.110 Scientific Memoirs by TABLE I.Medical Officers of the Army of 111 TABLE II.112 Scientific Memoirs by TABLE II.Medical Officers of the Army of India . 113 significant when compared with those in the succeeding one. There is a general resemblance in the phenomena in both, just as there was a general resemblance in the conditions to which the plants were subject at the time of experiment. There are at the same time differences in details of action corresponding with details in the external conditions. When the experiments included in Table III were carried out, the amount of soil moisture and of water on the leaves was much greater than when those of the present table were conducted, and coincid- ing with this we find indications of diminished tendency to; extension of action, and increased tendency to early action in the primary pulvinus. This will appear more clearly if the results in these respects are tabulated alone:114 Scientific Memoirs by TABLE III.Medical Officers of the Army of India . 115 TABLE. IV.116 Scientific Memoirs by TABLE IV.Medical Officers of the Army of India . 117 TABLE IV.118 Scientific Memoirs by of moisture, but the leaves were not weighted by it, and the direct sunshine had not yet impinged on the brake. There was an abundant supply of root moisture, slight evaporation, and an absence of extraneous strain on the primary pulvini coincident with very limited extension of action and delay in the action of the primary pulvini. TABLE V.Medical Officers of the Army of India . 119 of the plant had been for some time exposed to strong, direct sunshine. Under such circumstances, there was much more complete and extensive action than under the conditions present in the case of the experiments of the preceding table, the cut leaves acting completely in 13 of the 15 cases, and action extend- ing to a second leaf in one. TABLE VI.120 Scientific Memoirs by TABLE VI.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 121 TABLE VI.122 Scientific Memoirs by TABLE VI.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 123 TABLE VII.124 Scientific Memoirs by TABLE VIII.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 125 TABLE VIII.126 Scientific Memoirs by TABLE IX.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 127 TABLE IX.128 Scientific Memoirs by TABLE X.Medical Officers of the Army of India 129 TABLE X.130 Scientific Memoirs by TABLE X.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 131 TABLE X.132 Scientific Memoirs by TABLE X.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 133 TABLE X.134 Scientific Memoirs by TABLE XI.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 135 TABLE XI.136 Scientific Memoirs by TABLE XII.Medical Officers of the Army in India. 137 Action in the primary pulvinus preceding centripetal action in the cut pinna appears to be the normal phenomenon under certain conditions. It may be looked for as almost certain to occur in young, heavy leaves, in which, from the position and direction of the petiole, a special strain is evidently exerted on the primary pulvinus in maintaining the erect position. In old heavy leaves, spe- cially if loaded with dew or rain, similar phenomena frequently manifest them- selves. They do not, however, occur with such constancy as in the case of the young leaves. This is to be credited to the alteration in the character of the pulvinar tissues accompanying increased age. In the leaves of mimosa pudica the tissue of the under-half of the primary pulvinus is relatively weakest when the leaves arey oung and becomes gradually stronger and more resistant with increasing age. So much does this take place in certain cases that it is not uncommon to meet with old but otherwise healthy leaves in which the primary pulvinus has become rigid and in which accordingly petiolar depression is impossible. This increase in strength in the normally weakest tissue with in- creasing age is not peculiar to the pulvini of Mimosa pudica, much more con- spicuous examples of it are present in other plants. For example, in Bauhinias and in Albizzia Lebbek the young leaves exhibit extreme nyctitropic move- ments which gradually diminish and ultimately absolutely disappear with increas- ing age and thickening and rigidity of the primarily passively weaker portions of the pulvinar tissues. TABLE XIII.138 Scientific Memoirs by, Medical Officers of the Army in India. TABLE XIII.Note on some Aspects and Relations of the Blood-organisms in Ague. BY H. V. CARTER, M.D., LOND., PRINCIPAL AND PROFESSOR OF MEDICINE, GRANT COLLEGE, BOMBAY. Respecting abnormal aspects of the blood in fevers termed " malarial," no fresh information had been acquired of late; nor had the bacillary structures, described to me at Rome in 1880-81 by Professors T. Crudeli and Marchiafava, been witnessed subsequently at Bombay; and hence this subject (others inter- vening) had remained in abeyance until the present year, when the striking con- firmation of Dr. Laveran's researches by Professor Osler, published in the British Medical Fournal of 12th March 1887, compelled, as it were, renewed atten- tion. In July last, I therefore regularly examined the blood of a man affected with quartan ague (case No. 1 below), and detecting in it at fever-periods many pigmented spherules, I next found (in case No. 2) the equally characteristic crescentic bodies; after which further enquiry was continued until October, with the results now noted.1 It has thus been already ascertained that in Western India the so-termed " hæmatozoa of malaria, " are readily to be discerned; and, as this datum will doubtless apply to India generally, the conclusions arrived at here, as well as elsewhere, can be tested without delay. Dr. A. Laveran's original work, the " Traité des Fiévres palustres, Paris, 1884," contains a full account of his " microbe du paludisme " in its ordinary free forms, all of which I have seen; and, subsequently, to those Algerian dis- coveries of 1880-81, Dr. Marchiafava and several observers in Italy have added to the list of " malaria-organisms " other minuter forms sessile within the red blood-discs, which Dr. Osler in America also fully recognises, and which to a certain extent have been verified here. While so far in accord, the results newly acquired at Bombay yet differ in some respects, and will therefore be given in detail: the kind and source of data being first stated, next the organisms described, and lastly some of their rela- tionships discussed. 1During November some further data were acquired, which are alluded to in a Note at the end. U
140 Scientific Memoirs by I.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 141 should entail a positive diagnosis of actual malarial infection; and were the affirmative strictly maintained, I doubt not some of the instances above would be differently estimated, and the asterisk numbers be correspondingly increased. This qualification (and it may be there are others) it is right to mention here; and the remark applies also to series B, wherein some cases affected with a " malarious taint" (so called) must on current views have been likewise in- cluded. Adverting now to the positive instances, I note that in the 9 examples 2 of intermittents showed pigmented spheroids so few and seldom that it will suffice to mention the fact; both, clinically, being of mild and irregular illness. The remain- ing 7 were under continuous daily observation from three to six weeks, or more, and were closely watched: all being adult males, as regards history, aspect, and severity of illness none were obviously peculiar (only that quartan ague is sel- dom seen at Bombay); none were fatal, or complicated with marked local in- flammation; and, briefly, their ascertained blood-state alone served as a distinctive feature. None were first attacks, and none were seen at early stage of illness. The intensity, form, and duration of fever were varied; and once no actual pyrexia was ever present. The general condition of patients was fair or even good, and but twice seriously impaired; the splenic enlargement being never extreme, and uneasiness always either moderate or slight. The quartan ague of No. I was typical, and distinct quotidian and tertian paroxysms were watched in Nos. 3 and 4. Treatment by quinine prior to admission was usually denied, and sub- sequently this drug was purposely withheld so long as deemed desirable. If these instances be few in number, still they are all genuine and unselected represent- atives of ordinary experience; and the study of each being more sustained than in records I have met with, the results attained seem as trustworthy as could be expected in so plain a research. The notes following are much condensed, and they are arranged so as to permit of independent judgment and future compa- rison. These seven patients were 203 days in hospital (of which 40 fever and 163 non-fever days); and their blood was examined, commonly twice and frequently oftener, on 127 days (of which 29 fever and 98 non-fever days); blood organisms being found on 109 days, and not seen on 18 days of later convalescence after fever. CASE I.142 Scientific Memoirs by to 5 grains for eight days, the man begged discharge(cured)twenty days after the last febrile paroxysm, and 40 after admission. At first, the area of splenic dulness measured about 5 square inches, finally becoming nearly normal. The blood was examined on twenty-six days, viz., about dates of every relapse, also during the apyretic intervals, and often subsequent to the latest paroxysm seen. At febrile periods, pigmented spheroids, both sessile and free, became numerous with the onset of fever, the free organisms breaking up and dispersing during and after the acme of pyrexia; and at apyretic intervals, only some pigmented leucocytes might be seen in the blood. At no time, in this case, were the crescentic bodies found; but on the third day, after the last paroxysm of fever (quinine previously given), I detected active, flagellated spherules in the blood (t. 98Medical Officers of the Army of India. 143 The spleen became decidedly again enlarged144 Scientific Memoirs by 6. Continued (remittent) malaricus fever.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 145 lung intervening. During this period, and until his discharge, eight days later, the man seemed to rally very slowly; and though taking food fairly, he lost 10 lbs. in weight. Quinine with salines, and locally mild mercurial applications, were ordered. As compared With No. 6, the resemblance was at first considerable, but more pronounced were the marks of blood-contamination sequelar to the malarial: as, in that instance, the original infection seems to have been acquired outside Bombay, since the man was said to have had severe fever in his native town a month previous to his leaving for the capital. The blood was for a fortnight carefully scrutinised twice daily, or oftener. Upon admission I found some crescents and spherules, with many deeply pigmented endothelial cells and leucocytes, and numerous intra-disc pigment-forms showing apparent transitions to free organisms. During the next four days aspects were similar, the dense melanic masses diminishing daily, crescents well formed, and with fewer of them on the 13th and 14th date. I noted several free small spheroids containing pigment particles in such active movement as suggested their recent connection with the flagellated state; but this con- dition was not actually witnessed until the 15th, or five days after full decline of fever. On the succeeding five days there were seen spherules, crescents, and pigmented leuco- cytes, with latterly some free indigo-tinted granules: ordinary pale cells were frequent in the blood and small plasm-clumps. With the slight pneumonic attack the organisms became fewer, and they finally disappeared about eleven days after the man's admission: in detail I could not connect their persistence and decline with any of the local or general symptoms contemporarily observed. II.146 Scientific Memoirs by appearances similar to the above may all be met with; and, in addition, I noticed others probably unconnected with the pigmented bodies, such as active pale coc- cus-like granules, and even more striking heavings of the red-disc due to internal amæba-like masses (vide Plate IX A, Figs. 5 and 6). None of these aspects are attended with actual pigmentation, and if the formation of dark granules within or from the hæmoglobin of the discs be regarded as a mark of the malaria- organism, the following would be the more characteristic :Medical Officers of the Army of India. 147 granules which are rounded, isolated, almost opaque, and of tint a deep orange- brown, in the aggregate seeming black: they are unaffected by drying and the ordinary re-agents, and when quiescent are arranged as clumps, streaks, or rings, of varying complexity. Less uniform and much larger masses of pigment ("melanine" so called) may be seen, either free or usually inclosed in leucocytes and endo- thelial scales: the particles of indigo hue were oftener free, but sometimes also enclosed: the structure of these coarser pigments seems colloid rather than crystalline. 1. The spheroidal or globular bodies were rather the commonest seen: their dimensions varyfrom about1/10,000 inch to 1/3,000 inch (2.5 µ to 8.5 µ); contour defined, and aspect colourless bright and nearly clear, or slightly granular within: their shape round or ovoid, in the fresh state varying temporarily from slow amæboid movements, and apparent transitions towards the rod-form may also occur: they are either flagellated or bare. In ordinary specimens of fresh blood these bodies appear bare, and the smaller forms may always be so; the pigment granules within, more or less numerous and clustered, presenting only a languid motion, irregular or intermitting, and gradually ceasing after some hours: but when of dimensions approaching the smaller blood-discs, and specially when displaying active pigmental movements internally, it is likely that the bare spherules had lately been flagellated. The number present in the field may be 1 to 6, or not more may be seen in the whole specimen of a hundred microscope-areas: there is no tendency to aggregate, but some adhesiveness is manifest in a clinging to the glass: a proper motive power seems absent. While preserving somewhat their contour on drying, it is doubtful if they possess a distinct coat or envelope; but, as would appear from the freedom with which the pigment-granules move within, the interior may be semi-diffluent and though not distinctly fibrillar yet possibly contractile, since such inner movements are often defined, regular, and intermittent for a short time, after which they cease with the assumption of a quasi-rigid and cadaveric aspect. Flagellated spherules. 148 Scientific Memoirs by was rarely seen quite untrammeled; and the flagella being translucent, their number, arrangement, and length could seldom be clearly made out. Ap- parently 1 to 4 or 6 (or more ?) might be present, radiating when several, and measuring about 1/1,500 inch to 1/800inch (17 µ to 32 µ) long, with a mean breadth, thickest at the root but not tapering markedly, of about 1/40,000 inch (6µ): an occasional knobbed aspect of the filaments might be due to folds or knots ensuing on whirling or lashing movements. 1In the midst of the com- motion thus arisingMedical Officers of the Army of India. 149 two or three were the flagella detectible on close scrutiny. The bare spheroids take the dyes freely and often assume a granular aspect, which may be indicative of their structure: a distinct coat is not apparent in such and the dark pigment seems rather shrunken. 2. The rod-forms are curved and rather pointed at their ends, so as to be comparable to semi-lunar, crescentic, sickle or sausage-shapes; having their pig- ment-particles aggregated about the middle; and along their concavity, the traces of a thin arched membrane: forms transitional to the spheroidal, of vary- ing length, may also be sometimes seen. Isolated and quiescent, these bodies float (Medusa-like) with the convexity upwards, and, therefore, show various degrees of curvature according to position: their length equals 1/4,000 inch to 1/25,000 inch (6 to10 µ), and their breadth the 1/10,000 inch to 1/8,000 inch (2.5 to 3.2 µ); when seemingly entire and laterally viewed, the pendant membrane mea- sures, at deepest, one to two times the breadth of the body, but it is usually shortened and shrunken, and even may not be visible: no cilium at either end was ever detected, and the free edge of the membrane is either smooth or jagged. Crescent-organisms are common; and may persist alone for weeks, even after quinine; their contour is well-defined, consistence firm and elastic, and aspect clear or at most slightly granular: though not showing any amæboid changes of form, and seemingly without a distinct envelope on their rigid exterior, yet as occurs with the spherules above described, their pigment-contents commonly manifest for a short time after withdrawal of the blood, slow movements indicating a certain diffluence and activity of the internal substance; when quiescent after some hours, the pigment may appear as a folded membrane, or as aggregated or even scattered granules. Usually free, not unfrequently the crescents are seen apposed to side or edge of the red-discs; such contact may indicate a certain adhesive tendency possibly more than is manifest in the spherules, but it is not considerable, and as regards the larger organisms seems quite incidental: as an occasional aspect, I have noted crescents partially embraced in a folding of the discs,150 Scientific Memoirs by Coloured particles of an indigo-blue tint were not infrequent at later periods, and even for days after disappearance of organisms and of the melanoid pig- ment, to whichthey seem to be a sequel: their form was minute clumps, or plates, translucent even when of deep hue, and such materials were commonly free, being apparently little attractive to the leucocytes co-present. Life-history of the Organisms. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 151 seen in either sphere or sickle; and, much earlier, the intra-disc aspects lost their definiteness, without advance. Regarding the parasitism as a whole, nothing definite has yet been learnt of the mode or time of the first introduction of germs: though, according to current views, the malarial infection can be acquired through both air and water, and this research would certainly suggest the channel of drinking-water by preference. Its prolonged duration, also, sustained by means of repeated periodic exacerba- tions, is a phenomenon now rendered explicable: and assuming still a relation- ship of organism to infection, it becomes interesting next to note a particular way in which there was brought about a subsidence of visible blood-contamina- tion, so invariable as to suggest the epithet of 152 Scientific Memoirs by resemblance to other bodies always recognised as such. Further, on account of their non-cellular character, quick transitional and motile changes, they should, I think, be regarded as "hæmatozoa" rather than "hæmatophyta": and, in particular, they might be referred to the parasitic "monads" amongst In- fusoria, nearest perhaps to the Trichomonas sanguinis of the rat and equines elsewhere alluded to in this volume. Yet the organism of ague has peculiari- ties of its own and may be more than generically diverse, its comportment at the flagellar stage departing widely, and the resting-stage, as represented by the crescentic bodies, being singularly predominant: in a sense, such curved bodies recall the sickle-shaped germs of Coccidium (of the class Sporozoa immediately below Infusoria), which, as C. oviforme, parasitically, infests the liver and intes- tines of mice and several domestic animals, not sparing man himself. This is mentioned because there are indications that several blood-infections of man causing specific disease, originate in parasites primarily lodged in the tissues and there harmless. That at present in the blood these malaria-organisms are essentially foreign, will be evident: the bright hyaline material of the spheres may offer a certain resemblance to that of leucocytes and be likewise (if less in degree) amæboid, yet their pigmentation is well-nigh characteristic, and the flagellate stage even more so: the crescents from their aspect alone are quite distinct from any normal blood-structure. In specimens of fresh blood, the spiral bacterium of man, the flagellated monad of the rat, and that of the human ague-blood, all cause by their movements appearances of commotion which it might be difficult at first sight to discriminate; but yet briefly, for after a few minutes the pig- mented spheroid loses its appendages for good, the organism of the rat endures for only a few hours, whilst the bacterium, becoming quiescent, within the same period commences to grow in the blood and may be preserved for some days. Lastly, I would note the morphological and biological identity of the ague- organism, as depicted by its discoverer Dr. Laveran in Algeria and Italy, by Dr. Osler in the United States of America, and by myself at Bombay. Though unable at present to insist upon the significance of minute blood-disc changes so much as authorities elsewhere do; yet an expression of my own agreement so far should not be omitted, as fresh testimony upholding [the distinctive characters widely displayed by the malaria-infection. NOTE.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 153 154 Scientific Memoirs by made in Italy, more especially, become confirmed, such indications will be more insisted on here, where as yet experience has led me to hesitate in adopting all their reputed specificity and pathological significance. Seemingly, the consistence and tint of blood-specimens, bears no fixed re- lation to the organisms present in the circulation. As regards relations to the general state of patientsMedical Officers of the Army of India. 155 case 4 of old quotidian ague, demonstrated the occurrence of free organisms at least, with apyrexia of 5 days156 Scientific Memoirs by not only displays wider polymorphic aspects, but also maintains a relationship to symptoms so indirect as to render its significance both restricted and pecu- liar, as compared with other infecting-organisms of either acute fever (e.g., the spirillum) or chronic disease (bacillus). It is unfortunate, so to speak, that in malarious disorders some febrile periods should prove dubious in their blood- signs; since a valid test was needed for analysis of a common fever-type here, sometimes called the "typho-malarial." My experience, hitherto, is conveyed in the two lists above (p. 140): and Dr. Laveran states that he found the microbe of paludism disappear with onset of a Medical Officers of the Army of India. 157 onwards into such (cases 6 and 7). 2. Leucocytes containing outside their nucleus black pigment-granules, few or several, having been seen in connection with free organisms and not occurring in other infections, constitute, even when alone, decisive evidence of malarial blood-deterioration: they are late pheno- mena, and may persist for some days; but they were not always visible, even concurrently with other evidence, microscopic and clinical.158 Scientific Memoirs by "typho-malarial" or "remittent," have been scrutinised in vain for pigment organ- isms in the blood, either sessile or free. It appears that other febrile re-action than the self-generated is capable of checking or interrupting the growth of malarial blood-organisms; such as symptomatic fevers and the enteric, so long as they persist, the parasites re-appearing subsequently. The blood-state of special significance alluded to above is that termed "melanæmia," and such as presented by my Nos. 6 and 7, both of which were in a critical state on admission and might have died: the minute aspect of the blood was remarkable (see Plate IX, the last figure), and nearly as pronounced as in a fatal case of "fever" acquired in Northern India, which I have elsewhere described. Therapy. Medical Officers of the Army of India. 159 a similar abortive growth took place in the other milder cases after cessation of pyrexia, and concurrent with the continued exhibition of quinine. The fact was also elicited that in every one of these five cases there happened from 2 to 5 days after the artificially induced crisis, a development of flagellated organisms in the blood, either once or repeated at 2 or 3 days160 Scientific Memoirs by or non-pathogenous according to circumstances; and a chief discrepancy revealed in the present research as needing elucidation, is, I consider, the strik- ing separation of virus and symptoms shown in the cases detailed. That a plentiful monad-infection should give rise to pronounced, and possibly periodic, disturbance of the system, is sufficiently comprehensible; and it was the partial disconnection of the phenomena, which seemed to be obscure,Medical Officers of the Army of India. 161 bolic bye-products of the parasites. Phagocytes did not, for some hours at least, seem at all inconvenienced by the spherules they so eagerly engulfed, even when flagellated. A correct identification of the ague-organism is desirable, if only as a clue to its detection outside the human body, and thereby readier eradication from the environs of dwellings. Of late it has been successively termed an alga, a fungus, sporozoon, and infusorium; if rightly the latter, water or a liquid medi- um would obviously be needed for its growth and would serve for common vehicle; in the state of sporo-cyst desication might be survived, and convey- ance by dry air-currents: dissemination by evaporation would be unlikely, less so transit in solid vapour-particles. Hitherto, the organism has not been recognised outside the human body; yet, being highly polymorphic, it might need to pass some stage of development in the exterior, possibly in certain soils or in stag- nant water, under the influence of free organic nutriment, heat, and moisture. Contagia from without enter the frame by various channels, and, multiplying, are dispersed by lymph or blood-channels; so operating, possibly other organisms besides cocci and germs or spores, as bacilli through ingesta and by way of lymph- follicles in the mucosa of the ileum. Expanding such notion, even infusoria from without, common and innocuous in the intestinal canal and ducts, might under modifying circumstances find a passage into the circulation and there display a certain virulence. And not to speculate further, it seems to me that the efficacy of measures for the removal or prevention of 162 Scientific Memoirs by contaminations being hitherto unknown, it has been impossible to conjecture how such might differ in detail from the bacterial. A hematoid (filarial) blood- contamination shows, indeed, the tendency to persist with exacerbating intervals, but its nature and parasitism are essentially diverse; and a fit comparison can be made only with the trichomonous infection of equines, described elsewhere as being attended with wasting, recurrent pyrexia, and occasional lesion limited to the vascular area proper. Study of the spirillum fever led me to remark that that pyrexial symptoms, clinically insisted on, are really more contingent than the visible blood-state; and this statement will apply, upon evidence sub- mitted, even more forcibly, to the malarial disease. The datum seems, indeed, to be comprehensive, and accordingly Medical Officers of the Army of India. 163 spleen-pulp cell in which they are imbedded. Such masses were so seldom seen free that their formation in the liquor sanguinis appeared doubtful; and I considered it more likely that such densely pigmented cells belong to the spleen, from thence entering the circulation where their presence may, it is held, lead to embolisms of serious or even fatal degree. It appeared to me physically impos- sible that these large pigment-clumps were formed by aggregation of particles derived from dead parasites; and I inferred that even if, as they seem, they be of the same material, their origin was a common and concurrent one from hæmoglobin: in the spleen each of such pulp-cells taking up and destroying numerous infected red blood-corpuscles. The data now mentioned are worthy of note, and they also serve to confirm the opinion expressed above, that the col- lateral events of visible infection, co-temporarily occurring, may be of chiefest clinical import. Secondary fever. 164 Scientific Memoirs by POSTSCRIPT.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 165 morning urine was of clear amber hue, faintly acid re-action, sp. gr. 1016, and with slighter traces of albumen. Microscopic examination of the night-urine showed the defined fawn-tinted sediment to consist of pale granular matter, a few epithelial tube-casts, phosphate- prisms, without any visible traces of red blood-discs: the supernatant fluid being also free of clot or red corpuscles, of a deep and clear 166 Scientific Memoirs by burning sensation during the acuter stages of illness. Further, assuming that the deep-red aspect of the urine was due to an abundance of urobilin pigment, it may be noted that urobilin can be formed from bilirubin, and that bilirubin is now generally supposed to be formed from hæmoglobin; such transformation being, however, commonly thought to take place within the liver, which did not appear so much implicated as the spleen in this case. A small quantity of urobilin being present in normal urine, urobilinuria has been regarded as only the exaggeration of a physiological phenomenon; and indicative of insufficiency or, if prolonged, of disorganisation of the hepatic cells. Doubtless hepatic derangement ensues on the malarial infection; yet secondarily, I should say, to the splenic; and I would connect, in this instance at least, the state of the urine with that of the blood. Ad- mittedly, the pigmented organisms were here so few that they might have been overlooked, but they were present: and the malarial nature of the blood and urine-changes which pre- vailed, was, I may add, collaterally shown by the, fact of the patientMedical Officers of the Army of India. 167 if not in favour of the prior indigenous name of "Marsh" poison, at least of a designation referring to definite conditions of soil, moisture, and water-supply. Not long since, the late sagacious Professor of Military Medicine at Netley wrote respecting the new re- searches in Europe, as follows: Description of Plate. PLATE I.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75004539.tif] Lithographed at the Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, May 1887.
1 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75004542.tif] Lithographed at the Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, May 1887.
Description of Plate. PLATE II.11 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75004554.tif] Lithographed at the Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, May 1887.
Description of Plate. PLATE III.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75004566.tif] Lithographed at the Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, May 1887.
Description of Plate VI. FIG. 1. Flower of Wrightia coccinea. " 2. The same showing fly entrapped. " 3. Stamen enlarged showing the "wings". (a) Inner surface, (b) Outer surface. " 4. The " trap " formed by the stamen's perianth cut away. " 5. The same, two of the stamens removed, to show the interior of the cone. " 6. Diagram to show the adaptation of the wings (horizontal section).
PLATE V I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75004578.tif] THE FLY CATCHING-APPARATUS OF WRIGHTIA COCCINEA. Printed. at the Lithographic Office, Survey of India Department, Calcutta. July 1887.
Description of the Illustrations. PLATE IV. FIGURES 1 AND 2. Spirillum of the rat x 800 diameters: Temperature of the rat 101.6° F. FIG. 1.PLATE IV. SPIRILLUM OF THE RAT. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75004590.tif] Chart No. I. SPIRILLAR RAT. August-September 1885. Daily observations of Temperature and Blood-state. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75004590.tif] MEMO. on Blood. + Spirillum present. ? Sp. doubtfully seen.Description of the Illustrations. PLATE V. Figures 1 to 4 form a series, all magnified 500 diameters: Figures 1 and 2 are hæmatophytes, and figures 3 and 4 are hæmatozoa, as described in the text. The blood-disc introduced in each figure will serve to aid intercomparison of the organisms. FIGURE 1.PLATE [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75004602.tif] Lithographed at the Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, December 1887.
Description of Plate VII. FIG. 1.PLATE VII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75004614.tif] Photo-etching from the original pen and ink drawings-Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, September 1887.
Description of Plate VIII. FIG 7.PLATE VIII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75004632.tif] G. Bomford, del. Photo-etching From the original pen and ink drawings-Survey of India Offices Calcutta. September 1887.
iv FIG. 13. A group of red blood-discs agitated and distorted by a slender lashing filament, which had become detached from a neighbouring flagellated body, during its brief movements under scrutiny: the thrilling aspect amongst the corpuscles was very evanescent, and being detected in two or three separate parts of the field, it seemed, that more than one flagellum was liberated or else after detachment one had continued to travel. An appearance not very rare. FIG. 14. A phagocyte containing in its interior two pigmented spheroids. FIG. 15. Melanæmia. A group of pigmented structures seen together in the blood, the day after iii an evacuated Crescent, with the pigmented spheroid body, which had thence become extruded; fresh specimen non-febrile; and numerous free organisms also present, including the flagellate. b.ii puscle itself though not pallid seemed a little shrunken, and changed its outline. Within the disc-area, the cocci became dispersed, or variously aggregated, after the manner of black pigment-granules in spherules and crescents. In the liquid medium near, free cocci were present; not arranged in cluster or chain. From Case 6 on fifth day after arrest of fever by quinine and continued exhibition of the drug: axillary t. 98.2° F., Aspect rare. Free organisms were present in the blood. FIG. 6. A red blood-disc which showed on watching active amæboid movements, such as here delineated at one instant; and pertaining apparently to a pale, finely granular, plasmic material or body, within the disc-area and clearly differentiated from the coloured portion of the corpuscle. Move- ments varied and persistent for an hour, at least, without further change; the disc was turned about, but not displaced by them. Aspect occasion- al only. Date the ninth day after arrest of fever by quinine (drug con- tinued: t. 98.6° F. Flagellate organisms seen the day before; no free organisms co-present, and none visible for remaining nineteen days of patientDescription of the Illustrations in Plate IX. THE BLOOD-ORGANISMS SEEN IN AGUE. Magnifying PowerPLATE IX. BLOOD-ORGANISMS OF AGUE A. INTRA-DISC FORMS AND ASPECTS [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75004662.tif] B. FREE FORMS a . THE CRESCENTIC [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75004662.tif] b . THE SPHEROIDAL BARE [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75004662.tif] FLAGELLATED ORGANISMS MELANÆMIA [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75004662.tif] BOMBAY, JulySCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY MEDICAL OFFICERS OF THE ARMY OF INDIA. EDITED BY SIR BENJAMIN SIMPSON, M.D., K.C.I.E., SURGEON-GENERAL WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PART III. 1887. 1. 