1/5/99 IP/QB 10 m. 91. b. SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY MEDICAL OFFICERS OF THE ARMY OF INDA. EDITED BY SURGEON-GENERAL ROBERT HARVEY, M.D., C.B., LL.D., DIRECTOR-GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL SERVICE. PART XI. 1898. 1.SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY MEDICAL OFFICERS OF THE ARMY OF INDIA. EDITED BY SURGEON-GENERAL ROBERT HARVEY, M.D., C.B., LL.D., DIRECTOR-GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL SERVICE. PART XI. 1898. 1.CALCUTTA GOVERNMENT OF INDIA CENTRAL PRINTING OFFICE, 8,PLATE I. Fig. 1. Blood of a fowl; taken immediately before the occurrence of death after intravascular injection of 0.25 gramme of dried cobra-venom. Fig. 2. Specimen of the same blood 24 hours later. Fig. 3. Blood of a fowl which was dying after the subcutaneous injection of 0.01 gramme of dried cobra-venom of which 0.00075 constituted a minimal lethal dose. Figs. 4, 5. Eosinophil corpuscles from the blood of a fowl, which was dying 27 hours after the subcutaneous injection of 0.00075 gramme of dried cobra-venom. Fig. 6. Condition of 10.5 c.c. fowl's blood, 2½ hours after mixture with 0.01 gramme of dried cobra-venom. Fig. 7. Condition of 10.5 c.c. fowl's blood, 24 hours after mixture with 0.0005 gramme of dried cobra-venom. Fig. 8. Condition of 10.5 c.c. fowl's blood, 2½ hours after mixture with 0.01 gramme of dried daboia-venom. Fig. 9. Condition of 10.5 c.c. of blood of Varanus salvator, 2 hours after mixture with 0.01 gramme of dried cobra-venom. Fig. 10. Condition of the same blood, 24 hours after the mixture had been effected. Fig. 11. Condition of the same blood, 48 hours after the mixture had been effected. Fig. 12. Condition of 10.5 c.c. of blood of Varanus salvator, 24 hours after mixture with 0.116 of dried cobra-venom. Fig. 13. Condition of 10.5 c.c. of blood of Zamenis mucosus, 24 hours after mixture with 0.01 gramme of dried cobra-venom. Fig. 14. Condition of 10.5 C.C. of the blood of Zamenis mucosus, 24 hours after mix- ture with 0.116 gramme of dried cobra-venom. Fig. 15. Condition of the same specimen of blood, 48 hours after the mixture had been effected. Fig. 16. Specimen of normal, pure blood of Zamenis mucosus, 72 hours after its remo- val from the body. Fig. 17. Condition of 10.5 c.c. of blood of a cobra, 72 hours after mixture with 0.01 gramme of dried cobra-venom. Fig. 18. Condition of 10.5 c.c. of the blood of a cobra, 24 hours after mixture with 0.116 gramme of dried cobra-venom. Fig. 19. Condition of the same specimen of blood, 48 hours after the mixture had been effected. Fig. 20. Condition of 76 C.C. of the blood of a goose. 24 hours after mixture with 0.002 gramme of dried cobra-venom.
PLATE I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002720.tif]
PLATE I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002723.tif] ACTION OF COBRA-VENOM ON THE BLOOD OF ANIMALS OF VARIOUS DEGREES OF SUSCEPTIBILITY. hromo-Photo-etching. S. I. O., Calcutta, July 1896.
PLATE II. Fig. 1. Condition of 10.5 c.c. fowl's blood, 2½ hours after mixture with 0.01 gramme of dried cobra-venom. Fig. 2. Condition of 10.5 c.c. fowl's blood, 2½ hours after mixture with 0.1 gramme of dried cobra-serum. Fig. 3. Condition of 10.5 c.c. fowl's blood, 2½ hours after mixture with 0.1 gramme of Fraser's dry antivenene. Fig. 4. Condition of 10.5 c.c. fowl's blood, 24 hours after mixture with 0.1 gramme of dried cobra-serum. Fig. 5. Respiratory property of 10.5 c.c. fowl's blood, 2, 24, 48, 72, and 96 hours after mixture with 0.01 gramme dried cobra-venom. Temperature of the period ranging between 71.2° to 89.9° F. in the open air. Fig. 6. (a ) Respiratory property of 10.5 c.c. of blood of a cobra, 24 hours after mixture with 0.116 gramme of dried cobra-venom. (b ) Respiratory property of 10.5 c.c. of blood of a dhamine, 24 hours after mixture with 0.116 gramme of dried cobra-venom. (c ) Respiratory property of 10.5 c. c. of fowl's blood, 24 hours after mixture with 0.01 gramme of dried cobra-venom. Fig. 7. Respiratory property of 10.5 c.c, of fowl's blood, 2½, 24, 48, 72, 96 and 120 hours after mixture with 0.01 gramme of dried cobra-venom. Maximal temper- ature of the Laboratory during the period =71° F. Fig. 8. Respiratory phenomena of 10.5 c.c. of fowl's blood, 2½, 24, 48 and 72 hours after mixture with 0.01 gramme of dried cobra-venom. Exposed to a temper- ature of 98° F. Fig. 9. Respiratory phenomena of 10.5 c.c. of fowl's blood,2½, 24, 48, 72, 96, 120, 144 and 168 hours after mixture with 0.01 gramme of dried cobra-venom. Maximal temperature of the Laboratory during the period=68.9° F. Fig. 10. Respiratory capacity of 10.5 c.c. of Varanus' blood, 24 hours after mixture with 0.01 gramme of dried cobra-venom. Compare fig. 6. Figs. 11. 13. Respiratory capacity of specimens of 10.5 c.c. of fowl's blood, 1½ 24, 48 and 72 hours after mixture with 1 c.c. (in fig. 11) Fraser's liquid anti- venene, and 0.1 gramme (in fig. 13) Fraser's dry antivenene and 0.01 gramme of dried cobra-venom. Fig. 12. Respiratory capacity of 10.5 c.c. of fowl's blood, 1½, 24, 48 and 72 hours after mixture with 0.01 gramme of dried cobra-venom alone. Figs. 14. 16, 17. Respiratory capacity of 10.5 c.c. of fowl's blood, 24, 48, 72 and 96 hours after mixture with 0.01 gramme of dried cobra-venom and 0.1 gramme of dried cobra-serum. Fig. 15. Respiratory capacity of 10.5 c.c. of fowl's blood, 24, 48 and 72 hours after mixture with 0.01 gramme of dried cobra-venom and 0.1 gramme of Fraser's dry antivenene.
PLATE II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002736.tif] Fig. 1 x 830. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002736.tif] Fig. 2 x 830. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002736.tif] Fig. 3 x 830. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002736.tif] Fig. 4 x 830. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002736.tif] Fig. 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002736.tif] Fig. 6. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002736.tif] Fig. 7. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002736.tif] Fig. 10. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002736.tif] Fig. 8. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002736.tif] Fig. 17. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002736.tif] Fig. 9. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002736.tif] Fig. 11. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002736.tif] Fig. 14. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002736.tif] Fig. 12. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002736.tif] Fig. 15.
PLATE II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75002739.tif] EFFECTS OF COBRA-VENOM WITHOUT & WITH ANTIVENENE & COBRA-SERUM ON THE BLOOD OF VARIOUS ANIMALS. Chromo-Heliogravure Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, July 1896.
The Physiological Action of Cobra-venom. BY BRIGADE-SURGEON-LIEUTENANT-COLONEL D. D. CUNNINGHAM. In a previous communication dealing with this subject which was published in Part IX of this Periodical, the validity of certain generally accepted theories regarding the action of cobra-venom in inducing intoxication was questioned, and certain reasons were adduced in favour of the conclusion that the primary action of the toxin was hæmatic, and not neutral; or, in other words, that the nervous phenomena, which unquestionably present them- selves during the progress of intoxication, are not dependent on any direct action of the venom on the nervous apparatus, but are the manifestation of the effects which are produced on the latter by primarily induced changes in the blood. In the following pages an attempt has been made to strengthen the evidence supporting this view and to demonstrate the following facts; first, that cobra-venom does produce certain important changes in the blood of susceptible animals with which it comes into contact either within or without the animal organism; second, that the power of the venom to induce such changes in the blood of different kinds of animals bears a direct relation to the degree to which the latter are susceptible to intoxication; third, that the diminution and ultimate abolition of lethal property, attending the prolonged exposure of venom to the influence of high temperatures, runs parallel with diminution and abolition of capacity to give rise to hæmatic change. Some evidence regarding the action of cobra-venom on blood has been already adduced in the paper which has just been alluded to; but it is to a certain extent invalidated by the fact that, in the experiments which were then under consideration, sufficient care had not been taken to discriminate carefully between phenomena attending solution of particulate elements and those connected with the occurrence of chemical change. With additional experience, however, it became clear that, whilst cobra-venom is normally endowed with the property of giving rise both to solvent and chemical changes in the blood of susceptible animals, such changes by no means manifest them- selves invariably at the same time, and that, at a period at which processes of solution of erythrocytes may have been fully carried out, there may be no appreciable evidence of any reduction in the respiratory capacity of hæmoglobin. But the occurrence of either solution or reduction to any considerable extent is accompanied by conspicuous alteration in the colour of massive specimens of blood, and hence, in any case in which such alteration manifests itself, it B
2 Scientific Memoirs by is necessary to ascertain carefully how far the phenomenon is dependent on mere solution of the bodies of erythrocytes or on this along with various degrees of reduction in the respiratory property of hæmoglobin. Consequently, almost all the experiments dealt with in the present instance included both the microscopic examination of specimens of blood, which had been fixed at various periods subsequent to contact with venom, and a corresponding study of the respiratory phenomena presented by thin films of blood under the influence of exposure to air. The treatment to which the blood was subjected in the prepar- ation of microscopic preparations, included the brief exposure of cover-glass films to the fumes of 2 per cent. solution of osmic acid, and subsequent double-staining, first with Delafield's solution of hæmatoxylin, and, second, with saturated aqueous solution of eosin. Treatment of blood with osmic acid has frequently been objected to as likely to interfere with efficient staining, but such interference apparently only arises in connection with an unnecessarily prolonged exposure to the acid, and very brief exposures, whilst completely fixative, in no way interfere with perfectly successful staining. For some time double-staining with eosin and anilin-dyes was employed, Plehn's fluid, or successive treat- ment with methylene blue and eosin being used; but the results were too uncertain to be satisfactory, and this method was consequently soon abandoned in favour of the other, which not only yields excellent contrast-effects, but is also practically free from any risk of the occurrence of discharge of the nucleo- plastic stain by the eosin. Eosin is of special value in such experiments., because it not only serves as a good contrast-stain, but also as a delicate index to the occurrence of the earlier stages of solution of erythrocytes, owing to the great affinity which it has for hæmoglobin and the consequent staining which liquor sanguinis or serum containing any appreciable quantity of the latter in solution acquires under its influence. In order to test the respiratory value of any specimen of blood, thin layers were spread out on the surface of white porcelain freely exposed to the influence of the air; and, by employing a slab, such as those which are commonly used in water-colour drawing, including a number of adjoining spaces, separated by narrow ridges, numerous specimens, treated with various quantities of venom and at various periods subsequent to treatment, could readily be compared with one another and with samples of normal blood. The following table illustrates the principal phenomena which presented themselves in eight specimens of the blood of fowls, either pure, or mixed with various quantities of distilled water corresponding with those which were em- ployed as vehicles when the blood was treated with venom, and may be taken as affording a standard of comparison with the results attending contact with the latter under otherwise like conditions:Medical officers of the Army of India. 3 TABLE I. Phenomena present in specimens of blood of fowls, alone or with the addition of water. No. of Experi- ment. Nature of specimen. Coagulation. Colour. Solution of bodies of erythrocytes. Reduction in respira- tory property of hæmoglobin. Putrefaction. I Blood alone Immediate: No contraction of clot. 21 days later; surface scarlet; substance plum-coloured. Erythrocytes well pre- served 21 days. Entirely absent 21 days later. Absent 21 days later. II Blood alone Immediate: very considerable contraction: serum, after 24 hours, limpid, straw-coloured. 24 hours later; surface scar- let; substance, plum-colour- ed. No solution, 48 hours later. Entirely absent 24 hours. III Blood, 10.5 c. c. Water, 1 c. c. Firm within 2 minutes: 24 hours later, contraction con- siderable; serum, 244 Scientific Memoirs by The phenomena characteristic of this series of specimens were the following: rapid and firm coagulation; conspicuous contraction of the resultant clot; pro- longed retention of a vivid scarlet tint by the surface, and of a plum-coloured one by the substance of the mass; prolonged preservation of the bodies of the erythrocytes; and, finally, absence of any appreciable reduction in the respiratory capacity of the hæmoglobin until very conspicuous evidences of advanced putrefactive decomposition had made their appearance. Deviations from the standard were, however, present in certain instances. In specimen I there was an entire and permanent absence of any appreciable contraction of the coagulum, but this may be readily accounted for, because, as Lord Lister long ago demonstrated, contraction is absent in cases in which no septic organisms have gained access to the fluid, a condition which the behaviour of the material in other respects showed to have been present in this instance. Minor variations were present in the case of the remaining specimens, and specially in those to which water had been added, in respect to the precise period at which appreciable evidences of the occurrence of processes of solution of erythrocytes made their appearance, and may fairly be ascribed to the presence of corresponding variations in degree of septic contamination. Even in those specimens in which processes of solution set in relatively early, there was no indication of any coincident appreciable reduction of the respiratory property of the hæmoglobin, but this cannot be regarded as evidence that the relative acceleration of solution was not determined by the incidence of putrefac- tion, for, when the phenomena attending contact with venom come to be considered, it will be found that the earlier stages of putrefactive change, in place of favouring the occurrence of reduction, are in fact accompanied by a recovery of respiratory property from the loss primarily induced by the action of the venom. Table II illustrates the phenomena characteristic of twenty-five experiments in which various proportions of cobra-venom were brought into contact with specimens of the blood of common domestic fowls.
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 5 TABLE II Phenomena present in specimens of blood of fowls treated with various quantities of Cobra-venom. No. of Experi- ment. Nature of specimen. Coagulation. Colour. Solution of bodies of erythrocytes. Reduction in respiratory property of hæmoglobin. Putrefaction. I Blood, 76 c. c. Venom, 0.001 gramme. Water, 1 c. c. Slow; clot tremulous; a large amount of deep red opaque serum in 24 hours. Black in substance, dull red on surface in 24 hours. Almost quite complete within 24 hours. Perceptible in 48 hours. II Blood, 76 c. c. Venom, 0.002 gramme. Water, 1 c. c. Loose, 5 minutes; tremu- lous, 24 minutes; firm, 32 minutes. Substance of clot rapid- ly darkening; black in 24 hours. About half of the erythrocytes dissolved within 24 hours, and remaining ones deform- ed or partly dissolved. Absent, 24 hours; slight, 72 hours, absent, 96 hours. III Blood, 9 c. c. Venom, 0.002 gramme. Water, 1 c. c. Firm, 4 minutes; no con- traction. Black, 1 hour Complete, 1 hour Perceptible, 24 hours. IV Blood, 9 c. c. Venom, 0.00075 gramme. Water, 0.75 c. c. 10 minutes; no contrac- tion of clot. Darkening very rapidly; almost black in 52 minutes; perfectly black in 2½ hours. Almost complete, 1 hour; complete, 3 hours. Distinct in 24 hours; very con- siderable, 48 hours; almost absent, 72 hours; entirely absent, 96 hours. V Blood, 11 c. c. Venom, 0.0005 gramme. Water, 0.5 c. c. 4 minutes; a considerable amount of deep red serum in 24 hours. Black within 24 hours. Considerable, 2 hours; almost complete, 24 hours. Barely perceptible, 24 hours; absent, 72 hours. VI Blood, 9 c. c. Venom, 0.002 gramme. Water, 1 c. c. 15 minutes; no contrac- tion. Black in 3 hours. About half of the erythrocytes completely dissolved and the rest deformed, 1 hour; complete, 24 hours. Very conspicuous, 24 hours; almost complete, 48 hours; complete, 72 hours; greatly diminished, 120 hours. Slight odour, 96 hours. VII Blood, 10.5 c. c. Venom, 0.001 gramme. Water, 1 c. c. Absent up to 2o minutes; clot soft, incoherent; no contraction. Black in 24 hours Very considerable, 2 hours; very greatly increased, 24 hours. Barely perceptible, 24 hours; absent, 72 hours. VIII Blood, 10.5 c. c. Venom, 0.001 gramme. Water, 1 c. c. Within 6 minutes; no contraction. Darkening rapidly; black 24 hours. Very extensive in 2½ hours; complete, 24 hours. Absent, 24 hours. IX Blood, 10 c. c. Venom, 0.01 gramme. Water, 1 c. c. Within a few minutes; no contraction. Black in 3o minutes. Complete in 50 minutes. Complete in 24 hours.
6 Scientific Memoirs by TABLE II.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 7 XX Blood, 10.5 c. c. Venom, 0.01 gramme. Water, 1 c. c. Immediate, clot soft; no contraction. Black, 3 hours Complete, 3 hours Great, 24 hours; absent, 48 hours. XXI Blood, 10.5 c. c. Venom, 0.01 gramme. Water, 1 c. c. Almost immediate; no contraction. Darkening rapidly; black, 16 hours. ...... Very conspicuous, 16 hours; diminished, 20 hours; absent, 40 hours. XXII Blood, 9 c. c. Venom, 0.01 gramme. Water, 1 c. c. Immediate; clot soft; a certain amount of con- traction. Almost black, 20 minutes ...... Almost complete, 24 hours; diminished, 48 hours; absent, 96 hours. XXIII Blood, 9 c. c. Venom, 0.01 gramme. Water, 1 c. c. Loose, 10 minutes; firm, 33 minutes; no contrac- tion. Black, 33 minutes Complete, 33 minutes Very great, 24 hours; diminished 48 hours; almost absent, 72 hours; absent, 96 hours. XXIV Blood, 9 c. C. Venom, 0.01 gramme. Water, 1 c. c. Slow and imperfect; no contraction. Black, 11 minutes Complete, 35 minutes Almost complete, 24 hours; absent, 48 hours. XXV Blood, 9 c. c. Venom, 0.1 gramme. Water, 1 c. c. Very soft and loose, 3 hours; no contraction. Almost black, 5 minutes. Complete, 5 minutes Almost complete, 3 hours; very greatly diminished, 24 hours. Putrefactive odour and gaseous bubbles; present, 24 hours.
8 Scientific Memoirs by These experiments were conducted as follows:Medical Officers of the Army of India. 9 One of the most conspicuous of the phenomena attending the addition of cobra-venom to blood is a very rapid alteration in the colour of the latter. Normal specimens of blood do undergo a certain amount of change in colour for a short time after leaving the vascular system, those portions of them which are in direct relation to air, becoming vivid scarlet, and those which are not so gradually acquiring a bright plum-colour, but subsequently they remain, unaltered in tint until putrefactive change has been established for some time. This, however, is not the case in specimens which have been treated with venom for even very small ratios of the latter suffice to induce such rapid darkening, that, within the course of a very short time, the substance of the mass becomes prac- tically black and the surface of a very deep lake hue. Such changes and the rapidity and extent to which they are carried out serve as indices to the rate and degree of solution of the bodies of the erythrocytes, and, on examining any speci- men of blood in which they may have been fully developed, it will be found to con- sist of a homogeneous fluid, saturated with haemoglobin and containing the per- sistent leucocytes and, where such bodies are normally present, crowds of ery- throcytic nuclei. This alteration in colour is apparently quite independent of the occurrence of any loss in the respiratory property of hæmoglobin and entirely owing to effects produced on the refractive and reflective qualities of the fluid by the solution of so great an amount of its particulate contents, for thin films of specimens of blood, in which it has for sometime been fully developed, rapidly acquire a vivid scarlet hue on free exposure to air. The process of solution does not appear to be affected to any considerable extent by conditions of temperature and thus differs from that which determines reduction in the respiratory property of the hæmoglobin and which is unequivo- cally accelerated by heat. The rate at which solution progresses and the degree to which it attains vary with the ratio of venom to blood; complete or almost complete solution occurs almost immediately where the ratio of venom is rela- tively high; the process is more slowly but equally completely effected where the ratio is lower, and still more slowly and imperfectly carried out where the mass of blood to be acted upon becomes very excessive. The phenomena are such as would seem to indicate the presence of a certain ferment-property in the venom whereby, up to a certain point, small ratios of it are able gradually but eventually to occasion the same effects as those which are suddenly and explosively occasioned by the access of larger ones. The solvent action of cobra-venom on mammalian blood is just as energetic as it is on that of birds, but the blood of birds presents certain special advan- tages in the study of the progress of the process, because the nucleation of the erythrocytes and the fact that the nuclei escape solution, afford an index to the occurrence of degrees of change which might otherwise readily escape notice. In the case of mammalian blood extensive processes of solution may take place c
10 Scientific Memoirs by without detection because, until they have led to a very considerable reduction in the total number of intact erythrocytes or to appreciable staining of the fluids with free hæmoglobin, there is nothing specially to attract attention to their occur- rence. But where the erythrocytes are nucleated, any processes of solution must necessarily lead to corresponding increase in the number of free nuclei, so that the degree to which the latter are present in any specimen must serve as an index to the occurrence of even relatively limited processes of solution. The effects of the solvent action of the venom on the bodies of the erythro- cytes in specimens of birds' blood outside the body are illustrated in Figs. 611 Medical Officers of the Army of India. the persistence of the reductive change are alike essentially affected both by conditions of temperature and by the occurrence of putrefaction. The facts that the mixtures of blood and venom were not invariably exposed to like condi- tions of temperature; that incipient putrefaction is opposed to the manifestation of the toxic reduction; and that the extent and kind of septic contamination must necessarily have varied in individual instances, satisfactorily account for the want of any precise uniformity of results throughout the entire series of ex- periments. Elevation of temperature accelerates the development of toxic reduction, and, hence, mixtures of blood and venom of a given ratio exposed to relatively high temperatures will show appreciable evidences of reduction at periods at which corresponding mixtures exposed to lower temperatures entirely fail to do so. The differences which arise in this way are not dependent on any differences in the quality of the venom, but are solely owing to the influence of external. con- ditions, and, were it possible to acquire truly aseptic preparations, uniform results might be obtained in the case of any given stock of venom, simply by means of exposing mixtures of like ratio to like conditions of temperature and noting the results at like times. But the matter is further complicated because, as has been already pointed out, truly aseptic preparations of venom cannot be obtained save by the use of means affecting both toxic property and capacity for inducing solution, and we must, therefore, constantly allow for the occurrence of effects induced by putrefactive change, the progress of which is influenced not merely by conditions of temperature, but by the number and nature of septic organisms present in individual instances. The occurrence of putrefaction, like that of reductive change in the hæmoglobin, is accelerated by elevation in temperature, but the rate at which it will progress at any given temperature must also be influenced by the extent and nature of the septic contamination, and consequently the mere exposure of mixtures of blood with like ratios of venom of a given stock to like conditions of temperature during like periods will by no means necessarily ensure like degrees of putrefaction in them. The earlier stages of the putrefactive process in blood give rise to changes tending to mask the reductive effects of cobra-venom on the respiratory property of hæmoglobin, and it appears to be quite possible that, when septic contamination exceeds certain limits and conditions otherwise favour the rapid incidence and progress of putre- faction, any appreciable evidence of toxic reduction may fail to appear through- out the entire course of an experiment. The reductive effects of the venom on any portion of blood are only fully manifested in the absence of putrefaction, and, on the onset of the latter, any reduction which may previously have been induced by the venom undergoes a gradual diminution and is ultimately abolished. Owing to this, mixtures of blood and venom, which at a certain time have shown unequivocal evidences of reduction, may somewhat later entirely fail to do so, and the precise period at which the evidence of toxic reduction is greatest will in any case c 2
12 ScientificMemoirs by be determined, not merely by the temperature to which the mixture of blood and venom has been exposed, but by the extent to which it was originally septi- cally contaminated and the nature of the septic organisms constituting the contamination. Elevation of temperature within certain limits unequivocally favours the occur- rence of the toxic reduction, but it also accelerates putrefactive change, and, under these circumstances, the antagonism of the two processes must have led to even greater confusion than is actually likely to arise, had it not been that conditions of temperature are apparently more influential in affecting the pro- gress of putrefaction than that of toxic reduction. In consequence of this, at rela- tively low temperatures, the process of reduction tends to outstrip that of putre- faction and the full effects of the reductive action of the venom have time to mani- fest themselves before those of incipient putrefaction come into play to mask them. Owing to the antagonistic actions of the toxin and of septic contaminations and to the relations of toxic reduction and putrefactive change to conditions of tem- perature, mixtures of blood and venom exposed to relatively low temperatures afford clearer evidences of the occurrence of toxic reduction than corresponding mixtures exposed to higher temperatures are likely to show, and, where extensive septic contamination and relatively high temperatures co-exist, there may even be little or no appreciable evidence of toxic reduction at any time, Taking these facts into consideration, it is clear that any exact uniformity in the nature of the results of the experiments embodied in the Table cannot reasonably be looked for, and that the data as they stand are really indicative of the presence of a specific reductive action in the venom on the respiratory property of hæmo- globin, and of the fact that the onset of putrefaction gives rise to changes tending to neutralise and finally abolish toxic reduction. Whether or how far the phenomenon of recovery of respiratory property is dependent on decomposition of certain constituents of the venom remains, however, in the meantime a matter of conjecture. The facts that the progress of the toxic reduction is affected by conditions of temperature, and its persistence determined by the absence of putrefactive change, appear to afford a satisfactory explanation why certain competent observers, such as Mr. Pedler,*should have failed to detect its presence, for, at low temperatures, their examinations may readily have been undertaken at periods before any appreciable reduction had been effected, and, at high ones, at times at which all evidences of reduction had already been obscured or even totally abolished owing to the incidence of putrefaction. The actions of cobra-venom and of putrefactive change in giving rise to reduction and recovery of respiratory property in mixtures of blood and venom exposed to different thermic conditions are illustrated in Figs. 5,7, 8 and 9 of Plate II. Fig. 5 shows the phenomena of respiratory property exhibited by 10.5 c.c. of *Report of the Indian Commission for the investigation of snake poisons.
13 Medical Officers of the Army of India. fowl's blood at intervals of two, twenty-four, forty-eight, seventy-two and ninety-six hours after mixture with 0.01 gramme of dried cobra-venom during a period when the temperature of the laboratory in which the experiment was conducted was comparatively high, that of the outer air having had a range of 71.2° to 89.9° F., and demonstrates that, under these conditions, an absolute loss of respiratory property had occurred within the course of twenty-four, and complete recovery within ninety-six, hours from the time at which the mixture was effected. Figs. 7 and 9 show the results of similar experiments in which the maximal laboratory temperatures to which the mixtures of blood and venom were exposed were respectively 71° F. and 68.9° F., and very clearly illustrate the delay both in reduction and recovery of respiratory property in the hæmoglobin incident on depression of temperature, In the experiment illustrated by Fig. 7 maximal reduction was present forty-eight hours, and complete recovery one hundred and twenty hours, after the mixture had been made, whilst in that corresponding to Fig. 9 these phenomena presented themselves respectively at 72 and 168 hours. Fig. 8 illustrates the phenomena which characterised an experiment, which was conducted coincidently with that corresponding to Fig. 9, but under exposure to a temperature of 98° F. in an incubator, and demonstrates the acceleration of both reduction and recovery of respiratory property under such circumstances; very appreciable reduction having been present within two and half hours, and partial recovery within twenty-four hours from the beginning of the experiment. The results of the experiments which have hitherto been considered appear to afford conclusive evidence that cobra-venom possesses a very great power of giving rise to very important changes in specimens of blood with which it comes into contact outside the body, and it now remains to be seen how far there is any evidence of the occurrence of similar changes when the contact takes place within the vascular system. The phenomena which presented themselves in the course of a series of experiments dealing with this question are illustrated in the following table:14 Scientific Memoirs by TABLE III15 Medical Officers of the Army of India. TABLE III16 Scientific Memoirs by to blood was relatively high, it underwent rapid brightening on exposure to air. This, of course, clearly showed that the original tint was not entirely dependent on any actual loss of respiratory property in the hæmoglobin, but was to a great extent merely owing to defective aëration for some time before the period at which death occurred or the specimen was removed from the body. On the other hand, as has been already pointed out in my previous paper,*the phenomenon by no means affords any satisfactory proof of an entire absence of respiratory reduction, seeing that a loss of 33 per cent. of the respiratory property in the hæmoglobin of the blood is sufficient to cause death, so that 67 per cent. may, even in fatal cases, remain intact to account for the occurrence of very considerable change of colour on exposure to sources of supply of oxygen. The original colour of the blood in such cases was clearly owing to a great extent to antecedent defect in supply of oxygen, but, as in those instances in which the ratio of venom was exceptionally high there was conspicuous evidence of varying degrees of permanent reduction, it is probable that this defect was not the sole factor at work, but that, even where the ratio of venom was lowest, a certain amount of permanent toxic change was also present to contribute towards the induction of the sum of the reduction actually present. But another factor, which, as has already been pointed out, exerts an im- portant influence in modifying the colour of massive specimens of blood, quite independently of the presence of any temporary or persistent reduction in the oxygen-content of the hæmoglobin, and merely owing to the alterations in reflective and refractive properties of the fluid, was also invariably present, for in all cases, there were unequivocal evidences of the occurrence of extensive processes of solution of the bodies of erythrocytes. (Plate I, figs. 1-5). The out-come of such processes of solution did not, however, save in those cases in which the ratio of venom was a very high one and death had immediately followed its introduction into the vascular system, correspond precisely with that attending instances of mixtures of blood and venom effected outside the body, for, whilst in the latter the free, or partially freed, nuclei were isolated and more or less evenly diffused, in the present case the majority of them were aggregated into masses of irregular outline, and often of such considerable bulk as to suggest the possibility that they may occasionally give rise to embolic obstructions in the course of the vessels. The reason for this difference, and for its absence in cases in which death had immediately succeeded the introduction of the venom, is not hard to find. Where a mixture of blood and venom is effected outside the body, the particulate elements of the fluid subsequently remain at rest, and there can be no special reason why those which are undergoing solution should tend to adhere to one another. But, in cases in which solution is initiated within the vascular system *"Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army of India," Part IX, page 3.
17 Medical Officers of the Army of India. and whilst the fluid is in a state of constant movement, it is clear that softened and partially dissolved erythrocytes must frequently be liable to come into contact with one another, and, having done so, to cohere in consequence of their abnormal consistence. The difference in the two cases is clearly owing to the fact that there is nothing specially tending to bring the dissolving erythrocytes into contact with one another where the blood is at rest, whereas, in cases in which it is in continuous movement, facilities for contact must necessarily be present. Where the circulatory movement, is almost immediately arrested by the introduction of large quantities of venom, the opportunities for the occurrence of contact will be reduced to a minimum, and the chances in favour of contact, and the consequent formation and growth of aggregates of erythrocytes, must go on increasing in direct ratio to the length of time elapsing between the period at which the venom was introduced and that at which the arrest of circulation took place. In those cases in which prolonged chronic intoxication had preceded the removal of the blood from the body, the specimens were characterised, not merely by the presence of masses of free or partially freed nuclei, but also by the presence of very great numbers of eosinophil corpuscles. Not only were such corpuscles extremely abundant, but, as a rule, they were so greatly engorged with deeply coloured particles that the latter, until freed by rupture of the parent protoplast, in most cases presented the appearance of a solid, homogeneous mass in close contact with two or three peripherally situated nuclei. (Plate I, figs. 4, 5). The fact that such a phenomenon should present itself in association with the unequivocal occurrence of prolonged and extensive processes of solution of erythrocytes and consequent liberation of hæmoglobin into the liquor sanguinis is certainly in favour of the views of those who regard the particles con- tained within eosinophil corpuscles as, partially at all events, of hæmoglobic origin. That they are mere concretions of hæmoglobin, as some have maintained, is, however, clearly disproved by the fact that corpuscles may sometimes be met with containing particles of perfectly characteristic outline, but devoid of any special affinity for eosin, and, consequently remaining uncoloured after treatment with the latter. What the data would appear to indicate is that the particles are not mere concretions of hæmoglobin, but that it is only when saturated with the latter that they acquire a special affinity for eosin. That hæmoglobin has a great affinity for eosin is clearly demonstrated by the action of the stain on the bodies of erythrocytes or fluids containing the products of erythrocytic solution, so that, when we find an exceptional profusion of deeply stained eosinophil corpuscles coinciding with the occurrence of extensive solution of erythrocytes and liberation of hæmoglobin, it appears to be only reasonable to assume that a causal nexus exists between the two phenomena. The degree to which the experiments yielded results indicative of the presence of appreciable reduction in the respiratory property of the blood varied D
18 Scientific Memoirs by greatly in individual instances owing to want of uniformity in the ratio of venom to blood, to variations in the temperatures to which the mixtures of venom and blood were exposed, and, finally, to variations in the length of the period intervening between the time at which the venom was introduced into the vascular system and that at which the blood was examined. Where the ratio of venom to blood was highest, evidences of reduction of respiratory property were clearly recognisable at the time at which the blood was removed from the body, even in those cases in which the removal was effected within a few minutes after the experiment had been initiated. Where the ratio of venom was lower, but still considerably in excess of that corresponding to a minimal lethal dose of venom, appreciable evidences were either present or absent in the blood when first removed from the vascular system; present in cases in which a considerable time had elapsed since the beginning of the experiment, and in which the temperature of the body had been artificially maintained after death; absent where the examination was carried out shortly after the beginning of the experiment, or where the temperature of the body had not been kept up after death. Finally, where the ratio of venom to blood was very low, as it may fairly be assumed to have been in all cases of subcutaneous injection, and as it certainly was in all cases of the intravascular injection of minimal lethal doses of venom, there was an entire absence of any appreciable reduction, even in cases in which the examination was not made until after the lapse of a consider- able time after the beginning of the experiment. Taken as a whole, the results are such as to favour the belief that the reductive changes in the respiratory property of specimens of blood under the influence of contact with cobra-venom outside the body are also present in cases in which the contact is established within the vascular system. Where the amount of venom entering the latter is relatively great, evidences of the occurrence of immediate and general reduction are present; where the amount is smaller and conditions favouring the toxic action are present, evidences of reduction, although primarily absent, soon make their appearance, and, under these circumstances, the mere fact that appreciable reduction fails to manifest itself where the ratio of venom to blood is reduced beyond certain limits cannot be logically regarded as any conclusive evidence of an entire absence of reduction, seeing that the effects of a certain amount of reduction may readily be marked by those attending the presence of an excess of hæmoglobin retaining its normal affinity for oxygen. We have the clearest evidence of the occurrence of reduction in respiratory property under the influence of venom where the ratio of the latter to blood reaches a certain level, and that such evidence should cease to be appreciable when the ratio falls below this is only what might have been reasonably expected to occur. There is nothing to warrant the belief that any alterations in the specific properties of venom attend mere reductions in its quantity, and, hence, when we find appreciable evidences of
19 Medical Officers of the Army of India. its reductive action diminishing and finally disappearing coincidently with progressive diminutions in ratio of venom to blood, the phenomenon cannot logically be interpreted as indicative of any absolute loss of reductive power, but must be regarded merely as the consequence of the relative decrease in reduction occurring under such circumstances. If the data afforded by the results of the experiments which have just been recorded are to be regarded as of any value at all, it is clear that they show distinct evidence that cobra-venom does possess a very great power of giving rise to important changes in the constitution of any specimens of the blood of animals susceptible to cobrine intoxication with which it may come in contact either within or without the vascular system. But, even should this be granted, it may conceivably be maintained that it by no means necessarily follows that such hæmatic changes are the essential and primary causes of the symptoms of intoxication attending the introduction of the venom into the bodies of susceptible animals. There is, however, further evidence of the existence of an intimate connection between the development of intoxication and the occurrence of hæmatic changes, for it can be demonstrated that the variations in susceptibility to intoxication in different animals run parallel with variations in the degree to which their blood is subject to changes under the influence of contact with venom, and, also, that the reduction in toxic power, which any portion of venom undergoes when exposed to high temperatures, is attended by corresponding reduction in its power of inducing hæmatic change. The following tables contain an abstract of the evidence in favour of the first of the above propositions: Table IV illustrates the relative susceptibility to intoxication of fowls, water-lizards (Varanus salvator ), rat-snakes (Zamenis mucosus ), and cobras; Table V, the phenomena occurring in normal specimens of the blood of the reptiles of Table IV when removed from the body; and, Table VI, those present in cases in which like quantities of the blood of the same reptiles and of fowls are subjected to the influence of various amounts of cobra venom:20 Scientific Memoirs by TABLE IV21 Medical Officers of the Army of India. TABLE IV22 Scientific Memoirs by TABLE VI. Phenomena present in specimens of Blood of a fowl and of various Reptiles treated with various amounts of Cobra-venom. No. of experi- ment. Nature of animal. Amounts of blood an venom employed. Coagulation. Colour. Solution of bodies of erythro- cytes. Reduction in respira- tory property of hæmoglobin. I Fowl Blood, 10.5 c. c. Venom, 0.01 gramme. Absent, 44 minutes; no contraction of the clot. Black in 24 minutes Complete solution in 1¼ hours. Complete in 24 hours. II Varanus salvator Blood, 10.5 c. c. Venom, 0.01 gramme. Absent, 2 hours, 50 minutes; a larger firm coagulum and plum-coloured serum, 24 hours. Dark plum-coloured, 2 hours, 50 minutes. Deformation and partial solu- tion of many erythrocytes, 2 hours; very considerable, 24 hours; greater number of erythrocytes completely dissolved, 48 hours. Absent, 2423 Medical Officers of the Army of India. VI Dhamin, Zamenis mucosus. Blood, 10.5 c. c. Venom, 0.01 gramme. Entirely absent, 3 hours; present, 24 hours. Deposit dark red, supernatant liquid brownish-yellow, 3 hours; deposit almost black, 24 hours. Absent in deposit, 24 hours; very extensive, 72 hours. Entirely absent, 24 hours; barely appreciable, 48 hours. VII Dhamin, Zamenis mucosus. Blood, 10 c. c. Venom, 0.116 gramme. Entirely absent Deposit very deep plum- coloured, supernatant liquid pale brown, 3¼ hours; deposit almost black, supernatant liquid reddish-brown, 24 hours. Considerable, 24 hours; complete, 48 hours. Considerable, 24 hours; increased, 48 hours. VIII Dhamin, Zamenis mucosus. Blood, 9 c. c. Venom, 0.2 gramme. Entirely absent Originally very bright red; very deep plum-coloured, 1½ hours; almost black, 2½ hours. Very extensive, 30 minutes; complete, 2½ hours. Perceptible, 2½ hours; very conspicuous, 24 hours; diminished, 48 hours; absent, 72 hours IX Cobra Blood, 10 c. c. Venom, 0.01 gramme. Entirely absent Deposit scarlet, supernatant liquid clear, colourless, 2½ hours; deposit dark red, liquid very pale yellow, 24, 48, 72, 96 hours. Entirely absent, 96 hours Entirely absent up to 96 hours. X Cobra Blood, 10.5 c. c. Venom, 0.01 gramme. Entirely absent up to 48 hours. Deposit deep plum-coloured, supernatant liquid clear, al- most colourless, 24 hours. Entirely absent, 72 hours Entirely absent up to 72 hours. XI Cobra Blood, 10 c. c. Venom, 0.116 gramme. Entirely absent Deposit very dark plum- coloured, supernatant liquid limpid, very pale straw- coloured, 24 hours; deposit almost black, liquid pinkish, 48 hours. Entirely absent, 24 hours; very extensive, 48 hours. Entirely absent, 24 hours; very considerable, 48 hours. XII Cobra Blood, 9 c. c. Venom, 0.2 gramme. Entirely absent, 2½ hours; very imper- feet, 24 hours. Bright plum-coloured, 2½ hours; clot almost black, serum pale red, 24 hours. Entirely absent, 2½ hours; almost all the erythrocytes deformed and more or less bleached, 24 hours; major- ity of erythrocytes still undissolved, 120 hours. Entirely absent up to 120 hours.
24 Scientific Memoirs by As regards the question of relative susceptibility to intoxication, the data show that, with cobra-venom of a given stock, 0.00075 gramme per kilo; 0.04 gramme per kilo; 0.5 gramme per kilo; and 1.5 gramme per kilo constituted approximately minimal lethal doses respectively for fowls, water-lizards, dhamins, and cobras. In other words, they show that fowls are about 50 times more susceptible to cobrine intoxication than water-lizards are, and about 700 and 2,000 times more susceptible than dhamins and cobras, respectively, are. On turning to Table V it will be seen that the phenomena presented by portions of reptilian blood, or, more correctly, of the blood of the reptiles used for experiment, are essentially of the same nature as those characteristic of speci- mens of fowls' blood, as illustrated in Table I, save in so far as the normal rate of coagulation comes into play as a modifying factor. In respect to solution of erythrocytes, and reduction of the respiratory property of hæmoglobin, no differences are present, solution taking place very slowly and reduction not setting in appreciably until putrefactive changes are already far advanced. But, whilst in the case of fowls' blood, the rapid incidence of coagulation leads to the formation of a homogeneous clot, in that of reptilian blood, the incidence of the process is so much delayed as to allow of full time for the subsidence of the erythrocytes and the consequent differentiation of the clot into an upper transparent, pale yellowish or opalescent stratum, resting on a dense, deep red one crowded with erythrocytes. When we come to deal with Table VI, we encounter a series of data showing that like amounts of cobra-venom acting on like quantities of blood (9 to 11 c.c.) produced very different effects according to the nature of the animals from which the latter was derived. Where 0.01 gramme of venom was added to 10 to 10.5 c.c. of blood, in the case of fowls' blood complete solution of the bodies of all the erythrocytes had taken place within 1¼ hours; in that of varanus' blood a like result had very nearly occurred within 48 hours; in that of the blood of dhamins solution was very incomplete after the lapse of 48 hours; and, in that of cobrine blood, no appreciable indications of solution were present even after the lapse of 96 hours subsequent to the beginning of the experiment. In experiments in which the amount of venom was increased to 0.116 gramme, the amount of blood remaining almost as before, very nearly com- plete solution had occurred in varanus' blood within 24 hours; complete solu- tion in dhamins' blood within 48 hours; and partial solution in cobra blood within a like period. Finally, where the venom amounted to 0.2 gramme per 9 c. c. of blood, almost complete solution had taken place in varanus' blood within 30 minutes; complete solution in that of dhamins within 2½ hours; and only partial solution in that of cobras within 120 hours after the beginning of the experiment. The phenomena present in such comparative experiments are illustrated in figs. 6-7, 9-15 and 17-19 of Plate I, and clearly indicate that, in so far as solution of the bodies of erythrocytes is concerned, the power of
25 Medical Ocers of the Army of India. cobra-venom to give rise to hæmatic change runs parallel with its power of inducing intoxication. The determination of the question of the presence of any parallel series of variations in the degree of reduction of respiratory property of the hæmo- globin in the blood of animals of different degrees of susceptibility is more diffi- cult, because the relatively large quantities of venom, which must be employed in the treatment of specimens of intractable blood, necessarily imply corre- spondingly extensive septic contamination and the attendant early incidence and rapid progress of putrefactive change, but, in certain cases, in which experi- ments were carried out at relatively low temperatures, such as that illustrated in figs. 6 and 10, Plate II, the phenomena were such as to warrant the conclusion that the variations in susceptibility to solvent change are accompanied by cor- responding variations in susceptibility to the occurrence of reduction in respi- ratory property, and that, consequently, there is a general correspondence between degree of liability to intoxication and degree of susceptibility of the blood to undergo alterations in structure and property under the influence of contact with venom. A specific resistance on the part of the blood to the action of the venom would, therefore, appear to be one of the factors serving to provide natural im- munity from cobrine intoxication, and, in the case of reptiles and amphibia, this is, no doubt, co-operated with by the normally low temperature of the blood, and, in most instances, by low respiratory demand. The specific resistance and relatively low temperature must serve to limit and retard hæmatic change, and the low respiratory demand to allow of the occurrence of the latter to an extent which would inevitably prove fatal were the demand higher than it actually is. Were it not that artificial immunity is apparently dependent on the presence of antivenene in the blood, and that, when once established, it is very persistent, the fact of the concurrence in natural immunity of resistance to hæmatic change and absence of the development of antivenene in the blood under the influence of venom might further appear to suggest the possibility that the antidote originates as a direct product of the toxic hæmatic changes induced in the blood of susceptible animals, and that, therefore, specimens of such blood, treated with venom outside the body, ought to acquire protective and curative property. Table VII illustrates the nature of the phenomena characteristic of ex- periments in which solutions of venom, which have been exposed to the in- fluence of high temperatures for various periods, are introduced into the systems of susceptible animals, and Table VIII those of corresponding experiments in which specimens of the blood of such animals are treated with like solutions. E
26 Scientific Memoirs by TABLE VII. Physiological effects attending the subcutaneous injection of various amounts of heated cobra-venom of which 0.00075 gramme constituted a minimal lethal dose for fowls of K. I. in weight, symptoms of intoxication appearing 327 Medical officers of the Army of India. TABLE VIII. Phenomena presented by specimens of fowls' blood treated with boiled Cobra-venom. No. of- experi- ment. Treatment of solution of venom. Nature of speci- men. Coagulation. Colour. Solution of bodies of erythrocytes. Reduction in respiratory property of hæmoglobin. Putrefaction. I Just brought to boil. Blood, 9 c c.; venom, 0.00075 gramme; water I c. c. Firm, 4 minutes; clot highly contracted in 3 hours. Substance of clot still bright plum-coloured, 3 hours. Greater number of ery- throcytes intact, 3 hours; many still undissolved, 24 hours. Absent, 24 hours; slight, 48-72 hours; hardly per- ceptible, 96 hours. II Just brought to boil. Blood, 9 c. c.; venom, 0.002 gramme; water I c. c. Firm, 4 minutes; pale red serum present, I hour; large quan- tity deep red serum, 24 hours. Substance of clot very deep plum-coloured, 3 hours; black, 24 hours. Greater number of ery- throcytes dissolved, 3 hours; solution complete, 24 hours. Perceptible, 24 hours. III Just brought to boil. Blood, 9 c. c.; venom, 0.01 gramme; water, 1 c.c. Firm, 3 minutes; no contraction. Black, 1 hour Complete, a hour Considerable, 24 hours; very great, 48-72 hours; almost absent, 96 hours; absent, 120 hours. Faint odour, 96 hours. IV Just brought to boil. Blood, 9 c. c.; venom, 0.01 gramme; water 1 c. c. Firm, 5 minutes; a considerable amount of deep red serum, 24 hours. Black, 40 minutes Complete, 40 minutes Conspicuous, 24 hours; absent, 48 hours. Odour present, 48 hours. V Just brought to boil. Blood, 9 c. c.; venom, 0.01 gramme; water, I c. c. Firm, 5 minutes; no contraction. Black, 30 minutes Complete, 30 minutes Perceptible, 24 hours; absent, 48 hours. Slight odour pre- sent, 48 hours. VI Just brought to boil. Blood, 9 c, c.; venom, 0.01 gramme; water, 1 c. c. Immediate; no con- traction. Black, 2 hours 20 minu- tes. Distinct, 24 hours; very great, 48-72-96 hours; thereafter progressive diminution; absent, 168 hours. Slight odour, 168 hours. VII Brought to boil and then steamed for 3 hours. Blood, 9 c. c.; venom, 0.01 gramme; water, 1 c. c. Firm, 6 minutes; no contraction. Substance of clot deep plum-coloured, 3 hours 20 minutes; black, 24 hours. Erythrocytes deformed and partially bleached, 3 hours 20 minutes; solu- tion complete, 24 hours. Distinct, 24 hours. VIII Brought to boil three times and then steamed for 6 hours. Blood, 9 c. c.; venom, 0.01 gramme; water, 1 c. c. Firm, 4 minutes; con- siderable contraction, 2½ hours; consider- able quantity of pale red serum, 24 hours. Substance of clot plum- coloured, 2½ hours; black, 24 hours. Hardly any solution and no deformation, 2½ hours; al most complete, 24 hours. Barely perceptible, 24 hours; very considerable, 48 hours; very great, 72 hours; absent, 96 hours. Slight odour, 96 hours. IX Boiled for 6½ hours. Blood, 9 c. c.; venom, 0.01 gramme; water, 1 c. c. Firm, 3 minutes; red- dish serum exuding, 1 hour; large amount of deep red serum, 24 hours. Substance a clot deep plum-coloured, 24 hours. Very little solution, 24 hours; complete solu- tion, 48 hours.* Absent, 24 hours; barely perceptible, 48-72 hours; absent, 96 hours. Odour present, 96 hours. *The, rate at which solution took place in this case was not greater than that sometimes present in cases in which a corresponding ratio of water alone is present. E 2
28 Scientific Memoirs by The data contained in Table VII very clearly illustrate the influence which, as has been recorded by Wall and other observers, elevation of temperature has in occasioning the progressive reduction and final abolition of toxic property in cobra-venom. Even momentary boiling occasions a diminution in toxic potency sufficing to reduce minimal and slightly supraminimal doses to subminimal ones; a longer exposure to heat reduces the potency of larger doses to such an extent as to appreciably retard their lethal action; and prolonged exposure serves to render even excessively large doses quite innocuous. But, as Table VIII shows, a parallel series of phenomena present themselves in connection with the capacity for giving rise to hæmatic change. Brief boiling gives rise to dimi- nution and prolonged boiling to abolition of both the toxic and specific solvent properties of cobra-venom, and this coincidence of itself is enough to suggest the existence of a very close relation between the occurrence of the hæmatic changes and the development of intoxication. It is, of course, possible that this simultaneous loss of two distinct properties may be a mere matter of coincidence, but, when the phenomenon is taken along with that of the variation of liability to hæmatic change which accompanies variation in degree of susceptibility to intoxication, it appears to be more logical to regard it as indicative of the existence of a causal relation and to explain the loss of lethal power in the venom as the consequence of its loss of power to give rise to hæmatic change. There can be no question of the facts that cobra-venom has a specific power of inducing important changes in the structural and functional properties of the blood of animals susceptible to its intoxicant effects; that variations in sus- ceptibility to intoxication run parallel with variations in the degree to which the blood is liable to undergo change under the influence of contact with the venom, and that both the lethal potency and the capacity for inducing change are alike affected by exposure to high temperatures. They in themselves afford very strong evidence in support of the belief that the primary action of cobra- venom in giving rise to intoxication is one affecting the blood, and the close parallelism of the phenomena presenting themselves in cases of cobrine intoxi- cation with those characteristic of morbid conditions unequivocally dependent on alterations in the quantity or quality of the blood renders the proof almost complete. The phenomena in cases of intoxication by carbonic oxide and those attending excessive hæmorrhage are clearly primarily dependent on the fact that the blood no longer fairly satisfies the demands, and specially the respiratory demands of the system, and, when we find parallel symptoms arising under the influence of a material which is unequivocally capable of giving rise to the occurrence of important structural and functional hæmatic changes, it is surely more reasonable to ascribe them to the presence of the latter than to credit them to any obscure, direct action simultaneously exerted upon the nervous apparatus. When we have the clearest evidence that cobra-venom has the
29 Medical Officers of the Army of India. power of giving rise to important changes in the blood, which are of a nature adapted to induce the development of symptoms similar to those characteristic of the intoxication which it causes, it is surely unnecessary to endeavour to ac- count for the latter by means of invoking the existence of any hypothetical direct action on the nervous system. Experiments on the results attending the addition of Fraser's antivenene to specimens of blood which had been treated with venom appeared to afford a certain amount of supplementary evidence in favour of this view, for they seemed to indicate that, whilst incapable of appreciably affecting the solvent power of the venom on the bodies of the erythrocytes, the antidote did very considerably neutralise its reductive power on the respiratory property of the hæmoglobin, and that this effect was not one attending the presence of serum unendowed with antidotal properties. (Plate II, figs. ii-17.) As regards such experiments, it must, however, be allowed that a source of fallacy was present, as, owing to the relatively excessive quantities of serum which were made use of, the chances of the intervention of septic changes inductive both of early solution of erythrocytes and of the concealment of reductive change must necessarily have been very considerable, so that the neutralising action of the antidote may really be considerably greater than they appear to be according to the data. The evidence, as a whole, goes to show that cobrine intoxication, and, probably, colubrine intoxication generally, is essentially determined by the occur- rence of primary hæmatic changes, and, in this, differs from acute viperine intoxication in which the symptoms unequivocally indicate the presence of primary, acute nervous irritation and exhaustion. December 1897.
Note by A. A. Kanthack, M.A., M.D., F.R.C.P., F.R.C.S., Fellow of King's College and Professor of Pathology in the University of Cambridge. Dr. D. D. Cunningham was kind enough to send me his manuscript for perusal, knowing that in my laboratory we were working on the same subject. He requested me to add to his own observations. I do this all the more willingly since I owe all the cobra poison, which I possess, to Dr. Cunningham, so that I feel that by adding these brief notes I am acknowledging in some slight measure my indebtedness to the late Superintendent of the Zoological Gardens of Calcutta. The lines appended by me form an abstract of experiments executed under my direction by Messrs. J. W. W. Stephens, John Lucas Walker Student in Pa- thology at the University of Cambridge, and W. Myers. These experiments were made primarily with the object of studying the mode of action of an antitoxin on its corresponding toxin. Ehrlich in 1897 showed that a toxin can react chemically upon the antitoxin in vitro. Ricin, the toxin which he used, produces a curious effect upon defibrinated blood, the corpuscles being firmly clumped together and precipitated. Ehrlich filled 6 test tubes each with 95 c.c. of physiological saline solution containing 5% citrate of sodium and added thereto 5 c. c. of rabbit's blood. 1 c.c. of a 2% ricin solution would quickly precipitate the corpuscles. He added to 5 of the above test tubes severally 1 c. c. of 2% ricin solution mixed respectively with 0.3, 0.5, 0.75, 1.0, and 1.25 c.c. of diluted antitoxin, while to the 6th tube he added 1 c.c. of the ricin solution without the antitoxin. The result was that the addition of 1.25 and 1.0 c.c. of antiricin neutralized the action of the ricin in the test tube, while 0.3 c.c, had no appreciable effect, and 0.5 merely delayed the clumping and precipitation, whereas with 0.75 c.c. the clumping was imperfect as well as delayed. He now proceeded to test these mixtures of ricin and antiricin upon mice, and found that the addition of 1.25 and 10 c.c. of antiricin had neutralized the ricin also for the animal while 0.3 c. c. had no effect, 0.5 delayed death and 0.75 c.c. weakened its action to such an extent that nothing more than a moderate infiltration resulted. It is evident, therefore, that the animal experi- ments confirm the test tube experiments, and Ehrlich has thus shown that ricin and antiricin directly influence each other chemically without the assistance of cellular activity. In studying the action of cobra-toxin and its antitoxin,: therefore, a simple reaction was sought for, which could be demonstrated outsider the body in test tubes; and to this end, an investigation was made upon the action of cobra. poison upon blood.
32 Scientific Memoirs by When cobra-poison is added to shed blood in a test tube, two effects are noticeable:Medical officers of the Army of India. 33 Table III. Poison present. Rabbit, .6% saline. White Rat, .5% saline. Grass snake, .5% saline. Man, .5% saline. Toad, .3% saline. Cat, .6% Frog, .3% saline. Fowl, .5% saline. Guinea-pig, .5% saline. Dog, .6% saline. .5 c.c.=.5 mgm. H. Complete H C. H. C. H. C. H. H H H C. H. H .5 c.c.=.25 mgm. Slight H. H C. H. C. H. H H H H H H .5 c.c.=.125 Trace H. H C. H. C. H. H H H H H H .5 c.c.=.0625 No H Slight H. C.H. C. H. H H H H H H .5 c,c.=.031 No H No H Slight H. C. H. H H H H H H .5 c c.=.015 No H No H Trace H. C. H. H H H H H H .5 c.c.=.007 No H No H No H Trace H. No H H H Slight H H H .5 c.c.=.0039 No H No H No H No H No H H H Slight H Slight H H .5 c.c.=.0019 No H No H No H No H No H Slight H H Slight H. Slight H. H .5 c.c.=.0009 No H No H No H No H No H No H Trace H No H Trace H. H Saline No H No H No H No H No H No H No H No H No H No H NOTE 1.34 Scientific Memoirs by While, therefore, the isotonic point for saline solutions is practically identical for rat, snake, fowl, man and guinea-pig, the isotonic point, if we may use the ex- pression for cobra-poison is very different. Dog's blood is exceedingly sensitive to the poison; hæmolysis in this animal occurring in very dilute solution, for instance, in the strength 0.5 c.c. =.0009 mgm. An examination of the table shows us that there is no absolute relation between the hæmolytic reaction of the blood of an animal to cobra-poison, and the resistance of the animal itself to the poison. Thus while in this table cat's blood and guinea-pig's blood rank almost equally low, as regards hæmolysis, yet the cat is far more resistant to the poison than the guinea-pig. Again, on this scale, if it were taken as an indication of the resist- ance of animals, we should rank a frog and a guinea-pig as equally resistant, which, however, is far from being the case. These numbers must not, however, be taken as absolute, as from time to time variations occur in the minimum amounts of poison required to produce hæmolysis, These, however, are not sufficiently large to negative the general relation shown above, and may be due to changes in the poison, or in the blood, or in both. It may be interesting here to point out the action of temperature on the hæmolytic action which can be readily shewn by either of the above described methods. Thus.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 35 Consequently in these experiments a mixture of serum and water in the proportion of 55:45 was used. Taking then solutions of poison which readily hæmolyse, we proceeded to try what might be the action of serum on this phenomenon. It was found that the action could be completely arrested by using definite quantities of serum. Table VI. C.P. 1 c.c. =.2 mgm. in isotonic salt solution; Human blood. .5 c.c.C.P Complete H (in 1 hour) .5 c.c. C.P. +.001 c.c. isotonic serum (antivenomous) Complete H. .5 C.C. C.P. +.025 C.C.,,,, Incomplete H. .5 C.C. C.P. +.05 C.C.,,,, Incomplete H. .5 C.C. C.P. +.1 c.c,,,, No H. .5 C.C. C.P. +.2 C.C.,,,, No H. .5 C.C. C.P. +.3 C.C,,,, No H. .5 C.C. C.P. +.4 C.C.,,,, No H. .5 C.C. C.P. +.5 c.c.,,,, No H. The same results were obtained by varying the poison and keeping the serum constant. Repeated observations showed that for the particular serum used in these experiments.1 c.c. of isotonic serum is always sufficient to stop the hæmolytic action of.5 c.c. of a solution of poison (1 c.c. =.2 mgm.) on human blood. Further, if we take multiples of these numbers, the same relation holds good. Table VII. C.P. 1 C.C.=.2 mgm. .5 c.c. C.P. +.1 isotonic serum No H. I C.C. C.P. +.2,, No H. 2 c.c. C.P. +.4,, No H. 3 c.c. C.P. +.6,, No H. These observations show accordingly that the antivenomous serum posses- ses the power of neutralizing the hæmolytic action of cobra-poison in vitro in the same manner as the antiricin neutralizes ricin in the test tube. This action is, moreover, a specific one, as various other sera such as the antidiphtheritic, antistreptococcus, antitetanus, antityphoid have no such action. Correspondence between the antih36 Scientific Memoirs by the animal may or may not die. The following Table VIII. summarizes a number of experiments on this point:Medical Officers of the Army of India. 37 PART II. The influence of cobra-poison on the coagulation of the blood, and the action of antivenomous serum upon this phenomenon in vitro. The delay in clotting or complete absence of the same under the influence of cobra poison can be readily shown by inducting blood direct from a vessel into the poison solution as demonstrated by Dr. Cunningham. TABLE I. Guinea-pig: anæsthetized: cannula inserted in carotid. Clotting time. Next day. I. 1 C. C. C. P.=20 mgm. + 1 c. c. Blood Black solution Fluid. II. 1 c. c. C. P.=10 mgm. +1 c. c. Blood Black solution Fluid. III. 1 c. c. C. P.= 5 mgm. +1 c. c. Blood 1hBlack clot Solid jelly; no serum. IV. 1 c. c. C. P.=2.5 mgm. +1 c. c. Blood 18' Black Solid; no serum. V. 1 c. c. C. P.=1.25 mgm. +1 c. c. Blood 9' Black Solid; no serum. VI. 1 C. C. C. P.=.625 mgm. +1 C. C. Blood ... ... VII. 1 c. c. C. P.=.312 mgm. +1 C. C. Blood* 2' 2hdeep red serum ... VIII. 1 c. c. C. P.=.07 mgm. + 1 c. c. Blood* Bright red clot, red serum Semi-fluid clot. IX. 1 c. c. C. P.=.02 mgm. +1 c. c. Blood* Bright red clot, clear serum. Serum stained. X. 1 c. c. C. P.=.004 mgm.+1 c. c. Blood38 Scientific Memoirs by TABLE II. .5 c. c. C. P.+1.25 mgm. .5 c. c. C. P. =1.25 mgm. Antivenomous serum Saline 1% .5 c. c. saline 1% 7 c. c antivenomous serum. Isotonic. 60' still fluid (1 ) 12' firm (1 ) 10'. (2) 17' solid (2) 15'. 60' still fluid and very small clot (1) 3' 10' 9'. (2) 6' 60' still fluid 6' 6' 6½'. 24' still fluid 8' 16' 5'. 60' still fluid and small clot 5½' 7' 10 '. 7½' another specimen of blood. 60' still fluid and small clot 12' 10½' 8½. (1) 10' second speci- men. (2) 18' 11½'. 60' still fluid, very small clot 12' 11½' 25' second:specimen. 60' still fluid, some clot 12' 7½' 12'. NOTE.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 39 It will be seen that in Example II, no clot was obtained even after 24 hours, while by the addition of 0.1 c.c. serum clotting was normal, viz., 10'. Further it will be noted that the serum itself delays clotting somewhat. The specificity of the action of the anti-venomous serum was easily shown by either of these methods. Nor, on the other hand, had the anti-venomous serum any action on the well known properties of leech extract and peptone solutions in keeping blood fluid in vitro. A few experiments were made with a view to determine whether the blood of an animal artificially immunised had any greater resistance against this pro- perty of cobra-poison than that of a normal blood. Thus a cat received 100 mgms. of cobra poison in the space of ten days. Sixteen days later, the blood was tested with this result. TABLE IV. a saline+blood On three new genera of plants from the Kachin Hills. BY MAJOR D. PRAIN, INDIAN MEDICAL SERVICE. The year 1897 has been marked, so far as the records of the Calcutta Herbarium are concerned, by the communication, for the first time, of botani- cal specimens from the Kachin Hills in Upper Burma. The receipt of these has been primarily due to the exertions of Captain Pottinger, R.A., who made an adventurous journey into the unexplored country along the 'Nmai Kha from March till June, and brought back with him a very interesting collection. Captain Pottinger had further the kindness to enlist the sympathies of Lieute- nant Cruddas, S.C., Commandant of the Battalion of Military Police at Myitkyina, on behalf of the Herbarium. A native collector was sent to Myitkyina; this man has been able, thanks to the assistance and opportunities afforded him by Lieutenant Cruddas, to make large collections. The Kachin Hill region forms the catchment area of the Upper Irrawaday, and is thus wedged in between the well-marked phytogeographical areas of South-West China on the one hand and of the Eastern-Himalaya on the other, while it forms the meeting point of two equally distinct areas42 Scientific Memoirs by in the Eastern Himalaya and in Assam without appearing east of the Irrawaday: of this class there are 67 species, 10.68% of the whole Kachin flora. And the affinity of the Kachin flora is seen to be most marked with the flora of the Assam ranges from the fact that 522 species, or 83.25 of the Kachin flora, extend to this particular region, and that 46 of these species, or 7% of the Kachin flora, are peculiarly Assamese. The comparative values of the influences exerted by the floras of the four adjacent areas are, however, more accurately determined by using the numbers indicated by each distributional arrangement that occurs, treating the figures so obtained as numerators, employing as denominators the number of adjacent areas involved in each case, and adding the fractions relating to each area. The results are as follows:Medical Officers of the Army of India. 43 honour of Lieutenant Cruddas, who has afforded much kind help in connection with the investigation of the Kachin flora. PottengeriaPrain . Nat. Ord. SAXIFRAGACEÆ: Trib. Escallonie44 Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army of India. parum minoribus filamentis omnibus pibs albis puberulis. Discus æqualis. Stylus apice 2-fidus lobis fere aequilongis acutis. Nuculae juniores extus læves supra intusque papillosim glandulosæ.A Summary of the Deep-Sea Zoological Work of the Royal Indian Marine Survey Ship Investigator from 1884 to 1897. BY MAJOR A. W. ALCOCK, M.B., C.M.Z.S., F.G.S., SUPERINTENDENT OF THE INDIAN MUSEUM AND PROFESSOR OF ZOOLOGY IN THE MEDICAL COLLEGE of CALCUTTA, FORMERLY SURGEON-NATURALIST TO THE INDIAN MARINE SURVEY. "Forasmuch as the main ocean is.... by nature left free for all men to deal withal, as very sufficient for all men's use, and large enough for all men's industry."46 Scientific Memoirs by freezing point all the year round; that absolute darkness prevails, and that, therefore, living vegetation must necessarily be absent;Medical Officers of the Army of India. 47 According to Sir Clements Markham, the approved authority on this sub- ject, the renowned Arctic explorers John Davis and William Baffin are also to be included among Indian marine surveyors.* John Davis piloted (1598-1605) three expeditions to this country, of which the last was fatal to him; for, near the Malacca Straits he fell in with a "Juncke of the Japons", manned by pirates, by whom he was treacherously murdered. In the narratives of his eastern voyages several quaint natural history obser vations are recorded, which show that he and his men possessed that wide sympathy with other branches of science besides navigation, which has become traditional with British naval officers. William Baffin may properly be called an Indian marine surveyor, for (1617-1622) he actually made surveys and charts of parts of the Red Sea and Persian Gulf. His career, like Davis's, was grievously cut short in this part of the world, for he was killed in action before Ormuz, by the Portuguese, From the establishment of the Honourable East India Company, up to the revival of the present Marine Survey Department in 1874, the history of surveying in these seas is to be found in a most interesting Memoir on the Indian Marine Surveys by Sir Clements Markham, printed by order of the House of Commons in 1871, 48 Scientific Memoirs by Among the naval officers of the survey a surprising number became dis- tinguished for lasting contributions to science, but the only name that I can find relevant to the subject of this paper is that of Captain Moresby, whose surveys of the coral archipelagos of the Indian Ocean are well known to all readers of Darwin's Coral Reefs. The work of Moresby and of his Lieutenant, Powell, like that of Lieutenant John Wood who discovered the source of the Oxus, and like that of the numerous officers who were engaged on the survey of Mesopotamia, shows how marine surveying in India, although, as elsewhere, it had its origin in the extension of commerce and the safeguarding of navigation, soon became identified with the wider interests of science. On the abolition of the Indian Navy the survey of the seas of India came to an end, until, in consequence of the exertions of Commander Dundas Taylor, the present Marine Survey Department was inaugurated in 1874. It was about this time that a new world was being opened out to naturalists by the extraordinary discoveries of the Challenger (1872-76), and when the revival of the Indian Marine Survey was decided, the question of utilizing the new department for the purpose of deep-sea dredging was warmly taken up by the Asiatic Society of Bengal, with the result that the appointment of a sur- geon-naturalist to the survey was sanctioned. It is due to Commander Dundas Taylor to state that in all his reports he, too, urged the importance of having a naturalist attached to the survey. Accordingly, when the new department began its operations in the field, Surgeon J. Armstrong was appointed Medical Officer and Naturalist. But deep-sea dredging requires special apparatus and a well-engined vessel, both of which were wanting at this time; so that Dr. Armstrong, who was with the survey from 1875 to 1879, first in the I. G. S. Clyde and afterwards with a boat-party, had to report "it quite impossible to carry into execution the scheme of deep-sea dredging proposed by the Council of the Asiatic Society". He, however, dreged successfully up to the hundred fathom line, and published numerous observations on the littoral fauna and flora and on Ornithology, as well as several descriptions and figures of new species of Hydroid Zoophytes. And although he was himself unable to carry his re- searches into deep water, he made every arrangement for the equipment of the Naturalist's Department in the survey ship then under construction. After 1879, until 1884, the post of Surgeon-Naturalist seems to have been vacant, so that when the new and well-equipped survey ship Investigator was launched in 1881, and put to sea in December of that year, she did not carry with her a trained zoologist to undertake the long-expected deep-sea ex- plorations. At this moment, too, Commander Dundas Taylor retired from the command of the survey.
Medical Officers of the Army of India. 49 Under his successor, Commander L. S. Dawson, R. N., who was in charge of the survey from 1881 till 1884, the scheme of deep-sea dredging seems to have been lost sight of, although some deep-sea soundings were taken, and the specimens of bottom brought up were roughly analysed. Commander Dawson's Reports are only interesting to Indian Zoology in so far as they refer briefly to the launching of the Investigator :50 Scientific Memoirs by Under his immediate successor, Commander R. F. Hoskyn, R.N., dredging was carried on up to a depth of close on 2,000 fathoms, and many important additions were made to our knowledge of the seas of India. I was Surgeon-Naturalist under Captain Hoskyn until his death in 1892, and I cannot imagine a man who, while making no pretensions to special zoological knowledge, and perfectly indifferent to any credit that might come of discoveries made under his auspices, could be more indulgent to the naturalist's department and more tolerant of the extra noise and of the mess that commonly accompany dredging operations. For a few months, after Captain Hoskyn's death, Lieutenant G. S. Gunn, R.N., officiated in charge of the Survey, and made eight successful hauls of the dredge in deep water. Commander C. F. Oldham, R.N., who was in charge of the Survey from 1892 to 1897, made about fifty hauls of the dredge in water over 100 fathoms deep. Most of these fell to the care of Surgeon Captain A. R. S. Anderson (who joined as Surgeon-Naturalist in 1893), except during the season of 1896-97, when Surgeon-Captain J. W. Grant officiated for Dr. Anderson. The present Chief of the Survey, Commander T. H. Heming, R.N., with Dr. Anderson as Naturalist, has, up to the end of the year 1897, made seven hauls in deep water, one of which, off the Travancore Coast, in 430 fathoms, is one of the most successful on record. Altogether, as far as I can ascertain, the ship, up to the end of the year 1897, had made about 105 more or less successful dredgings in water over 100 fathoms deep. Section 3.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 51 For Deep Sea Temperatures, Cassella-Miller's Six's maximum-minimum thermometers were used, with the bulb enclosed in, and protected from the enormous pressure by a second bulb rather more than half-filled with spirit. For Deep Sea Dredging, Captain Carpenter was very fond of the "tangle- bar," which certainly catches a lot of crabs, Anomura, Echinoderms and Alcyo- naria, but knocks them about dreadfully. He also used, in deep water, a large dredge much of the Challenger pattern, and a trawl of ordinary pattern. In his time hemp-rope, paid out and hauled in very slowly by the steam-winch, was employed. A dredging in deep-water, in those days, was a long business: the rope took a long time to sink, and could not, therefore, be run out quickly for fear of tangling, nor could it be hauled in quickly, for fear of breaking. After- wards we always used the American reversible trawl and a practically unbreak- able rope of steel-wire reeled on and off a drum and surging-drum revolving by steam. This is a very quick and convenient way of dredging, but the speed is not altogether an unmixed advantage, for delicate specimens suffer greatly from being dragged rapidly through a mile or two of deep water. In all cases we used an "accumulator," consisting of a row of thick india-rubber disks, between iron guides, to equalize the strain. The routine way in which a deep-sea haul was managed, in my time, was as follows:52 Scientific Memoirs by isolated basin that lies to the east of the Andaman-Nicobar chain has been very properly granted an independent name, as the Andaman Sea. For the purposes of this paper it will be convenient to divide the Arabian Sea into two areas, namely,Medical Officers of the Army of India. 53 Commander Alfred Carpenter); it lies between 3° and 4° westwards of the Nicobars and carries between 1,300 and 1,400 fathoms water, the depths to the east and west being about 2,300 and 2, 100 fathoms, respectively. In the northern third, as also round the continental shores of the Bay, the bottom naturally consists of the mud deposited from the various large rivers that discharge into the Bay, and this gradually passes into a Globigerina -ooze that, at the 1,700 fathom contour line, becomes nearly pure. Near the Anda- man shore a good deal of calcareous ooze of other kinds is found54 Scientific Memoirs by SECTION 5.55 Medical Officers of the Army of India. Of the 25 previously-known true bathybial species (1,52056 Scientific Memoirs by Table I.57 Medical Officers of the Army of India. Table II.58 Scientific Memoirs by Table III.Medical Officers of the Army of India. 59 waters, and that, on the one hand, of Japan, and, on the other hand, of the West Indies, and in the Introduction to the Study of Fishes, p. 270, he says, in com- paring the fishes of Japan with those of the Mediterranean, " We can only ac- count for the singular distribution of these shore-fishes by assuming that the Mediterranean and Japanese seas were in direct and open communication with each other within the period of the existence of the present Teleosteous Fauna." Again Dr. Gwyn Jeffreys, in the Journal of the Linnæan Society, Zoology, V01. XII (187460 Scientific Memoirs by In this he discovered 277 species, two of which, and three varieties, he described as new, and noted the occurrence of a number of forms identical with fossil (Pliocene) species from Kar Nicobar. From our point of view, Mr. Chapman's work is unsatisfactory, because it was undertaken in an informal way, through an officer of the Geological Survey Department, to whom I had sent, for a particular purpose, certain specimens of deposit that were unlike anything I had seen in four years service on the ship. Had it been understood that a semi-official publication was to be the result, numerous particulars required to complete Mr. Chapman's paper would have been supplied. Of the deposits from the Bay of Bengal, only a few specimens sent by Captain Carpenter to Sir John Murray have been properly examined. Sir John Murray has published (tom. cit. ) the results of an examination of a sample of blue mud from 1,300 fathoms. From the Andaman Region the late Dr. H. B. Brady described and figured (tom. cit. ) some large arenaceous Foraminifera. The following is the list of new species and varieties of Foraminifera dis- covered by the Investigator in deep water:Medical Officers of the Army of India. 61 The following is Professor Schulze's list of species, with localities:62 Scientific Memoirs by a reporter, though arrangements are in progress to send the Alcyonaria to Dr. Alex. Brown, of Aberdeen University. With reference to the Madreporaria, I may quote the following general remarks from my report:Medical Officers of the Army of India. 63 some support to certain theories of Miocene Geography favoured by Professor Suess and Dr. J. W. Gregory, to which I have already referred. The following is the list of deep-sea Madreporaria:64 Scientific Memoirs by ECHINODERMA. The collections of Asteroidea and Ophiuroidea have been named and the new species described, some of the numerous new species of Echinoids and Holothurians have also been noticed, but the Crinoids have received no attention yet. ASTEROIDEA. J. Wood-Mason and A. Alcock : Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., Jan. 1891, pp. 12-14; Dec. 1891, pp. 427-440, fig.II. A. Alcock : An account of the Collection of deep-sea Asteroidea: Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., Feb. 1893, pp. 7365 Medical Officers of the Army of India. 14. Porcellanaster cæruleus, Wy. Thoms. . Andamans, 683 fathoms; Lacca- dives, 738 fathoms. Bay of Bengal, 1,664-1,748 fathoms. 15. Styracaster horridus, Sladen . Bay of Bengal, 1,74866 Scientific Memoirs by 52. Asterias mazophorus (n.), A. A. . . Andamans, 12067 Medical Officers of the Army of India. Dr. Koehler's list, which follows, includes only one new generic type68 Scientific Memoirs by 28. Pectinura conspicua (n.), Koehl. Bay of Bengal (off Godávari), 410 fathoms. 29. Pectinura heros, Lyman. Laccadives, 86569 Medical Officers of the Army of India 53. Gorgonocephalus lævigatus (n.), Koehl. . G. of Manár, 14270 Scientific Memoirs by 5. Orphnurgus asper, Thl. var. glaber (n.), J. H. T. W. Andamans, 561 fathoms. 6. Pannychia Wood-Masoni (n.), J. H. T. W. Andamans, 271, 490, 188Medical Officers of the Army of India. 71 The deep-sea Crustacea dredged by the Investigator, and named, up to the end of the year 1897, number 188 species; but only the stalk-eyed forms have been fully worked out. In addition to these 188 species, several other extremely interesting forms have this year been dredged, but are not included in the list, as no notice of them has yet been published; among them are a new species of Spongicola from 498 fathoms, species of Pylocheles from 185 fathoms, of Ptychogaster, Paralomis, Trachycarcinus and Homalodromia from 430 fathoms. Of the 188 species mentioned in the following list, 124, excluding all about which there is any doubt, are new to science, and among the new species eighteen are types of new genera; these are marked with an asterisk in the list. Although these 188 species all belong to the deep-sea fauna, there is no doubt that a good many of them live, not at the bottom, but at middle depths, This question has already been discussed by other writers, notably by Faxon, in his recent memoir of the Albatross Crustacea, so that I shall here relate only my own observations and conclusions. There can, of course, be no doubt that the creeping forms, such as the Brachyura and Anomura, must come from the bottom. We are also justified in assuming, from their colour, from the several modifications (in the directions either of hypertrophy or of atrophy) of their organs of vision, from the very moderate development of their swimming-feet, and from the habits of their shallow-water relatives, that the species of Phoberus, Nephrops, Nephropsis, Iconaxius, Calastacus, Calocaris, Callianassa, Polycheles, Panulirus, Arctus, Engystenopus, Alpheus, Crangon, Glyphocrangon, etc., inhabit the bottom. But it is probable that most of the Schizopoda and of the Peneiform Macrura, as well as forms like Heterocarpus, Pandalus, Hoplophorus, Acanthephyra, Pasiphæa, Psathyrocaris, Nemato- carcinus, etc., swim freely at varying depths beneath the surface. On one occasion when the dredging-rope fouled, and the trawl, though it may have touched the bottom in 1,439 fathoms, clearly could not have dragged, for it came up almost clean, we found in the bag only a Willemoesia, a Dorodotes, and an Hoplophorus. On two other occasions, when the trawl was lowered in 840 and 922 fathoms, but certainly did not touch bottom, the bag contained (besides a Medusa, a Chiroteuthis pellucida, and a Chauliodus fish) two species of Gnathophausia, a Sergestes, an Acanthephyra and a Phye. All these Crustacea, although (with the probable exception of Willemoesia ) they almost certainly did not come from the bottom, yet must undoubtedly72 Scientific Memoirs by The geographical distribution of the 60 previously-known species on our list, now newly met with in Indian waters, is in several cases most curious and suggestive. Twenty-seven of them are Challenger species from the East Indian Archipelago and Japan, and would be expected to occur in Indian waters. Seven (namely Gnathophausia zo73 Medical 0fficers of the Army of India. II. AMPHIPODA74 Scientific Memoirs by 24. *Parasolenocera annectens, J. W. M. (n.) Andamans, 405 fathoms. 25. Hymenopeneus microps, S. I. Smith Common off Laccadives, 74075 Medical Officers of the Army of India. 46. Glyphocrangon Smithii, J. W.-M. (n.) Andamans, 561 fathoms. 47. Glyphocrangon priononota, J. W.-M. (n.) Laccadives, 865-880, 931 and 1,000 fathoms; Arabian Sea, 890 and 947 fathoms. 48. Glyphocrangon hastacauda, Sp. Bte. Bay of Bengal, 609 fathoms. 49. Glyphocrangon cæcescens, J. W.-M. (n.) Bay of Bengal, 1,748 76 Scientific Memoirs by 72. Acanthephyra eximia, S. I. Smith Andamans, 405, 561 and 500 fathoms. G. of Manar, 738 fathoms. 73. Acanthephyra microphthalma, S. Smith Bay of Bengal, 1,748 fathoms. 74. Acanthephyra armata, A. M. Edw., var. fimbriata, J. W.-M. (n.) Andamans, 405 fathoms; Bay of Ben- gal, 475 fathoms; off Malabar Coast, 406 and 559 fathoms. 75. Acanthephyra curtirostris, J. W.-M. (n.) Andamans, 922 fathoms; Bay of Ben- gal, 764 and 84o fathoms; off south of Ceylon, 364 fathoms. Laccadives, 1,000 and 1,043 fathoms. 76. Acanthephyra sanguínea, J. W.-M. (n.). Andamans, 490 fathoms; Bay of Ben- gal, 1,748 fathoms; Laccadives, etc., 738, 86577 Medical officers of the Army of India. VIII. MACRURA TRICHOBRANCHIATA78 Scientific Memoirs by 116. Munida squamosa, Henderson, var. prolixa, A. A. (n.). Andamans, 188 79 Medical Officers of the Army of India. 145. Parapagurus minutus, Henderson (n.) Maldives, 719 fathoms. 146. Sympagurus monstrosus, A. A. (n.) Bay of Bengal, 12080 Scientific Memoirs by 168. Ethusa pygmaæa, A. A. (n.) Andamans, 188Medical Officers of the Army of India. 81 Colossendeis leptorhynchus was also dredged in the Andaman Sea at. 636 fathoms. Both these are Challenger species, and were dredged both in the Southern Ocean between Kerguelen and the Cape of Good Hope and in the easternmost part of the South Pacific, at depths of 1,375 to 1,600 fathoms, the latter also in the Patagonian fjords at 400 fathoms. POLYZOA, BRACHIOPODA, TUNICATA. The collections of Polyzoa and Tunicata have not been examined, nor are they of any extent. Among the latter is a species of the curious stalked Asci- dian Culeolus from the Bay of Bengal, 1,997 fathoms; it appears to be closely related to C. recumbens Herdman, which was dredged by the Challenger in the Southern Ocean, between Kerguelen and the Cape of Good Hope, in 1,375 fathoms. Brachiopoda are not numerous in Indian waters. In shallow water we sometimes find Lingula, Crania and a small species of Terebratula; but in deep water, in these seas, the only Brachiopods that I know of are (1) a minute species of Terebratula from the Laccadives, 86582 Scientific Memoirs by (Poromya tornata and Solariella infundibulum ) belong to the abyssal fauna, and may be expected to have a wide range; three (Onychoteuthis banksii, Calliteuthis reversa and Cirrhoteuthis pacifica) are free-swimming forms from the middle depths; and four have a somewhat peculiar geographical distribu- tion. These four are:83 Medical Officers of the Army of India. 23. Lucina bengalensis, E. A. S. (n.) Bay of Bengal, 410 fathoms. 24. Cryptodon philippinarum, Hanley Bay of Bengal, off Ceylon, 20084 Scientific Memoirs by 48. pleurotoma (Surcula ) subcorpulenta, E. A. S. (n.) Off Colombo, 675 fathoms. 49. Pleurotoma (Ancistrosyrinx ) travan- corica, E. A. S. (n.) Off Travancore Coast, 406 fathoms. 50. Drillia fugata, E. A. S. (n.) Bay of Bengal, off Ceylon, 200Medical Officers of the Army of India. 85 81. Dentalium mirificum, E. A. S. (n.). Bay of Bengal, off Ceylon, 20086 Scientific Memoirs by Antagonia capros (West Indies, Madeira, Bay of Bengal, Arafura Sea, Japan), Neoscopelus macrolepidotus (West Indies and Atlantic Coasts of the United States, Madeira, Andaman Sea, Australasia), and possibly, Malacocephalus l87 Medical Officers of the Army of India. The 119 new species discovered by the "Investigator" represent upwards of eighty genera and seven families (using the terms in the wide sense employed by the founders of Ichthyology) that previously had not been known to belong to the Indian fauna: of this genera 28 are regarded as new to the system, and are marked with an asterisk in the annexed list: a few of them deserve special notice, such as:88 Scientific Memoirs by Murænidæ which form a little over Io per cent. of the whole. Scopelidæ 89 Medical Officers of the Army of India. 20* Bathyseriola cyanea, A. A. (n.) Bay of Bengal, 98 to 276 fathoms. 21. Antigonia capros, Lowe. Bay of Bengal, off Ceylon, 32090 Scientific Memoirs by 52. Neobythites conjugator, A. A. (n.) Malabar Coast, 360 and 406 fathoms; Bay of Bengal, off Ceylon, 320Medical Officers of the Army of India . 91 81. Macrurus Hoskynii, A. A. (n.) Bay of Bengal, 1,310 fathoms. 82. Macrurus Hextii , A. A. (n.) Laccadives, 865 and z,000 fathoms; Malabar Coast, 36o fathoms. 83. Macrurus Wood-masoni, A. A. (n.) Laccadives, Malabar Coast, Gulf of Manár, 360 to 1,000 fathoms. 84. Mystaconurus cavernosus , G. and B. Andamans, 188 to 405 fathoms; off Colombo, 18092 Scientific Memoirs by 111. Bathypterois atricolor , A. A. (n.) Laccadives, 891 fathoms; off Cape Comorin, 824 fathoms. 112. Bathypterois insularum , A. A. (n.) Laccadives, 1,140 fathoms. 113. Bathypterois Guentheri , A. A. (n.) Andamans, 490 and 561 fathoms. 114. Chlorophthalmus corniger , A. A. (n.) Bay of Bengal, 145Medical Officers of the Army of India . 93 148. Congromuræna macrocercus , A. A. (n.). Andamans, 265 fathoms; Bay of Bengal, 200SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY MEDICAL OFFICERS OF THE ARMY OF INDIA. EDITED BY SURGEON-GENERAL ROBERT HARVEY, M.D. LB. LL.D., DIRECTOR GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL SERVICE. PART XI. 1898. 1 