IP/13/SB.5 REPORTS ON MILITARY CANTONMETNS AND CIVIL STATIONS IN THE PRESIDENCY OF BOMBAY INSPECTED BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER IN THE YEARS 1875 AND 1876. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75008459.tif] Bombay: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1877.
PART I. REPORTS ON MILITARY CANTONMENTS INSPECTED IN 1876. SATARA. AHMEDNAGAR. KOLHÁPUR. SIRUR. BELGAUM. POONA 1. SUDDER BAZAR DHARWAR. 2. NATIVE TROOPS. SHOLÁPUR. 3. EUROPEAN TROOPS. PART II. REPORTS ON CIVIL STATIONS INSPECTED IN 1875. Reprinted by order of Government. TANNA. POONA. AHMEDABAD. AHMEDNAGAR. PART III. REPORTS ON CIVIL STATIONS INSPECTED IN 1876. SATARA. DHARWAR. KOLHÁPUR. SHOLÁPUR. BELGAUM. BIJÁPUR. B 221
PART I. REPORTS ON MILITARY CANTONMENTS INSPECTED IN 1876. Satara Sholápur. Kolhápur. Ahmednagar. Belgaum. Sirur. Dharwar. Poona. 1. Sudder Bazar. 2. Native Troops. 3. European Troops. B 221REPORT ON THE CAMP AT SATARA. The military cantonment of Satara was transferred to the civil authorities and municipality in 1867, when it became a civil station. It covers an area of about 3½ square miles, and is situated on the south-east of the town. The ground gradually slopes down from the hill-fort to the river Yenna, which is about a mile distant from the Sudder Bazaar. The surface of the camp is well wooded, and contains a large extent of grazing ground, and is intersected by several nullahs carrying off the storm-water falling on the south and south-east sides of the hill-fort, which discharge themselves into the Yenna. 2. The road to Kolhápur skirts the southern boundary, above which is the filthy village of Godoli; but this is not, as it ought to be, included within camp limits. By the side of this road is the Godoli tank, which is not, I am informed, used for drinking purposes. The road to Rehmutpur leads from camp in a south- east direction, whilst that to Mhowlee passes through the upper part of it, nearly due east. The old Poona road over the Neera bridge skirts camp limits on the north-east. 3. The Residency is situated in a prominent position on the higher level to the south-west of camp, and the Government treasury and bungalows occupied by gentlemen in civil employ are also chiefly on the south-west; whilst military officers live in bungalows on the south-east, as these are in the vicinity of the Native Infantry lines and the barracks. 4. The troops at present quartered at Satara consist of two companies of the 1st Battalion 2nd Regiment2 the wastage-water from it and the cook-room are not good, as it flows out through a spout on to the ground below, to be absorbed as best it can. The ventilation in the barrack was good, and, in my opinion, sufficient; but the rain is said to beat in through the ridge-ventilator. The men say that they are obliged to close the doors during the night to keep out the south-west wind. 8. The tiled barracks are of old pattern, and not so good as the corrugated iron one in arrangement, as part of the verandahs in each of them has been walled off to form an ablution-room; this is very objectionable. The urinals and latrines at these barracks were also clean, though there was a slight smell in one; but I notice that filth-tubs are kept at the back, where they are not wanted, and only accumulate dirt. 9. The married men's quarters seem to be sufficient and in good order, except that the tiles had been badly laid in one row, as I could see daylight through the roof. The complaint of leaking (evidence of which I saw) was general in this patcherry. 10. In front and rear of the barracks are soldiers' gardens, which are very neatly kept, and are well drained, and are in no way, in my opinion, injurious to the health of the troops; but the ground in and below the barracks was, to a certain extent, swampy, and requires subsoil drainage. Nothing could be easier than to cut trenches to let off the water, but they must be kept clean, and free from grass and weeds. There is a nullah on the south-east between the barracks and the Government Gardens, into which all these intercepting surface drains might be led. The Government Gardens are on the other side of the nullah, and are rather close to the patcheries; but from inquiries made I could not learn that any sickness could be attributed to them; and as they are well drained, and to the leeward of the barracks, they are not, I think, a source of danger to the men. 11. The road to Mhowlee, as I have said, passes between the corrugated new barrack and the tiled ones, and as all corpses of Hindus dying in the town are carried out by this road, the sight has a very depressing effect on the men, who, in cholera times, fear the introduction of the disease amongst themselves. 12. On account of one of the barracks undergoing repair, the others are, for the time being, somewhat overcrowded. 13. The drinking-water for the European troops is supplied from a well which is said to yield good water all the year round. 14. The hospital for the European troops was originally built for the accommodation of the sick of the Native Infantry. It is a good and well-venti- lated building; but the cluster of Native huts near the commissariat lines, which are in too close proximity to it, are most objectionable, and should be removed. 15. The health of the European troops last year at Satara has been very good, but they have suffered very much indeed from syphilis, as, out of the small detachment quartered here last year3 at the time of my inspection, as the nightsoil had been deposited on the ground at the back, where the rank grass, &c., growing there showed that this objectionable practice was the rule and not the exception. 18. The Native Infantry lines are on the right flank, facing northward; they are consequently to the south of the Sudder Bazaar, which is most objectionably close to them, being only 135 yards distant. They were erected in 1872, and have been condemned by the medical officers. They consist of 12 blocks, each containing 28 single rooms, each room affording only 810 cubic feet. The only means of ventilation is through the doorway; as the roof, being thickly thatched, is nearly impervious to air. The plinths are not in all cases sufficiently raised above the ground, as in some instances they are only about 6 inches above it. The surface drainage is defective, though it might be made very good. 19. The sepoys obtain their water from three wells to the east of the lines. An analysis of this water has been made by the Chemical Analyser to Govern- ment, who recommends its use only after filtration; but I am informed that these wells dry up during the hot weather, and the men are put to great shifts, as they have to go long distances to fetch water, even, it is said, as far as the Yenna river. I met some of the sepoys of the Rifles drawing water at a well called the Purdesis' Spring, half a mile distant from camp, near the Ranee's garden. This water is reported to be excellent; but it is simply a surface well, and the conservancy of the gathering ground above it should be carefully looked to. 20. I have already reported to Government on the sanitary condition of the Sudder Bazaar, which is at present a distinct peth under municipal rule; but I must mention that, in consequence of the Native Infantry hospital having been appropriated for the use of the European troops, the only building which could be secured for a hospital for the 4th Rifles is one situated in the bazaar. This is not a suitable place, though it is kept perfectly clean, and the privy, in which the dry-earth system is adopted, is kept quite free from smell. The ablution-water escapes into an earthenware vessel, which is sunk in the ground outside, and is removed every day. 21. The latrines of the Native Infantry are to the east. They are built on the standard plan, but were offensive at the time of my visit. The nightsoil is removed in an iron cart to Ghenda Mal. 22. The health of the men of the Rifles has been good, but they also are found to suffer from syphilis. 23. The surface of the camp is not so well kept as it ought, in my opinion, to be. I observed water lying about, and grass growing in the roadside gutters, which should be removed. This action has hitherto not been taken on account of the expense which would be incurred; but Mr. Moore, I believe, will shortly be in possession of funds which will enable him to carry out this very necessary work. 24. Cutchra and sweepings collected in camp are deposited on the road leading from the Mhowlee road to the Ranee's garden, on the east of camp. The condition of this manure-yard was objectionable at the time of my visit. The sweepings should not be exposed, but should be covered over with earth, or should be burnt, and the ashes used to apply to nightsoil at the privies in the bazaar. 25. The nightsoil was formerly placed in deep pits dug in the ground near the Ranee's garden, but this practice is now stopped. It should be deposited in garden-ground to the east of camp, in trenches 2 feet broad by 1 foot deep, with intervals of 1 foot between each trench, and the stuff should be covered every day.
4 26. The officers' houses appeared to me to be very old, and I saw very few provided with a proper plinth. I think houses of better construction are a want in Satara, though it would be difficult under existing circumstances to get land- lords to build them. 27. The burial place for Europeans is on the east of camp, between the Rehmutpur and Mhowlee roads. It was in good order, and kept clean. The Portuguese Christian burial-ground is situated on high ground over the old Poona road, Hindus are taken to Mhowlee, and low-caste Hindus and Maho- medans are buried at Ghenda Mal. 28. Such is a brief description of the sanitary condition of the camp at Satara, and I will now make a few remarks on it. The climate of Satara is one of the best in Western India, and is said to be particularly good for Europeans. The hot weather is neither excessive, or prolonged, and the place itself should be one of our most salubrious stations. It is, I am informed, a political necessity that European troops should always be stationed in the close vicinity of Satara; and this being so, I am of opinion that the best place to put them would be on the tableland near Yuteshwur. At present there would not be a sufficient water- supply for them there; but there is now a scheme before Government to bring the water to the town from Khas, along the summit of the tableland, and I would recommend Government in the Military Department to urge the adoption of this scheme, which would enable it to station a European regiment on the hills in a place where the annual rainfall is not excessive. I think, with the view of ob- taining accurate information on this point, that the rainfall should be carefully registered during next monsoon at Yuteshwur. Dr. Ross states in his report for 1874 that the annual rainfall at Yuteshwur hill is 59 inches, which is much less than in Bombay. A cart-road to the top of the tableland could be made with the greatest ease, and at a very small expense, by widening the present approach5 Surface-drains should also be cut, and the bathing-water should be conveyed into them. The Khas water-scheme, if adopted, would benefit the European, but especially the Native troops, for whom also a proper hospital is much required. 32. One of the greatest wants in Satara is the introduction of the Conta- gious Disease Act, as the filthy village of Godoli is, in every sense, a source of danger to the troops, and should, if possible, be removed. Another site could, I imagine, without much difficulty, be found for it. If that cannot be done, it should be included within municipal limits, and daily inspected and kept clean. But the prostitutes in Satara are now under no sort of regulation, and consist of the dregs of the lowest castes of Natives; and as the station is a civil one there is great difficulty in the way of putting the provisions of the Act into force. 33. Whether the objections in the way of again establishing a military cantonment are insuperable, it does not fall within my province to say; but I am told that owners of property in camp would make a strong remonstrance against its being again transferred; and I am sure that the present Collector will, when provided with funds, do all that is possible to keep the station cleaner than it is at present. T. G. HEWLETT, Acting Sanitary Commissioner. Sanitary Commissioner's Office, Bombay, August 24th, 1876.
Military Department. No. 3754. Bombay Castle, 6th September 1876. Letter from the Acting Sanitary Commissioner, No. A - 766, dated 24th August 1876. Forwards a report on the Sanitary condition of the camp at Satara. *With plan. RESOLUTION.Para. 11. Funeral Proces- sions. 7. It is much to be regretted that the barracks were constructed at the side of the Mhowlee road, as never a day passes with- out one or more funeral processions; and if any epide- mic is prevalent, they are more numerous; but the Collector States that if any virulent epidemic prevailed, he should consider it his duty to order the funeral processions to take another route. Para. 14. Native Huts near Commissariat Lines. 8. Steps have already been taken for the remo- val of these huts. Paras. 15 & 32. Contagious Diseases Act. 9. The introduction of the Contagious Diseases Act into Satara is under consideration on a separate reference from Govern- ment, received under Military Department No. 9196, dated 18th October 1876. Para. 16. Removal of nightsoil. 10. Instructions have been issued for the nightsoil from the barracks to be taken to a spot near to that where the Sudder Bazar and Station nightsoil is deposited. This will be more convenient as regards distance, and will have the ad- vantage of being to leeward of the barracks. Para. 17. Filthy conditions of a native latrine. 11. A strict surveillance is now kept over this latrine. Paras. 18 & 31. Native Infantry Huts. 12. The General Officer Commanding Poona Division has been requested to submit an estimate for improving the ventilation and surface drainage of the Native Infantry lines. Para. 19. Water-supply. 13. An estimate of the cost of sinking an additional well has also been called for. The gathering ground above the Purdesi's well is kept clean. Para. 20. Native Infantry Hospital. 14. The original Native Infantry Hospital is at present occupied by the European sick. Plans and estimates for the construc- tion of an hospital for the latter are now under pre- paration, and when this building is erected, the native hospital will be put to its legitimate use. Para. 21. Native Infantry Latrines. 15. The latrines are regularly cleaned out morning and evening; but it so happened that they were visited by the Sanitary Com- missioner just before the evening cleaning. Para. 23. Surface of the camp. 16. The present Collector of Satara has forbidden the practice that has hitherto obtained of excavating moorum in the camp, which left unsightly holes and pits for water to accu- mulate. He has also had the pits drained, and the road-side gutters cleaned since the Sanitary Commissioner's visit. Para. 24. Camp Refuse. 17. The sweepings are now burnt and thrown on the nightsoil in the pits; but the same practice cannot be applied to the privies in the bazar, as it would entail the entertainment of a larger establishment than can be afforded. Para. 25. Deposit of night- soil. 18. The Collector states that the plan of disposing of the nightsoil sug- gested by the Sanitary Commissioner will be adopted so soon as arrangements for acquiring a plot of good soil have been carried out. The present site is in hard moorum, and there is no soil with which to cover the filth. Para. 28. Location of Troops on Yuteshwar. 19. His Excellency the Commander-in-Chief fully concurs with the Sanitary Commissioner in regard to the suitability of Yuteshwar as a site for a Military Station, but at present, His Ex- cellency considers, it would be useless bringing forward a proposal involving so large an outlay of money. 2
3 Para. 29. Encamping ground. 20. The site alluded to has already been selected as an encamping ground. Para. 30. Separate ablution rooms. 21. The provision of separate ablution rooms for the men occupying the tiled barracks does not appear to be a work of such emergency as to warrant an application to Government for funds to carry it out. The present arrangement has been found convenient, and not hitherto considered very faulty. Para. 33. Re-establishment of Military Cantonment. 22. An attempt was made some time ago to re-establish the Military Can- tonment of Satara, and the difficulties in the way were found to be almost insuperable in consequence of the large amount of private property which it would be necessary to include within Military limits. Vide Government Resolution, Mili- tary Department, No. 3287, dated 13th August 1875. I have the honor to be, &c., (Signed) G. BURROWS, Brigadier-General, Quarter Master General. Military Department. No. 4951. Bombay Castle, 16th November 1876. Letter from the Surgeon General, British Forces, No. 1458, dated 18th September 1876. States that he concurs generally in the remarks of the Acting Sanitary Commissioner in his report on Satara, communicated with Government Resolution No. 3754, dated 6th September. Letter from the Surgeon General, Indian Medical Department, No. 3758, dated 13th Septem- ber 1876. With reference to Government Resolution No. 3754, dated 6th September 1876, states that he has no remarks to offer. Letter from the Quarter Master General of the Army, No. 19-49*Act XIV. of 1868. His Excellency the Commander-in-Chief is of opinion that the "Indian Contagious Diseases Act*might, with advantage, be applied to the station of Satara, if Govern- ment are prepared to provide the necessary funds for its administration. 2. The "Rules for the Prevention of Venereal Disease," framed under Bombay Act III. of 1867, could not be brought into force at Satara without first making it a Military cantonment, and the difficulties attending that measure would be many, as already shown in the correspondence underlying Government Resolution, Military Department, No. 3287, dated 13th August 1875.REPORT ON THE CANTONMENT OF KOLHA'PUR. The cantonment of Kolhápur is situated on high ground over the valley of the Panchganga river, and is about a mile distant from the town, which lies to the south-west of camp. It occupies an area of rather more than 663 acres, and the country all round is open, and cultivated towards the river. 2. The roads throughout the cantonment are well kept, and great attention is evidently paid to prevent the lodgment of water, the natural drainage being extremely good. 3. There is only one regiment quartered here2 7. The Sudder Bazaar is situated on the west of the lines. Its population is said to consist of:3 13. The water-supply is derived from 12 wells, some of which run dry in the hot weather, though two are said to yield good water all the year round. These wells ought to be covered, to prevent impurities finding their way into the water; and each should be fitted with an iron chain and iron bucket, or, if the men prefer to use their own brass lotas, these should be cleaned before being brought to the well; bat I should be glad to see the Kattyani water brought into camp. I certainly think it ought to be done, but it is estimated that the cost of bringing it in would amount to about Rs. 20,000 or 25,000. It would be a great safe- guard to the troops, though the health of the regiment has been remarkably good, only 4 deaths having occurred during the past year. 14. Altogether, I think Kolhápur Cantonment is kept in as clean a con- dition as it can be, and that great care and attention have been paid on its general arrangements, and that its sanitary condition is, on the whole, good, but that there is much need for a beef and mutton market; and that the privies in the bazaar should be regularly inspected and more diligently cleaned, and that iron recep- tacles should be placed below each seat. I also think the bazaar establishment or cleaning is too small, and might advantageously be increased by another cart. T. G. HEWLETT, Acting Sanitary Commissioner. Sanitary Commissioner's Office, Bombay, 29th August 1876
Military Department. No. 3762. Bombay Castle, 6th September 1876. Letter from the Acting Sanitary Commissioner, No. A.2. The same remark also applies to that portion of paragraph 14 which recommends that a beef and mutton market should be provided. 3. With regard to the bad drainage, noticed in paragraphs 7 and 8 of the report, steps have been taken to remedy this defect. 4. With reference to paragraph 12, the Brigadier-General states that he has directed the Officer Commanding at Kolhápur to have the bathing water carried off, by means of drains outside the huts, to small plots of garden in front, as recommended by the Sanitary Commissioner. 5. It is further reported that the privies are regularly inspected, and that the people using them will be directed to provide receptacles, as recommended. 6. The Sanitary Commissioner is in error as regards the number of sweepers paid for by Government for the conservancy of the latrines, four Bil- dars being the establishment allowed. I have, &c., (Signed) G. BURROWS, Brigadier-General, Quarter Master General.
REPORT ON THE SANITARY CONDITION OF THE CANTONMENT OF BELGAUM, INSPECTED IN AUGUST 1876. The Cantonment of Belgaum is situated in latitude 15° 32' North and longitude 74° 53' 30" East, at an elevation of about 2,500 feet above the level of the sea from which it is distant about 53 miles. It is about 66 miles South of the Military Cantonment of Kolhapur and 47 miles North of that of Dharwar, whilst the nearest sea port Vingorla is 76 miles to the west, the line of the Western Ghauts being about 30 miles in the same direction, but as the physical geography, climate, &c., of the Cantonment have often before been described by Medical Officers, I do not think it will be desirable in this report to enter more minutely into these matters more especially as I have lately touched upon them in a report on the adjacent town which I have recently submitted, nor will I attempt to give the details of every building occupied by each corps, as such information is already in the possession of Government, but I will confine my remarks to those points which I think it is desirable should be brought to especial notice. 2. As one of the greatest points of danger to the troops, I will commence with a description of the Sudder Bazar as I saw it at my inspection on the 10th August 1876. It forms part of the eastern boundary of the Cantonment and is separated from the town by a water course called the Bogarvis Nullah which is crossed by several roads leading into the town so that the communication between the two places is constant and uninterrupted. 3. The soil consists of laterite over the underlying trap rock, and the population as given in the Census of 1872, is said to have amounted to 2,636 males and 2,694 females, or a total of 5,330 persons, but I am informed by Colonel Mason, the Cantonment Magistrate that these figures include Natives living in the regimental bazars and Officers' lines, and that the population of the Sudder Bazar by itself consists of 1,308 Men, 1,546 Women, 1,661 Children, or a total of 4,515 persons. The remarkable excess in the number of women over that of the men will attract attention and if correct may partly I think be accounted for by the location of European troops at this station. 4. It is said that these people reside in 994 houses, 100 being of a better sort and the remainder of an inferior, in some instances, I would remark, of a
2 very inferior description. On the average, on the assumption, that the popula- tion as given by Colonel Mason is correct, there are only 4.6 persons to a house, so that the houses are not according to this statement overcrowded, but I am informed in reality they are so, as it is found that a very large number of persons belonging to the town really live in the houses of their friends in the Sudder bazar where they are not subject to any taxation whatever. 5. The better class of houses have a sufficient plinth two or three feet high and are built of cut-stone with laterite walls or entirely with laterite, but the walls of the inferior sort consist simply of mud bricks whilst the entrances to some of these houses are very small. For example the doorway of a house in Karkur street was only 4 feet high by 14 inches broad. The houses are chiefly built on the ground floor and are all tiled, but they are not provided with any means of ventilation, the consequence being that their interiors are dark, close smelling and unwholesome, and some of them are of great length so that there is little or no ventilation, and although regularity has been observed along the line of streets, there is none with reference to the rear which generally opens into a small court-yard enclosed by a mud wall. The filth in some of these places was very great, and proved that there was an entire absence of any proper systematic inspection. 6. There are said to be 380 private privies in the bazar, of which 232 are built under the roof of the house, whilst the remainder are in a far safer position as they are detached. 7. The drinking water of the inhabitants is entirely derived from wells excavated in the laterite of which it is said 64 are private and 3 public. Many of the private wells are situated within a few feet of a privy. 8. There are only 2 public latrines, one for males containing 14 compart- ments, and another for females with 20 compartments, They are situated in the extreme east on a high bank which appears as if it had in bye gone days formed part of a bund just above the banks of the Bogarvis Nullah. Their condition when I saw them was simply disgraceful. Each building consists of two rows back to back separated by a paved central passage. At the men's privy the cesspool for the offensive fluid to run into has been placed on the highest part viz., on the north end but though it was full, it was covered over with such a thick scum that an Officer who was accompanying us did not see that it was a cesspool and walked into it, but the pavement in the centre even if it had been properly laid in the first instance has sunk towards the south and a filthy fluid composed of urine, fæces, and ablution water was seen flowing out over the open ground. The stench of the place was horrible, and I can easily conceive that people do not like to visit it. In each compartment there is placed an iron box, but the urine guards have been bent down, and the men evidently do not micturate into it as a pool of urine was seen on the ground in front of each compartment. I could not enter the female latrine as it was occupied at the time, but on looking down the central passage I saw nightsoil flowing into it and nothing could be worse than its condition. 9. Colonel Mason was good enough to have a census taken of the number of people visiting these privies from 4 A.M. till 8 P.M., on the 13th August when it was found that 477 persons visited them. Now taking 4.6 persons as the average number of occupiers of a house and multiplying these figures by 380, the number of privies in the bazar, it will be seen that only 1,748 persons used the private privies so that if this number is added to the visitors of the public latrines only 2,225 residents could have used any privy on that day and the very serious question arises where did the remaining 2,390 persons ease themselves? It is
3 clear that the nightsoil must have been passed in the inhabited area, as indeed there was ample evidence, and this practice is a source of great danger and should be instantly stopped. 10. The urgent necessity for the erection of several new public latrines and urinals must, I think, be apparent. These however should not be of a similar pattern or construction to those I have described, but they might be after a form recently introduced by Mr. Arthur Crawford, the Collector of Ratnágiri, which ensures the removal of all filth. It may be useful to state what amount. of nightsoil is produced during each day in the Sudder bazar. It is usual to assume that 2.5 ozs. of solid matter are passed, and 40 ozs. of urine are voided per head of population per diem, so that there would be.31 or rather more than a quarter of a ton of solid matter and 5 tons of urine produced every day. This calculation does not include the ablution water. A tank-cart, Bombay pattern, holds about a ton, so that the removal of all the nightsoil, &c., from the bazaar would require at least about 6 or 7 carts the expense of mainte- nance of which would probably be prohibitive with the present income at the disposal of the Cantonment Committee. 11. All the roads are said to be unmade, but they appear in good order and their surface was clean and they are stated to be nearly four miles in length; on each side of the roadway is a gutter which is supposed to carry off the storm-water into the Bogarvis Nullah, but as they are covered over with slabs of stone so as to form entrances to shops and houses, and as it was found on lifting them up that they were invariably choked and blocked.with filth of all kinds, it is clear that they do not answer the purpose for which they were constructed. The stone slabs should be at once removed and the gutters excavated, and U shaped. gutters should be provided in their stead, and no square drains should be allowed nor should the rubble walls of houses form one side of the gutter, as the water soaks into the walls and makes the surface of the floors damp. 12. The following return shows the number of animals kept in the bazar:4 14. The beef slaughter house is on the south east of camp near the Tent Lascar lines and over a nullah and close to where the dhobies wash. The arrangements are not good, and the remarks which I shall presently make regard- ing the Commissariat slaughter houses which are contiguous to those for the bazar apply equally to the latter. About 8 head of cattle and about 20 sheep are killed daily for the use of Officers and the Sudder bazar. I would particularly notice that the well in front of the slaughter houses requires to be covered as the water is fouled with all kinds of impurities, and it is said to be drawn for the use of Officers. 15. I am indebted to Colonel Mason for the following return of shops:5 impassible on account of the horrible stench arising from this depot. Inside it pits about 20 feet square and which are said to be 10 feet deep have been dug When a pit is filled it is left exposed to allow its contents to consolidate. 19. This is a very unscientific way of dealing with the nightsoil, and although I have given the same advice in my report on the town of Belgaum, I think it well to repeat it here. A field should be chosen distant from any well or drinking water supply, and a long trench 2 feet broad and 1 foot deep should be dug and along side it at an interval of a foot another trench should similarly be excavated. The nightsoil should every day be poured into it for a depth of not more than 6 inches, and then covered over with earth excavated from the trench alongside. If there is much liquid the filling should commence from the lower end and in front of this but separated from it by a thickness of a foot should be dug a pit 5 feet deep into which the ooze can percolate and fresh earth should day by day be thrown over the ooze. When the field had been com- pletely manured in this way it might be allowed to stand for three months and should then be ploughed up crosswise when it would be found ready for culti- vation. 20. I estimate that at least 10 new public latrines are required, 5 for each sex, and there should be one nightsoil cart Bombay pattern for each 2 latrines. This should make 2 trips or more if necessary a day, and the scavenging establish- ment should be increased by at least 2 carts and 8 road sweepers as 2 men to a cart are necessary. The present carts are not of a good pattern. The Bombay tilt cart for the removal of cutchra is the best I know and could easily be procured. 21. The cutchra collected in the carts should not be as now deposited by the side of the road near the Khanapur manure yard, but should be used for filling in low lying ground on the south outside camp limits and each day's deposit should be covered with earth. I may mention that I saw milch cattle returning from grazing along the Khanapur road in the act of feeding on the cutchra there deposited. Among other matters more attention should be paid to limewashing the inside of houses. This a very cleansing operation and should, be done thoroughly twice a year at the Dewali and in the hot weather. 22. The wells ought to be covered. I saw them fouled with flowers, sticks, grass, leaves, &c., and the water should be drawn up by an iron chain, and if possible, by an iron bucket, or the people might use their own metal vessels provided that these were clean; for which purpose a trough a little distance from the well might be built. The surface below each well should be paved on a slope leading to a gutter. The wastage water should not be allowed as now to run out on to the ground, but should be conveyed through a glazed stone-ware drain to the roadside gutter. 23. The European guard room in the bazar was in good order but the privy attached to it is placed on the west, and the filth is removed from the same side so that on opening the door on the east the smell was very bad. There was no ventilation, but I was informed that after my visit immediate orders were issued to fix a ventilator in the roof. The room for the native infantry bazar guard also requires ventilation and the floor space is insufficient as the room is only 18 feet long by 10 feet broad so that as the guard consists of one naik and six men five of whom sleep in it at the same time, each man has only 33 feet of superficial area. I think a larger room should be provided. The privy in the rear was very dirty at the time of my inspection. The Pound for cattle is near this guard room and its surface requires flagging. The cesspools in the bazar should be cleaned out and filled up. The bathing water should be allowed to flow in to the present roadside gutters which it could do if they were not blocked
6 up, but the privy water should be retained in an iron vessel at the privies and should on no account be allowed to flow into them but should be all daily removed. 24. I have been much struck with the apparent absurdity of allowing people on one side of a ditch to live without paying a single pie for the main- tenance of a proper establishment for their conservancy arrangements, whilst residents on the other side of it have to pay taxes for this necessary operation. From the above description it will be seen that the state of the Sudder bazar in Belgaum is wretched in the extreme, and the establishment sanctioned is in my opinion utterly inadequate to keep it clean, but it is all that can be paid for out of the present income, and I would therefore strongly recommend that the same taxes which are levied in the adjacent town should be imposed in the bazar. The provisions of the Cantonment Act would have to be enlarged before these taxes could be enforced, but it is absolutely necessary that the cleaning staff be increased and this action would, I believe, raise a sum sufficient to pay for the cost of supervisors and removal of cutehra and nightsoil and putting into force the sanitary clauses of the Act. In addition to the above taxes, I recommend that there should be a special halalcore cess, and that all bhungees should, as they are in Bombay, be declared to be public servants and be paid for out of the Cantonment Fund. 25. If the additional public privies I recommend are sanctioned, it will be possible to close many of the private ones and great care should be taken not to allow any of the existing ones to be under the same roof as the sleeping apart- ments without an opening being made in the roof like those provided for the escape of smoke from kitchens. All privies should be paved in rear and all new ones ought to be detached by an air space of at least 3 feet all round and a paved passage should be left for the bhunghee and if possible there should be no roof over it. 26. What is much needed however is skilled daily inspection. The art of cleaning a town requires to be learnt, and it should be remembered that the division of the inhabited area into sections over which there is a responsible head is the keystone of successful practical sanitation. The present conservancy sergeant is miserably underpaid though he is, I believe a very hardworking man, but when a change is made it would be well to get up a Sub-Inspector from the Public Health Department in Bombay, who has been accustomed to superintend cleansing operations carried out on a system. 27. It will be convenient to mention here that I inspected the Commis- sariat cattle yard. It was extremely clean and well kept, but I am of opinion the manure should not be stored inside camp and that it should be daily carted away. It might safely however be used on the Government gardens. 28. I was surprised to find that although the burial grounds for Europeans in camp limits have been closed, yet that the bodies of Native Roman Catholics are still allowed to be buried in the old Roman Catholic burial ground and that Native Protestants are buried in the adjoining graveyard. Both these places were untidy and very badly kept, as they were covered with rank vegetation and no order was preserved in digging the graves. In my opinion they should be at once closed and a fresh site outside camp near the new English burial ground should be provided. 29. The Contagious Disease Act is in force in Belgaum Cantonment, and 114 Prostitutes are registered, 22 of whom belong to the town and one comes from Shahpur a neighbouring Township which is within easy distance of camp but which is not under British rule as it belongs to the Chief of Sangli and is therefore foreign territory. I am indebted to Dr. Peters, the Surgeon in charge
7 of the Lock Hospital, for the following return showing the number of admissions from venereal disease among the European troops stationed at Belgaum. SYPHILIS PRIMARY. GONNORH8 30. The very serious increase in the number of cases that has lately taken place among the men of the 7th Fusiliers is partly due, I was informed, to the introduction of some women from Poona, who were not discovered until they had infected several men; but I believe these women have now been brought on to the Register. I am also informed that much illicit intercourse takes place between the soldiers and women who bring in supplies from the neighbouring villages who are not of course on the register, and it is said that nothing can be done to stop this practice unless the roads and country round are patrolled by the Police, a measure which would be very expensive and might be inoperative. I am also informed that it has been the practice not to bring on the Register a prostitute who claims to be the kept mistress of any one particular soldier; I think this plea should not be allowed. The successful working of the Act requires very active measures on the part of the Police, though in a place like Belgaum there will be always, in my opinion, great difficulties in putting the Act into force, and it was suggested to me by one of the Commanding Officers that it would be better that each corps should have its own Lal Bazar, and I am told that this plan was successfully carried out at Cawnpore. The subject should engage the earnest attention of the authorities, as the number of men who have been off duty from this cause is comparatively speaking very large. I also think the periodical examination of the women should be made once a week, not every fortnight as now. 31. It would doubtless also for this as well as for many reasons be advis- able that Shahpur be bought up and brought within Municipal limits, but I am told that such a course is simply impracticable though from a sanitary point of view it is highly desirable. 32. The native population living in the Officers' lines is said to consist of 458 men, 192 women and 93 children, and the surface conservancy establishment allowed for this part of the Cantonment consists of 7 carts, 7 road scavengers and 1 halalcore. I am informed that there is a public latrine for the use of these people, and all the cutchra and nightsoil are taken to the manure yards. The servants' privies are usually erected in a corner of their master's compounds. It was found that whilst the solid matter is generally speaking removed, a pool of offensive fluid is too often left to putrefy in the rear of the privy opening. 33. The under growth of grass and weeds has been, in my opinion, allowed to grow far too luxuriantly in the Officers' compounds and over the Cantonment generally. This should, I think, be scrupulously kept cut down throughout the rainy season. This remark is especially applicable to the Fort. 34. The roads throughout the Cantonment are well made, well swept, and the roadside gutters are generally speaking, as they should be, kept free from weeds, though I saw many in which the grass had grown up. It is most im- portant that all these should be kept clean so as to allow a ready escape for the surface water. 35. The drinking water supply for the Officers' lines is, I am informed, principally drawn from a deep well dug in a corner of a quarry near the church. The water is drawn by a moat and bullocks and except at the end under the moat the well is covered with wooden planking, but immediately above this opening trees are growing out of the side of the quarry, and I saw that leaves had fallen through it into the water. The trees should be removed and never allowed to grow and the water should be raised by a force pump. The well yields excellent water which lasts all the year round, though the supply is said to run rather short during the hot weather. The surface of the quarry is uneven and covered with rank vegetation and was not clean, whilst the wastage
9 water from the well had caused an offensive pool of black mud. It is thought that if this surface were levelled the wastage water might be utilized over a garden, but in no case whatever should any manure be used, as the water passing over it would find its way back into the well. 36. The native population in the Cantonment of Belgaum which com- prises the residents in the Sudder and regimental bazars and Officers' lines are very unhealthy. Last year the mortality rate was greater here than in the adjacent town, as it attained the very high rate of 35.27 per 1,000. In 1872 it was even higher as it then amounted to 37.4 per 1,000. 1875 was the first year in which a death from cholera was registered, but the fever rate is persistently high. In 1875 12.38 per 1,000 of population died from this cause. In 1872 the deaths from bowel complaints were remarkably high, 8.4 per 1,000, but during the last two years this rate has fallen, and in 1875 it was only 2.81 per 1,000. Young children have always been remarkably unhealthy in the Cantonment. (I am speaking it will be remembered of the native population.) As in 1872, 38 per cent., and in 1875 the extremely high rate of 46.28 per cent. of the total deaths took place among children under 12 years of age. Such facts point to insanitary conditions which I think have been amply shown in the preceding sections. 37. I will now mention those points connected with the barracks and native regimental lines which, I think, should be brought to notice. 38. The Artillery barracks are occupied by C Battery, 4th Brigade, R. A., which is of the following strength:10 39. As, I regret to say, is usual in India though the subject is one which, in the construction of buildings, always first of all engages the attention of Engineers at home no proper arrangement has been made to convey away the rain falling on the roofs, the wastage water from sergeant's bathing rooms and the liquid filth from the men's urinals on the upper story of the barracks, or the water from the cookrooms, ablution rooms, and outhouses, &c., and the most rude and unscientific contrivances have been adopted for some of these places. In the first place the rain simply drips off the roofs and either falls on to the foundation or is blown by the wind into the verandahs. Rain roof gutters and pipes are the remedy. A urine tub is placed at night on the open top of the projection at each end of the building, but the men make water not only into it but on to the stone pavement. The place is washed down daily and was lime whited, but the arrangement is exceedingly objectionable. A glazed stoneware urinal trough should be erected along the length of the outside wall. This should be well washed out in the early morning with water, and the fluid should be conveyed through a glazed stone ware pipe attached to the outer wall, to a drain, and applied to a garden in the rear. 40. Below the sergeants' quarters is placed a semicircular iron receptacle furnished with a lid through which the pipe from the bathroom is led. The consequence being that any gases generated below are conveyed up the pipe into the bath room. This arrangement is dangerous and expensive. The water has to be lifted out of the iron receptacle and carried away. It would be far better to make it remove itself through a 3-inch glazed stoneware pipe for utilization in a garden, and the same remark applies to the ablution room water and with the greatest force to the cookroom water, in the iron receptacle of which the filthy water containing much organic matter rapidly decomposes, and the gases are carried back into the cookroom and taint the food. This can be obviated at once by cut- ting off the end of the pipe one foot above the iron receptacle, in the centre of the lid of which, an open iron funnel one foot square should be fixed, so that the pipe above could discharge its contents into the funnel, and thus the foul air generated below would find a ready access into the external air and not pass back through the pipe, but this action should not prevent the laying of glazed stone- ware pipes and the conveyance of all this fertilizing material to gardens in the rear. 41. I must particularly notice the kitchens; they are much too dark as it is difficult to see the sink; and there should be no dark corners in a kitchen. It would be easy to provide windows. The smoke also does not pass readily up the chimney but blackens the roof and walls, which consequently present a very dirty appearance. This can easily be obviated by fitting at a height of 6 feet from the ground a projecting iron funnel such as is commonly used in a chemical labora- tory over the place where the cooks stand in front of the fire place. All the smoke would then pass up the chimney. The ash boxes of the kitchen are not good. They ought to consist of a moveable iron not wooden box which should be emptied into an iron filth cart. I must also condemn the system of water supply to the barracks and kitchens. In the latter it is stored in a wooden cask into which the dirty hand and dirty vessel is dipped. The water should be kept in an iron tank in one corner of which a filter ought to be fitted and the water should be drawn off through a brass cock. The barracks are not provided with Macna- mara's filters which have been so successfully introduced into Bengal and the old bad arrangement of three gurrahs in which coarse charcoal and sand are supposed to be kept is the only system of filtration adopted. A Macnamara or Silicated Carbon filter which might stand in a large porous earthenware vessel should be procured for each barrack room at once. The privies were remarkably clean, free from smell and were evidently carefully inspected, but the filth cart is kept in their rear which is objectionably near and in full view of the public road.
11 42. Contrary to the original design the verandahs in the west side of the barrack rooms on the upper story have been enclosed by corrugated iron sheets placed below for a height of about 3 feet, and above this are windows which only open by a sliding frame-work in the centre. This is said to be necessary on account of the force of the wind and rain, but I think it would have been better if vertically revolving venetians had been erected in their stead; such as have been fitted at the Goculdass Tejpall Hospital in Bombay. It has also been found necessary to close the ridge ventilators to keep out the rain. The Patcheries and their outhouses require drainage in the same way as the barracks, otherwise the arrangements of these buildings were extremely good and they were wonderfully clean and well kept. 43. I would also notice that only one cocoanut oil light suspended from the centre of the ceiling is allowed for each barrack room besides 2 wretchedly small wall lights. These are merely sufficient to cast a gloom over the whole room at night, and the darkness is calculated to have a decidedly bad effect on the health of the men as nothing can be more cheerless or dismal or more likely to drive them out to worse places, whereas if the place were properly lighted with kerosine oil lights they would find their own barrack rooms more cheerful and comfortable than any other place and would be deprived of the temptation to go out. 44. Although it may be thought that the subject does not come strictly within my province, I would venture to say that the stables are not in my opinion sufficiently ventilated. The men have to work in them for several hours a day and therefore I venture to make this remark. The new syce lines were extremely clean, well kept and are better than most native habitations. Temporary latrines have been provided for their accommodation. 45. The water supply is obtained from a well on the east of the lines. The water is said to be always good and abundant. The stable litter is deposited below this well, I do not think the site a safe one. If possible the litter should be sold, and if this is not feasible it might be carted to the Government gardens or in any case it might be burnt. 46. On the whole I consider these Artillery barracks from their situation, general construction and space most admirably adapted for preserving the health of the men, and the extremely careful and constant supervision kept over their cleanliness by the Commanding and Medical Officers tends greatly to prevent the defects I have named from having that bad effect which otherwise they are calculated to produce. These evils are however remediable at a not very heavy outlay, and I trust the suggestions I have made regarding them will be carried out. 47. The following returns show the number of men, women and children of the 2/7th Royal Fusiliers present at Belgaum both in the barracks, in camp, and the Fort On the 11th August 1876: 12 and the native establishment was as under13 49. The same objections that I have urged regarding the Artillery barracks with reference to the absence of drainage apply even still more forcibly to those occupied by the Fusiliers. It is an urgent and very important sanitary work. No expensive works are wanted and though doubtless glazed stone ware pipes would be the best if properly and scientifically laid much time would be taken in procuring them from England and open U shaped stone drains would serve the purpose admirably. Colonel Herbert, Commanding the Fusiliers, I see from the correspondence on my files, has lately called attention to the want of these open drains from the Patcherries where the married families of the regiment live, and I heartily endorse his opinion that the provision of these open drains is absolutely essential and necessary. At the time of my inspection of the Patcherries there was simply no means provided for carrying away the filthy water from the bathrooms; as the iron boxes had not then been supplied by the Barrack Department. It was discharged on to the ground and formed offensive pools which flowed down towards the line of Patcherries in the rear. The open drains from these buildings should be led so as to discharge their contents into an intercepting drain which should have its outfall in the garden below and to the north-east of the plungebath. Those from the barracks and their cook and ablution rooms, &c., might be led into gardens where the fluid could be turned to a profitable use 50. The necessity of providing proper glazed stoneware troughs for urinals for the men in the upper storied barracks is urgent, and this measure should be carried out at once. The smell early in the morning was sickening in the extreme. The uneven surface of the stone assists in the decomposition of the urine and early steps should be taken, as long as this objectionable arrangement is allowed to continue, to cover the place with asphalt or with sheet lead. Troughs containing dry earth would be better than the present poisonous urinal tub which ought in every station in my opinion to be condemned. The addition of lime to urine is not recommended as it assists its decomposition. 51. In the quarter guard the prisoners' room requires ventilation by the insertion of clerestory windows on each side; the 5 cells on the west of the quarter guard are not fit for occupation by European prisoners. The back wall faces the west and the ventilation is in my opinion thoroughly insufficient. The walls should be pierced and the doors ought to be made to face the west. The urinal for the guard room has also been built on the west, and the wind blows straight over this place into it. 52. The necessity for drainage from the Patcherries has already been spoken of, but the sleeping rooms in them require more ventilation; and a very disgusting arrangement has been allowed by providing for each family a detached building containing a cook room on one side and a privy at its back under the same roof. The privies should be distinct and detached. 53. The drinking water for the regiment is drawn from a deep well in the nullah between the Patcherries and the hospital, but there are a range of native privies on the water shed above it. These are situated near the apothecaries' quarters and should be at once removed and another site fixed for them. 54. The hospital is common to both the Artillery and the Fusiliers but the Medical Officers recommend that as a saving to Government of about Rs. 150 a month on account of establishment could be effected by converting it into a general hospital that this action should be taken. I think trees should be planted and a garden made in the enclosure. But I wish to draw attention to the marshy ground above the hospital on the west below the temple of Mahalukshmi, which I think must exert a deleterious influence on the health of the residents in the Regimental lines. I am of opinion that if search were made springs of water would be found below the Hill which perhaps might be utilized.
14 The following is the description return of the Hospital Wards:15 58. The lines of the 2nd Prince of Wales Own Grenadiers were also extre- mely well kept, the plinths of the pendalls are well raised and the ventilation. in each room though not perhaps sufficient is much better than is usually seen. in sepoys' huts. The privies of these lines are however extremely bad and were so offensive that it was almost impossible to go into them. They are on the standard plan but they are not paved in rear. They exhibited a marked contrast to those occupied by the 14th Regiment, and were as bad as I have ever seen; and they did not seem to me to have been as carefully inspected as those of the 14th. Pools of urine were found in the front of each compartment from which a most offensive smell emanated. If the standard plan is adopted the floors front and rear should be asphalted or at least paved. These privies are saturated, and I imagine will unless almost rebuilt be always a source of annoy ance. The camp limits only I am informed extend as far as the nullah running from west to east along the south front of these lines. I think they should be extended up to the Khanapur road so as to take in the fields on the opposite side of the nullah, so that the trench system might be adopted when these privies chould be abolished altogether. The success of this system which was tried here by a native infantry regiment some years ago is well exemplified by the magni- ficent crops now growing in the field on the east of the Khanapur road which was manured in this manner. The wells in these native infantry lines should be covered, the water in the one in the 2nd Grenadier lines used by the Purwarrie sepoys of the Regiment was defiled with leaves and other cutchra. 59. The tent lascar lines are on the extreme end of camp on the S. E., they consist of merely mud huts with thatched roofs and are very bad, as they are built in such close proximity to each other, and as the eaves of the thatch come down to about 3 feet from the ground there is no ventilation and they are not proper places for families to live in; the row of huts on the south should be, at once removed and placed on the vacant ground on the west, but the huts should be built on raised plinths and be well ventilated. Their privies were clean and the filth like that from all the native infantry lines is taken out to manure yard No. 2 on the Khanapur road. 60. The Fort must be considered by itself as the town lies between it and the rest of Cantonment. In it is quartered a detachment of the 7th Fusiliers, 108 men strong and their families, and the bungalows in it are occupied by Officers and their families. 61. The population is said to consist of16 62. A great deal too much undergrowth has been allowed to grow in the compounds; there are many fine trees but so long as the lower branches of these are kept lopped they so far from being prejudicial are good as their roots absorb moisture and their leaves carbonic acid; but for example in compound attached to house No. 27 belonging to Mullipa shroff, the jungle was so dense that I could not see 20 yards a head and in the compound occupied by the Reverend Mr. Smith it is also very thick. In Mr. Mackenzie's compound it was also objectionable. 63. In each compound there is a servant's privy, but these were in some instances very dirty, and I took occasion to point out to Officers occupying one or two houses how objectionable was the state of their servant's privy; a pool of offensive liquid urine mixed with ablution water being found in rear of each privy inspected. 64. The nightsoil from the barracks, bungalows and servants' privies is after collection deposited into iron buckets standing under an open shed close to Officers' bungalows, the nearest occupants of which complained bitterly of the nuisance caused by it. The smell emanating from it was at least on one occasion so penetrating that a person sleeping in one of the adjacent bungalows was awakened out of sleep by it. A filth cart comes at 11 A.M and removes these boxes, but it has to pass by the only road out of the Fort through the main guard gate, and I can personally testify to the extremely disgusting nuisance it causes. In a Fort where the maintenance of the walls is a military necessity, this stuff should not be stored as it is now, and the best way would be to make a covered way through the walls on the east and a wooden foot bridge across the ditch, so that it could be carried at once outside and deposited into a cart stationed on the other side of the ditch. 65. The conservancy establishment allowed for the Fort consists of17 In the first place these barracks were only intended for 77 men but are now occupied by 108 men, the consequence being that some of them are much over- crowded. In No. 1 barrack which is opposite the Safa Musjid and Arsenal the beds were much too close, there being in one instance only 15 inches, in another 16 inches between adjoining beds. The windows do not come down to the floor, the doors are not louvered, and the urinal and ablution rooms are placed on the west and obstruct the breeze, and the plinth is not high enough. No. 2 barrack room is altogether better, is well raised and has sufficient ventilation and space. The building originally intended for a hospital is now used as a barrack room and answers the purpose, but I am informed that there is now no hospital in the Fort for the use of the detachment and no medical assistance beyond an assistant apothecary. It is in my opinion desirable that considering the large European population in the Fort there should be a medical officer stationed here, as in cases of serious illness much valuable time would be lost in sending to camp for one. 67. The two cells are of old pattern and are not in my opinion fit for the incarceration of European prisoners at all events not until the walls have been pierced, the ceilings removed, and thorough ventilation provided. 68. In the quarter guard the room called the dry room where prisoners are temporarily confined requires ventilation. It can easily be made by piercing the wall. 69. The married men's quarters have been made in an old Jain temple. There is a great want of ventilation in the rooms on the ground floor, but the upper story is supposed to be haunted, and is not used if it can be possibly avoided. The noises complained of at night are probably caused by bats and other night birds, and it is thought if wire gauze screens were fixed across the windows the entrance of these creatures would be prevented. 70. The two public latrines in the Fort are situated in rear of the barracks. They were not clean, and the ground in the neighbourhood was covered with rank vegetation. 71. There are 49 wells in the Fort some of which are used for drinking water. The best water is said to be procured from the well inside the arsenal, but it is not available for public use but outside close to the Safa Musjid which was built by Asad Khan but which has been closed since the mutiny is the well from which the water for the troops is drawn by the usual leather buckets. The ground all round it was fouled and was covered with refuse. The well should be covered and a force pump might be fitted and a U shaped drain should be made to carry away the wastage water into the road side paved gutters. 72. During the rains the ground towards the South-East becomes flooded, and the quarters occupied by the warrant officers of the Ordnance Department were I was told inundated last year. More water way should be provided and a main outlet drain should be led if necessary through the ditch on to the low lying ground beyond. 73. The wet ditch is not healthy, and there was a good deal of scum observed on the surface of the water, stable filth had evidently been thrown into it. The water in it is utilized for irrigating the rice fields below, and heavy compensation would be claimed if it was cut off, as a higher rate of assessment has been paid on account of its use but it, as long as this arrangement is allowed to continue, should be scrupulously kept clean.
18 74. In conclusion I would desire to express my acknowledgments to Brigadier General Kirby and all the officers with whom I was brought into contact especially to Major Lloyd the Brigade Major for the aid they so kindly and zealously afforded me during my inspection of the Cantonment of Belgaum. T. G. HEWLETT, Acting Sanitary Commissioner. Resolutions adopted at a meeting of the Cantonment Committee of Belgaum, on Saturday the 7th October 1876, on certain subjects entered into in the Report of the Sanitary Commissioner on that place. 1. In order to improve the state of the privies in the bazar complained of by the Sanitary Commissioner, the Committee is of opinion that a small house- tax, or any other tax that Government might approve of, should be levied on the inhabitants of the bazar to provide funds for that purpose, and also for con- servancy purposes in general. It may here be remarked that taxes are levied on the inhabitants of the town but none are levied on those of the Cantonment bazar, and consequently that many natives leave the former and crowd into the latter. 2. The Committee considers that it would be very desirable to carry out the suggestions of the Sanitary Commissioner as to the alterations he suggests in the gutters, in the bazar, and also as to building stables for the cattle if funds could be provided for the purpose. 3. The Committee quite agree with the Sanitary Commissioner in the recommendations contained in paragraph 20 as to the erection of new latrines in the bazar and the supply of an increased conservancy establishment. 4. The hedges of Officers' compound are regularly cut and rank vegetation kept down, but as the Sanitary Commisioner visited Belgaum during the height of the monsoon there was of course grass growing at that time. 5. The Committee concur with the Sanitary Commissioner in all he says in para. 43 as to the lighting of barracks, as there is no doubt that if the barracks were better lighted they would be far more comfortable and cheerful for the men, and this might prevent their going out at night; they are at present lighted according to regulation. 6. With reference to para. 49 the question of open drains for the patcheries of the 2/7th Royal Fusiliers has already been referred to Army Head Quarters, the reason why there were not any iron receptacles under the pipes of the wash-houses was that the Barrack Department were unable to supply them, they were being made in the arsenal, and a good many have since been provided. 7. The Cantonment Committee agree with the Sanitary Commissioner in what he says in para. 59 as to the huts in the lascar lines, this subject was brought to notice in the last yearly report of the Committee. 8. In conclusion the Cantonment Committee have to state that they have re- quested the Cantonment Magistrate to attend to all the suggestions of the Sanitary Commissioner which can be carried out without involving additional expense. J. H. KIRBY, Brigadier General, Commanding B. D., and President of the Cantonment Committee.
No. A-934 OF 1876. FROM T. G. HEWLETT, ESQUIRE, Acting Sanitary Commissioner; To COLONEL MACDONALD, Secretary to Government, Military Department. Sanitary Commissioner's Office, Bombay, 19th October 1876. SIR, In obedience to the instructions conveyed in paragraph 15 of Government Resolution, General Department, No. 2617, dated 23rd August 1876, I have the honor to submit for the information of His Excellency the Governor in Council the accompanying report on the sanitary condition of the Cantonment of Belgaum with a copy of the Resolutions adopted by the Cantonment Committee on the proposals I made. I have the honor to remark that it would have been an assistance to me if the Cantonment Committee had taken up each recommendation seriatim and had stated what measures could or would be taken by it in each instance to remedy the specific cause of complaint. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, T. G. HEWLETT, Acting Sanitary Commissioner.
Military Department. No.5151. Bombay Castle, 25th November 1876. Letter from the Sanitary Commissioner, No. A.-934, dated 19th October 1876. Submits a report on the sanitary condition of the cantonment of Belgaum, with a copy of the Resolutions adopted by the Cantonment Committee on his proposals. Observes that it would have been an assistance to him if the Cantonment Committee had taken up each recommendation seriatim, and had stated what measures could or would be taken by it in each instance to remedy the specific cause of complaint. RESOLUTION.in design and construction could have escaped the attention of the number of officers whose duty it is to inspect the men's quarters it is difficult to understand. 14. The attention of the authorities should be called to paragraphs 63 and 64. 15. Government will await the report of the Quarter Master General on paragraph 66. J. A. M. MACDONALD, Colonel, Secretary to Government No. 3839. GENERAL DEPARTMENT. Bombay Castle, 5th December 1876. Resolution of Government in the Military Department, No. 5151, dated 25th November 1876, on a report by the Sanitary Commissioner on the sanitary condition of the Canton- ment of Belgaum. RESOLUTION.according to Government Resolution, Military Department, No. 5151, dated 25th November 1876, I have the honor to state that the Chaplain of the Canton- ment of Belgaum reports to meNo.19in each of the two barrack rooms referred to by the Sanitary Commissioner in excess of the regulation number. There are, besides, other buildings occupied by the detachment in the Fort which the Sanitary Commissioner does not appear to have taken into account when comparing the amount of accommodation with the strength of the detachment. The General Officer Commanding Belgaum has been instructed to reduce the men in the barrack rooms to the regulation number. Location of Medical Officer in Fort. 8. With regard to the Sanitary Commissioner's remark (paragraph 66) touching the necessity for a Medical Officer being station- ed in the Fort, the General Officer Commanding Belgum District reports that both the Commanding Officer and the Medical Officer of the 7th Fusiliers, on arrival of the Regiment at Belgaum, were of opinion that it was unnecessary to keep even an Assistant Apothecary in the Fort, because, when a man is taken sick there is no difficulty in having him at once removed to the Regimental Hospital in Camp. The "large European population in the Fort" is in medical charge of the Civil and Staff Surgeon, who resides near enough to meet all emergencies. Miscellaneous Improvements. 9. Estimates for carrying out the numerous improvements noticed in paragraphs 11, 14, 23, 39, 40, 41, 42, 44, 49, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 67, 68 and 69, will be called for so soon as the Public Works Department is relieved from its present pressure of work in con- nection with the famine relief works. Skilled Inspectors. 10. The Sanitary Commissioner has been addressed on the subject of employing skilled Inspectors in carrying out the sani- tation of the several cantonments, as ordered in para- graph 7 of Government Resolution, Military Department, No. 5151, dated 25th November 1876. I have the honor to be, &c., (Sd.) ROBERT BAIGRIE, Colonel, Officiating Quarter Master General. B 321REPORT ON THE SANITARY CONDITION OF THE CANTONMENT OF DHARWAR, INSPECTED IN AUGUST 1876. The new Military Cantonment of Dharwar is situated at about the dis- tance of a mile and a half to the north-west of the town on a site to the west of the Belgaum road from which the ground slopes down towards a nullah by which the surface drainage is rapidly carried off to two artificial tanks. The surrounding country is quite open so that the buildings in the cantonment are fully exposed to the prevailing breeze, and cultivated fields extend all round the camp which covers an area of 331½ acres and is only of sufficient extent to accommodate one regiment of native infantry. It was occupied for the first time by H. M.'s 12th Regiment N. I. on the 1st November 1875. The officers' bungalows are situated on the higher ground near the Belgaum road towards the east and are separated by the parade ground and an open space from the lines and the regimental hospital. 2. The lines consist of two blocks of pendalls divided by a main central road 160 feet wide. The native officers' houses are situated on either flank, 8 being along the right and a similar number on the left flank, and in each block there are 16 rows of pendalls, each of which contains 20 rooms 10' 4" x 9' 9" for married sepoys and 24 rooms 9' 2" x 9' 9" for single men. The rooms are built back to back and each room has a verandah 8' 6" X 4' 6". The plinths are 6 inches high and the walls which are composed of mud are 10 feet in height whilst the ridge is 16 feet above the floor, which is made of mud. The roofs are single tiled and ventilating openings have been provided in them for each room. The doors are 5' 8" in height so that a man can stand upright in them. Each married sepoy's room has therefore a superficial area of 100 square feet and a cubic capacity counting to the top of the external wall of 1000 cubic feet. In reality it is more as the above calculation does not include the lean to of the roof. 3. The drinking water is derived from three wells dug in the metamorphic schist on which the cantonment stands. One of these wells is set apart for the use of the officers and the other two are for the use of the sepoys, one being for Purwaries. They are situated between the lines and the nullah referred to above. The Purwaries' well is 85' deep and is 170 yards distant from the place where the trench latrines for the use of the men are placed. This system is remarkably well carried out under the energetic orders of Colonel Hogg, and I was much struck with the entire absence of any smell and pleased to see that the trenches were not too deep, and that the ordure was at once covered with earth.
2 The latrines too are in my opinion placed at a convenient and safe distance from the lines, being about 300 yards from the nearest row of pendalls and not more than 750 from the farthest. 4. The regimental bazar is on the south-west corner of the lines and was very clean, but the burial ground for natives dying in cantonment limits has been placed in very dangerous proximity to it, only 70 yards intervening between it and the bazar whilst the sweepers' huts are only 44 yards distant from it. This burial ground should at once I think be closed, and Colonel Hogg has selected a site for a new graveyard, which I consider to be a very good one, though it is beyond the limits of the cantonment. It is situated in the field immediately behind the present rifle butts and below the hill on the other side of which is the small village of Yetingood. There would be ample space here for a cremation ghaut for burying the bodies of Hindoos of caste as well as for a burial ground for each caste, and I strongly recommend that the land be taken up for this purpose. 5. The lines were remarkably clean and well kept, and there was ample evidence to show that great attention is paid to their sanitary condition. The conservancy establishment consists of four regimental and two station sweepers, but in addition to this eight sweepers are kept up by the Native officers and men, four of whom are employed in removing the dry sweepings and four are engaged, in conveying the nightsoil to the trenches, where the filth from the European officers' houses is also taken. 6. The following is the strength of the regiment:3 7. The hospital is a good building in every respect and is intended to accommodate 30 men. It was very clean and well kept. I think, however, the place which I was informed was intended for a bathing place is used as a urinal and the arrangement did not seem to me to be a good one either in design or construction. In my opinion also the infectious disease ward is in too close proximity to the Belgaum road and it is too much enclosed by walls and not sufficiently ventilated. I think pucka buildings for the treatment of infectious diseases are a mistake. There is no well for the hospital, and Dr. Ogilvie pointed out the necessity of one being provided. I quite concur in this opinion. The dead house has not as yet been built. 8. From this brief description of the sanitary state of the cantonment of Dharwar, it will be seen that every thing has been done to render it healthy and to keep it clean, and that its general condition is from a sanitary point of view extremely satisfactory. Colonel Hogg informed me that had his regiment remained in the station, it was his intention to have planted trees throughout the cantonment especially in front of each row of pendalls, and I hope this admirable suggestion will be carried out. The difficulty regarding the wastage water from bathing places was observed here as in all sepoy lines, and I am of opinion that detached places to be used as lavatories for men and women should be provided on either flank, and that the use of nanees inside the rooms should be prohibited. The practise of bathing and washing clothes also near the wells should be stopped, and proper washing troughs might be provided at the lowest part of the canton- meat so that the water might escape at once into the fields. In any case surface drains to carry away the storm water and as long as they are permitted the water from the nanees should be made along each row of pendalls. The bath- ing water might, in the meantime, be utilized for gardens. 9. I must mention in conclusion that the registration of births and deaths which occur in the cantonment should be reported direct to the Sanitary Com- missioner. This has not as yet been done through, I am sure, an oversight. T. G. HEWLETT, Acting Sanitary Commissioner.
Military Department. No.5054. Bombay Castle, 22nd November 1876. Letter from the Sanitary Commissioner, No. A.-991, dated 7th November 1876. Forwards a report on the sanitary condition of the new Cantonment of Dharwar. States that he forwarded it to the Officer Commanding the station for any remarks the Cantonment Committee might have to make, but that it was returned to him without reply. RESOLUTION.of the cantonment of Dharwar by the Acting Sanitary Commissioner, I have the honour to state, with reference to paragraph 7 of the report, that I have never detected any one using the bath as a urinal. 2. It is possible the smell which Surgeon-Major Hewlett detected actually came from the iron pan into which the sepoys in hospital pass urine, inas- much as this pan is placed only a few yards from the bath. 3. This iron pan contains dry earth, and my orders are to have fresh earth placed in it every two hours or oftener, if necessary. 4. The bath is constructed according to the revised standard plan for Native Infantry Hospitals, recommended in1871. 5. One of the two wards for the treatment of infectious diseases is very near to the Belgaum road, but considering the amount of space available, I do not think this could have been well avoided; moreover their size is such that only two or three patients should be treated in each, and in the event of a serious epidemic occurring, a large kutcha building would have to be erected, or the patients would require to be treated in tents on a more favourable site. 6. The position of the hospital and buildings was determined by a Com- mittee ordered to be assembled by the Officer Commanding Dharwar. 7. I quite agree with the Sanitary Commissioner that kutcha buildings are to be preferred for the treatment of infectious deseases as they can be de- stroyed after they are no longer required. But I think that small pucka built wards, similar to those we have, are very useful for the treatment of a solitary case of small-pox or cholera into which the patient can be placed at once. 8. At the present time I have a solitary case of small-pox under treat- ment. Had there been no infectious ward, this man would have been placed in a tent, and the tent would be destroyed when the man is discharged from hospital. 9. The bath has not yet been used, for the hospital was not ready for the reception of sick until the beginning of the last monsoon. 10. I would again earnestly recommend that a well be at once provided near the hospital. It might be built as a famine work in the same manner as other relief works are now being executed. The nearest well to the hospital is nearly half a mile distant. 11. The dead-house will be commenced to be built shortly. I have the honour to be, &c., (Signed) C. F. OGILVIE, M.D., Surgeon-Major, H. M,'s 12th Regiment N. I. Military Department. No. 1340. Bombay Castle, 26th March 1877. Letter from the Quarter Master General of the Army, No. 19-51-1299, dated 20th March 1877. Para 4. SIR,Para . 7. 2. A plan and estimate for the construction of a well for the Native Infantry hospital has been submitted to Government under this office No. 22-12REPORT ON THE CANTONMENT OF SHOLAPUR, INSPECTED IN SEPTEMBER 1876. The greater part of the old military Cantonment of Sholapur including the Sudder Bazar, Modee Khana and Cavalry Lines, was transferred to the civil authorities in 1871, and is now under the control of the Municipal Commissioners of the adjacent City, whilst the old artillery lines on the south-west of camp have been pulled down and the site on which they stood has reverted to the jurisdiction of the Collector of the District. The Cantonment as at present defined covers an area of about 600 acres and affords only sufficient accommoda- tion for the location of a single Native infantry regiment. The walled Fort of Sholapur which is adjacent to the City is still in charge of the military authorities. 2. The line of the present camp limits has, in order to effect the changes mentioned above, been very considerably modified from that previously existing and is now most irregular. Starting from the North-east corner near where the Kumbharee road crosses it the boundary line passes toward the West and includes part of the catchment area of the Sideshwar tank. The northern face in this direction extends for about half a mile until it approaches the Sudder Bazar, when it takes a bend at an acute angle to the South, and in so doing skirts the Sudder Bazar as far as the line of the Officers' compounds where it again stretches towards the West in an irregular line until it meets the nullah carry- ing off the water leaking through the bottom of the Moti Bagh Talao and from the springs which arise below it to a point nearly opposite Teekajee ke Warra at a distance of about 400 yards below the South-east corner of the cemetery. The southern boundary of camp is formed by this nullah and by the road leading from the Moti Bagh to the Bijapur road from which the line is continued to the point opposite the North-eastern corner whilst the parade ground of the Native infantry regiment forms the eastern face. The road to Kumbharee as I have stated skirts its eastern boundary whilst that to Bijapur passes from North to South through the Cantonment and is carried over the embankment of the Moti Bagh Talao which is approached by a bridge over the G. I. P. line which, after leaving the railway station at a distance of rather more than a mile from camp on the West, passes near its Southern limit and crosses the tank just on the confines of the Cantonment. 3. The country on the east is quite open and at a higher elevation than the Cantonment and forms part of the catchment area of the Sideshwar tank. Whilst that on the South is also open and uncultivated and forms the watershed of two nullahs across which the embankment of the Moti Bagh Talao has been made. On the North is the Sudder Bazar below which on the West the road has been formed below and through the embankment of an old tank which was destroyed by order of the Emperor Aurungzeeb who converted it into a garden and called it the Nawee Bagh by which name it is still known though there is
2 now only a plantation of babul trees to mark the site of the former garden. This road leads to the Collector's bungalow and so on to the city and on the west of it is the present civil station. On the South-west, commencing from the old race course is an extensive Government koorun or bir for grass which is said to cover an area of 500 acres. The station is very bare, the soil being in places not more than 2 inches deep, and the only trees in it are those planted along the roads except in the valley of the Moti Bagh Talao where the garden from which the tank derives its name is situated and where there are many magnificent tamarind, mango and peepul trees. Immediately below the embankment of the tank the ground is marshy and swampy, and the rank sedgy rushes that grow here so luxuriantly show that this condition is perennial. 4. The Officers' houses are situated on the ridge immediately above the Moti Talao and the regimental lines occupy the parallelogram towards the east. These have been built on the highest part of the Cantonment and the site is in this respect a desirable one, as there is a good fall from it on the North, South and West and the country is open all round. 5. The strength of the 19th Regiment which now occupy the lines is as under3 which the occupant and his family bathe. The wastage water is carried away by a tiled gutter 10 feet from the walls, and then flows out on to the open surface to be absorbed as best it can. This practice should, in my opinion, be stopped, and detached lavatories for each sex should be erected on either flank. If this cannot be done, along each row of huts should be laid a U shaped drain to carry the wastage water away. It might profitably be used to water trees which are also much wanted in these lines as there is no shade. 7. The water supply for the lines is procured from 4 wells; the water from the one lately excavated on the North-east is remarkably good and very abund- ant. It is 55 feet deep. It has been very properly covered with a wooden planking by its designer Major Mathew, Executive Engineer, Sholapur, but the channel in the pavement round the well for the wastage to escape by is not sufficient and the water lodges. The Purwaries' well is situated in the nullah between the male and female regimental latrines and is in dangerous proximity to these places which ought to be removed further away, if another well cannot be dug for the low caste men. The regimental bazar is on the west of the lines, it only contains 9 shops. 8. The lines were remarkably clean and well kept, and great attention is evidently paid to their conservancy, but the regiment suffered severely in 1874 from ague as with an average strength in that year of 652 men there were 697 cases. In 1875 the number of admissions from this cause greatly diminished as there were only 345 cases out of an average strength of 668. The cause of this malarious fever may, in my opinion, be partly ascribed to a damp subsoil. At first sight it may seem strange that in lines where the bare rock crops up to the surface there should be any possibility of a damp subsoil but it not unfre- quently happens although boulders of solid rock may appear on the surface yet that below it the trap has become disintegrated from constant percolation. Now we know the water bearing stratum is towards the East and that the flow of the subsoil water is towards the South, North and West. In all of which directions we find wells fed by the springs above. I should therefore recommend that deep subsoil drains be dug especially along the. Eastern face so as to inter- cept the water and to direct it into the nullah running along the Northern face of the lines. 9. The regimental latrines are on the North of the lines and are in my opinion in a wrong site, as the male latrine is close to the catchment canal of the Sideshwar tank. They cannot be moved to the South-east or they would be on the watershed of the Moti Bagh Talao, but I think they might be placed lower down nearer the Sudder Bazar. They cannot be placed on the East or they would be on the watershed of the nullah in which the wells are situated. The male latrines consist of 2 ranges of buildings each containing 22 seats, they are unpaved in rear or front, and the cesspool into which the liquid filth runs cannot be properly cleared out. I hope to see a better form of privy introduced as that brought to notice by Mr. Arthur Crawford consists of iron foot rests and a corrugated iron shoot and an iron pan below. This arrangement ensures the removal of every thing. The present ones emit a very bad stench and the dry earth system would be preferable if trench latrines cannot, on account of the rocky subsoil, be carried out. There are 8 sweepers employed by the regiment for conservancy purposes. 10. The hospital is on the west of the lines and is a thatched building with ample roof ventilation. It affords only space enough for 20 sick men so that increased hospital accommodation would appear to be necessary. There is also much need of a dead house. The regimental solitary cells are placed in the hos- pital compound which appear to be an undesirable arrangement. The dry earth system is carried out in the regimental privies which were extremely clean.
4 11. The conservancy establishment for the removal of sweepings is as follows:5 been formed by making an embankment across two small nullahs. There is no record to show the date when this was originally done, but I am informed by Major Mathew, R. E., the Executive Engineer, that the tank was rebuilt in 1830. At this present time when it is drying up owing to the failure of the mon- soon, it does not cover an area of more I am informed than 3 1/6 acres, but when full it is said to have a surface area of 68 acres. The bottom of the tank has silted up and there is now a depth of many feet of mud containing decomposing organic matter. Nearly all the surface of the exposed portion is now covered with a cake of dried weeds which emits a fetid smell, and below which aquatic plants are again beginning to germinate. I am glad to hear that the Cantonment Committee has decided in spending Rs. 5,000 allowed by Government as a Famine Relief Fund in scraping the exposed surface of this tank and in remov- ing the layer of dried weeds and the earth below it for a depth of about 6 inches and in pulling up the weeds from the part still covered with water. The mud in my opinion should be excavated to a depth of at least 3 feet, and I would gladly see the greater part of the balance, standing to the credit of the Can- tonment Fund as per statement appended to this report spent in effecting this object. Major Mathew informs me that the year before last, he repaired the masonry work and removed the old sluice gate which he found partly open below, and that in his opinion at present no leakage whatever takes place through the bund, but that the bottom of the tank itself is not water-tight and that the running stream in the nullah below is due to the fact that the water infiltrates through the bottom of the tank and thus escapes. 18. The ground immediately to the West of the embankment and between it and the Moti Bagh is still a swamp and as marshy as it was in 1865, at the time when Dr. Leith reported on it. The existence of this marsh immediately to windward of the Cantonment is, in my opinion, extremely dangerous and should be stopped, and I would suggest that the Executive Engineer be requested to favor the Committee with his opinion whether it would be possible to drive a puddle trench down to hard rock or to puddle its bottom surface so as to confine the water in the tank. I cannot venture to offer an opinion whether this course is financially possible, but the trench should be, if possible, on the tank side of the embankment. Whether this course is feasible or not there can be no doubt but that it is absolutely imperative under any circumstances that the marsh be- low it should be efficiently drained. The earth trenches at present cut in it have been allowed to be overgrown with rank vegetation and the water does not escape. They should be at once cleared out and cross drains should be cut through the marsh to the intercepting arterial drains. There are two wells in this marsh at which cattle are watered and in which the water is almost level with the external ground surface. The watering of cattle at these places should, in my opinion, be stopped as they stir up the mud and make the ground filthy. 19. There is also a tank here called the Lily Tank which has been lately cleared out and which is situated below a Lingayet temple sacred to Rewun Sidah which is much frequented by his devotees who after worshipping at the temple sit and feast among the trees near the Lily Tank and the well from which the Officers' and European residents' drinking water is drawn. Major Mathew has done excellent service by blocking up the steps leading down into this tank and has fitted it with 2 wheels and iron chains and buckets which are used by the Lingayets, a fact which affords a happy answer to those who are afraid to order this admirable and sensible innovation on account of caste pre- judices. Below the tank and fed by the overflow from it is the swimming bath formerly erected for the use of the soldiers of the artillery but recently handed over by Government to the Cantonment Committee. Running water constantly passes through it, and with the water from springs which are found in the nullah forms a stream which flows through and past the Moti Bagh and so down the valley.
6 20. The Officers7 25. I must also notice that the burial grounds for all castes and creeds of persons living in the Cantonment have been allowed to be established over the bank of the nullah immediately below and adjacent to the English burial ground. I consider the site is an improper one, as in the first place there is not sufficient soil for each grave to be dug for a depth of 6 feet and in the next it is to wind- ward of camp, and there is plenty of space available on the South-east beyond the Tower of Silence on the watershed of a nullah running towards Hoolgee. This spot would be most convenient for the sepoys, but it is at present not within Cantonment limits, but application should in my opinion be made that a sufficient area of ground be given up for this purpose. 26. All the bungalows in Sholapur are covered with thatch, and I am informed that this material if well laid in the first instance will last for 20 years. I am of opinion that this covering for roofs is prejudicial to health, as it admits of no perflation, and is besides liable to catch fire readily and it must be con- tinually undergoing decomposition. It would therefore be desirable whenever opportunity offers to compel house owners to roof their houses with double tiles leaving ventilating openings in the roofs. The windows also of many of the bungalows I saw were, in my opinion, too small and the atmosphere in some of the houses appeared to me to be close whilst the plinths did not seem to be sufficiently high. It would be desirable if a standard bungalow for Officers adapted to modern ideas could be devised which whenever the Cantonment Committee had occasion to condemn an existing house should be erected in its stead. Some such action I think is necessary for, as far as I see, the Officers of regiments upcountry are completely at the mercy of house owners and are compelled in some stations I have visited to live in houses which are not fit for human occupation. 27. In concluding this report, I would desire to express my best acknow- ledgements to Colonel Price, Captain Trench, and especially to Major Mathew, R. E., for the aid and information they so kindly afforded me. T. G. HEWLETT, Acting Sanitary Commissioner. Sanitary Commissioner's Office, Camp, Poona, 12th October 1876. STATEMENT of INCOME and EXPENDITURE of Cantonment Fund since 1st April 1872. Camp, Sholapur, 25th September 1876. Receipts. Amounts. Expenditure. Amounts. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. In 1871-72 No record. In 1871-72 No record. In 1872-73 575 0 0 In 1872-73 604 0 0 In 1873-74 3,277 9 5 In 1873-74 2,955 13 8 In 1874-75 913 12 4 In 1874-75 1,033 1 11 In 1875-76 1,160 8 0 In 1875-76 975 2 3 Balance on 1st April 1876 13,294 13 8 (Signed) R. TRENCH, Captain, Staff Officer, Sholapur.
8 EXTRACTS from Proceedings of the Sholapur Cantonment Committee, held at Sholapur on the 1st November 1876. * * * * * * 3. With reference to the Sanitary Commissioner9 tary Authorities it was handed back to the latter. The Moti Bagh being a place of recreation and cool shade, the Committee are of opinion that any attempt to interfere with it is very undesirable and that it should not be touched. As there are already two wells between the Lily Tank and the Bijapur road, another well is not necessary, but those mentioned will both be covered and repaved, also supplied with buckets. When this work is completed, all access to the Lily Tank will be stopped. A stone trough for watering cattle will also be provided near one of the wells. With reference to the dhobies washing, the Committee do not know of any other place to which they could resort which would not be fully as much if not more objectionable than the present situation. The nullah in which they wash not being (as supposed by the Sanitary Commissioner) to windward of camp except during the monsoon. The latter remark applies also to the burial grounds. The question of the burial grounds will be considered by the Committee. The Committee agree with the suggestion of the Sanitary Commissioner regarding the bungalows in camp, and have resolved that whenever new bunga- lows are to be built, plans and estimates are to be laid before them for approval before sanction is given for the erection of the building. In conclusion the Committee in acknowledging the valuable suggestions of the Sanitary Commis- sioner beg to observe that the proposals will be carried out as opportunity offers. (Signed) G. U. PRICE, Colonel, President, Cantonment Committee. Sholapur, November 1st, 1876. [True extracts.] R. S. A. TRENCH, Captain, Staff Officer, Sholapur, and Secretary, Cantonment Committee.
No. A-1034 OF 1876. FROM T. G. HEWLETT, ESQUIRE, Acting Sanitary Commissioner; TO THE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, Military Department. Sanitary Commissioner's Office, Bombay, 14th November 1876. SIR, I have the honor to forward to you, for the information of His Excellency the Governor in Council, my report on the sanitary condition of the Cantonment of Sholapur as seen by me at my inspection during the month of September, with copies of the resolutions adopted by the Cantonment Committee on the proposals I have made. 2. In submitting these I have the honor in obedience to para. 15 of Government Resolution, General Department, No. 2716, dated 23rd August 1876, to remark that after giving due weight to the opinion of the Committee who state that "lavatories are impracticable for sepoys," I am still most strongly of an opinion which has been strengthened by further experience that these nanees or bathing places inside the verandahs of sepoys' huts are one of the most fruitful sources of the intermittent fever which is the curse of the Native Army in this presidency, and which causes Government so much expense and impairs the efficiency of Native regiments by entailing loss of service perhaps more than any other cause. 3. I would, therefore, hope that Government will be pleased to order the abolition of all nanees inside the huts, at all events, of single men in native regi- ments for as Government will see when my report on Ahmednagar reaches it, there need be no practical difficulty in the matter, as a capital form of bathing pavement has been already introduced into the Sudder Bazar of that station by Major Moore, the Cantonment Magistrate, and there can be no valid reason why such should not be at once introduced into every Native regiment in the presidency. 4. For the women a separate bathing place distinct from that of the men might be erected which might be enclosed by a fence about 4' high, made of split bamboos, if such is considered to be necessary, which I confess seems to me to be doubtful as one sees native women bathing quite unconcernedly before men in almost every stream you pass throughout the length and breadth of India, and as there is no immediate exposure of the person there is nothing indelicate to their ideas in doing so. 5. This action is especially needed at Sholapur for as Deputy Surgeon General Maitland says "judging from past records of native regiments quartered
2 there, Sholapur is a feverish station," and it becomes my clear duty to urge Government to adopt those measures which I believe will materially prevent the recurrence of the malarial type of disease which hitherto has been so prevalent there. 6. Deep subsoil drainage is also absolutely necessary. There is now in my opinion a constant current of water percolating through the subsoil, under the lines from the high ground on the east to the lower level on the west. The cutting of deep subsoil drains running from North to South along the eastern face and between each of the rows of the pendalls would divert the subsoil water and keep the foundations of the huts drier. They would in no way, in my opinion, interfere with the supply of wells below. The difference of level is too great for that, but they would prevent the creep of the water upwards to the foundation of the huts and would thus effect what we want a dry subsoil. Of course catch water surface drains would also be necessary. I have gone further into this sub- ject in my report on the Poona Cantonment which will shortly come before Government. 7. I am glad to learn that there is a well with good drinking water inside the Fort. I was informed that the water in it was brackish and that the only drinkable water was procured from the Naga well in the ditch outside the main gate. 8. I am still of opinion that the marsh between the Moti Bagh Talao and the garden is correctly described as being to windward of camp. The Committee allows it is so during the monsoon, and as that extends over four months of the year and sometimes longer, I do not consider I am in error in having so described it. For example take 1865 when the wind set in from the south-west in February and blew for a period of 8 months and again in December from the same quarter; but in any case I am certain from the lay of the ground that the marsh miasmata must creep up the hill towards the Officers' bungalows and the native infantry lines. 9. Although there is no cultivation of rice and sugar cane in the Moti Bagh, yet I believe I am right in stating that lucerne grass grows there, and as this requires constant irrigation it is not a crop which should be allowed in this feverish spot. I quite agree as to the desirability of keeping up the garden, but so much irrigation should not be permitted. I also think when the tank is cleared out that the mud so excavated should be thrown over the embankment so as to raise the surface of the marsh, which I still think ought to be drained at once as I look upon it as one of the most prolific sources of disease in the Cantonment. 10. The covered well suggested by me in para. 23, for which the Com- mittee do not see the necessity, was to do away with the present most objection- able open holes from which the natives draw water on the north of the garden. A public well should, I submit, undoubtedly be provided for their use as the present places are absolutely dangerous as they are merely surface holes. 11. I can only reiterate my opinion that the practice of dhobies washing clothes in the nullah referred to is a source of disease to the Cantonment and should be stopped. The Cantonment Committee ought, in my opinion, to have no difficulty in selecting another site further off, but in any case the present practice should be authoritatively stopped. 12. I am glad to learn that the question of the burial grounds will be con- sidered by the Committee for by the present practice the orders of Government as to the depth of graves are persistently disobeyed.
3 13. In conclusion I would respectfully trust that Government will be pleased to order that the large balance Rs. 13,214, at the disposal of the Com- mittee be spent on these absolutely necessary works so that the sanitary condi- tion of the station which has attracted the attention of the Army Sanitary Commission may be at once improved by carrying out the obviously necessary wants alluded to in my report. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, T. G. HEWLETT, Acting Sanitary Commissioner.
Military Department. No. 387. Bombay Castle, 31st January 1877. Letter from the Sanitary Commissioner, No. A.No. 359. GENERAL DEPARTMENT. Bombay Castle, 6th February 1877. Resolution of Government in the Military Department, No. 387, dated 31st January 1877(e .)REPORT ON THE CANTONMENT OF AHMEDNAGAR. Inspected in September 1876. The Military Cantonment of Ahmednagar is situated in Latitude 19º 5' N. and Longitude 74º 47' E., at an elevation of 1,900 feet above the sea, from which it is distant in a straight line about 130 miles. It is 70 miles to the N.E. of Poona, and 48 miles north of Dhond, the nearest station on the G. I. P. Railway. It covers an area of 42 3. The barracks of the European troops and the Sudder Bazaar, &c., occupy the high ground on the east of Camp; whilst the Native Infantry Regiment is cantoned in quarters outside the City walls; and the Tent Lascars occupy lines near the Mandai Bazaar, close to the Poona Road. In the middle of the Canton- ment, though somewhat nearer the City, is the old Fort of Ahmednagar, which surrendered to the Duke of WellingtonPlan No. 19 of 1876/77 Sketch showing junction Of Bhingar and Shapore A at Ahmednagar. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75008699.tif] Ex. Engineer's Office; Ahmednagar 20thOctober 1876.
Plan No.19 of 1876/77 Sketch showing junction Of Bhingar and Shapore Aqueducts at Ahmednagar [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75008702.tif] Scale 300 feet to an Inch Ex. Engineer's Office, Ahmednagar 20thOctober 1876. Sd/W. Manson, Major B.E., Executive Engineer, AC.
3 terval of 64 feet between them, and of 60 feet between the ends of adjacent barracks. 8. The men's barracks were found to be very clean, well kept, and carefully looked after; but the faults of original construction are such that they cannot be remedied without great expense. I think, however, some measures are neces- sary to improve the ventilation4 11. The cook-rooms in the rear of the barracks are very light and airy buildings, and were extremely clean. The Government provide that these rooms should be lime-washed only twice a year. I do not think this is nearly sufficient; and, in my opinion, this cleansing operation should be performed not less than once a month. I was informed that the want of it was so much felt that the cook-rooms had been lime-washed at the expense of the regiment. They are fitted with ovens, and the arrangements appeared good, except that I think the arches under the fire-places should not be devoted to any other purpose than that for which they were constructed, namely, the drying of the firewood. The water used in the cook-house is kept in a wooden cask outside, which is filled by the bhistie , and into which the dirty hand of the cook and the dirty vessel is dipped. This is wrong. The water should be poured into an iron tank placed on a stand outside the cook-room, and should be drawn off through a brass cock. I am informed that the regimental authorities are anxious that a shed for serving out the rations should be built. In my opinion such a building is much wanted; and it need not be an expensive one, as it would be better to have it open on all sides. Protection against the rain could best be given by means of weather- frames. The arrangement regarding the cook-room leavings, also, is not good. This cutchra is thrown on to a raised stone sink at the back, from which it is removed, and deposited on the ground outside, in an enclosure the surface of which has, by constant removal, sunk below the level of the ground. All this refuse should be placed in an iron vessel which should be bodily removed by a cart, or, at all events, its contents should be emptied into a cart; but in this event great care should be taken to see that it be properly cleaned before it is replaced. But the most economical and best plan of getting rid of all the liquid slops from these cook-rooms, and of the ablution-water from the barracks, would be, to lay down a proper system of glazed stoneware pipes through which these matters would be carried to a proper out-fall, which in this case would be near the Gov- ernment Gardens, where the water would be of great value. 12. Another point I wish to lay stress on is, that as the drinking-water for the European troops is brought into the station in a pure state by the Bhingar and Shahpur Aqueducts, it is desirable that it should be distributed, not by the filthy musuck and bhistie's leathern bag5 from west to east; but along the northern face the verandah is completely walled in, and is used as an apothecary's store-room, which the Medical Officer rightly, in my opinion, considers to be insecure. The floor of this and the other ward has been paved with stone slabs, which slope to the walls, round which runs an open gutter 6½ feet by 7 feet. This is flagged over at the doorways; but it is most ob- jectionable, as the closed part was found full of all kinds of cutchra6 and plan for huts for these followers is much wanted. The doors should be always well raised, and the plinth be not less than 2 feet; and the external walls should have windows made in them of not less than 3 feet by 2. The eaves should not come nearer than 6 feet from the ground, and the roofs should, if pos- sible, be tiled; and a ventilating opening, such as is made for cook-rooms, should be placed over the centre room on either side of the ridge, and deep drains should be cut to carry away the surface water. Trees should be planted in front of each row to absorb subsoil moisture and carbonic acid, but the branches should be cut to a higher level than the eaves, so as not to impede the circulation of air; and proper privies should be provided. No nanees, or bathing-places, should be allowed inside the huts, but detached lavatories for either sex should be erected on either flank. 18. In my opinion these Syce Lines are in dangerous proximity to the two hospitals and to the Officers' houses, and would prove a certain source of danger if epidemic disease broke out amongst them; they ought to be removed at once, and the best site for them, in my opinion, would be to the south-east; but I am inform- ed this would be too great a distance from their stables, and that there is another objection in the soil consisting of black cotton soil. This latter objection, it is thought, might be overcome by bringing moorum from the adjacent nullah, but whether it would be possible to remove the stables, I must leave to the military authorities to decide. These stables were erected in the pre-sanitary era, or they surely could not have been placed to windward of the barracks. 19. The hospital of the Royal Artillery occupies a very good site, and the description return is as follows:7 Buildings. Number. Number of Stories. Aspect. Dimensions. Total Superficial Area. Total Cubic Space. Superficial Area per Man. Cubic Space per Man. By scale, author- ized to date, will accommodate Length. Breadth. Height. Barracks 1 2 W 87 24 20 4,176 83,520 92 1,856 46 Upper 2 2 W 87 24 20 4,176 83,520 92 1,856 46 Story 3 2 W 87 24 20 4,176 83,520 92 1,856 46 The men sleep on the upper story, which is well raised off the ground; and the arrangements are in most respects very good, although there are some very grave defects which I will proceed to point out. For example, no arrangement has been made for a night-urinal en the upper floor. There is the usual urinal below, outside the barrack; but is it likely that men getting up in the night to make water would go downstairs, and out to this urinal, instead of, as a matter of course, making water over or through the open iron railing round the verandah of the barrack-room ? Indeed, this practice was acknowledged. I am of opinion that a glazed stoneware trough should be placed in the projection over each end of the verandah, and that the discharge-pipe from it should be fixed outside the build- ing, and be led to a drain properly trapped, to be conveyed away to a garden. The trough should be sluiced out every day with water. 21. The three-gurrah filter arrangement is kept in the corner of the veran- dah, but the one emptied in my presence contained no sand. These filters are, as before said, a sham and a delusion, and are utterly untrustworthy. 22. These barracks are, like " The Queen's", insufficiently lighted by one centre-hanging and two wall oil-lanterns. The course I have recommended for the former barracks should, in my opinion, be adopted here. 23. The lean-to of the roof of the barrack-rooms is planked, and the central ridge-ventilator is all that can be desired; but the air-shafts from the rooms in the lower floor are not, as I think they should have been, carried through the roofs by louvred openings, but appear to terminate in an opening which can be shut by a hinged door just below the planking of the roofs in the upper storey. The ventilation on the lower floor, consequently, is insufficient. 24. I have now to speak of a source of great danger which ought to be im- mediately remedied. An attempt was made to provide these barracks and their subsidiary buildings with a system of under-ground pipe drainage. Excellent and proper as the idea was, this system of drainage has been8 opening of the tin pipe which passes inside the wall, through the floor, down the wall of the bath-room of the serjeant's quarters below. It is then taken through the wall and terminates in the drain, the water from the bath-room in the lower floor being carried into the drain by means of an open sink. This is most danger- ous and radically wrong. From each room, above and below, the water should be conveyed at once through the external wall by means of an iron pipe, the end of which should terminate one foot above a trapped communication with the drain. If this course be adopted, no gas could enter the building. There are rain-water gutters round the eaves of these barracks, and these pipes should also terminate one foot above a syphon-trap. The present under-ground pipes must at any hazard be taken up, and glazed stoneware pipes ought to be laid in their stead; and care should be taken that they be laid in straight lines, and at every change of line of direction there should be (as is always done in England) a man- hole constructed, so that, by putting a candle at the further end, it is possible to see whether there is any obstruction in the length above. If these suggestions cannot be carried out, it is far safer to have open, segmental, U-shaped drains, which can be seen daily, and kept clean; but the water should not be wasted, but must be used either for gardens, or for keeping the space in front of the barracks green with turf. The remarks I have made regarding the drainage of barracks apply, of course, to the subsidiary buildings9 cleaning out the silt by hand-labour would be found prohibitive; but it seems to me that the rush of water from the neighbouring hill might be utilized in clean- ing away this deposit, by diverting the present channel into a trench cut into the silt down to the original level, when the water would surely force its way through; and at a very little cost or labour the whole of this silt might, it is thought, in this way be removed during the course of a few monsoons, when the original saturating tanks could at a very small expense be restored by re-building the band, the materials for which are at hand. Major Manson, R.E., Executive Engineer, was good enough to accompany us to the spot; but he informs me that he has a project for at once increasing the supply by restoring an old reservoir in a nullah, called. the Bundara Nullah, which is situated further north, and between the Sháhpur and Bhingár Nullahs, which he considers could be led into the Sháh- pur Aqueduct, and which would materially increase the water-supply. I hope this excellent suggestion will meet the prompt attention it deserves. 30. The Sháhpur joins the Bhingár Aqueduct, which starts from a well dug in a field near the Bhingár Nullah, not far from its source, but below the origin of the Kapurwadi and Nagabáe Aqueducts. Major Manson has done excellent service to this as well as to the Sháhpur Aqueduct in covering over the air-shafts, and especially in covering with solid masonry the Sháhpur Aqueduct as it passes through the open well in the immediate vicinity of its source, which, as it is situated on the side of the road, was exposed to all the dirt and other impurities blown or thrown into it. 31. It will be thus seen that the source of the drinking-water supplied to the European troops at Ahmednagar is all that can be desired; but I must strongly protest against its mode of distribution. I believe engineering skill could soon provide a means of making it raise itself to reservoirs built to the necessary height, from which it could be distributed all over the camp, and be laid on to each building. Such a course would be desirable in a sanitary point of view, and would do away with the objectionable water-mussucles and bhistie . 32. Before leaving this subject of the European barracks I may mention here, I visited the plunge-bath of both the Artillery and the 2nd Queen's. That of the Artillery seemed to me to require cleaning; and a pipe-drain is required from the horse-watering trough which is in its close vicinity. The plunge-bath of " The Queen's " is situated in a garden, and the water is properly applied to the land. It was very clean. 33. As the Sudder Bazaar is situated on the north, and in the close vicinity of the barracks of the European troops stationed at Ahmednagar, it will be convenient to speak of its sanitary condition in this place. It occupies an area of about 11 acres, and forms the north-east boundary of the Cantonment, and is partly coterminous with the village of Bhingár, which formerly was such a fruit- ful source of danger to the station, but which, since the energetic rule of the pre- sent Cantonment Magistrate10 two iron pans placed side by side, the solid matter is caught in one, whilst the urine and ablution-water are retained by the other. There are four necessaries provided for public accommodationGround Plan of the Chowpatee Fountain at Ahmednagar. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75008798.tif] Scale 10' Feet to an Inch. Municipal Office Ahmednagar, 30th Septr. 1876 N. Gursetjee Setna, Sectry A. Mty.
Plan, section, and Elevation showing a Bathing-Platform in the sudi at Ahmednagar. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75008804.tif] Elevation on, C, D, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75008804.tif] Scale 5 and 10 feet to an Inch. Ahmednagar, 2nd June 1874. Executive Engineer's Office A.C.
Plan, Section, and Elevation, Showing a Bathing-Platform in the Sudder Bazaar at Ahmednagar. Plan [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75008807.tif] Elevation on C,D, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75008807.tif] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75008807.tif] Cross section on A.B. Scale 5 and 10 feet to an Inch Ahmednagar,2nd June 1874. Executive Enginner's Office.A.C.
11 loads of cutchra from the whole of camp. This is distinct from the regimental establishment, which is of the following strength:12 47. The Officers' Lines in this part of the Cantonment appeared to be well kept, and the servants' privies in their compounds are carefully looked after. 48. The Commissariat Cattle Lines, situated on the right bank of the Bhingár Nullah below the village, were extremely clean: The privies of the followers who have huts in these lines were very well kept, and were quite clean. The slaughter- yards and hanging-rooms were perfectly clean, and evidently great attention is paid to this most important duty. These buildings and the cattle-sheds are quite the best I have as yet seen in any Cantonment. 49. The burial-grounds are in a safe position and are carefully attended to, and much good has been done by the careful supervision over the Musalmans' burial-ground. 50. The walls of the Fort of Ahrnednagar enclose an area of 50 acres. It now only contains the magazine, and ordnance and barrack stores; but it is approached by a carriage-way through the main gate, over which are quarters for 4 European soldiers. These are well ventilated, but are somewhat shut in by the ramparts above; but, on the whole, are fairly good;but the Key Serjeant's quarters over the gate are not, in my opinion, a fit residence for a European. The privy for the men is also on the ramparts, but there is a very dangerous hole13 53. In front of each married man's quarters a mud hole was found to have been dug for a depth of about 8 inches, which was covered, at the time of my visit, by either a piece of iron or of a broken chattee; but, on removing this it was seen that these places had been used as latrines, and that not only by children, but by adults. In some of these places ashes had been sprinkled over the night-soil. Proper attention, also, had not been paid to the drains leading from the nanees, or to the surface-drains, the outlets of which were found to be choked with rank grass; and the water had collected, and formed in many cases an offen- sive pool, which was in process of being gradually absorbed by the earth. 54. On pointing these defects out to Colonel Morris, immediate orders were given to clean the lines thoroughly; and as it was found that the permission to allow children of tender age, who are too young to go to the regimental privies,14 of high caste and one for Purwaries. These ought to be covered, and fitted with iron buckets and chains. 60. The open-air gymnasim for the sepoys appears much frequented, and must tend to keep them healthy. 61. The Kothla is a square enclosure, which is, I believe, private property; the huts in it have been ventilated, and water from the Kapurwadi Aqueduct has been introduced, and it has been drained. 62. I also inspected the private bakery at the back of the Kothla, from which bread for the use of the European troops is supplied. It was extremely clean; but I think that a bakery should always be worked by the Commissariat, in a Government building. I was sorry to see that the Steven's dough-kneading machine was not in use. 63. The portion of Simpson's Bazaar which comes within Cantonment limits was extremely clean, and afforded a contrast to the remaining portion of the bazaar, which is under the Municipality. 64. The Lock Hospital is situated on the right of the regimental hospital, and is a convenient building. It contains accommodation for 16 sick women; but a chimney for the cook-room is much needed. I am indebted to Surgeon-Major Burrows, in charge of this hospital, for the following statement. The in- crease in disease lately is due to the fact that one woman had diseased several men in succession before she was discovered:15 the room is level with the surface of the ground. The Native guard consists of a naik and 3 men; their room is 22 feet by 12 feet, but the ventilation is very defective. The walls require piercing, and ridge ventilation should be provided. 67. The Native population of the cantonment is thus distributed:16 70. It will be seen that the death-rate in 1872 attained the enormously high one of nearly 44 per 1,000, and the fever death-rate in that year was the very large one of 17.6 per 1,000. This points to preventible causes of disease, probably malaria, and is a statement sufficient to cause anxiety. It clearly shows the importance of strict attention being paid to sanitary improvement. I am glad to see that the fever rate has fallen to 8.78 per 1,000 in 1875, but even this is still too high. 71. The deaths were recorded to have taken place at the different ages below mentioned:17 73. The birth-ratio is only obtainable for the last two years, but the result of last year (19.83 per 1,000) or of the previous one (13.06) is far below the real number; and endeavours should be made to improve the registration of births and deaths, as it forms such a very important part of sanitary statistics. 74. I append a statement showing he receipts and expenditure of the Cantonment Fund during the last five years, and also a return showing the items of revenue and expenditure during last year. This shows a balance of Rs. 15,000 in hand, which I trust the Cantonment Committee will expend on some of the works I have pointed out. 75. In bringing this Report to a conclusion I would desire to express my best thanks to Colonel Morris, Commanding the Station, and to all the Officers I met, for the trouble they were good enough to take in obtaining for me the information I required. T. G. HEWLETT, Acting Sanitary Commissioner. B 63218 ABSTRACT STATEMENT of the Ahmednagar Cantonment Fund for the year ending 31st March 1876. RECEIPTS. EXPENDITURE. Headings. Amount. Total. Headings. Amount. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Balance Credit brought forward ...... 15,695 2 2 I.19 MEMORANDUM No. 258 of 1876, showing the Sanitary Improvements intro- duced in the Ahmednagar Cantonment and Bazaars, since May 1874, by the Secretary, Ahmednagar Cantonment Committee, under sanction of the Canton- ment Committee. 1. Planted about 500 trees. 2. Caused three new bathing pavements to be constructed on the left flank of the Native Infantry Lines, and one bathing pavement to be removed from the side of the Aurungabad Road, in front of the Native Infantry Bazaar. 3. Caused masonry drain to be constructed to carry off the waste water from the three bathing pavements mentioned above. 4. Introduced the aqueduct water inside the Kothla. 5. Caused masonry drains to be constructed for draining the Kothla. 6. Caused brick-kiln to be removed near the Officers' houses, Moti Bagh. 7. Introduced a proper system of conservancy in the houses and com- pounds of those who required the indulgence of having privies, by causing pans to be placed so as to catch the deposit as well as urine water, and arranged for a proper establishment for keeping the same clean. 8. Caused all temporary privies to be removed from compounds where proper arrangements were not made. 9. Prohibited cesspools alongside of the public roads, and caused all in existence to be closed. 10. Caused windows to be placed in the houses where proper ventilation did not exist. 11. Caused the lowering of compound walls to be introduced, to the height of 4½ feet. 12. Caused proper bathing accommodation to be constructed for persons of different castes, and put a stop to the evil practice which existed, namely, bathing on the pavement surrounding the open reservoirs from which drinking water is procured. 13. Caused proper masonry drains to be constructed for carrying off the waste water from the bathing pavements. 14. Caused pans to be placed in all the public as well as private latrines, and ordered dry earth to be placed in them. 15. Caused the waste water from the distillery to be removed daily, instead of flowing, as it did, into a nullah alongside of the Aurungabad Road. 16. Caused cows, buffaloes, and other animals to be removed from private dwellings in the bazaar, and appointed open ground for them to be picketed on. 17. Had proper latrine accommodation made in the two liquor-shops. 18. Placed the Mahomedan burial-ground in decent order. 19. Constructed a latrine of 24 seats for the use of the Commissariat followers, on a plan of my own, causing the seats to be so made that the deposit and urine water fell in the same pan. 20. Introduced dust-bins in the Sudder and other bazaars. 21. As Vice-President, and afterwards Chairman of the Bhingár Munici- pality caused many improvements in the sanitary arrangements of the town, and thus put a stop to the usual complaints made regarding its unsanitary state. In conclusion, I must not forget to mention the support I have had from the President and Members of the Cantonment Committee, as well as the Executive Engineer Officer; as also the valuable assistance I have always received from Rugnath Ramjee, the Cantonment Conservancy Serjeant. C.A. MOORE, Major, Secretary to the Cantonment Committee. Ahmednagar ,29th September 1876.
20 STATEMENT showing the Receipts and Expenditure of the Ahmednagar Cantonment Fund during the last five years. Receipts. Amount. Total. Expenditure. Amount. Total. Remarks. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Balance in hand, 31st March 1871. ...... 20,950 5 6 1871-72 19,281 6 1 19,875 10 11 1872-73 18,018 1 2 16,459 13 9 1873-74 13,642 8 5 20,967 10 9 1874-75 15,068 14 2 13,962 13 9 1875-76 13,476 8 5 14,068 3 4 85,334 4 6 79,487 6 3 Balance in hand, 31st March 1876. ..... 15,103 7 3 Total Rs. ...... 1,00,437 11 9 Total Rs. ...... 1,00,437 11 9 Ahmednagar, 29th September 1876. C. A: MOORE, Major, Secretary, Cantonment Fund Committee.
21 No. 2 OF 1877. Cantonment Ahmednagar, 8th January 1877. FROM THE OFFICER COMMANDING AT ARMEDNAGAR, AND PRESIDENT, CANTONMENT COMMITTEE, To THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER, BOMBAY. SIR, In reply to your letter of the 28th October last, forwarding your In- spection Report22 Para. 11.23 openings of the verandah windows, or to remove the shutters of the inner windows; as in hot weather the more means that there are of closing during the heat of the day, the cooler will they be. The ropes of the clerestory windows might be removed, and the shutters fixed during the hot weather, if so required by the Medical Officer. With reference to the waste-water from the men's ablution- rooms, and the iron receptacles at present in use for its reception, it is recom- mended to remove these iron vessels, and that the refuse-water which would collect in the cesspits is to be removed daily, either by the men for the purpose of watering their gardens in front of the barracks, or by the conservancy establish- ment of the regiment24 REPORTof a Sub-Committee assembled by order of the President of the Cantomment Committee of Ahmednagar to report on the alterations and additions recom- mended by the Sanitary Commissioner at his inspection, in September 1876,of the Royal Artillery Lines and Salabhát Khan's Tomb, &c. W. MANSON, Major, R.E. President. A. CAMPBELL, Captain, R.A. T. K. BIRNIE, A.M.D., and P.M.O. British Forces. J. WILLIAMSON, Surgeon.25 (20). Minor improve- ments. Para. 20.26 mitories the wooden staircase would have to be extended further up, as the present stone-steps are utterly useless for invalids. The Sub-Committee consider that the upper storey should be built in, as the dormitory-floor has been. A skittle-alley should also be provided near the building. The centre room, used for dining, is very thoroughly ventilated, and it is thought this provides enough space for a recreation-room. (29). General Improve- ments. Para. 29.27 as manure for gardens, &c. The pits are situated between Mr. Lawrence's house and the cemetery, and are distant from the former about 300 yards. The Sub-Committee are of opinion, as there seems an objection to the storage of the unsold rubbish in these pits, that it should, in future, be carted out, as recommended by the Sanitary Commissioners, to the manure-yard. The second point is more difficult to treat with. The Cantonment Magistrate tried as an experiment, and with a view of turning the dry rubbish to ac- count "when it was not purchased by kumbhars," to store it with the filth, by placing a layer of rubbish mixed with black soil over the filth, daily. After al- lowing it time to decompose, he endeavoured to sell it by auction, but no offers were made. This shows that the owners of the fields adjacent to the manure- pits do not appreciate the value of manure, or else they are not in a position to purchase it. To carry out the plan suggested by the Sanitary Conamissioner, fields would either have to be rented or purchased, or else the ground about the present filth-pits would have to be cleared of the trees now growing upon it. There are objections to both. But treating with the system of digging trenches of, say, 150 yards in length, 1 foot deep, and 2 feet in breadth, it must be remem- bered that for 4½ months, out of the year there would be some difficulty in the tank-carts making way over-the black soil. Then, again, a field once manured, and placed under cultivation, could not be used again for two or three years, as the soil, if manured yearly, would be too strong, and in all probability would burn the roots of the young crops: so, to carry Doctor Hewlett's proposal out, a large area of land would be required, and it is not thought that in a pecuniary sense it would answer. The other objection is, that it would be a pity to destroy the babul grove, the trees now being about 7 or 8 years old, and the profit arising from the sale of the wood for purposes of fuel would, in a few more years, be greater than that obtained from the sale of manure. The present system of having deep pits dug, 50 yards in length, 6 feet in depth, and 4 feet in width28 The tank-cart system the Sub-Committee do not quite approve of. The question arises, where would the bath-water in compounds be collected, which the cart is to carry away? If a collection of water was allowed, cesspools would again have to be introduced; and this method of collecting water they are sure would be condemned by the Sanitary Commissioner. The Sub-Committee, there- fore, think that, until funds are available, fresh river-sand should be placed from time to time in all the drains where bath-water runs; and they consider that, should this system be carefully carried out, no complaints could arise. W. MANSON, Major, and Executive Engineer A. C. C. A. MOORE, Major, and Cantonment Magistrate. F. GEORGE CURRAN, M.D., Surgeon, and Sanitary Officer. Ahmednagar, December 2nd, 1876.
No. F.-151 OF 1877. FROM T. G. HEWLETT, ESQUIRE, Acting Sanitary Commissioner; TO THE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, Military Department. Camp Poona, 15th January 1877. SIR, I have the honor to submit to you, for the information of His Excellency the Governor in Council, my inspection Report on the Cantonment of Ahmed- naggar with the remarks of the Cantonment Committee upon the proposals made therein, and in doing so would beg to express my thanks to the Cantonment Committee for the care they have taken in considering the recommendations I have made for bettering the sanitary condition of this important Cantonment. The Committee however takes exception to some of the proposals, and I shall now proceed to answer these in detail. 2. Para. 6.2 5. Para. 11.3 12. Paras. 42 and 43.Military Department. No. 1711. Bombay Castle, 18th April 1877. Letter from the Sanitary Commissioner, No. F.-151, dated 15th January 1877. Submits a report of his inspection of the Cantonment of Ahmednagar, with the remarks of the Cantonment Committee upon certain proposals made by him. RESOLUTION.9. The suggestion regarding night-urinals in para. 20 should be consider- ed. It appears absolutely necessary that some such arrangement should be adopted. It certainly ought to have been included in the details of the original design. 10. The state of the three-gurrah filter, as described in para, 21, was probably attributable to the supineness or neglect of the men, whose duty it was to see that it was in working condition. 11. The fault in the air shafts noticed in para. 23 might be remedied without entailing much expenditure. 12. The report of the Quarter Master General on para. 24 will be awaited. All that is recommended for improving Salabhát Khan's Tomb as a sanitarium will be borne in mind when funds for meeting the expense are available. 13. It is very gratifying to Government to see the number of improvements introduced in the Ahmednagar cantonment and bazars as exhibited in the Cantonment Magistrate's memorandum attached to the Sanitary Commissioner's report. 14. Doubtless the Cantonment Committee will, as soon as practicable, adopt such of the recommendations of the Sanitary Commissioner regarding the general improvement of the sanitary condition of the cantonment, and for the increase of the water supply. 15. What is stated in paras. 53 and 54 of the Sanitary Commissioner's report should be brought under the notice of the Quarter Master General. Sanitary Commissioner's reportNo. 19-24Para. 8 of Government Re- solution and para. 15 of Sani- tary Commissioner's report. Para. 20. 10. The measures required to remedy the defects in the hospital would also entail a very large expenditure, which it would be impossible to meet during the existing financial pressure. His Excellency considers that the filling up of the gutters in the wards, and the provision of night urinals in the Artillery Barracks, are all that can be carried out at present. Filters. 11. Para. 10 of the Resolution is disposed of by para. 4 of this report. Para. 11 of Resolution. 12. The Executive Engineer states that, so far as he is aware, there is no fault in the air shafts in the Artillery Barracks. The foul air form below, he reports, is discharged into the space between the planking of the ceiling and the undersides of the tiles, and finds its way through the ridge ventilators. 13. The Officer Commanding at Ahmednagar reports, with reference to para. 12 of the Government Resolution, that all communication between the barrack rooms and the drain pipes has been stopped; and that the drainage from the ablution rooms of the barracks is now discharged into a masonry receptacle. It is proposed to use the drain pipes to carry off the storm water from the roofs only. 14. With regard to para. 15 of the Resolution it is noted that the stringent orders issued at the suggestion of the Sanitary Commissioner, have put a stop to the evils mentioned in paras. 53 and 54 of the report regarding the mud holes in front of the married men's quarters in the Native Infantry Lines and the choking of the surface drain outlets. 15. The reports of the Cantonment Committee, alluded to in paras. 16 to 19 of the Resolution, would appear to have been rendered in accordance with the spirit of the orders passed in the General Department, under Government Reso- lution No. 2617, dated 23rd August 1876 (para. 15), a copy of which was received under Military Department Resolution No. 3692, of the 31st idem. 16. The appointment of Sub-Committees is the most practical mode of obtaining exact information regarding the various subjects on which the Can- tonment Committee have to submit reports. The order appointing these Sub-Committees would necessarily emanate from the President of the Canton- ment Committee, who is also the Officer Commanding the station. 17. His Excellency the Commander-in-Chief is therefore of opinion that in submitting resolutions and reports on the various proposals made by the Sanitary Commissioner, the Cantonment Committee have not exceeded the duties devolving on them. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, R. BAIGRIE, Colonel, Officiating Quarter Master General. Military Department. No. 3346. Bombay Castle, 4th August 1877. Letter from the Quarter Master General of the Army, No. 19-242. The proposal for the whitewashing of cook-rooms once a month, which is approved by His Excellency the Commander-in-Chief, will be recommended for sanction by the Public Works Department. 3. With regard to the erection of a ration shed, if the suggestion in the 8th para. of the Quarter Master General's report is found to be feasible, an esti- mate of the cost should be prepared and submitted for sanction. 4. The first cost of arranging for the distribution of water by pipes, as suggested by the Sanitary Commissioner, would probably be great, but as it is presumed it would lead to a large portion, if not the whole, of the expenditure at present incurred in keeping up an establishment of bhisties being reduced, Government would be glad to receive an estimate of original cost and of the probable saving in the item of establishment referred to. 5. The measures proposed in para. 15 of the Sanitary Commissioner's report in respect to the hospital would, according to the Cantonment Committee, involve considerable removals, and His Excellency considers they would entail so large an expenditure as to render it impossible to afford funds for the purpose during the existing financial pressure. Government therefore concur with His Excellency that it will be sufficient for the present to fill up the gutters in the wards, and to provide night urinals in the barracks. The necessary steps should be taken towards carrying this out. 6. His Excellency the Commander-in-Chief being of opinion that the course of procedure adopted by the Cantonment Committee at Ahmednagar in the pre- sent instance in considering the report of the Sanitary Commissioner is unobjec- tionable, it may be continued tentatively. J. A. M. MACDONALD, Colonel, Secretary to Government. B 221REPORT ON THE CANTONMENT OF SIRUR. Inspected in October 1876. The Cantonment of Sirur4 the space between the front of opposite pendalls being occupied by the hor e lines. The pendalls are built on a plinth of 2 feet high, and each contains 42 rooms. Each quarter consists of two rooms5 7. The Native Officers' houses also require roof and side-ventilation, and such can be provided for them, in my opinion, at a small cost. 8. The old syce lines are now being converted into a regimental bazaar, which was much needed. There will be a difficulty experienced in choosing a proper site for a public latrine for the residents in it, as the bazaar is so near the road, and is situated above a nullah leading to the river; but I think that they should be built on the same principle as those already recommended. 9. There are two rows of new syce lines in course of erection, which were nearly completed at the time of my visit. These are much better than the syce lines in some cavalry regiments; but it is unfortunate that no roof or side- ventilation has been provided, and that the huts have not been raised on a plinth, but in some instances the floors of the rooms are below the ground-level. Ridge-ventilation, or, at all events, openings such as are made in cook-rooms for the escape of smoke, might without difficulty be provided, and continuous open- ings of one foot might be made along the top of the external walls; or windows, 3 feet by 2, might be inserted in them. The latrine for the syce lines will be ample and convenient. The position of the litter-yard between the syce lines and regimental bazaar should, in my opinion, be changed, as it is altogether too near. I was glad to find, however, at a second visit to Sirur, that Colonel LaTouche has had the new huts in the syce lines built as above suggested, and it is a manifest improvement. 10. The conservancy establishment consists of 23 men, who are paid by the regiment, and the removal of all cutchra from the lines is evidently very carefully attended to, as they were very clean, and well cared for. I think, how- ever, the prickly-pear hedge along the boundary of the lines is a mistake, as it was seen to harbour filth, and it should, in my opinion, be removed, as a wooden fence would be quite as effective and much more cleanly. 11. The school-room requires roof and some side-ventilation, and, in my opinion, the standard guard-room is quite unfitted for the purpose to which it is put; and I consider it is an absolutely dangerous building for the guard, especially as it is the only place where a prisoner can be kept. It has been for years past condemned by the Commanding Officer and the Medical Officer, and, I believe, by the General Commanding the Division; and I can only hope that Government will be pleased to order a proper standard guard-room and proper cells to be provided 12. The present hospital, too, is in front of the lines, but, is a building which, although it would make an excellent standard guard-room, is utterly un- suited in every one way for a hospital. It was originally built as a talimkhana, and has likewise been condemned for years past by the Commanding and Medi- cal Officers: a full description of it will be found in Doctor Gordon's Report, so that it is not necessary that I should describe it again; but I would desire to represent to Government, with all the earnestness I can, that the provision of a new hospital for the Poona Horse is a matter of urgent necessity, as, in the present building, the men are made sick, and it is impossible that it can be other- wise, when sometimes the beds are necessarily so close together as to be nearly touching. I look upon the hospital at Sirur as one of the worst places that I have seen, and I trust that immediate measures may be taken to provide the men of this regiment with a building in which their diseases should, at all events, not be aggravated, and one where proper quarters for the hospital establish- ment can be provided. At present there are absolutely none of any description whatever. 13. I should also recommend that the site for the new hospital should be on a line with the Officers' compounds. There is no site for a hospital, good in B 7196 every respect, but this is, I think, better than any other that is available, and it would be convenient for the men. There is a hollow at the back of the plot of ground which would partly have to be filled in, and an approach would have to be made across the nullah at the side to a space at the back, where the dead- house and servants' quarters could be conveniently placed. The nullah which passes at the back of the Officers' lines is, I am informed, patrolled during the dry weather to prevent its being used as a latrine. 14. The Officers' lines are on the east of the Cantonment, and were ex- tremely clean and well kept, and call for no remark. The health of the regiment is good, and comparatively few cases of malarious fever were treated last year. 15. From the above brief description it will be seen that the sanitary condition of the Cantonment of Sirur is extremely good, and there was plenty of evidence to show that every care was habitually taken to keep it so. T. G. HEWLETT, Acting Sanitary Commissioner. No. 61 OF 1877. FROM THE OFFICER COMMANDING POONA HORSE, AND AT SIRUR, To THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER, POONA. Camp Sirur, 20th January 1877. SIR, In returning the accompanying Report received with your letter No. A 121 of 1877, of the 12th instant, I have the honour to state there is no Cantonment Committee at Sirur, the Cantonment Act III. of 1867 not having been made applicable to Sirur. 2. With reference to your suggestions, I would beg to offer the following observations:7 7. The proximity of the Native Officers' houses to the lines, and also to the Native Town, makes the subject of a drain, such as you recommend, a very difficult matter, without carrying it on through the main road into the Native Town. I will, however, consult the Executive Engineer on the subject. The space between the lines and Native Officers' houses would not admit of a garden. 8. The subject of the bazaar lines requires no remark. 9. With regard to the syce lines, I purpose, when repairing them next year, to carry out a similar system of roof-ventilation as has been provided to some of their huts already, and which will ensure a thorough draft of air and ventilation. 10. I will, when my funds allow of it, place earthen pans under a barred opening, into which the urine of the horses could run and be removed, and thus prevent the soil being saturated, as at present. 11. Side-ventilation shall be put to the school-room 12. The building used as a standard guard is regimental property, and was built for the use of the Farrier Major, being in the vicinity of the sick-horse stables. Its utter unfitness as a guard-room has been constantly brought to notice. During the rains, when the guard have to sleep inside, it is particularly objectionable, its size not properly accommodating the, strength of the guard. There is no separate room for a prisoner; and former Medical Officers of the re- giment reported that to put a man in close confinement in the room during the hot season would be absolutely dangerous to life. By para. 103, Section 16, Bombay Army Regulations, and G. O. C. No. 231 of 1875, simple imprison- ment has to be carried out in the quarter-guard of the regiment; but I have literally no place where men under such punishment can be imprisoned. 13. The subject of the hospital and its total unfitness has also been con- stantly brought to notice by me to my superiors, and has been as often reported on by the Medical Officer in his annual reports. 14. The want of quarters for the medical subordidates is also a matter which has been constantly represented; they have absolutely none, and most of them live in the Native TownMilitary Department. No. 900. Bombay Castle, 1st March 1877. Letter from the Acting Sanitary Commissioner, No. A.REPORT ON THE SANITARY CONDITION OF THE CANTONMENT OF POONA, INSPECTED IN OCTOBER 1876. THE Cantonment of Poona, reached by the G. I. P. Railway at a distance of 119 miles from Bombay, is situated in latitude 18° 30' 41" north and longi- tude 73° 55' 21" east, at an elevation of 1,850 feet above the level of the sea, from which it is about 70 miles distant in a straight line. It is the largest and most important military station in the Bombay Command, and as such has often before been reported upon by previous Sanitary Commissioners. It will therefore be unnecessary in this report to describe its physical geography or climate, as infor- mation on these points is already in the possession of Government, but in obedience to the order conveyed in Government Resolution in the General Depart- ment, No. 2617, dated 23rd August 1876, I will confine my remarks to point- ing out in detail all sanitary defects in drainage, water supply, conservancy, &c., and will try to indicate what improvements are most urgently required and how they may best be carried out. 2. It may, however, be useful to state that the Cantonment covers an area of 4½ square miles, and that it lies partly on the watershed of the Muta river which flows past the City of Poona on the west, whilst the surface drainage from the eastern part is carried off by two nullahs which discharge themselves into the conjoined streams which form the Muta Mula River which extends along but is separated by the civil lines and by cultivated fields from the northern face of the Cantonment. I would also recall to recollection that the rock, on which the Cantonment stands, consists of the Deccan trap which in places crops up to the surface but which especially towards the north-east is covered with a thick layer of black cotton soil. 3. The garrison of Poona at the date of my inspection consisted of2 Followers. Corps. EUROPEAN REGIMENTS. Corps. NATIVE REGIMENTS. Europeans. Natives. Men. Women. Children. Men. Women. Children. Men. Women. Children. 2-15th Regiment ... 104 229 336 198 523 1st Lancers 297 325 273 5th Regiment N. L. I. 20 292 375 66th Regiment .. 61 129 111 38 51 8th Regiment N. I. 50 75 58 26th Regiment N. I. 36 271 326 Total ... 165 358 447 236 574 Total 403 983 1,032 4. The Cantonment Act has been in operation at Poona since the 1st July 1868, and the Committee, I am informed, is at present composed of the follow- ing members:3 water from that part of the Cantonment crosses the Sudder Bazar. On the north- west the boundary passes through the Civil Lines which however are neither under the Poona Municipality or under the Military authorities, but are simply under the jurisdiction of the Collector of the district. After which the line meets the Arsenal road in Cantonment which may be considered the northern boundary of the bazar whilst on the south the line is also most irregular as the City Limits are, as it were, dovetailed into it, and the filthy straggling hamlet of Bunghy Warra intervenes between the Sudder Bazar and the slaughter houses which are situated just over its southern limits. 6. The area covered by the Sudder Bazar is estimated to amount to 350 acres. It is about 1,233 yards long by about 733 yards broad at its widest part, and is traversed by four principal roads running nearly in a straight line from north to south. They are called East street, Main street, Centre street and West street, besides which there are several thoroughfares of less importance which have not received names. There are also several streets running from east to west which form the line of communication with the different Peths of the City to which they are adjacent. Among such may be mentioned Sucha Peer street which coming from Nana Peth in the city joins Sepoy Lane which is the direct road to the N. I. Lines. Another communication would be by Exhibition Lane and Malcolm Tank Road running from Main street to West street and so over the Manick nullah into Bhowani Peth, whilst on the south the Sholapur bazar road leads to the same Peth and the Satara road passing by the Petty Staff Lines and below the Commissariat Cattle Lines forms the southern boundary. 7. The bazar is thickly built over, but there are some open spaces within its limits, though these are principally situated on its outskirts, among such may be mentioned on the north the triangular space in the centre of which Sir Jamsetjee Jeejeebhoy's Fountain has been erected, whilst on the east is the bazar garden which, though small, is much frequented and is a great boon to the inhabitants. Towards the south end of East street is the old, disused and, I must add, badly kept English burial ground whilst on the west is the neglected and filthy open space round Malcolm tank and along the western boundary there are bungalows and compounds of residents. On the confines towards Sucha Peer is an open space where formerly the Tanneries were situated and where one dhor still remains, opposite which, but within City Limits, is the Roman Catholic burial ground for Native Christians and further on at the extreme limit of Sucha Peer is a Mahomedan burial ground which is still used and is the only burial ground within the bazar. On the other side of the Manick nullah there are cultivated fields between the thickly populated parts of the City and the bazar whilst on the north and east are Officers' and residents' houses. 8. The only tanks it is necessary to mention are Ghaseeram's tank opposite St. Mary's Church which, though not within the Sudder Bazar, exercises an influence over it as at present when the water in it is nearly dried up the ex- posed mud and dying vegetation are beginning to emit a very bad smell. Besides the above is an unnamed tank formed by an old quarry at the south end of East street, to which I shall have occasion again to refer whilst speaking of the water supply. 9. I must say in the outset that all the statistics regarding the Sudder Bazar are in the most unsatisfactory state, and that no reliable information con- cerning them is procurable from the records in the office of the Cantonment Magistrate. Colonel Evezard has, however, been good enough to extract from the records kept in the office of the Collector of Poona, the following informa- tion for me, which, however, is very meagre, and not such as in my opinion ought always to be forthcoming regarding a Cantonment.
4 10. The population of the Sudder Bazar at the time of the census of 1872 amounted to 22,046 persons, of whom 11,507 were males and 10,539 were females, being in the proportion of 91 females to every 100 males. It con- sisted of5 13. There is no record to show the exact number of privies in the bazar, but it is estimated that nearly every house has one. These too often are situated inside the houses, but some are in a far safer condition being detached, but they are all supposed to be cleaned through a wooden trap door opening on to the street at the back. There is no record to show the number or even a correct map to show the position of the drains in the Sudder Bazar but the great majority of the privies are not connected with any drain, but the filthy fluid flows into an absorbent cesspit of which it is said there are upwards of 2,500, and nearly all this offensive matter soaks into the ground in the immediate neighbourhood of the habitations of the people. 14. The houses that are connected with the drains are in great danger as the connection consists of pipes plastered over at the top, so that all the gas from the drains must pass into the house. These connections should without the delay of a single day be made open on the top. 15. Some of the drains have not, Colonel Evezard informed me, been opened for 40 years, so the state of filth in them may be more easily imagined than described. They consist of the objectionable |_| shaped rubble masonry drain with flat inverts and allow soakage all round, but there is no correct map extant to show their size and position though they for the most part have been made along the line of the natural channels for stormwater. In the aggregate the underground drains are said to be only 20 yards short of two miles, in length, but in the absence of a proper map it is almost impossible to describe them, and the following is necessarily a very imperfect account of the course of the principal ones. 16. A line drawn from East to West and North of the old English burial ground may be said to show the area which is drained into an open ditch which falls into the Manick nullah at Sucha Peer. The first arterial drain starts from the west side of house No. 328 in Main street and runs down nearly in a straight line to the back of the row of houses forming the north side of the grain market, where it meets au intercepting sewer winch starts from Main street nearly opposite the Bazar office. It then follows the line of and is, in my opinion, in most dangerous proximity to Rastias aqueduct, which it will be remembered is one of the sources of water supply to the City until after passing under Taboot road it reaches West street which it crosses at its junction with Sucha Peer street but between houses 516 and 517 it ends in an open ditch and is discharged into the main outlet which, in the absence of any other name, I will call the Sucha Peer ditch. 17. The next main covered drain runs at the back of the shops occupied by Borahs from house No. 336, on the North to house No. 1115, on the South. Two drains are given off from it, one of which passes between houses 45 and 46 and the other down the gully between houses 58 and 59. These cross under Main street and after draining Durjee Ali meet near the Musjid and are continued as one drain to the back of a house in Centre street under which it passes, when at the back of the vegetable market it becomes open and runs as an unmade ditch under a baker's shop and behind one of the blocks of the mutton market until it falls into the main open ditch just opposite the Convent Church and in the vicinity of the Convent school for girls and St. Vincent's school for boys. 18. The district lying between the vegetable market and the grain market to the south of Sucha Peer street is drained by two open nullahs which carry off the stormwater through the filthy Kunjer Alli and passing as a single nullah under West street are discharged into the Sucha Peer ditch between houses which are occupied by Europeans.
6 19. The next drain commences on the north of the old. English burial ground, and passing between Mr. Barretto's compound and Mr. Sorabji Jeewaji's house as an open ditch crosses Main street, where it is covered and after passing through the filthy Mochee Warra crosses Malcolm Tank road and is continued through the equally filthy district of Kamatteepoora, receiving the sewage of the houses to the south of the vegetable market, and after being joined by another drain, which starts from the east side of Ghoree Khata, falls near Malcolm Tank road into the one previously described, which runs along the east side of West street, the two together forming the commencement of the Sucha Peer ditch. 20. I was fairly astounded to hear that there was not a single public latrine or urinal provided for the use of the inhabitants of the Sudder Bazar, and all the halalcores in the bazar are private servants and in no way under the control of the Cantonment Committee, except that they are compelled to carry the night-soil, when they choose to collect it, to the carts which, by what seems to me a most disgusting and improper arrangement, are stationed on a site enclosed by a prickly-pear hedge but open towards and within, will it be believed? 37 yards of the shed where all the sheep and goats intended for the food of Europeans as well as of natives are slaughtered. There are only six wooden night-soil carts, which are not watertight, dry rubbish being put into their bottoms to prevent leakage. These carts are supposed to make two trips a day, at 9 A. M., and at 1-30 to the manure yard beyond Cantonment Limits on the Sholápur road. 21. It may be useful here to state the amount of solid matter passed and of urine voided by the population of the Sudder Bazar. It is usual to assume that 2.5 ozs. of solid matter and 40 ozs. of urine in a given population represent the quantity passed per head per diem, so that we have about 1½ ton of solid matter and 24 tons of urine to deal with. The 6 night-soil carts may be of sufficient size to remove most of the solid matter, but very little of the urine or of the ablution water ever leaves the place except by soakage. The underground drains before mentioned, bad as they are in form and construction, yet do carry off some part of these effete matters, but as there is no record to show the num- ber of privies connected with these drains, it is impossible to calculate how much is removed in this way. 22. The unbuilt privies are generally situated inside the mud walled compound, but occasionally are found outside in the street where they are enclosed by matting. Two stones are placed on the bare ground on which the occupant squats and performs the offices of nature between them, and washes his naked body in the same place. I really do not know which is worse, the condition of such places or the cesspits which have been built outside but which being absorbent allow the soakage to go on perpetually. These cesspools are for the most part covered with a wooden lid but they are scarcely ever opened even, much less cleaned. At the back of a large tenant house near quarters occupied by Europeans, a row of three cesspools was observed which required considerable force and much time to open when the cesspool was found to con- tain five feet of the most horribly offensive fluid but as the privies with which it communicated were in daily use, it was evident that soakage into the surround- ing subsoil must have been going on for a considerable time past. 23. The principal roads are as a rule well swept, but the general surface of the Sudder Bazar is most disgracefully filthy, there are no dust boxes into which the cutchra can be deposited, whilst the interior of private enclosures was found covered with collections of refuse which was evidently never removed, and the lanes in the bazar were seen to be everywhere fouled with night-soil whilst the arches below the culverts built across roads are turned into public latrines.
7 The Manick nullah bank is one huge latrine whilst ruinous houses afford ready and convenient shelter for the people to ease themselves. Early in the morning, at the back of nearly every dead wall, the ground is found wet with urine. 24. The conservancy establishment consists of 14 rubbish carts which are supplied by a contractor and are employed in the different sections of the bazar, and it is intended that the cutchra should be thrown into them by the people as the carts slowly move along the streets. 12 biggaries are engaged in cleaning out nullahs and drains, cutting hedges and doing any other work which may be required. Whilst 7 men and 6 women are engaged in sweeping the roads and filling the carts with rubbish; and 5 halalcores are employed in cleaning up night-soil deposited during the night throughout the bazar. These people work under the immediate orders of the conservancy sergeant who has under him a havildar and 7 peons who are employed to superintend the work in the various sections of the bazar. The cutchra is taken to the Potters' field at Lall Bagh on the south-west of the bazar, dead to windward of the Wanourie barracks and close to the Kurruckwasla canal. 25. The bazar is not lighted and the roads are not watered, though a few streets are sometimes watered by private subscription. 26. The only offensive trades allowed to be carried on are the tannery or rather a skin dressing establishment over the Manick nullah and one indigo dyer. 27. The vegetable, mutton and beef markets in the Sudder Bazar are in every way unsuited for the sale of food. The mutton market is situated on either side of a crowded street opposite the Convent Church School and close to the junction of three streets. It consists of two tiled sheds built on either side of the road. There are 15 stalls in each shed, and the meat hangs in the veran- dahs of the sheds but running diagonally across the road a few feet above the market and crossing under a baker's shop is the open unmade drain of the dis- trict. This drain as it passes close to the market has been covered with planks in order to keep off some of the stench, but three privies discharge their liquid contents into it from adjacent houses immediately opposite the back of the shed where in a verandah the heads, feet, &c., are sold, and the ground between it and the drain is the resort for natural purposes of all the market people and passers by the road. A Kurruckwasla water stand pipe has been erected in front of the south side of the market, but no drain has been made to carry away the wastage water which, consequently, causes the ground to be kept in an unwholesome state. At the back of the shed on the north side the ground below the dead wall of the market is made wet by the urine of the residents of the filthy huts in the immediate neighbourhood, one of which approaches within 6 feet of the building. These huts are occupied by the families of 30 mutton butchers. Dogs hungry, lean and nearly rabid congregate along the road between the sheds, whilst the dust blows over the meat tainted as it is with the drain emanations, and the flies which are innumerable make a passage through the mutton market any thing but desirable. 28. The vegetable fruit and fish market is a little further along the same road at its junction with Centre street. It consists of 17 stalls built on either side of the road, whilst the same filthy unmade open drain passes in the rear of the row of stalls on the north side. The traders have covered the road side gutters over with planks which are raised so as to form platforms in front of the shops. The fish sellers 6 in number, are allowed to cut up and gut the fish in the road. I know of no native municipality where the arrangements are so bad. 29. The beef market consisting of two tiled sheds built on either side of the road is further away towards the south end of the bazar. Each shed con- tains at the east end 5 stalls of a superior kind, as the platform on which the vendors sit and the verandah in front of it are paved. These stalls are separated
8 by a transverse wall from the remaining 14 stalls on either side which though of the same size, are not paved. Behind each row of sheds are the houses of the 50 beef butchers, and the filthy habits of these people and even their attempts to be clean by sweeping away the dust in front of their houses, tends to spoil the beef. 30. This is a proper place to describe the slaughter houses which are built near the Commissariat cattle lines on the outskirts of the bazar close to the filthy hamlet of Bunghy warra and not far from where the old condemned night-soil carts stand. These are not now used but, having been impregnated with night-soil they emit a very penetrating stench which vitiates the atmos- phere for a long distance round them. The slaughter houses stand on high ground near the head of several small nullahs with which the ground in the vicinity is intersected. The beef slaughter house is a walled and paved enclosure with a central gutter leading to a cesspit outside, but it was seen that the persons in charge in order to save themselves trouble had dammed up the passage into this cesspit and the blood and water were flowing out over the ground at the back. The mutton slaughter house was, I was informed, a somewhat similar building, but General Lord Mark Kerr, C.B., Commanding the Poona Division, in the hopes of getting some action taken ordered it sometime ago to be pulled down and now there is only a jouli shed built over the bare ground where the animals are slaughtered and where the carcasses are dressed and cut up. It is, as I have mentioned above, only 37 yards distant from the place where the night-soil carts for the whole bazar stand ! 31. The animals are supposed to be inspected by the Conservancy Sergeant before they are slaughtered, and it is said that the comparatively large number of 25 head of cattle and 90 sheep and goats are slaughtered daily. 32. The establishment allowed for the cleaning of the slaughter houses consists of a cart which is employed in taking away the offal, blood, and other refuse from the mutton slaughter yard, and a puckauli bhistie and a sweeper who are employed in removing blood and in cleaning the beef slaughter yard. 33. The grain market is situated at the head of Sucha Peer street, the shops being private property but the filth of the surroundings nearly equals that of the beef, mutton and vegetable markets. There are said to be 120 grain sellers. 34. The following is the number of animals said to be kept in the Sudder Bazar. Horses and Mares. Ponies. She Buffaloes. Bull Buffaloes. Bullocks. Cows. Sheeps and Goats. Total. 300 50 300 5 1,000 400 300 2,355 There are no proper stables for them. They are tethered inside or outside, houses, but all their urine soaks into the ground. There are stated to be 50 milch cattle stables which on the average are said to contain 10 animals. So that the milk supplied to the Troops and Residents in Poona cannot be wholesome. 35. The system in force regarding the registration of births and deaths is utterly and entirely wrong, and the returns are absurd and not worth the paper they are written on. For example, for Poona and Kirkee Cantonments with a joint population of 28,450 persons, only 54 births were recorded in 1875 or 1.9
9 per 1,000. The death rate is equally erroneous, only 18.06 per 1000 being registered from the two Cantonments. The people are supposed voluntarily to report at the various chowkies whenever a birth or death takes place in their families, but there is no penalty enforced for their not doing so. I will not prolong the report by giving the various statistics of births and deaths that are in my office as they refer to the combined Cantonments; but one point I may call especial attention to, namely, that for last year out of the 514 deaths which were reported, 207, equal to 40.27 per cent. took place in children under 12 years of age, in 1871 the rate of children mortality was 44.81 per cent. and since that time it has never been below 35 per cent. of total deaths. This unmistakably, if any further evidence were needed, points to the insanitary condition of the Sudder Bazar. 36. The drinking water is principally derived from the Kurruckwasla canal which passes through the Sholápur bazar part of which was removed for its formation. The canal itself is to a certain extent protected by a strip of ground having been left on either side of its banks, but I saw dust, leaves and other impurities being blown into it. I shall revert to this point again in another section of the report, as I consider the passage of the canal close to such abominable nuisances as are met with on its way from Parbuttee down- wards ought to lead to action being taken to improve existing matters. The Executive Engineer for Irrigation is unable from press of work to supply me with a tracing I asked for to illustrate the course of this portion of the canal. A service reservoir has been formed in the middle of the Sholápur bazar from which the unfiltered canal water is brought into the bazar through iron pipes laid at first along the commencement of the bed of the Manick nullah as far as the side of the tank at the south end of East street under which it passes into the bazar where the pipes, protected by stones, are laid over the bank of the nullah but by what I consider is an objectionable arrangement water is let out of the canal on the east side of the Sholápur bazar, and a stream flows under the canal down the nullah along side the tank above referred to, where arrangements have been made so as occasionally to pond it up to a sufficient height to fill the tank but usually it escapes down the nullah in a small stream, along which the people walk knee deep and wash their dirty vessels and dirty feet and hands and rinse out their mouths and spit on to the walls of the adjacent tank, the ground round which is further defiled by puckal bullocks who stir up the mud as the bheesties stand on the wall to draw the water, in which process a con- siderable quantity is spilt whilst other persons get over the wall and dip their dirty hands, vessels and ropes into the tank which ought not, in my opinion, to be used as a source of drinking water supply (as this should always be drawn from covered reservoirs,) but whilst it is so used the parapet wall should be heightened and wheels fitted with iron chains, buckets, and windlasses should be placed all round it, whilst the ground below should be paved to prevent soakage into it and a proper drain should be made to carry away the wastage water. There are altogether at the present time 7 Kurruckwasla water stand pipes in use in the bazar though 7 more have been erected which are not how- ever as yet open to the public. 37. Another source of drinking water in a very objectionable state is found in the Sir Jamsetjee Jejeebhoy Fountain which is now supplied with Kurruckwasla water, and around which are four small detached houds for the use of bheesties, Mahars, Mangs and Native Christains into all of which dipping places grass, leaves, flowers and all kinds of impurity were observed floating and undergoing putrefaction. The floor of the fountain should be raised, the top covered, brass cocks let into the sides, and the surface outside should be fitted with rests for water vessels to stand on and be paved on a slope to carry away the wastage water. The same remarks apply to the houds at the Malcolm tank and in the garden near the bazar office.
10 38. There are besides 17 public wells which whether filled by rain or from springs, ought to be immediately closed as they must be simply cesspits. 39. A statement showing the income and expenditure of the Cantonment Fund is appended to this report. There is annually, I am informed, a large deficit, and the amount collected last year Rs. 24,768, including the Government contribution of nearly Rs. 8,000 is manifestly insufficient when it is considered that it has to be devoted to the wants of the whole Cantonment, and that not much more than one-third or a sum certainly under Rs. 10,000 is spent on the bazar alone. 40. Such is a brief description of the sanitary condition of the Sudder Bazar of Poona, and for years past the Cantonment Committee have been repre- senting the necessity of having a larger sum of money placed at their disposal so as to enable them to carry out the improvements which are so imperatively demanded. The Officer at present in Command of the Division and President of the Cantonment Committee has evinced the most earnest interest on the subject, but has been prevented from taking action by not having had any money at his disposal to carry out what are absolutely necessary and essential sanitary improvements. 41. The whole Cantonment of Poona was laid out without any proper attention or in complete ignorance of sanitary requirements. How else would it have been possible to have chosen a site to leeward of a filthy native town for the location of European troops and for the residences of the Head Quarter Staff of the Army, of the Divisional Staff, of the European Officers in the garrison, of the large number of European residents at the Head Quarters of one of the principal Collectorates in the Presidency. However, we have to deal with things as they are, and my clear duty is to state what improvements are in my opinion most urgently required and how they can best be carried out. 42. Having the means of enjoying the benefits of a pure water supply, though I consider the present method of distribution requires some alterations, the greatest sanitary improvement needed in the Sudder Bazar of Poona is in my opinion undoubtedly sewerage. Sewerage distinct from drainage and as there is much misapprehension as to the proper meaning of these terms, I think it well to state that drainage means the provision of channels for the sole con- veyance of water either falling on to the surface or percolating through the subsoil, while sewerage means the construction of channels for the removal of water fouled in domestic use, and of urine of men and beasts as well as of night-soil which may or may not, according to circumstances, be admitted into them. Sewers constructed on scientific principles next to a pure water supply conduce most largely to the health and comfort of civilized communities, but if built in ignorance of sanitary requirements become certain and sure means of generating filth poisons, and of thus disseminating putrid fevers which too frequently terminate fatally. A. cardinal point in good sanitary engineering is to separate drainage from sewerage. By this means the channels for the conveyance of sewage can be made much smaller, and therefore far less costly than in the old days when huge channels (which in India would only be in full operation for four months in the year) were constructed for the removal of sewage plus rainfall. At the present time in towns in England glazed stoneware pipes of different sizes up to 15 inches in diameter are used for the conveyance of sewage. If the amount of sewage is too large to be conveyed by a 15-inch pipe, egg- shaped brick sewers laid in Portland Cement form the intercepting and main sewers. 43. The first point in a sewerage scheme is to determine the site of the outfall. In the case of the Sudder Bazar the valley line is to the north-west. The ultimate destination of drainage should be to running streams. Sewage on
11 the contrary should always, if possible, be in the first instance taken to the soil which it enriches by its contained organic matter until by filtration it becomes sufficiently pure to be allowed to enter streams. 44. I am certain if Mr. Rawlinson or any other great Sanitary Engineer were here, his advice to Government would be to lay glazed stoneware pipes down the centre of each street and thoroughfare, and between each row in the back slums and to connect every privy-ablution place in the bazar through pro- perly ventilated traps with them, and thus convey the sewage whilst fresh to an outfall if possible on to land, for example on to the fields between the railway and the river where Mr. Whiting proposes to establish his sewage farm. The existing nullahs being in the first instance cleaned out and left for the convey- ance of the storm water alone, and every privy or any other connection being scrupulously cut off and diverted into the sewage channels. That, I feel certain, is the best advice and would be the cheapest in the long run, because the channels for the sole conveyance of sewage are so much smaller than those required for the conveyance of sewage combined with storm water. In India rain only falls for 4 months in the year, and consequently during the remaining 8 months the wetted periphery of sewers constructed to carry off the combined fluids would bear a ludicrously small proportion to the greater portion of the interior of the sewer which even in the minor sewers would have to be made of huge dimensions to carry off the enormous rush of water sent down after a few hours' heavy rain in the monsoon, and consequently during the greater part of the year the space above would be simply reservoirs for gas to collect in. 45. I believe, as I have, said, that a system of pipe sewers if laid by a com- petent Sanitary Engineer would be incomparably the best way of dealing with the question, but of course before anything could be done to alleviate the present disgraceful state of affairs other than by constant flushing and constant opening up and cleaning the existing drains, much time must be occupied in making a complete survey of the bazar and taking the levels and in settling the question of outfall. All of which points must be determined before the estimates of its cost can be prepared. If it is undertaken I think endeavours should be made to see whether in the first instance the municipality of the neighbouring City would not at the same time establish a sewerage scheme as I advised them to do last year into which the outfall for the bazar might pass, but if there is no hope of this action being taken in the City, the sewerage should be diverted from the Manick nullah and carried to the fields above suggested. 46. I must however take notice of another course which has been suggested as though it is far less efficient, far less perfect than the scheme I recommend, yet it would undoubtedly be an improvement in the present state of things, as it would effect what is the great sanitary want in the Sudder Bazar, namely, the removal of sewage from amidst the very sleeping rooms and habitations of the people and, to a certain extent would tend to dry the subsoil. This course is to lay open segmental drains down each of the lanes in the back slums and along the main streets and to allow the privy and ablution water to escape by them, these channels would convey sewage during the fair season and sewage plus storm- water during the rains. 47. The great objection I have to this system of drains is that it would be offensive to sight and smell, and though much less dangerous to health than the existing soakage into the subsoil yet it would still be prejudicial to health, as the open gutters would contain the most offensive matters and would run past each man's house, while vehicles passing over them would damage their sides and they would get blocked up by dry refuse some of which would be carried into and
12 would infallably block up the drain at the lower levels where they must neces- sarily be closed, as the depth below the surface would otherwise render them dangerous. 48. Whatever course is decided upon, I am of opinion that no sewage should be allowed to enter the drain opposite the Convent school down to its junction with the Sucha Peer ditch or to be discharged into the Sucha Peer ditch itself but all, if possible, should be conducted down a main sewer which should be built under the roadway from the Cantonment Magistrate's office straight down Sucha Peer street and the drainage and sewage of all north of this street (if open sewer channels are decided upon) should be led into it. If the levels will not admit of the contents of the drain opposite the Convent Church being taken into the above main sewer it should be diverted and, if possible, a pipe should be carried straight down to and alongside the bank of the Manick nullah. I do not recommend that the sewer should discharge its contents into the Manick nullah direct, though it may be necessary that this course should be adopted during heavy freshets in the monsoon if it has to carry both rainfall and sewage. 49. I say that this alternative scheme which has been suggested is not one- tenth part as good as the pipe sewerage scheme, and I respectfully but strongly advise Government not to sanction it until at least estimates have been made to see what is the comparative cost of the two schemes. If, however, the open drains are determined upon, then in my opinion, they should be commenced from near the habitations so as to prevent the subsoil being made wet, but the Sucha Peer street sewer must be made at the same time, for the condition of the present ditch is most dangerous to the health of the residents in its neighbourhood. 50. I have given prominence to sewerage as the most urgent sanitary work to be executed in the Sudder Bazar, because the present state of affairs is as bad as it possibly can be, and in my opinion the filthy cesspools and the putrefying nightsoil in the bazar are the cause of the typhoid fever which has appeared among the European troops stationed at Poona; but the entire re-organization of the conservancy system and the necessary establishment is equally important, and the immediate erection of public necessaries and urinals for the use of the poor people who have now nowhere to go to, as well as the assumption of the of duty collecting all the nightsoil in the bazar by means of servants paid out of the funds of the Cantonment Committee are measures which ought, in my opinion, to be carried out without any loss of time. 51. The Cantonment Committee has, I would very earnestly wish to point out, not acted in this respect up to the orders of the Legislature as expressed in Section 18 of the Cantonment Act which says, the Cantonment Committee shall cause a sufficient number of public latrines and urinals to be constructed for the use, &c. No bunghies should be allowed to be private servants, all must be as in Bombay declared to be public servants, but radical reform is wanted through- out the whole establishment. 52. It is entirely and utterly out of the question that a Cantonment Magistrate however zealous, however devoted, can in such a large bazar as Poona do work which appertains to the office and duty of a Health Officer. He is engaged in Court at the very time when he ought to be out in the bazar on inspection duty, and it is utterly wrong in my opinion that the same man should be both accuser and judge. I can speak with thankfulness from an experience of some years that I was in Bombay obliged to make my complaint regarding infringements of the Municipal Act before a Magistrate who heard the evidence and dealt with the case according to law. 53. Mr. Norman has, I believe, made a proposal which meets with my warmest approbation namely, that the Sudder Bazar and all the Civil Lines
13 extending down to the river be constituted a municipality. By this course taxation could be at once applied to all persons residing within the above limits, and I earnestly hope this suggestion may be carried out by Government. 54. If it is so, or in any case, I think there should be as indeed appears to be contemplated in Section 7 of the Cantonment Act, a Health Officer appointed, who should have under him a proper establishment to enforce the performance of sanitary work. There is at present no systematic daily cleaning or inspection, such as is always essential in carrying out practical sanitation. 55. The bazar is not divided as it ought to be into at least five wards, over each of which should be a Sub-Inspector, whilst each ward should be subdivided into sections, and over each section should be a mukadum. Each ward and each section should have its own distinct establishment of carts, coolies and bunghies so as to be entirely independent of any other ward, as by such an arrangement it is possible to fix responsibility on some one individual if the section were found dirty. 56. Taking into consideration the vast Imperial interests at stake regarding the preservation of the health of the European soldiers quartered at Poona, the Health Officer should, in my opinion, be a Commissioned Medical Officer and under his orders should be placed a European who should be designated the Chief Superintendent. This officer should be responsible for the working and efficiency of the whole establishment. His and the Sub-Inspectors' duties would not only consist in seeing that all privies, all cesspools as long as they are allowed to exist should be daily cleaned, but that all surface refuse was removed not only from the public streets but from private compounds, and that all infringements against the sanitary clauses of the Act were reported to the Health Officer for such action as he is allowed by law to take. 57. The cutchra should not be sold to potters. It ought to be carted away to a greater distance and not be deposited nearer than one mile from the petty staff and depôt lines. The contract system of carts and bullocks as at present in force is entirely wrong. The proper cart for the conveyance of town sweepings is the Bombay tilt cart, and one such should be procured as a pattern, so that at least 20 like it might be made. 58. The present disgusting system of having leaking open filth carts for the conveyance of the night-soil should be at once stopped and proper iron tank carts, Bombay pattern, should be substituted in their stead; but they ought not for another hour to be allowed to stand in the close proximity of the mutton and beef slaughter houses and Commissariat lines. The night-soil carts should be brought from stables at a distance to sites which should be paved and drained and to which Kurruckwasla water should be laid on and a triangular iron rest, Bombay pattern, should be put under the yoke to keep the cart level; and the soil when brought by the bunghies should be poured into it through an iron funnel, and the cart should be washed before being driven out of the yard. 59. The bunghies' baskets also are not good. The Bombay pattern basket should be introduced and iron receptacles for use in the privies themselves should be insisted upon, but as soon as public necessaries are erected I strongly advise that several of the existing privies should be closed. 60. It will be a difficult matter to select sites in the bazar for the night-soil carts to stand whilst being filled, for they must not be too far from the privies. Perhaps sites as near as possible to the undermentioned places would be as unob- jectionable as any that can be named. 1. Sholapur bazar 2 Carts. 2. Madras Warra near Commissariat Lines 2 "
14 3. Manick Nullah near of the South end of West street. 4 Carts. 4. Manick Nullah near Dhore Warra........................... 6 15 their vegetables and mutton and beef are, as I have said, now surrounded with open drains in which filth stagnates and undergoes putrefactive decomposition and are enclosed by the crowded hovels of a squalid native population whilst the atmosphere around them is tainted with the emanations from privies, cesspools, &c., &c., in the neighbourhood whilst the flies swarm over each piece of meat as it hangs on the filthy string suspended over the unclean stall, where it is touched by the dirty hand, or is swayed about by contact with the long unwashed gar- ment of the vendor, as he gets up or down from the raised platform where he is supposed to sit. This is no exaggerated picture, but a simple statement of bare truth, and it is impossible to see the present markets without coming to the con- clusion that they are totally unfit for the sale of food, and that the erection of fresh ones is a matter which should be taken in hand as soon as the other more vital subjects have been dealt with. At the same time in my opinion the pre- sent markets should be closed as soon as possible, and temporary open sheds should be run up in other less objectionable sites in their stead, I think such sites might be found at or near the Malcom tank. An open space all round the sheds is absolutely essential, and if Kurruckwasla water is laid on there should be a drain made to carry away the wastage water. The permanent markets might be constructed on a somewhat similar design to those lately erected by Mr. Robertson, C.S., at Dharwar; which are the finest I have seen out of Bombay and which cost only Rs. 26,000. This amount is only for the cost of a fruit vegetable and grain market, but the revenue derived from the stalls yield an annual interest of 8 per cent. Three markets will be required, one for the sale of fruit and vegetables, the 2nd for the sale of fish and mutton and the 3rd for the sale of beef. 67. The mode of distribution of the drinking water requires to be improved. The practice of allowing people to walk knee deep into the water from which they draw their water supply should be stopped, and Mr. Whiting who introduced at Punderpoor the excellent plan of fixing brass cocks into a raised water main would, I am sure, have no difficulty in providing a better system. It is an established principle in sanitation that drinking water should be supplied from covered channels and instead of the present dangerous open tanks, &c., the water should be led into covered reservoirs made preferably of cast-iron or, if that cannot be procured, of masonry in the sides of which brass cocks should be fitted. If these are built in the form of a cross after the beautiful shape for example of the old Mahomedan dipping well called the Chaoputee Fountain in the city of Ahmednagar, a tracing of which will be found in my inspection report of that Cantonment, a larger number of persons can draw water at one time than if the reservoir is built in a straight line, but what I wish to draw particular attention to is that no permission should, on any account, be given to any one to erect a standpipe or to make a fountain until it was shewn that a proper and efficient drain had been designed to carry away the wastage water. If evidence is required for the necessity of this all that is required is an inspection of the ground round any standpipe in the bazar,16 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75008972.tif] in the roofs and in the external walls of houses are matters of the most urgent sanitary importance. For the roofs the openings which are usually made in cook-rooms can easily be constructed and for the external walls an open space about 9 or 12 inches deep should be left all along the wall under the eaves or else there should be windows not less than 3' x 2 let in. The regis- tration of births and deaths is also all important and house-owners should be compelled under a penalty to give information of the occurrence of a birth or death in their houses. 69. This report will show that the sanitary condition of the Sudder Bazar of the principal Military Cantonment in the Western Presidency is in a condi- tion which is eminently dangerous not only to its inhabitants but to the Euro- pean soldiers who frequent it and to the large European community Civil as well as Military who live around its outskirts, and the statement given in para. 42 shows how utterly and entirely inadequate is the amount of funds placed at the disposal of the Cantonment Committee to provide for even a fraction of what is absolutely necessary for the maintenance of a proper establishment for efficient daily conservancy, and shows how entirely chimerical any hope must be of raising a sum sufficient for the undertaking of those structural works of which there is the most urgent need. If Mr. Norman's suggestion of the establishment of a Municipality is allowed, sufficient funds for the reforms I have suggested regard- ing conservancy may perhaps be raised; but no amount can be raised by local taxation sufficiently large to pay for the cost of a sewerage scheme. This I respectfully submit, considering the vast Imperial interests affected, should be at all events partly defrayed by the State, and if, as has been suggested by the Can- tonment authorities, a portion of the revenue derived from the sale of the country liquor manufactured for, and consumed by, the people in the immediate district was assigned for the provision of the necessary funds, the improvements so much needed in the Sudder Bazar of Poona might be made. 70. In bringing this section of my report on the sanitary condition of the Cantonment of Poona to a conclusion, I would beg to express my acknowledge- ments to the Cantonment Magistrate, Colonel Evezard, for all the trouble he has taken to show me the worst parts of the bazar and in obtaining for me all the information he was able to do. T. G. HEWLETT, Acting Sanitary Commissioner.
17 STATEMENT showing the Receipts and Expenditure of the Poona Cantonment Fund for the year 1875-76. Receipts. Expenditure. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Balance in hand ........ 13 15 2 Bazar Conservancy Es- tablishment 7,037 15 7 Taxes and Licences. Pound fees 17 6 6 Ghorepoore and Wanowrie Villages 288 0 0 Cess money 2,250 0 0 2,267 6 6 Fines. Station Conservancy Es- tablishment 3,901 10 0 Fine under Cantonment Rules 855 4 0 Cantonment Fund 2,244 0 0 Do. Lock Hospital 113 8 0 General Management 1,463 6 9 Do. Departmental 10 0 0 978 12 0 Grazing Fund. Lock Hospital Establish- ment 5,134 6 2 Right of grazing over can- tonment 1,650 0 0 Latrines18 EXTRACT para. 7 of the Report of the Cantonment Committee, dated 1st December 1876. "The Sanitary Commissioner's Report on the Sudder Bazar having been referred to a Sub-Committee, the Sub-Committee have submitted a report now before the Committee. The Committee concur with the views taken by the Sub-Committee in their report and are of opinion that their suggestions may be adopted, as far as practicable. With regard to the registration of houses, the Cantonment Magistrate reports that Registers of Houses are kept up in his office, but it is necessary that Government should lay down certain rules, as provided for under Section XI. of Bombay Act III. of 1867, Clauses 1 to 3." (True Extract.) B. H. POTTINGER, Major, Assistant Quarter Master General, Poona Division. EXTRACT Para. 9 of the Report of the Cantonment Committee, dated 1st December 1876. "Quarter Master General's letter No. 10-12919 2. And firstly with respect to the want of reliable statistics regarding the Sudder Bazar complained of by the Sanitary Commissioner it may be remarked that, the Cantonment Committee have no effectual machinery for taking a census of the population, a necessary step that lies at the basis of all statistics possess- ing the slighest value. Something however might be done in this direction by ordering a registration of the houses in the bazar and their inmates, and the mode of registering births and deaths is certainly capable of much improvement. 3. Another point enlarged on in the report is the irregularity of height and depth found in the houses of even the principal streets. This is however a matter that could only be dealt with under a Building Act, and which does not fall within the scope of the present observations. 4. With reference to the state of the drains which is, no doubt, very dis- creditable, all that can be recommended in view of the impossibility of effecting a complete system of arterial drainage such as that put forth by the Sanitary Commissioner is, to repair such portions as have become decayed or ruinous; to clear out all accumulations of filth garbage and mud heaps; and to flush the drains whenever such can be done without incurring needless expense. With respect to ventilation the Executive Engineer might be asked his opinion as to the practicability of ventilating some of the principal drains such as that passing under Mr. Barretto's house, and one or two others which have been reported on as nuisances and dangerous to the public health, from the accumulation of deadly sewer gas elaborated in their interior. 5. Unquestionably the most effectual plan of perfecting a sewerage scheme for the Bazar is the one advocated by Dr. Hewlett, viz., laying down glazed stoneware pipes of proper dimensions throughout the centre of the main and smaller streets. Such a system, however, would be extremely costly, and could not possibly be carried into effect without the expenditure of a much larger outlay of money than at present is in the hands of the Committee to deal with. 6. The next best course would, in the opinion of the Sub-Committee, be the adoption of Open segmental cut-stone drains along the sides of each street and lane, and which would allow the free escape of sewerage and storm-water. These drains should be kept constantly flushed by means of the Kurruckwasla water and no accumulation of filth or deposit allowed to remain. 7. The objections referred to in paragraph 47 of the report, viz., the offensiveness to sight and smell would be trifling in comparison to the risk to health of the community at large, which the present system of covered drains certainly entails. 8. The absence of public latrines and urinals is certainly a crying want, and the Secretary might be asked his opinion as to the most desirable sites for locating such places of public accommodation. Speaking broadly, such places of public resort as markets, police courts, railway stations, &c., are localities where it is desirable that some provision should be made for the wants of the native public. Such erections should be of the most inexpensive kind, and the greatest care would be necessary to provide against the possibility of their be- coming dangerous to the public health. 9. To defray the expense and ensure the cleanliness of these urinals and latrines, those of the inhabitants, who are unable to provide and maintain private privies should be compelled by law to resort to the public ones, paying a tax of one anna a month for their use. Whilst house holders prefer- ing to have private necessaries, should be taxed at the rate of 8 annas per
20 mensem, their privies being cleaned by the public sweepers, for the proper performance of whose duties the Committee, and not the houseowners, should be held responsible. 10. Notwithstanding its many objectionable features, the system of privies as described by Dr. Hewlett with cesspits and wooden covers is the one most extensively used by all classes of natives in this cantonment. This system it is feared will at present be found impossible to supersede, but its evil results may, by a good halalcore system, be reduced to a minimum. As recommended by Dr. Hewlett an efficient body of bunghies should be organized and placed under the authority and control of the Cantonment Committee, or an Officer delegated by it for the purpose of exercising authority over the cantonment sweepers. The sweepers ought to be placed under the immediate superintendence of a reliable Muccadum, or what would be still better an European Superintendent, who might be obtained from the Public Health Department of Bombay. 11. In regard to cartage no doubt the filth carts of the Bombay pattern possess all the advantages claimed for them by the Sanitary Commissioner, but in view of the recent contract entered into for the removal of sweepings and sewage matters by carts of a pattern furnished by the Quarter Master General's Department, it would be undesirable at present to interfere with existing arrangements. 12. Dr. Hewlett's recommendation for establishing a slaughter house at a short distance from the Cantonment along the line of railway, where animals would be killed and prepared for the market, seems a very desirable one. Arrangements might be made with the Railway Company, as is done in Bombay, for bringing the meat into market by early morning train. 13. Two markets for the sale of meat and vegetables should be erected, one in the neighbourhood of Malcom's Tank, and another near the Railway Station, where the Rest Camp now stands. The latter undoubtedly possesses great advantage as being situated in a clear open space and close to the railway Station, and would be a great convenience to residents in the civil lines, and the population dwelling at the northern end of the Cantonment. 14. The mode of distribution of the drinking water by fixing brass cocks into a raised water main, as suggested at paragraph 67 of the report is excellent, and would admirably meet the requirements of the inhabitants. 15. The other suggestions referred to at paragraph 68 regarding the provision of a sufficient number of dust boxes in the streets; the removal of cattle from dwelling houses and causing their location outside bazar limits, which however desirable would, in the opinion of the Sub-Committee, be found almost impossible to carry into effect; the compulsory white washing inside and outside of all houses in the bazar at least twice in the year; and the provisions recommended for roof ventilation are approved, and as far as it is practicable, should be insisted upon. Collector, Poona. T. B. BEATTY, Deputy Surgeon General, E. SEXTON, Surgeon Major. Members.
No. A.-151 OF 1877. FROM T. G. HEWLETT, ESQUIRE, Acting Sanitary Commissioner; TO THE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, Military Department. Camp Poona, 15th January 1877. SIR, In forwarding to you, for submission to His Excellency the Governor in Council, the accompanying Report on the Sudder Bazar of the Cantonment of Poona, I have the honor to attach the monthly report of the Cantonment Com- mittee at that station, together with the report of the Sub-Committee on the proposals I have made which have been forwarded to me by the Assistant Quarter Master General P. D. A. 2. A perusal of the report will, I think, prove to Government that the sani- tary condition of the Sudder Bazar of Poona is in anything but a satisfactory state. The evils complained of in it have grown up year by year as the Canton- ment increased in size, and the improvements now required to put it into a state of even ordinary cleanliness will necessarily entail a large outlay of money; but the constant danger of a severe epidemic breaking out is so imminent that I think measures should at once be taken to at least organize a staff by which surface cleaning can be perfected, if the more costly but yet most necessary work of sewering the bazar cannot be commenced for want of funds. 3. I am glad to learn that two public latrines are to be at once constructed, one on Mr. Crawford's principle and one on the Jubbulpur plan, and that a new beef slaughter-house is to be erected in a proper place, but the aid of Government is earnestly solicited to enable the Cantonment Committee to get funds to maintain an efficient establishment. In my opinion, as expressed in the report, the shortest and most efficient way would be for Government to constitute the Sudder Bazar and the Civil lines a Municipality as suggested by Mr. Norman. This would at once bring in a larger income and would enable a stricter super- vision to be kept over the sanitary arrangements. I am still of opinion that there should be one Chief Officer with two responsible Executive Officers, an Engineer and Health Officer. At present the work and responsibility is so divid- ed that speaking as an old Health Officer, I am certain the work of cleaning even cannot be properly performed. 4. As regards the Committee's remarks on the sewerage scheme, in which they recommend the half measure which will be not only expensive but is opposed to sanitary principles, I would hope that Government at all events will order that levels be taken and estimates be framed to show what the cost of laying down pipe sewers in the Sudder Bazar would be. It seems to me that persons in India regard pipe sewers from the omne ignotum pro terribili point of view, and are frightened at what they do not understand. If only this one bazar could be properly sewered, the advantages of the plan would, in my opinion, be so appa-
2 rent that I believe a new era would commence, and that other places would follow this example and thus that the sanitary condition of the country would be much benefitted. I am also of opinion that it would be highly advantageous if Government could influence the Poona Municipality to take simultaneous action in the City of which in fact the Sudder Bazar is in reality, as regards health, a component part. I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, T. G. HEWLETT, Acting Sanitary Commissioner.
Military Department. No. 3110. Bombay Castle, 18th July 1877. Letter from the Sanitary Commissioner, No. A.-151, dated 15th January 1877. Submits report on the Sudder Bazar of the Cantonment of Poona. RESOLUTION.7. Reliable information regarding the number of latrines in use in the bazar (para. 13) ought to be obtainable without entailing much trouble or any extra expenditure. If the statement that "the filthy fluid flows into an absorbent cesspit, of which, it is said, there are upwards of 2,500, and nearly all this offensive matter soaks into the ground in the immediate neighbourhood of the habitations of the people," is approximately correct, it behoves the authorities responsible for the sanitary condition of the Sudder Bazar to make particular enquiry and to suggest what steps should be immediately taken to check the continued defilement of the ground in and around the houses of the bazar. The first thing to be done apparently is to provide suitable public latrines. The non-existence of such conveniences not unnaturally caused the Sanitary Commissioner much astonish- mentwould remove the chief causes of the Sanitary Commissioner's very just com- plaint. It is not creditable to the intelligence or sense of decency of the persons whose business it is to look after the slaughter yard that nightsoil carts should be allowed to be placed close to windward of it, and that through the laziness of the people concerned, the passage for draining off the blood and water from the slaughter yard should be allowed to be dammed up! 16. The Sanitary Commissioner describes the filth of the surroundings of the grain market to nearly equal what has been reported to exist near the meat market! Possibly this might be reduced by more active supervision. 17. The system of registraion is doubtless as faulty as many other arrange- ments connected with this bazar. This matter might be considered by an early date in view to a project, including cost of establishment, being submitted for the orders of Government. 18. As regards the drinking water, of which the supply appears to be ample, the Sanitary Commissioner notices that the existing system of dipping goes far to foul the water. In so large a place as the Sudder Bazar of Poona arrangements ought to be made for delivering the water from stand pipes fitted with cocks. 19. All that is stated in paragraphs 42 to 49 by the Sanitary Commissioner will be considered when Government have received the report called for in para- graph 1 of this resolution. 20. What is stated in paragraph 51 should be brought to the notice of the Cantonment Committee. 21. The Quarter Master General should report as to the feasibility of relieving the Cantonment Magistrate of the duties of the Health Officer, and with whom the performance of those duties should rest. 22. An expression of the views of His Excellency the Commander-in- Chief on the proposal to form the Sudder Bazar and Civil Lines into a separate Municipality will be awaited. It should be stated whether, if the proposal be adopted, the Cantonment Fund will be relieved of all charges on account of the bazar, and under what rules the land and property in the Sudder Bazar will in future be held. 23. From a perusal of this valuable report by the Sanitary Commissioner, it would appear that notwithstanding that the Sudder Bazar of Poona is the largest bazar of its kind on this side of India, that it belongs to the largest cantonment in this presidency, and contains within its limits no small amount of wealth, it is deficient in all the main essentials (with the exception of a supply of drinking water) which would render the sanitary condition of its inhabitants sound. 24. In admitting this it must be also admitted that the officers concerned have, with the very insufficient means at their disposal, done the most that could be expected to secure a certain amount of cleanliness in the bazar; but so long as the state of affairs described by the Sanitary Commissioner continues, the bazar must remain a hot bed from which disease at any time may spread to the troops quartered to leeward of it. J. A. M. MACDONALD, Colonel, Secretary to Government. 3
REPORT ON THE SANITARY CONDITION OF THE REGIMENTAL LINES OF NATIVE TROOPS QUARTERED AT POONA. Inspected in October 1876. The lines of the three regiments of Native Infantry forming part of the garrison at Poona are situated in the centre of the Cantonment and on the ground sloping down from the race-course on the east to the unnamed nullah on the west, which forms one of the principal drains of the Cantonment. This water- course starts from below St. Mary's Church, near the beds in which the water of the Kharakwásla Canal is filtered, and runs in a northerly direction in a valley between the race-course and Ghorpurie on the east and the officers' quarters along Wodehouse Road, the arsenal and the northern lines on the west, and, after passing beyond the northern limits of the Cantonment, is continued through cultivated fields, until after a course of about two miles it discharges its contents into the Muta Mula River. 2. The 5th Regiment N. I. is quartered on the extreme right of the Native Infantry lines, and the area covered by the regimental lines, including the parade-ground on the east and the hospital which is on the left bank of the nullah, is said to amount to nearly 14½ acres. The strength of the regiment and of the Native followers will be seen from the following table:4 each wing is sub-divided into 2 blocks of 8 pendalls, which are built in paral- lel rows, there being 4 rows of 2 pendalls in each block. The Native officers' houses are on either flank. The houses of the 8 subedars of the regiment being at the head of each company, whilst the houses of the 8 jemadars are situated on the other flank, so that each line consists of a subedar's house, 4 pendalls (these being divided by the broad central road) and the jemadar's house. 4. The lines were originally built by the 10th Regiment, and are not of good design or construction. The pendalls consist of tiled buildings with mud- walls, and though of the same size, do not contain the same number of rooms; the one for married men having 20 rooms in it, 10 being placed back to back, whilst in the single men's pendall there are 22 rooms. The cross-streets, running east to west between the lines of each company, are about 70 feet broad, whilst the central street is 116 feet wide; but the streets running north to south between the Native officers' houses and the pendalls are only 22 feet broad, and the pendalls themselves have been built in much too close proximity to each other, as only about 3 feet are said to intervene between the ends of adjacent buildings. 5. From the natural slope of the ground on which they are built, the plinths vary very much in height, being at the east end almost level with the surface of the ground, whilst on the west they are raised for one or two feet. From the same cause the walls at the east end are universally low; one, measured, was only 3' 7" in height. In the rooms the height of the ridge is stated to be 13' 9", while that of the front wall is only 5', whilst the doorway is said to be only 4½ feet high. The superficial area allowed for each married man is said to be 100 square feet, and for each single man 90 feet; whilst the cubic space allowed to each married man is said to be 1,375 cubic feet, and that for a single man 1,237 cubic feet. Each hut consists of an inner room, divided from the verandah out- side by a mud wall; and the doorway, fixed as it is in the verandah wall, forms the only means of entrance of light and air. The room is perfectly dark when the door is shut. The floors are of mud, and in the corner of the verandah is the nanee or bathing-place, the wastage water from which is led out through a half- tile into a gutter on to the ground outside, which is in some cases continued on to the surface drain, which is excavated down the slope in front of each row of pendalls, and which discharges itself into the nullah. In other cases it is led to the strips of gardens or the trees in front of each row of huts. Practically, all the bathing-water soaks into the ground close to the huts. 6. The regimental bazaar is situated in the close proximity to and on the west of the lines. It contains the following shops for the sale of:5 with a wooden lid. These, like all other privies built on the standard plan, emit a most penetrating, fetid odour, which is nauseating to the persons who are obliged to use them. 8. I am informed that the conservancy establishment consists of 9 men, 18 women, and a cart; and besides these there are said to be 2 private, 8 public, and 2 regimental halalcores. The cutchra collected in the regimental lines is sup- posed to be removed by the Cantonment Magistrate, and the night-soil cart is taken to the manure-yard on the east of the camp. 9. The water-supply is, for the present, derived from 2 Kharakwàsla stand- pipes; the wastage water runs into the garden, which has been lately constructed under the orders of Lord Mark Kerr, where it is utilized. As the growth of weeds and grass has not been checked in the nullah before referred to, the water in it, consequently, stagnates, and the ground is rendered marshy. The bed of the nullah should be kept scrupulously clean. 10. The quarter-guard is situated on the east of the lines, facing the race-course and parade-ground; attached to it is, at one end, a store-room, and at the other a room for the detention of prisoners. Ridge and more side ventilation are required in these buildings. 11. The regimental hospital is situated about 186 yards on the west flank of the lines, and is separated from them by the nullah. It has lately been erected, and is a tiled building with, ridge-ventilation; it is said to be large enough to accommodate 30 men. By a very objectionable arrangement the west verandah has been partitioned off into store-rooms, office, &c. This interferes with the proper ventilation of the building, which is otherwise good. The ablution-room is in the S. W. corner of the verandah; the water from it runs through an iron pipe let through the wall, but which there ends, so that the foundation is made damp. There is no dead-house. The privies are on the standard plan, but dry earth is used. The guard-room requires ventilation, as also do the houses of the 2nd class servants. The infections-disease ward con- sists of a chuppered shed raised on a built-up plinth. I think more ventilation is required, and that the sides should not be fixed but made to open. 12. The children of the regiment are vaccinated by the Medical Officer, and there are at this present time only 8 children in the lines who are not pro- tected, as they are too young to undergo vaccination. The deaths of sepoys are reported to the Brigade Major, and those among the followers to the Cantonment Magistrate, whilst the births are reported monthly to the latter officer. 13. The following returns of sickness and mortality cannot be used as an argument regarding disease causes appertaining to the lines which the regiment now occupies, as part of the regiment was at Belgaum during 1875; but out of an average strength of 638 men the admission rate per 1,000 of strength was 641.95, and the average number of daily sick was 14, or 22.71 per 1,000 of strength. 14. Table showing the sickness and mortality in the 5th Regiment Native Infantry during the year 1875, and the prevalence of the principal diseases in each month of the year:6 Average Strength. Average Number of Daily Sick. Number Daily Sick per 1,000 of Strength. Number of Deaths. Died per 1,000 of Strength. Causes of Deaths in Hospital. Died out of Hospital. Cholera. Small-pox. Enteric Fever. Fever, Intermit- tent. Fevers, Remittent and Continued. Apoplexy. Dysentery. DiarrhREPORT ON THE BARRACKS OCCUPIED BY EUROPEAN TROOPS AT POONA. INSPECTED IN OCTOBER 1876. B 1162 REPORT ON THE BARRACKS OCCUPIED BY EUROPEAN TROOPS AT POONA. INSPECTED IN OCTOBER 1876. In submitting this section of the Report on the Cantonment of Poona I shall only refer to those points which I think should be brought to notice, as the barracks have often before been reported on by previous Sanitary Commissioners. 2. The Right Flank Lines at Wanowrie were, at the date of my inspection, occupied by the Head-Quarter Wing of the 2-15th Regiment, which is of the fol- lowing strength:[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75009108.tif] Quart,A.G.F. Hogg, Major, Poona General of the Army.
PLAN of WANOWREE BARRACKS. Scale 400 feet to an Inch. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75009111.tif] Quarter Master General's Office Poona, 24thNovember 1876.... Govt. Photozincographic Office Poona 1877. (Signed) AGF Hogg major, Dy Quarter Master Gerteral of the Army.
3 through the floor and ceiling of the serjeants' bath-room below, where it termi- nates about ½ a foot above the stone floor of this bathing-place, which is thus kept constantly wet by the water falling from the room above and by that used by the occupants of the serjeants' room on the ground-floor, which escapes by a pipe led through the wall into an iron receptacle which is never properly clean- ed,4 in the privy; but as long as this system is continued there should be a scoop and a dry-earth box for each seat. 10. The ablution-rooms are in good order, but the basin where the men are supposed to wash their persons after a visit to the bazaar is simply turned into a urinal, and is not a good arrangement. The water for the ablution-rooms is led through open segmental stone-drains to the company's gardens and there utilized. This is a great improvement, and is one of the many reforms introduced by Lord Mark Kerr; but the mode of storing it in cess pools at the side of gardens is not good. The reservoirs into which it runs should not be dug below the surface of the ground, as there is a sediment formed which cannot be kept clean; but a reser- voir might easily be constructed at the highest point along the length of the line of garden, from which the water could be led through earth-channels over the garden. A drain to carry away this wastage water should always be made at the further end of the reservoir, and care should also be taken to provide subsoil drainage, at the lowest part of the garden, to carry away the effluent water, as otherwise it will stagnate. 11. I must also notice that many unauthorized buildings have been made in these lines for the soldiers' pet animals. I quite think that buildings for them are requisite and proper; but I do not think that the dry-earth store of a privy, for example, should be turned into a pigeon-house. It would not cost much to build proper dog-kennels, fowl, and pigeon-houses, which would be a great boon to the men. 12. The dammered iron urine tubs in the urinals outside the barracks stink, as all such do. They should be abolished, and glazed stone-ware urinals be fitted in their stead; the urine and water could be used over the garden. 13. The eight old-pattern barracks face the north-west. Five of them have been built in half echelon with a space of 150 feet between each barrack. The first barrack of the remaining three is in a line with the second barrack of the north row, and the second barrack is in a line with the last barrack of the north row, whilst the third is in a line with the first row of married men's quarters. They are upper-storied, and both floors are occupied. These barracks are not of good design, as will be seen from the accompanying tracing. 14. The following is the description return furnished by the Quarter Master General of the Army:WANOWREE SOLDIERS QUARTERS (8) LOWER STORY [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75009126.tif] UPPER STORY [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75009126.tif] HOSPITAL [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75009126.tif]
WANOWREE SOLDIERS QUARTERS (8) LOWER STORY [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75009129.tif] UPPER STORY [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75009129.tif] HOSPITAL [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75009129.tif] Photozincographed at the GovtOffice Poona 1877.
5 the centre of the dead wall, is a door approached by steps, and on the landing inside the verandah is the foot of a stone staircase leading to the upper floor, whilst facing the doorway are two rooms opening into a third, which are divided from the barrack-room by a dead wall6 16. The same errors of construction were observed on the upper floor, where the verandahs were also occupied by the cots of the men, and the two small rooms at the north-east end were also found to be inhabited. One of these rooms is only 12 feet 7 inches broad and 8 3/8 feet wide. In this were 2 men. The other room opening into it is 12 feet 7 inches broad and 5 1/8 wide; it was used to keep some of their kit in. Such places are improper residences for British soldiers in India. The three rooms on the north end of the upper-storey of one of the barracks was told off to 2 serjeants. The two inner rooms are mani- festly improper places for quarters for a non-commissioned officer. The room on the south-east corner is also used as a sleeping room. If the recommenda- tions made above are carried out, the space occupied by the projections would be reserved for the staircases, and the serjeants' rooms on the north-east would be thrown into the barrack. Arrangements should also be made for fixing a glazed stone-ware urine trough for the use of the men on the upper-storey. 17. The quarter-guard and the 6 solitary cells attached to it are in front of the lines between the new and old barracks. I was informed that about 15 men sleep in this guard-room, which is 40 feet long by 20 feet broad. This is manifestly too small a space, as each man has only 53 square feet of floor space, and some of the cots were very close to each other. The following is the space between some of the cots I measured:7 and west is almost on a level with the roof of the building. It is built on an old and exploded ground-plan, the wards forming three sides of a square, the open side facing the north, and the cook-house, store, latrines, wash-house, &c., forming a second square in rear of the south ward. The objections to this plan of construction are8 ciples of hospital construction, viz., that the building should not be hurtful to the sick, could be carried out. 22. It only remains for me to notice the officers' houses, which are situated below the hill on which the hospital is built. They are very bad; some of these are barely fit for human occupation, and the Native servants' houses and latrines are, I am informed, a source of constant annoyance and complaint. I think these houses should be condemned. It is much to be wished that Government would erect proper and good houses for officers; even as a speculation it would pay, and it would be a great boon to the officers, who practically now are entirely at the mercy of the owners of the houses in which they are compelled to live. If Government is not inclined to take this action, then, I think, it should give the Cantonment Committee absolute power to condemn a house and to order its demolition and its being rebuilt within a stated time, after a design to be approved of by Government and to be kept in the Quarter-Master General's Office. 23. The Left Flank European Infantry lines derive the name they are usually known by from the adjacent and filthy village of Ghorpuri, which, how- ever, is not within Cantonment limits. The barracks are situated on a ridge sloping down from the race-course, with a fall partly towards a nullah on the north-west and partly towards the north and east. The soil on which the barracks stand is composed of hard moorum; but the hospital and married sol- diers' quarters are, for the most part, on black cotton soil, and are on a lower elevation than the barracks; whilst the officers' quarters are also on black cotton soil, which overlies the moorum between the barracks and the large water-course, called Bhyroba's Nullah, which forms the eastern boundary of this portion of the Cantonment. The barracks are separated by the road and part of the general parade-ground from the Tent Lascar and Native Infantry Lines, the former of which approach within 250 yards of the barracks, which are 24 in number, 12 of them being called "the new pattern," though they must have been built for upwards of thirty years, while the remaining 12 are of a very much older construction. 24. The barracks face the west, and are built in 4 parallel lines, there being 5 of the new-pattern barracks in the north-westerly row, 6 in the 2nd line, 1 of the new pattern, and 6 of the old pattern in the 3rd row, and 6 of the old pattern in the 4th line. There is a space of 125 feet between adjacent bar- racks, but only 75 feet between the ends of the barracks in opposite lines. Each set of barracks is extremely faulty in design and construction. The newer barracks are double-tiled buildings, with 6 cowl-ventilators in the roof and 11 clerestory windows on each side and 2 at either end. The height of the plinths varies according to the ground, but is only of an average height of about 2½ feet. The inside of the barrack-room is of the following dimensions:CHOREPOREE SOLDIERS' QUARTERS (12) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75009150.tif] SOLDIERS' QUARTERS [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75009150.tif] HOSPITAL [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75009150.tif]
CHOREPOREE SOLDIERS' QUARTERS (12) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75009153.tif] SOLDIERS' QUARTERS (12) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75009153.tif] HOSPITAL [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75009153.tif] Photozincographed at the GovtOffice
9 dahs, 7 feet in width, are not enclosed, and there are quarters for one serjeant, consisting of 2 rooms, opening into the barrack-room on the north of the build- ing. The barracks are double-tiled, but have only two cowl-ventilators, and, as the roof comes down so low, there are no clerestory windows. There are 4 detached lavatories provided for the use of the occupants of the old barracks. 26. There are 4 cook-rooms for the use of the regiment. The two on either flank are good and well lighted from the east, but those in the centre are very dark; and I think the recommendation made by Colonel Finch, R.E., of having large windows let into either end wall, should be carried out. At present one end of one cook-room (No. 63) is divided by a mat-screen and used for the prepara- tion of coffee, for the coffee-room. There is a building close by which, if it could be used for this purpose, would be an advantage. 27. Kharakwásla water is laid on to these old barracks and cook-rooms, but no means have been provided to carry off the wastage water. That for the lavatories is advantageously used over the company's garden Lord Mark Kerr has instituted. There were 4 privies built for the use of the regiment; but one, being situated just in front of the officers' quarters, has been closed. The dry- earth system is adopted, but, as usual, the men will not carry it out. The privies at my inspection were, however, clean and free from odour. 28. The married soldiers' quarters consist of 4 blocks of double-tiled build- ings, each containing quarters for twenty families, consisting of two rooms back to back with a broad verandah running along the west, but in the rear the verandah has been utilized by part having been walled off so as to form a bath-room into which Kharakwásla water is laid on. The walls in each bath-room were observed to be very damp. The floor of the rooms are paved with stone, and the women complain that their children catch cold from running about on them with naked feet. The plinths at the north end are about 5 feet in height, but they gradually diminish in height until at the south end they become level with the ground. The cook-rooms are in pairs at the east of each block, and the privies are behind the cook-rooms. Paved gutters run between the patcherries and cook-rooms, which carry off the wastage water from the ablution-rooms; these terminate in a cistern, whence the water is drawn out and made to flow over the gardens now being formed in rear of each block. These cisterns are not good; for, as I saw, they become full, and the water becomes ponded back into the gutter, which it occasionally overflows. Only one of the blocks of patcherries has a roof gutter, and that of very bad construction, as it is much too small in calibre and square in shape. 29. I am informed that malarious fever clings to these patcherries, and I am strongly of opinion that it always will do so until the whole surface occupied by them is drained by deep subsoil drains as well as by surface drains, which should in all cases be laid according to the recommendations of the Army Sani- tary Commission, which should be carried out in entirety. 30. The cisterns should be abolished, and the wastage water, as recom- mended for Wanowrie, should be led to a reservoir above each garden, when through taps it could be at pleasure allowed to flow over the garden; and at the lowest part of this should be a drain to carry the effluent water clear away from the vicinity of the patcherries. These quarters are not provided with roof-ventilation. This, in my opinion, should be made. 31. At about the distance of a furlong to the north-east of the patcher- ries is the burial-ground, which hitherto, I had understood, was intended for the exclusive burial of the bodies of European soldiers, their wives, and children; but now I am informed that in the Roman Catholic portion of it several Native Christians have been buried. I think this practice should be stopped, as, other- wise, this part of the burial-ground will be filled in more rapidly than is desirable. B 11610 32. I may also notice the church which has been built for the use of the Protestant soldiers, and which is situated between the patcherries and the hospital. The roof is of corrugated iron, and is very low, being not above 12 feet from spring. It is hermetically sealed, as no louvres have been provided. This action is, I think, necessary, as the place during the hot weather must certainly be injurious to health; and it would be an immense improvement if ridge-ventilation could be provided for the hot air to escape, and if inlets for the entrance of fresh air could be made all round the eaves of the roof. 33. The Men's Hospital consists of a building with 4 wards, which form 3 sides of a quadrangle. Two wards face the west, and a separate ward has been built on the north and south at right angles to them. This form of construction is bad enough; but the ventilation of the 2 wards at the back is still further im- peded by the proximity of the store-rooms, cook-houses, and dead-house, which entirely shut them in on the east. The dead-house, by an extraordinary arrange- ment, has been placed close to the cook-house. There are ranges of servants' quarters behind these out-buildings; these, however, are to be removed. In my opinion all these subsidiary buildings on the east should be removed, so that, at all events, there might be perflation of air; but nothing can make the building a good one. I do not know if the walls would stand it; but I think, if it could be safely done, it would be desirable to put an upper-storey over the 2 wards on the ground-floor, leaving the space so recovered for administration and store-rooms. There is a detached ophthalmic ward, which, however, is too much enclosed by the main building. The office is on the best site in the place, and I think if any alterations are made it should be utilized for wards. 34. There is likewise a Female Hospital, which, if it had a higher plinth, would be a good building; but it is much too close to the guard-room, cells, &c., and there are no matrons' quarters provided. 35. In the rear of the hospital are 12 solitary cells, which are bad in design. There is no roof-ventilation, and only one window, 1 foot square, and a barred door facing the north. 36. Between the hospital and the officers' quarters is the Ghorpuri Bazaar; but, though it is kept as clean as it can be, the construction of the sheds in the rear do not admit of proper cleanliness, and they should be removed, as they only harbour prostitutes and low-caste people who might well be located further away 37. The officers' quarters, consisting of 27 bungalows, are situated on the black cotton soil between the barracks and Bhyroba's Nullah, which forms the boundary of the compounds attached to some of the bungalows. These houses are for the most part, in my opinion, unfit for officers to live in, as the plinths are low, and the soil round them becomes saturated during the rains. Great efforts are now being made by Colonel Finch, R.E., the Executive Engineer at Poona, to improve the condition of these quarters by cutting deep surface drains, which, how- ever, are not paved at bottom, and which, good as they are, yet still, in my opinion, are not at sufficiently near intervals to efficiently drain the soil, which holds water. like a sponge and which becomes intensely malarious. The landlords will not do anything to improve the sanitary condition of these houses. They know that the officers of the regiment quartered at Ghorpuri have no choice, as they must occupy these houses, which are the only ones available. It is, of course, quite out of the question that officers will spend money themselves to improve these properties, and Government have hitherto done nothing to save the officers from the effects of the malarious soil on which they are compelled to live. 38. Another source of unhealthiness to the officers is to be found in the fact that the nullah being the boundary of the Cantonment, the fields on the other side are under no sort of regulation of any kind whatever. When going
11 round these compounds with Colonel Barclay, Commanding the 66th Regiment, I saw a night-soil and a cutchra cart returning across the nullah. After per- sonal inquiry as to the site of deposit of these matters, I found evidence that this filth had been deposited, probably for years past, within about 400 yards of the nullah, just opposite the officers' houses. The carts I saw had come from the regimental lines, and the drivers were, of course, paid to bring this valu- able manure to the fields; but as the officers' houses have so injudiciously been placed over this nullah, I think if they are to be compelled to live here, that the Cantonment limits should be extended so as to include, at least, a quarter of a mile on the east side of the nullah. 39. Adjacent to the officers' lines, but outside of Cantonment limits, is the filthy village of Ghorpuri, where there is a population of over 4,000 persons, and in which there is no conservancy establishment, but the inhabitants are in the habit of using the eastern bank of the nullah as a latrine. This place is a constant source of danger to the Ghorpuri lines and also to the Cavalry lines on the other side of the railway. It would, of course, be desirable to locate the village on another site; but if that is too expensive, it certainly under present arrangements should be brought under the control of the Cantonment Magistrate. 40. Such is a brief description of the sanitary condition of the Ghorpuri lines. I regret that I am unable to give any detailed medical history, extending over a term of years, of regiments living in these lines, as the Surgeon-General British Forces has informed me that such is not available; but I have been favoured with the returns attached to this report from the Medical Officers of regiments which have occupied them, and I recommend the Cantonment Committee carefully to study these, and to see how persistently each regiment has for years past suffered from malarious fever. 41. Doctor Giraud has been kind enough to favour me with copies of his reports on the sanitary state of these lines in 1874 and 1875, in which he most strenuously and earnestly recommends the improvement of the lines and barracks by the only effectual means. As these documents are already in possession of the military authorities in Poona, it is not necessary for me to copy them; but I can only say I agree most heartily with most of what Doctor Giraud has written, and with the majority of his recommendations, which are conceived and based on true principles of sanitation. 42. I am strongly of opinion, and speaking simply from a sanitary point of view, that seeing that the site of these barracks has been so injudiciously chosen at the lowest part of camp; that they are themselves so badly constructed; that the site of the patcherries is also malarious; that the hospital is such an insani- tary building; and that the officers' quarters are such fever-nests12 44. In this event the very first thing to do is to provide deep subsoil drains, as well as shallow surface drains, so as to prevent the soil around 1. each barrack, 2. each patcherry, 3. the hospital, and 4. each officer's house, being saturated with water. The shallow trenches that are now being dug, good as they are, are yet, in my opinion, insufficient, and are not in accordance with the principles of subsoil drainage laid down by the Army Sanitary Commission, which are, in my opinion, the only means which can effectively drain this site; although I am glad to see that Colonel Finch, R.E., the Executive Engineer, is doing a great amount of good by levelling off the surface around each barrack on a slope to a shallow earthen surface trench, and I am informed the surface round the barracks is to be metalled. This action will, doubtless, do much good; but it will not, in my opinion, do away with the necessity of draining the subsoil as well as the surface. 45. I consider the 12 old-pattern barracks should be absolutely con- demned. They are on such low plinths that they never can be made healthy. They are utterly faulty in their construction, as they are so much shut in, that the prevailing breeze can never reach them properly, and their roofs are so low that there can be no ventilation when the doors are shut to keep out the wind both in the cold and hot weather and the rain during the monsoon, and they are not worth going to any expense in the hopes of improving their condition. They are occupied by 312 men, so that accommodation for that number would be required. 46. Regarding the 12 new-pattern barracks, much may be done towards their improvement, and I should recommend13 (d .) That the shutters be removed from the windows in the inner walls, and that these be cut down to the floor, and that the panels of the doors be louvred. (e .) That the drains under the present stone floors be cleared out and be filled in, as they are only receptacles for filth, and that strict orders be given that the floors should not be sluiced with water, as the founda- tion thereby is rendered damp, and for cleaning purposes dry sweeping is quite sufficient. (f .) That the dwarf external wall in the west verandah be removed, and that vertically-revolving venetians be fitted for a height of 7 feet from the floor to the post-plate, and that louvres be fitted in the roofs of the verandahs. (g .) That below each Kharakwásla water-pipe, whether in the barracks, cook-rooms, &c., there should be a trapped sink leading to a pipe drain to carry away the wastage water. 47. If new barracks are built on sites to be hereafter selected, then I strongly recommend that the instructions of the Army Sanitary Commission be carried out: that all barracks should be built on open basements so as to allow a free circulation of air under them, and that they be upper-storied. But on this point there is no necessity now to dilate; but, in my opinion, if there is space enough for the regimen over the old race-course in rear of the Wanowrie barracks, it would be a far better site for the barracks, and the Wanowrie houses would be safer for the officers than those now occupied in the Ghorpuri lines. 48. As regards the patcherries, as before stated, each site should be thoroughly drained both with deep subsoil as well as by surface drains. The ground near the patcherries is, I am informed, to be at once metalled and levelled off on a slope; this is as it should be, but I think that the roofs should be provided with large zinc gutters and downtakes leading to a paved drain, that ridge- ventilation should be provided, and that detached ablution-rooms should be built when the rear verandahs could be open throughout their length. 49. I have already mentioned the action that, I think, should be taken re- garding the hospital. As regards the officers' lines, I am afraid they can never be rendered healthy residences; but, doubtless, something might be done to make them less malarious than they are now; and I think the Cantonment Committee might well exercise the power vested in it by Section 10 of Chapter III. of the Cantonment Act, and that many, if not all, of these houses might be declared un- fit for human habitation until proper means of drainage and, in some instances, until more ventilation has been provided. I would, however, suggest that great- er power be given to the Cantonment Committee, which, on the production of sufficient evidence, should not only have the power to shut up but to cause a building to be absolutely removed which is unfit for human habitation. There can be no doubt that all inhabited buildings on black cotton soil should be provided with open basements, or else should be built on piles. The dwelling-rooms should be raised above the earth, and there should be a free current of air below them. I am also of opinion that all such buildings should be upper-storied, as the only real safeguard in malarious districts is to sleep at a height of about 18 feet above the surface of the ground. At present the compounds ought to be levelled off, and deep but covered subsoil drains should be dug round each house to cut off the earth water trickling from the higher level down to the nullah. These com- pound subsoil drains should communicate with the main deep subsoil drains, and, besides, surface drains should be provided for each compound. 50. There ought also to be a Crawford's rural privy attached to each compound for the use of the servants, who now use Colonel Finch's earth-trenches as latrines as well as the banks of the nullah. B 11614 51. I think that each regiment stationed at Ghorpuri should be directed to carry out the system introduced by the 2/7th Fusiliers at, I believe, the sug- gestion of Dr. Giraud, who says:14 e REPORT ON THE BARRACUS OCCUPIED BY EUROPEAN TROOP AT POONA 1876 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75009178.tif]
Scale, 6 Inches to a Mile Quarter Master General's Office Poona 23rdDecember 1876.... GovtPhotozincographic Office, Poona-1876 (signed). A. G. F. Hogg Major; DyQuarter Master General of the Army. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75009181.tif]
15 These people formerly lived in the most wretched mud hovels with thatched roofs, of which about 146 are still standing; but an immense improvement has lately been begun by building blocks of pendalls for their residence, of which one is already completed and seven, more are to be constructed. There are 30 rooms in each block, and each room is 9'x 11' The plinths average from ½' to 2', and the height to the ridge is from 11' to 13'. The doorways are 4' to 4½' x 2' to 2½. No windows have been provided, as, I think, there should have been; but there is continuous ridge-ventilation, and openings have been left along the top of the wall. 56. The natural drainage of the surface is good, as the soil consists of hard moorum, and slopes towards the south and west. There are 2 latrines on the west side, one for men of 13 seats, and another for women of 10 seats; whilst the water-supply is derived from the Lall Bagh well, and from a channel leading from the Mutha Canal which runs close alongside the boundary wall. 57. I have given the above somewhat full description of the Commissariat lines, because I think that they may be a source of danger, as I saw filthy rags and bits of paper thrown over the boundary wall of the canal from these lines. It was partly the vicinity of these lines and of the filthy Native bazaar beyond that led me to support the recommendation made by the Cantonment Committee that the purity of the drinking water of this important Cantonment and of the city of Poona should be placed beyond suspicion by its being brought in from Parbutti through iron pipes. Government, however, rejected the proposals of the Committee; but I am still of opinion that it would be the safest course to adopt, as from the accompanying tracing, showing the course of the canal from Parbutti through the Cantonment, it will be seen that it passes, after cross- ing the Umbhai Nullah, in close proximity to the filthy brick and tile kilns to which the cutchra from the city and bazaar is taken, and in front of the collec- tion of tanneries which are situated on the water-shed above its course, and which emit a f16 me they were the most comfortable cells he ever was in. The cells are light, lofty, and fully exposed to the prevailing breeze. 61. In bringing this report to a conclusion I would desire to express my best acknowledgments to General Lord Mark Kerr, Commanding the Division, for all the assistance he gave me during my inspection, and especially to Major Pottinger, Deputy Quarter-Master General, for all the trouble he took on my behalf. T. G. HEWLETT, Acting Sanitary Commissioner. 15th January 1877. 2ND QUEEN'S. Statement showing the Average Strength of the Regiment during the Years 1869 and 1870. 1869. Men. Officers. Average Strength. Malarious Fevers. Average Strength. Malarious Fevers. 852 428 33 8 1870. Men. Officers. Average Strength. Malarious Fevers. Average Strength. Malarious Fevers. 894 482 35 7 HOSPITAL, 56TH REGIMENT. Return showing the Average Admission for Malarious Fever at Poona. Year. Average Daily Strength. Average Daily Admissions for Fever. Remarks. Officers. Men. Women. Children. Officers. Men. Women. Children. 1871 32.20 899.22 117.25 118.43 05.00 1.05 03.33 00.59 1872 31.33 921.67 104.83 124.17 05.48 08.36 03.55 01.29 1873 33.25 937.66 115.33 152.50 01.81 02.63 02.95 01.51
17 TABLE of Admissions and Deaths by each Class of Disease in the 2/7th, Fusiliers quartered in Ghorpurie Barracks (Poona) during the Year 1874. Average Strength, 853. Class. Order. Description. No. of Adimis- sions. No. of Deaths. Remarks. I. A. General Diseases 764 3 1. small-pox, 2 enteric fever, 28 contd. fever,271 febricula, 323 ague, 161 remit. fever, 3 ma- lignant cholera, 1 erysipelas. B. Do. do. 113 1 14 rheum. acute, 14 rheum. chro- nic, 71 primary syphilis, 9 secondary syphilis, 4 lumbago, 1 hæmoptysis. II. I. Diseases of Nervous System. 10 1 1 meningitis, 1 sun-stroke, 3 neu- ralgia, 3 dementia, 2 sciatica, 1 apoplexy. I. Eye 10 ... 1 hordeolum, 1 iritis, 7 conjunc- tivitis, 1 tarsal ophthalmia. III. Ear 18 ... 1 perforation of memb, tym., 3 inflam. memb. tym., 4 deaf- ness, 9 inflam. of external meatus, 1 abscess. IV. Nose 1 ... 1 epistaxis. V. Circulatory System 7 ... 1 pericarditis, 4 varicose veins, 2 palpitation. VI. Absorbent 23 ... 23 inflam. of glands. VIII Respiratory System 17 ... 15 bronchitis, 2 pneumonia. IX. Digestive 382 3 90 tonsillitis, 96 dyspepsia, 17 dysentery, 104 diarrh18 TABLE of Sickness amongst the Officers, Women, and Children in the 2/7th Fusiliers, during the Year 1874, quartered in Ghorpurie Lines (Poona ). Average Strength. Disease. Number of Admissions. Remarks. Officers. 30.10/12 Malarial Fevers 5 As this table only gives the actual admissions into hospital, it does not afford a correct estimate of the ac- tual amount of sickness amongst the women and children, which should be somewhat as follows:19 TABLE of Admissions and Deaths by each Class of Disease in the 2/7th Fusiliers quartered in Ghorpurie Barracks (Poona) during the Year 1875. Average Strength during year, 574.00. Class. Order. Description. No. of Ad- missions. No. of Deaths. Remarks. I. A. General Diseases 846 1 2 enteric fever, 156 febricula, 604 ague 84 remit. fever. B 96 1 8 acute rheum., 24 chronic rheum., 49 primary syphilis, 2 secondary syphilis, 5 phthisis pulmonalis, 1 hæmoptysis, 7 lumbago. II. I. Diseases of Nervous System. 2 ... 1 epilepsy, 1 neuralgia. II. Eye 16 ... 2 lachrymal obstruction, 3 iritis, 6 conjunctivitis, 1 traumatic iritis, 2 keratitis, 2 hordeolum. III. Ear 3 ... I inflam. of memb. tym., 1 deaf- ness, 1 inflam. of external meatus. IV. Nose 1 ... 1 polypus. V. Circulatory 4 ... 2 palpitation, 2 varicose veins. VI. Absorbent 32 ... Inflam of ing. glands. VIII. Respiratory 65 ... 2 laryngeal catarrh, 1 bronc. catarrh, 53 bronchitis, 4 pneu- monia, 1 pleurisy, 4 asthma. I.X. Digestive 241 5 61 dyspepsia, 13 dysentery, 93 diarrh20 TABLE of Sickness amongst the Officers, Women, and Children in the 2/7th Fusiliers, during the Year 1875, quartered in Ghorpurie Lines, Poona. Average Strength. Disease. No. of Admissions. Remarks. Officers. 32 Malarial Fevers 2 This return only shows the actual admissions into hospital, and gives but a very faint idea of the actual sickness that prevailed amongst the women and children during the year 1875. Owing to the limited hospital ac- commodation, only the most severe cases were admitted; but a very much larger proportion (who can- not be shown in this return) were treated outside. Malarious fever and general debility (engendered thereby) were the principal causes of this great sick- ness; and it is calculated on a rough estimation that there was a daily average sick, during the year, of21 REMARKS OF THE CANTONMENT COMMITTEE ON THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER'S REPORT ON THE BARRACKS OCCUPIED BY EUROPEAN TROOPS AT POONA. The Committee having been favoured with a perusal of the Sanitary Com- missioner's Report on the barracks occupied by the European troops in Poona, beg to record their high appreciation of the valuable recommendations which, clothed in forcible and eloquent language, form a valuable contribution to the cause of sanitary science. Before entering upon the consideration of the more important suggestions of the Sanitary Commissioner, the Committee would ven- ture to premise, that a considerable number of the sanitary improvements indi- cated in the report depend in a great measure on the proper supervision, by the regimental authorities, of those who are charged with the carrying out of the or- dinary rules of health. It is useless, for instance, to provide ample ventilation on the most approved scientific plan, if the object in view be frustrated by permit- ting the inmates of the barrack-rooms to close at night doors that it is essential should remain open to the breeze; again, the objectionable practice, mentioned in the report, of allowing serjeants and their families to cook in the bath-rooms attach- ed to their quarters, ought not to be allowed. The attention of officers com- manding regiments and regimental medical officers might with advantage be directed to this portion of Dr. Hewlett's Report. 2. The arrangement by which the dirty water escapes from the bath-rooms of the serjeants' quarters in the Wanowrie Lines is defective, and the improve- ment suggested by the Sanitary Commissioner seems to provide an effectual re- medy. Complaint is also made that the clerestory windows are shut at night instead of being fixed open. This is another matter that calls for the unremitting vigilance of the regimental authorities. Another subject of no less importance is the alleged inefficiency of the water-filters, some of which were found to con- tain neither charcoal nor gravel. Dr. Hewlett seems to favour the use of Mac- namara's filters, which the Committee believe are universally provided in all the barracks of the Bengal Presidency, and which it is to be presumed are found to answer their purpose in all essential particulars. 3. The Committee notice with regret the very reprehensible practice of al- lowing men to make water at night through the iron railing all round the veran- dahs: surely such an odious and filthy habit could not obtain if proper supervi- sion were exercised by those answerable for the good order and cleanliness of the barrack-rooms. The system of having a urine tub brought into the men's sleeping rooms at night is a bad one. It is not stated whether the tubs are of wood or iron, but either is a bad material for the purpose: the former emits a most offensive odour, and the latter is soon corroded by the action of the urinary- secretion, and both are equally injurious to health in a hot and confined atmos- phere. Attention is called to the fact that the floor all round the urine tub is defiled by those who have recourse to it at night: this again shows a neglect of proper care and watchfulness on the part of the non-commissioned officers, whose duty it is to enforce decency and cleanliness in the barrack-rooms. 4. The remedy for the foregoing, proposed by the Sanitary Commissioner, viz., to provide a stone-ware trough at each end of the building, seems feasible, and might, it is presumed, be carried out without incurring much expense. The Committee dwell at some length on this part of the report, as nothing has a more important bearing on the health and comfort of the men than ample accommo- dation of the nature proposed. 5. The arrangements for cooking seem to be capable of improvement, and the Sanitary Commissioner's suggestions in regard to the supply of water for culinary purposes deserve attention. The Committee notice that in the privies, which are on the dry-earth principle, the system does not appear to be carried out in its full integrity by those who use them, possibly more through deficient knowledge than from neglect or carelessness. If the men were instructed how to use the dry earth every time they have recourse to the buildings, the more B 11622 intelligent individuals among them would, at all events, discern the necessity for a little extra trouble in a matter affecting the welfare and comfort of all. 6. The Committee notice with pleasure the remarks of the Sanitary Com- missioner with reference to the reforms introduced by the President in regard to the laying out of company's gardens and the utilization of the waste water for irrigation purposes; assuredly this is not the least of the many useful improve- ments effected by Lord Mark Kerr. 7. The Committee perceive that the Sanitary Commissioner condemns the eight old-pattern barracks at Wanowrie in the most unqualified manner. The opinions expressed are those of an expert, and the Committee do not feel disposed to controvert them in any way. The remedies proposed by Dr. Hewlett are, however, of so extensive and sweeping a character that it becomes a question, whether it would not, in the long run, be better and cheaper to remove the build- ings altogether, and construct new barracks on a more approved plan in their stead. 8. With reference to the remarks concerning the guard-room and prison- ers' room, it is obvious that the latter is too small to contain the number of men that are sometimes confined in it. The Sanitary Commissioner is of opinion that the solitary cells are utterly unfit for the incarceration of European pri- soners. Views so strongly expressed must necessarily carry weight, and the Committee would direct attention to this part of the report with a view to fur- ther inquiry. 9. The regimental hospital at Wanowrie seems to be utterly unsuited for the treatment of European soldiers, both by its faulty construction and deficient ventilation. The Committee note With pleasure the improvements recently made, as described by Dr. Moffit, and the credit of which is also given to Lord Mark Kerr. In case it should be decided not to erect a new hospital, the Committee would recommend the adoption of the measures proposed by Dr. Soffit with a view to increasing the ventilation of the hospital, viz., the cutting down of the windows of the wards and the opening out of the two verandahs next the inner square. 10. In regard to the officers' houses at Wanowrie the Sanitary Commissioner reports very unfavourably, and he is of opinion that they ought to be condemned. Dr. Hewlett favours the idea of giving the Cantonment Committee absolute power to condemn a house and to order its demolition. With reference to this subject, the Committee, if well advised, are of opinion that the Cantonment Committee are, with certain restrictions, already vested with this authority; but whether it would be advisable to enforce it too strictly, is open to question. It ought not to be forgotten that, in order to effect any real improvements in the direction indicated, demolition and re-construction would have to proceed pari passu; for, although a body possessing authority may order the demolition of a house, it has no power to compel an owner to build it up again; and the Committee are of opinion that any attempt to enforce too stringently the cantonment rules affecting house pro- perty would only have the effect of driving house speculators beyond cantonment limits altogether. 11. Having supplied all the necessary information and needful suggestions concerning the Wanowrie Lines, the Sanitary Commissioner next proceeds to describe the barracks at Gthorpurie, known as the Left Flank European Infan- try lines. These buildings were constructed about thirty years ago, and it is need- less to say they do not come up to the level of the requirements of modern sanitary science. Dr. Hewlett says they are faulty in design and construction, deficient in ventilation, and in some parts not raised a sufficient height above the ground. The barracks are built on a sloping ridge of hard moorum; but the regimental hospital, married quarters, and officers' bungalows are all on a cotton soil. All minor disadvantages of site are, however, overshadowed by the most objectionable feature of all, viz., the contiguity of the "filthy village" of Ghor- purie, as the Sanitary Commissioner not inaptly terms it, and the horrors of which he depicts in vigorous, but, as the Committee believe, not exaggerated, language.
23 12. The crowding of the European burial-ground with the bodies of Native Christians is an evil that ought and can be stopped by the exercise of a little wholesome power of restraint on the part of the Cantonment Committee. The faulty construction of the regimental hospital seems to be further aggravated by the crowding together of a heap of subsidiary buildings and servants' quarters, which shut out the light and hinder ventilation. By what Dr. Hewlett very justly terms an "extraordinary arrangement," the dead-house and cook-room are placed close together in an objectionable vicinity, which the Committee think it would be difficult to find a parallel for elsewhere. 13. Regarding the filth deposited in the nullah near the officers' bungalows, and the various other nuisances complained of in that neighbourhood, the Sani- tary Commissioner proposes to extend the Cantonment limits so as to include, at least, a quarter of a mile on the east side of the nullah. This, if feasible, would be a very desirable reform, and would protect the immediate neighbourhood against some of the worst and most Offensive of the many nuisances existing in the locality. 14. It only remains for the Committee to draw attention to the emphatic language in which the Sanitary Commissioner insists upon the necessity of sub- soil drainage. Dr. Hewlett, the Committee are glad to perceive, bears willing testimony to the great efforts now being made by the Executive Engineer at Poona to improve the condition of the officers' quarters by cutting deep surface drains; but he complains that these are not paved at the bottom, and he states that, however good and necessary surface drainage may be in itself, it cannot be held to take the place of, or supersede the necessity for, subsoil drainage. 15. Before concluding this Report the Committee again take occasion to record the sense of their obligation to the Sanitary Commissioner for his most valuable description of the present sanitary condition of the European Canton- ment at Poona. The Report, drawn up in clear, terse, and vigorous language, with- out verbiage or ambiguity, is a model of what sanitary reports ought to be. It may be sometimes considered expedient to differ from the views of the Sanitary Commissioner; but it is impossible to mistake his meaning, and the precision and definiteness of his statements are above all praise. MARK KERR, C.B., Lieut.-General, President, Cantonment Committee. M. MILES, Colonel, Commanding Her Majesty's 26th Regiment. R. MACDONALD CHAMBERS, Lieut.-Colonel, Commanding Her Majesty's 5th Regiment Native Light Infantry. C. W. WAHAB, Lieut.-Colonel, Commanding Her Majesty's 8th Regiment Native Infantry. T. B. BEATTY, Deputy Surgeon-General, I. M. D. L. S. BRUCE, Surgeon-Major, Civil Surgeon. F. J. HERCY, Major, Commanding Her Majesty's 2nd Queen's. E. SEXTON, Surgeon-Major, In medical charge Lock Hospital. G. C. EVEZARD, Colonel, Secretary, Cantonment Committee.
Sanitation.obtain if proper supervision were exercised by those answerable for the good order and cleanliness of the barrack-rooms." But although it must be admitted that the habit referred to is not cleanly or decent, and by keeping a number of the men on police duty throughout the night it might be for the time checked, the most common-sense view to be taken of the matter is to admit the absolute necessity of providing suitable urinaries on the upper floors, and to see that they are provided. 11. Arrangement should undoubtedly be made, as soon as possible, for the provision of a sufficient number of stone-ware troughs, as suggested by the Sanitary Commissioner, in each room. 12. What is stated in para. 8 might be remedied under regimental arrange- ment. 13. With a little alteration, the defects noticed in para. 9 might be reme- died. 14. The state of the ablution rooms remarked upon in para. 10 require notice on the part of the authoritiesa neglected state, but the difficulty is to induce landlords to rebuild unless at very much enhanced rents. 24. The Ghorpuri barracks are about to be improved and additional accom- modation built. When the project was last before Government, the remarks and suggestions of the Sanitary Commissioner were duly noted and much that he suggested adopted. 25. It would doubtless improve the whole site if the rough subsoil drainage were carried out. But drainage of that class should be general throughout the cantonment. Even to carry it out partially would involve an outlay for which no provision can, for some time, be made. If funds can be obtained to cover the cost of even a partial draining (subsoil), it would perhaps be better to commence with the site occupied by the married men's quarters and the hospital. 26. Steps should be taken for closing the burial ground mentioned in para. 31, if not already done. When the new burial ground near the Shohápur bridge is opened, no burials ought to be allowed in any other part of the cantonment. 27. Orders have already been issued for improving the accommodation, the furniture and ventilation of the small chapel at Ghorpuri. 28. What is stated in para. 33 regarding the hospital should be considered, and report submitted as to the best means of improving what is admitted to be a badly-designed and inconveniently-arranged set of buildings. 29. Some steps should be taken to remedy what is stated in para. 38. 30. With reference to what is stated by the Sanitary Commissioner in para. 42 of his report, it may be remarked that the Ghorpuri range of barracks would probably be abandoned if better barracks on a more eligible site were avail- able. But as not only now but for some time to come it will be impossible to obtain a grant sufficiently large to cover the cost of building a complete set of barracks on a new site, and as the existing site is capable of being rendered healthy, the abandonment of the present range of barracks cannot, at all events for the present, be considered. 31. Government in their Resolution No. 3027, dated 13th July 1877, have dealt with the question of additional barrack accommodation, and have also touched upon certain suggested improvements to the existing quarters. Nothing further therefore need be said on the subject of paras. 43 to 48, inclusive. 32. The gravest drawback to the Ghorpuri lines is that connected with the site occupied by the officers' houses. The men's quarters stand on a ridge of clean hard soil not altogether deficient in natural drainage, but the ground occu- pied by the officers' quarters lies to leeward of this ridge, and consists of deep black soil, which is proverbially bad as a building site; added to this the majority of the houses are of an inferior class, insufficiently raised, the area enclosed in each compound being as insufficiently drained. 33. Some years since the building of quarters for officers on the south flank and left flank of the barracks was contemplated, but the want of funds necessitated the postponment of any action in the matter. The additional barracks about to be built will occupy about the best site that could have been given for officers' quarters, and it would be now difficult to obtain a suitable piece of ground within a convenient distance of the barracks for the officers' houses, without building over that immediately in front of the barracks. 34. Much may undoubtedly be done to improve the existing site by increas- ed drainage, and whenever funds can be made available, the work should be taken in hand. 3
35. The recommendation given in para. 50 would, it is believed, be carried out if the authorities impressed on landlords the necessity for furnishing suitable latrine accommodation. 36. The attention of the regimental authorities concerned should be called to what is stated in para. 51. 37. If the piping proposed to be laid down (vide para. 52) will not add considerably to the cost of the improvements already sanctioned, the proposal should be entertained. 38. The Quarter Master General should report on what is recommended in para. 54. 39. The remarks recorded in paras. 55 and 56 are satisfactory and credit- able to the department concerned. 40. An extract from the Sanitary Commissioner's report (paras. 57 and 58) should be sent to the Public Works Department for consideration of what is stated regarding the liability of the water brought from Kharakwásla being contami- nated while flowing into the south-west end of the cantonment. J. A. M. MACDONALD, Colonel, Secretary to Government. To The Sanitary Commissioner, With copies of the Sanitary Com- missioner's re- port. The Quarter Master General, The Chief Secretary to Government, General Department, The Secretary to Government, Public Works Department, The Surgeon General, British Forces.
PART II. REPORTS ON CIVIL STATIONS INSPECTED IN 1875. RE-PRINTED BY ORDER OF GOVERNMENT. Tanna. Poona. Ahmedabad. Ahmednagar. B 221INSPECTION REPORT OF THE TOWN OF TANNA. No. A/503 TO THE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, GENERAL DEPARTMENT. Office of the Sanitary Commissioner for the Government of Bombay, 3rd June 1875. SIR, I have the honour to report, for the information of Government, that on the 28th May I went to Tanna, as I had heard that cholera had broken out in the town. 2. I made my official inspection of it in company with Dr. Hojel, the Acting Civil Surgeon, who pointed out to me the houses in which cholera cases had taken place, and showed me the measures he had adopted to stamp out the disease. We were also accompanied by Colonel Coles, the District Superintendent of Police, and by Dr. Cody, the Superintendent of Vaccination and Health Officer of the Western Circle; and, as we were going round, Mr. Robertson, the Collector, joined the party, and accompanied us in our inspection. 3. Dr. Hojel promised to give me a short account of the circumstances connected with the outbreak, and has written a report, which is so clear and concise that I do myself the honour to forward it to you. From it, it will be seen that, although there had been a fatal case of cholera which had been im- ported from Násik on the 13th April, yet no fresh case had occurred until the 15th May, when a boy was brought by rail from Tullegaon, a village near Poona, where cholera was then said to be prevalent. 4. This boy was taken to house No. 32, situated in one of the main thorough- fares in the town. It is a two-storeyed house, used as a chawl, and divided on each floor by a passage running down its length, on each side of which are dark, ill-ventilated compartments used as dwelling-rooms, the walls of which are com- posed of plastered bamboo tatties. There were at the time living in it 60 or 70 persons, who drank the water of a foul surface well situated in the corner of the building. The boy was promptly seen by Dr. Hojel, and, although on arrival he was in an advanced stage of cholera, he recovered. Instant measures were taken to prevent the disease spreading, by burning the soiled clothes of the patient, by disinfecting his excreta, by the fumigation and lime-washing of the walls and rooms, &c. 5. Dr. Hojel's exertions were not confined to this particular house. At his suggestion the Collector was good enough to warn station-masters along the line to prevent persons suffering from cholera from entering the trains, and in order to protect the town a shed was erected near the railway station for the accommodation of any sick who had escaped previous detection.
4 6. On the 20th May Dr. Hojel heard that cholera had broken out in the neighbouring districts, and was anxious to take timely measures to put the town in a proper state of cleanliness; but I regret to notice that his endeavours to get the municipal authorities to do their duties did not meet with immediate success, although from the commencement he had reciveed the cordial aid of Mr. Cumine, the Assistant Collector. Dr. Hojel acknowledges the assistance he received at once from the police authorities, who placed sepoys to watch the principal roads leading to the town, so as to prevent people who might be suffering from cholera, or who were coming from villages known to be infected, from entering the town. 7. On the fifth day after the boy was brought from Tallegaon two fresh cases of cholera occurred, one in house No. 32, where he had been living, and one in a house immediately opposite. Dr. Hojel had both these houses fumigated, whitewashed, and the floors scraped and cow-dunged, and disinfecting powder freely used, and the soiled clothes of the patients burnt in his presence. 8. The municipal authorities appear to have taken alarm at the occurrence of these cases, and Dr. Hojel was able, after disinfection of their contents, to have all drains in the neighbourhood of the two houses cleaned out. He estab- lished fires in the neighbourhood, and burnt sulphur and dammer; but reports that even then " the aid of the Municipal authorities was, considering the circum- stances, given in a most niggardly way." 9. On arrival the smell of sulphurous acid gas in every direction attracted my immediate attention, and I was pleased to see that at last more strenuous efforts to cleanse the town had been commenced under the orders of the Col- lector. 10. Up to the date of my visit 18 cases of cholera had occurred, 4 of which5 14. There are 2,086 houses, but in the great majority of them there is no privy attached, as only 406 houses had privies; whilst the occupants of the re- maining 1,680 houses, numbering about 11,340 persons, have to go outside their domiciles to obey the calls of nature. There are, I believe, only two public latrines which have been built on the side of the creek; but, as Dr. Hojel truly says, they are so far from the houses that the people will not go to them, and they are, there- fore, practically useless, and, besides, they have been erected far above the low- water line, and if they were much used would prove a nuisance, as the excreta would be every day exposed for several hours until the tide reached them. The people consequently def6 tary Commissioner for 1873 (the last one published) that in that year the annual death-rate at Tanna was 33.22 per mille. It must be remembered that 1873 was a healthy year, and not a single death from cholera was registered during it in the entire Tanna Collectorate, but in the town the fever death-rate attained the very high point of 21.19 per 1,000. In Bombay city during the same year it was 9.31. Again 4.75 persons in every 1,000 died from bowel complaints, whilst in Bombay only 2.42 deaths per mille took place from this cause. 20. Although I am not in a position to state exactly what the annual income of the town is, yet I believe I am right in saying that the municipal expenditure on sanitation during 1874-75 amounted only to between 7,000 and 8,000 rupees, whereas during that year they had an income of upwards of 31,000 rupees. I think, however, enough has been said to show that there is an urgent necessity for pressure to be brought to bear upon the Municipality to make it do its duty in a more efficient manner, and perhaps I may be permitted to indi- cate what I think ought to be done. 21. In the first place, for the accommodation of the people who are unpro- vided with privies, who form the great bulk of the residents, there ought to be suitable sites chosen on which they could obey the calls of nature. It is absurd to think that police orders can compel people to ease themselves at only certain spots in an inhabited area, unless those spots have been selected within reason- able distance from the inhabitants' dwellings. This action ought to be taken at once, and need not necessarily cause a great outlay of money. It is far better to have a proper number of sites selected, than one large one which would pro- bably be too far off for the people to visit. I think the erection of privies near houses should be discouraged as much as possible; but if any permission to build them is given, they ought to be detached from the house, and have a clear air space of at least 3 feet all round them. 22. If new public latrines are erected, it will be necessary, of course, to entertain a larger number of sweepers. We find in Bombay that in the urban districts 1 sweeper can clean 20 privies a day; thus the 20 sweepers already engaged, would only suffice to keep the existing privies clean, and for the new public latrines not less than 15 additional sweepers would be required. Two night-soil carts are not enough; there should be at least six. 23. The house gullies in the urban parts of the town should be paved. This work should be done by the house-owners. Section 58 of Bombay Act VI, of 1873, the District Municipal Act, is precisely the same as Section 144 of the Bombay Municipal Act of 1865, under which miles of house gullies were paved in Bombay. And similar action ought at once to be taken in Tanna to prevent the ground in the immediate vicinity of the houses and wells being soaked with all the liquid refuse of the house, and at the same time the Municipality should increase its staff of scavengering carts and labourers. Dr. Hojel estimated that it would take 70 men to cleanse the surface, and I agree with him. When this has once been thoroughly done, it might be possible, though I do not say it would be, slightly to reduce the number of men. This strength would only give 1 scavenger to remove the refuse of every 29 houses. The number of scaven- gering carts ought to be largely increased; should certainly be not less than 12. And the people should be assisted by the erection, in proper sites, of dust-boxes into which they should be compelled to throw their house refuse, and should be no longer allowed to deposit it in the house-gullies from which it is now never removed. 24. All the filthy, dangerous cesspools should be at once closed and filled in with sweet earth, and a proper site ought to be selected where the nightsoil and dry refuse collected could be deposited, and where the town sweepings might be burnt and their ashes mixed with nightsoil and applied at once to the fields.
7 25. If financially possible, a system of pipe drainage to carry away the house sullage, not the storm water, should be devised. The storm water should be allowed to find its way into the existing drains, which should be deepened in places, and in others filled in so as to obtain a proper gradient, whereby the water could flow off into the creek. The sullage should, as I have said, be re- moved by glazed earthen or stoneware pipes, and should, if possible, be applied to the fields in the neighbourhood of the town. 26. If such a course is impracticable, the next best plan to adopt would be to make use of the existing roadside gutters; but they should be lined through- out with cut stone, either V-shaped or preferably U-shaped, and their gradients should be laid with extreme care so as to prevent the sullage lodging in them and forming cesspools, as at present. The outlets of these drains ought to be more numerous, and they should terminate in regularly built sewers, which should be continued on to low-water mark. 27. Such action would, I fear, be expensive, but it is really imperative in the interests of public health. The pipe drainage ought not to be exorbitantly expensive, as the main pipes need not be of large diameter; but this is a question which would, perpaps, be better left to be decided by an Engineer. 28. The water-supply ought to be at once improved, as far as is possible, by cleaning out, as I have advised Mr. Robertson to have done, the wells before the monsoon sets in. I have not seen any analysis of the water in the surface wells or the tank, but it is so manifestly impure that it cannot fail to be delete- rious to health; the use of the tank water ought to be restricted as much as possible; and when the wells are fuller it ought to be solely used for watering the streets, flushing drains, &c. 29. Tanna is in the close vicinity of hills, and there have been, I was in- formed, several propositions put forward to impound water among them, and to bring it in under pressure for the use of the town. The scheme which Mr. Robertson, I believe, considers to be best, is that a dam should be built across a valley in the Persik Hills, opposite the station, and on the east side of the railway. I was informed that, roughly speaking, such a quantity of water would be im- pounded as would yield 10 gallons per head of population. I need not say that this would be an inestimable boon to the people of Tanna, and perhaps if prison labour were employed the cost of the scheme would be materially reduced. 30. The excuse made by the municipal authorities to Dr. Hojel, that they could not get men to perform the duty of scavengers, is unworthy of them, because there is always an unlimited supply of men obtainable in Bombay. 31. In bringing this report to a conclusion, I would desire respectfully to hope that the thanks of Government may be accorded to Dr. Hojel and Mr. Cumine, for I am certain it is solely due to the energetic action taken by the former under adverse circumstances, that the disease has been arrested before attaining formidable proportions. Had it once gained a strong footing, there would have been a large loss of human life as the result of the apathy and past neglect of the municipal authorities. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, T. G. HEWLETT, Acting Sanitary Commissioner.
8 No. 86 OF 1875. FROM SURGEON-MAJOR A. N. HOJEL, GENERAL DUTY, BOMBAY, ON TEMPORARY DUTY AT TANNA, To THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER, BOMBAY. Tanna, 29th May 1875. SIR, In compliance with your request I have the honour to submit some remarks upon the outbreak of cholera at this station. 2. On the 13th of April last, a man was brought from Násik suffering from cholera, and he died in a few hours after his arrival. I was not then in Tanna, so I am unable to say what measures were taken. 3. On the 15th May a boy was brought by train from Tallegaon (near Poona) in an advanced stage of cholera of a bad type; he, however, made a good recovery, and the house, No. 32, Ghaty Alli Street, in which he was located, was thoroughly fumigated, the floors scraped, and the walls white-washed. All excreta as soon as passed were disinfected, and the soiled clothes burnt in my presence. 4. With a view to prevent, if possible, the importation of fresh cases, I wrote to the Collector asking him to caution the station-masters, along the line of rail, of the danger of allowing sick people to enter the trains; at the same time I placed myself in communication with the municipal authorities, and arranged for the erection of a temporary shed near the railway station, and some distance to the leeward of the town. The policemen on duty at the station received directions to detain any sick people alighting from the trains until I had seen them; and if they turned out to be suffering from cholera I should have had them removed in a dooley, which was in readiness, to the shed above alluded to. 5. On the 20th May, having received information that cholera had broken out in several villages in the Collectorate, I endeavoured to impress on the municipal authorities the necessity of placing their house in order so as to be in as favourable a position as possible to meet a deadly enemy which might any day knock at their gates. The chairman of the managing committee met my advice, as to the sanitary measures which should be adopted, with a polite assurance that everything that I recommended should be immediately done. But I regret to say that the assurance was not followed by action. Mr. Cumine, the Assist- ant Collector in charge of the Sudder station, very kindly lent all the weight of his official position to the forwarding of my views; his advice, like mine, was politely received, but not acted upon. The police authorities were, how- ever, more obliging, for the Chief Constable immediately acted on my suggestion of placing men on all the principal roads leading to the town, so as to intercept, and prevent entering the town, any people that might be suffering from cholera, or coming from villages known to be infected. 6. On the afternoon of the 21st May two fresh cases occurred in the town: one in the house mentioned in paragraph 3, and the other in a house exactly opposite. Both these houses were fumigated, whitewashed, and the floors scraped and cow-dunged, and disinfecting powder freely used. The soiled clothes were burnt in my presence.
9 7. The municipal authorities, now becoming alarmed at the occurrence fresh cases, began to lend a more willing ear to my suggestions, and I was able to get all the drains in the vicinity of the houses alluded to in the last paragraph cleaned out, having first disinfected their contents. Fires were lighted in the verandahs and on either side of these houses, and sulphur with dammer burnt. But even now the aid of the municipal authorities was, considering the circum- stances, given in a most niggardly way. 8. It is unnecessary for me to follow each case separately, as daily reports, have been fowarded to you; I may merely state here that, up to the present date, (18) eighteen cases have come under treatment, and of these (4) four have proved fatal. I have no doubt that other cases may have occurred, of which I have not received information. Six of the whole number of cases reported and three of the fatal cases, occurred in the house No. 32, Ghaty Alli Street. This is a small two-storied house divided off into a numbe of dens by bamboo parti- tions. In many of these so-called rooms a person of ordinary height cannot stand upright, air finds very little admission, and the light of day none. In such a building as this there were living between 60 and 70 human beings, the accommodation not being fit for so many domestic animals. I am happy to say that these people, becoming alarmed at successive cases occurring in the house, determined to leave it. They were taken to the dharamshala outside the town; here they were thoroughly fumigated with sulphurous acid. A police guard took care that they did not enter the town for two days, at the expiration of which time they elected to separate and go to live in the open country for some time, which they were permitted and encouraged to do. 9. The roof of the house No. 32, Ghaty Alli Street, is being taken off, the partitions pulled down, and the floors dug up. These measures, conjoined with. scraping and whitewashing the walls again, and a liberal use of disinfectants, will, I trust, render the premises safe for habitation in future, instead of being a hot-bed for the birth and dissemination of septic poison, which it most certainly would be if allowed to remain as it is. 10. A few remarks on the state of the town, and the measures I have taken with a view to checking the spread of cholera, and placing it generally in a better sanitary condition than I found it on my arrival here some three weeks ago, may not, perhaps, be out of place in this report. The approximate population of Tanna is 14,299; the dwellings in which these people are housed number 2,086. With the exception of those in the main streets, the so-called houses are small huts, badly lighted, with scarcely any ventilation, and crowded together in such a manner that the air cannot possibly circulate between them. They are approached from the main thoroughfares by narrow lane-ways, some of which will not admit two persons walking abreast. 11. Of the 2,086 houses only 406 have privies: so that the occupants of 1,680 dwelling-houses respond to the calls of nature in such places as they find most convenient to themselves, without reference to the comfort of their neigh- bours10 people. I may also mention that the municipality possess but two nightsoil carts, one of which is broken, and consequently not available. 13. On the banks of the creek there are a few latrines which are available for the people living in that quarter of the town, but they are so far from the houses that the people will not go to them, so that they are, practically useless; besides, they have been erected far above the low-water line of the beach, and if they were much used they would prove a nuisance, as the excreta would be exposed for several hours every day, until the tide came and carried it away. 14. Such nightsoil as the municipality have been able to remove from the town with their one cart, has, until the last few days, been taken to the jail gardens, where it has been treated with dry earth, and subsequently utilized for agricultural purposes. But now it appears there is no demand for it; so I have advised that trenches be dug outside and to leeward of the town, in which it can be deposited, sprinkled over with disinfectant powder, and afterwards covered in with earth. 15. The drainage of the town is most defective and totally inadequate to the requirements. Each street has a gutter on either side; many of these coalesce and empty into two larger drains, which are intended to carry the surface sullage into the creek; others find their own way either into a large nullah which crosses the town, or go independently in the direction of the creek. The street gutters are not paved at the bottom, so that refuse water or other fluid finding its way into them soaks into the soil. I very much doubt if even the larger drains have any flooring but earth; but this I know, that none of the gutters or drains carry their contents into the creek, for they all terminate in open earth trenches, a long distance above the low-water mark, and in many instances considerably above the high-water line; the consequence being, that here along the beach we have gigantic cesspools filled with a seething and bubbling mass of semi-fluid filth, constantly emitting sulphuretted hydrogen and ammonia. 16. Nearly all the street gutters are covered with large stones; on raising these either a quantity of black or green semi-liquid filth, emitting a vile smell, is found, or the water-way is completely choked up with solid dirt. How the rain water is to be carried off from the surface during the monsoon, I am at a loss to imagine. 17. I am aware that there are difficulties, both physical and financial, in the way of having a perfect drainage system in Tanna. As the town lies low there is not naturally much fall to facilitate the outrun, even supposing that the drains contained nothing but water. Then I am informed that the funds of the municipality are low. But these are questions which I must leave to be discussed between that body and their engineer. I merely look at the matter from a sanitary point of view; and I would urge that, at least, some efforts should be made to remedy the disgraceful state of the drainage of Tanna as it now stands. 18. The water-supply of Tanna is nearly on a par with its drainage. It is deficient in quantity, and, looking to the sources from which it is derived, I should say its quality must be bad. I believe, however, that the Assistant Col- lector has forwarded several samples to the Chemical Analyser to Government for examination. 19. The drinking water is obtained either from surface dipping wells or open tanks. The wells are, for the most part, situated in the compound of the houses, or in confined places between groups of huts. Too often it is the case that drains from the houses and privies pass quite close to the wells; and it is but natural to infer that soakage must take place (remembering that the drains are not floored) and the water in consequence be polluted. At the present time the wells are nearly empty, indeed quite so in the day-time, water being only obtain-
II able from them in the morning; and what has oozed into them during the night is quickly exhausted. All the wells that I have seen are dirty beyond belief, and should, I think, be cleaned out before the monsoon sets in. I have pressed the matter on the attention of the municipal authorities; but, I regret to say, they are a moribund body, and it is difficult to move them to anything that would involve the expenditure of even a few annas. 20. Large numbers of people take their drinking water from the tanks; each of these contain, I am told, a large volume of water after the rainy season, but now a considerable portion of the muddy bottom is visible. At the water- line may be seen people washing themselves, their clothes, and their bullocks; and when these avocations have been concluded they will fill theirw ater vessels and carry them home, using their contents for drinking and cooking purposes. Now from what I have stated12 and then to report the case to me, so that no time might be lost in combating the disease at its commencement. A supply of dammer and sulphur was also placed in each chowkey; and Colonel Coles, the District Superintendent of Police, was good enough to give a party of 16 of his men and one jemedar to see that the fires were kept up, and the disinfectants put on them from time to time. There was likewise a supply of chunam and McDougall's powder in each chowkey, and Mr. Cumine and myself went from house to house advising the people to use these freely in their houses. 25. The excreta of cholera patients was at once disinfected, and all soiled clothes burnt; the infected houses fumigated and whitewashed, the floors scraped and freshly cow-dunged. All others living in the house were prohibited from approaching any of the sources of water-supply, the water they required being drawn by outsiders and poured into vessels which were placed in the verandahs of the infected houses when those living within required water. They were also restricted as much as possible from moving about among the people, and sulphur fires were burnt in their verandahs. 26. Having received reports of several fatal cases of cholera in Lakuli, a village about 15 miles from Tanna, I detached a medical subordinate to that place to give his professional assistance, and telegraphed to Bombay for another to replace him. This latter subordinate I told off especially for cholera duty, as I did not wish those connected with the hospitals to run the risk of carrying infection into the military hospitals or into the jail. 27. On the 24th May a boat belonging to the Customs Department arrived from Bassein, and anchored in the creek opposite to the military lines, when it was found that the inspector on board had cholera. The boat was placed in quarantine, and dropped down the creek when the tide served, and anchored some distance below the town. She was kept in quarantine until the man recovered, when she was thoroughly fumigated13 authorities preferred trusting to "nuseeb" rather than drawing their purse- strings. Mr. Robertson's influence, however, induced them to change their opinion. 33. I have not been unmindful of the safety of the troops or the inmates of the jail, and I am happy to state that not a single case has occurred among either. 34. I regret that I have not had the time to elaborate this report as I could have wished; but, when it is considered that I have the charge of four hospitals and a dispensary, besides my work in the town, I trust it may be sufficient excuse for the hurried manner in which this report has been put together. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, (Signed) A. N, HOJEL, Surgeon-Major, Acting Civil Surgeon, Tanna. (True Copy) T. G. HEWLETT, Acting Sanitary Commissioner. B 221No. 1951. GENERAL DEPARTMENT. Bombay Castle, 30th June 1875. Letter from the Acting Sanitary Commissioner, No. A.-503, dated the 3rd June 1875 11. As might be expected, the state of the town is described as exceedingly filthy and offensive, and in censequence the death-rate is high. In 1873, a healthy year entirely free from cholera, it was over 32 per mile against 24 per mile in the neighbouring city of Bombay, and the death-rate from fever and bowel complaint is double that of Bombay. 12. The Municipal Revenue and Expenditure of Tanna may be thus sum- marized from the returns for 1873-74:17. As regards drainage, the suggestions of the Sanitary Commissioner are probably financially impracticable. But the cost of substituting for the present earthen gutters properly paved open saucer drains ought not to be great. Care should be taken that these drains have a proper and sufficient gradient, and that the out-falls are carried down to low water-mark. 18. Steps should be immediately taken to set aside near each quarter of the town convenient places for natural purposes. It will probably be best to manage these on the "trench system"; when this is done, the use of house- privies, always dangerous and expensive, should be discouraged. Such of the wealthier classes as wish to have privies should be permitted to do so only on condition of their being detached, properly constructed, and fitted with efficient receptacles, and of paying for the cost of cleaning them. This will cause a saving to the Municipality, and the work is one for which the public ought not to pay. The house-owners should be required to pave their gullies within a reasonable time. 19. A thorough surface cleaning of the town should be carried out at once, and if dust-bins are too costly, the house-holders should be required to deposit their refuse in specified convenient places, whence it should be removed daily. When this is done, the existing Staff (49 hallalcores and scavengers with their muccadums) ought to be sufficient to keep the town clean. It is pretty clear that the men have not hitherto been properly supervised and kept up to their work. 20. The President should report as soon as practicable what steps the Municipality propose to take to improve the sanitary condition of the Town, and whether any additional powers under Section XXVII. of the Act are required. 21. The thanks of Government are to be communicated to Dr. Hewlet for his energy in this matter. W. G. PEDDER, Acting Secretary to Government.
INSPECTION REPORT OF THE CITY OF AHMEDABAD. No. A.2 4. The rock on which Ahmedabad is built, belongs to the later tertiary series, and is composed of alluvial sand which is known in Guzerat by the name guraroo. This, says Captain Cruikshank in his Revenue Survey Report, is land of light colour, varying from almost mere sand to soil of the richest quality, and its fertility depends on proper culture and abundant manuring. I regret that I am unable to state accurately the altitude it attains above the level of the river, for, strange to say, there does not exist, either in the office of the Collec- tor, of the City Survey Officer, of the Executive Engineer of Ahmedabad, or in the Municipal Office, a map which shows the levels in the town. There is one which was made in connection with a scheme for supplying a portion of the town with water, in which a few sections are given; but as the datum to which they refer is not stated, it is impossible to ascertain from it the re- lative heights of different parts of the city. It is, however, roughly estimated that the highest point of the town is about 30 feet above the summer level of the river; and there appears to be a ridge extending from Astoria Dhallspore on the south, to the Kalupur Road on the north-east, which forms the line of water- parting; so that the natural drainage of the greater portion of the city is to- wards the river, whilst the storm-water from that part lying to the east of the ridge flows towards the south-east, into an artificially made nullah outside the walls. Advantage has been taken of the slope towards the river to provide for the discharge of some of the storm-water by deepening four shallow nullahs by which it is conducted through the walls into the river. The streets, however, are, during the rains, water-courses, and as will be afterwards shown, sewers. During the fair season these nullahs are absolutely dry. 5, The average rainfall, as deduced from observations taken at the Hute- sing Hospital during the fourteen years 1861 to 1874[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75009299.tif]
3 It is right, however, to mention, that as there is no vane or weather-cock at the hospital, or, indeed, in Ahmedabad, the above return cannot be considered reliable; although it may, perhaps, serve to show approximately the points of the compass from which the wind most frequently blows. 7. The annual mean temperature of the air during the same period was the high one4 walled hamlet of Saraspur, which is situated about a mile to the north-east of the town. The area within the walls is estimated to be about 2 square miles, and Saraspur contains about 52 acres. The city is divided into four wards, named Kharuya, Dariapur, Shahpur, and Jamalpur, and for municipal purposes each of these divisions, or as they are called zillahs, is again sub-divided into three sec- tions, whilst Saraspur forms a distinct section by itself. There are supposed to be about 50 miles or more of thoroughfares, taking into account all the lanes in the city; but there are only 18 miles of made roads, 11¾ miles of which have been laid with limestone excavated from the bed of the river, and 5 miles with broken tiles covered with earth, whilst 9¼ miles are formed of earth only. Altogether there are about 27½ miles of roads for the passage of wheeled vehicles. The principal streets run north and south, and though there are some running east and west, they are for the most part interrupted, and do not extend across the town. The Oliphant road, a fine, broad street, extends from the Ellis Bridge on the west to the Astoria Gate on the south, but it does not go through the thickly populated parts of the city. The houses are chiefly upper-storied, and are built of brick and mud, with tiled roofs. In many quarters of the town they present merely a dead wall towards the streets, and the windows of the rooms on the inner side look outi nto an enclosed courtyard. They are generally built in blocks which are approached only through a gateway; and through each block there often is a central street, from which crooked lanes diverge. Such blocks are called poles, but the passages in them are not thoroughfares. They vary in size from those in which there are only 5 or 10, whilst in others there are 50, 60, or even more houses. For example, in the Jamalpur Division there is the Mandvie's pole, which is supposed to contain a larger area than the village of Saraspur, and in which it is said upwards of 10,000 people reside. It is sub-divided into several smaller poles, but the only approach to it is through two gates. The street through Mandvie's pole forms the exception to the rule, and is a thoroughfare. Each pole has, at its entrance, generally speaking, an enclosed space divided into two partitions, one reserved for males and the other for females, each contain- ing seats varying in number from 5 to 20. These places, denominated panch- privies, are devoted to the separate use of the inhabitants of the pole in which they are situated. 11. The population of the city at the time of the census in 1872 amounted to 111,680 persons, and that of Saraspur to 5,193; so that the total population living under municipal jurisdiction consisted of 116,873 persons; of whom 58,477, or 50.03 per cent. of the total, were males, and 58,396, or 49.97 per cent. were females; the former exceeding the latter by only 81, so that the equality of the sexes is, for an Indian city, remarkable. 12. The subjoined table shows that the city, together with the hamlet of Saraspur, is overcrowded:5 and Jamalpur Divisions are shown to be not nearly so thickly populated as Dariapur and Kharuya:6 flow out into the public streets, to be absorbed into the ground or to be washed away by the storm-water. These khalkoowas are not often, in fact hardly ever, I am informed, cleaned out, until the expiration of 30 or 40 years. I saw one that had been opened for my inspection in the enclosure of the municipal offices. It joined the servants' privy, and had not been opened, certainly, for fifteen years. The smell issuing from it was over-poweringly disgusting. Water was found at 111/4 feet below the surface of the ground, and it was 21/4 feet deep. Below it there was 11/2 foot of deposit, from which gases were escaping through the water. Besides the above, there are 2,752 of what are termed "deep" privies in use. These are simply khalkoowas with a privy seat, having a central open- ing of about 6 inches broad on the top of the arch. They are usually situated inside the houses, especially those occupied by Mussulmans; and there are some that, although constantly used since they were constructed, have not been cleaned for fifty or sixty years. 17. The surface of the panch-privies is usually unpaved, and the night- soil is collected by a bhungy in attendance, who mixes ashes with it. The urine and ablution water is collected in a chunamed cesspool, from whence it is removed by carts, or flows into a khalkoowa. The public privies are enclosed by a stone wall, and are paved and provided with seats. The nightsoil is re- moved from a passage running at the back, where the bhungy mixes it with ashes. The urine and ablution-water flow outside into cesspools, from which it is carried away in carts. 18. The surface of the roads is, as a rule, well swept, but within the boun- daries of private enclosures there are too often collections of rubbish which are not removed. Ruinous houses also afford a ready site for the collection of filth of all sorts, and open spaces and the lanes in the city are sometimes, during the night, fouled with nightsoil; whilst the sides of the dead walls are used as urinals, from which a very offensive odour arises. Until quite lately, as there was no Magistrate, the Municipal officers were unable to take any action whatever to compel cleanliness on the part of private owners, or to punish offenders against the sanitary clauses of the Act. 19. The conservancy establishment works under the orders and active superintendence of the Secretary to the Municipality, Mr. Rughoonath Janardhun Prabh. It consists of7 20. The above named depôts are also the points on which the bhungies work, and to which they carry, in broad bamboo baskets furnished with a cover, or in carts, the nightsoil, made into a kind of compost with the ashes. This is deposited in trenches about 40 feet long by 15 feet broad and 6 feet deep, which are filled in about six weeks' time. The nightsoil is then covered with kutchra and allowed to consolidate for four or five months, when it is sold to farmers at a rate of 4 annas per cart-load. I must here state my opinion that the Duriapur Depôt is in much too close proximity to the fine old well called Dada Hurri's, as it is only about 300 yards distant from it, and at a higher level, and during the cold weather it is to windward of the railway, and complaints have reached me as to the nuisance caused by it. It should, therefore, in my opinion, be closed. Dead animals are removed to the above depôts, and their bones are collected and sold. There was at each depôt a very offensive smell, which could be perceived at a long distance away. 21. The city is well lighted, there being 1,350 kerosine oil lamps in use; and the public streets are watered twice a day by 28 bhisties, and by water carts, of which there are 43; and the following method, which is said to be pecu- liar to Ahmedabad, is also adopted:8 walls. There are also 34 brick-kilns, which are principally situated to the south- east, and 39 tanneries, 15 of which are in the vicinity of the Sháhpur Gate. The dhobies appear to be allowed to wash their clothes in the river wherever they like, and there is no restriction regarding the washing of dyed cloths in the stream. 25. The bodies of Hindus are, for the most part, carried out of the town as far up the river as the ford near the temple of Dudheshwar, about a mile above the city, and about ¼ mile below the Sháhi Bagh, where the railway bridge crosses the river. They are burnt on the sand on the edge of the water, and the ashes are thrown into the running stream. At the same place, in the very centre of the dry bed of the river, and within 40 yards of the stream, Kolis, Marwaries, and Khumars are in the habit of burying their dead in the sand. The graves are dug for a depth of about 3 feet, and the bodies are said to be not unfrequently scratched out by jackals and other animals. There were about 300 or 400 mounds of sand, each indicating a grave, to be seen at the time of my visit. The bodies of the Shrawak inhabitants of the city are burnt on the bank of the river near the Sháhpur Gate, and their ashes are thrown into the stream. Musul- men are buried in the numerous places of sepulture all round the outside of the town. The only burial-grounds inside the city allowed to be used are those for Christians. The Prostestant one is situated close under the walls at the Khánjia Gate. It was formerly a Mussulman graveyard, but must have been appropriated to its present use in 1780, when General Goddard took the city, as there is a tomb in it erected over the body of Captain Gough, of the Bengal Native Infantry, who died of the wounds he had received during the assault of the town. Near this is the Roman Catholic cemetery, between the water works and arsenal. It is a small place, but its position is not so good as the Protestant one. 26. I must also notice that there are many objectionable hollows near the city, and the right of excavating the ground below the walls on the north-west side has been sold by Government to potters, and as the hollows thus made afford convenient shelter, the place is used as a public necessary. 27. There is not a single made drain or sewer in Ahmedabad; and, from the account already given, it will be seen that the storm-water runs off through the streets, and through the four nullahs referred to, and that the household refuse- water with privy-water and urine are allowed to flow into closed pits, from the bottom of which the fluid escapes into the surrounding soil. We know that for a mixed population it is safe to assume that 40 ounces of urine are voided per head per diem; so that in Ahmedabad, every day, there are produced about 124 tons of urine, equal to 45,260 tons per year; and this amount contains about 1,855 tons of solid putrescent matter, which, during every minute of the day is giving off the deadly gases of decomposition, and which, by constant infiltration through the soil, finds its way into the water-bearing stratum. In the 2,752 "deep" privies, besides the urine, the nightsoil of about 9,200 persons is retained every day at the bottom; so that, at 25 ounces per head per day, there must, every year, be about 235 tons of solid nightsoil deposited within the inhabited area of the city. 28. It will be thus seen how impure the subsoil has been rendered by the accumulated filth of generations upon generations the consequence being, that the water in the wells throughout the town has become brackish, and totally unfit for drinking purposes. The well-water is so bad that it cannot be used for gardens, as flowers watered with it die. I am informed that water drawn from wells situated immediately outside the walls, although much less so, is still brackish, but is drank by some of the poorer classes; whilst at a few hundred yards, distance from the city the water in the wells becomes sweet and potable. Such facts are instructive; and that this contamination of the water-bearing stratum in the town has been going on for centuries, may be learnt from the fact, that the people have, from time immemorial, been in the habit of constructing beneath their courtyards tanks or reservoirs lined with hydraulic cement, into which the rain-water, falling on the roofs during the monsoon, is stored for the year's con-
9 sumption, and this is, at the present time, the principal source of drinking-water in the town; whilst those persons who cannot afford the cost of their construc- tion, or who have not space enough within their enclosures, procure their drink- ing water from the river. About forty years ago, I am informed, water-works were constructed at the south-western extremity of the city. The water is raised up to a height of 52 feet on to a tower, and is filtered through vegetable charcoal and gravel, and is brought into the heart of the town through an earthen pipe, 8 inches in diameter, which is enclosed in very thick masonry. It is distributed by means of iron stand-pipes, of which there are 16, and from 6 covered masonry reservoirs, on each side of which there are 10 brass-cocks, and on each end 3, so that 26 people can draw water at once. This supply is excessively limited, and does not exceed 1 gallon per head of population; and the place whence it is drawn is obviously, from a sanitary point of view, the worst that by any possibility could have been chosen, as it is at the furthest point below the town, and after the river has been polluted by the cantonment people, the steeping of hemp and gunny bags for the paper-makers, after it has received the ashes of the dead, and the filth washed out of clothes by dhobies, and percolating from khálkoowas in the town and places where offensive trades are carried on, and during the monsoon after the admixture of water carrying off urine and ablution-water, kitchen refuse, &c., and after it has been at that season still further contaminated by the bodies washed out of their graves at Dudeshwar; whilst immediately opposite the water- tower and above stream during the fine weather, dyers spread their dyed cloths to soak and to dry on the sand. 29. The accompanying analysis, by Dr. Gray, of some of the waters in Ahmedabad, gives some idea of their impurity:10 Grains per Gallon. Parts per Million. Oxygen, total required by the water at 140º F. in presence of Acid. Nitrous Acid. Colour in stratum of 2 feet. Odour. Taste. Reation. Sediments. Sample of Water taken from Total Solids. Loss on Ignition. Chroride of Sodium. Sulphuric Acid. Line. Magnesia. Silica. Carbonic Acid combined. Hardness before boiling. Permanent. Removable. Ammonia. Free Albumenoid. Of Nitrates and Nitrites. Stand-pipe at Khu- masa's Chukla 34.16 .28 9.77 2.30 6.59 6.15 2.80 6.83 14.00 2.80 11.20 .09 .13 1.20 .0700 .402 Faint yellow- ish white. Nil. Flat. Neutral, but alkaline after con- centration. Vegetable debris, crys- tals of carbonate of lime. Infusoria absent. Borradaile's Well 85.40 .84 17.95 8.26 5.49 2.92 3.08 17.08 7.70 2.80 4.90 .17 .19 3.20 .0910 .0603 Yellowish white. Nil. Brackish or saline. Neutral. Small in quantity. Light brown vegetable de- bris. Paramecia, mo- nads. Punch koowa Well 89.88 12.52 19.59 8.55 17.25 6.05 2.52 15.99 16.80 11.90 4.90 .17 .17 4.50 .1820 .0402 Yellowish green. Nil. Saline. Netural. Copious dark brown vegetable debris. In- fusoria not seen. Ghasiram's Pole Well 111.16 6.44 27.77 12.30 15.36 4.64 3.08 18.22 20.30 16.80 3.50 .14 .19 5.10 .1120 .0402 ... ... ... ... Copious. Brown clay coloured. Paramecia, rotifers, &c. Hybutklian's Well 82.32 2.24 18.93 11.15 14.74 3.63 3.36 13.21 20.30 14.70 560 .18 .18 4.50 .0840 .0402 Faint yellow- ish green. Nil. Saline. Neutral. Dark flocculent, monads. A paramecia observa- able. Premabhai Gate Well 125.16 3.08 42.82 16.34 4.39 1.91 1.96 15.94 16.80 13.30 3.50 .51 .36 3.60 .3780 .0402 Opalescent. Nil. Saline. Neutral,Al- kaline af- ter con- aion. Copious vegetable de- bris. Paramecia. Railway Tank 33.88 .56 6.17 3.07 12.07 3.36 ... 6.60 14.00 2.80 11.20 .06 .18 1.50 .1050 .0805 White and opalescent. Nil. Flat. Neutral. Copious. Vegetable de- bris. Infusoria ab- sent.
11 30. No wonder that Dr. Gray views with suspicion the water from the stand-pipe and the railway tank, and, not knowing that the first has been filtered, recommends its use only after filtration. As to the remainder of the samples, Dr. Gray says they are so highly charged with mineral impurities alone, that their use as drinking water ought to be prohibited. The river-water taken from the well above the town near the Shahi Bagh, from which the railway tank is supplied, contains only 6.17 grains per gallon of common salt (chloride of sodium); why should there be, lower down, at the water works, 9.77 grains per gallons, if not from greater contamination? These amounts of salt are large; but compare them with Premabhai Gate well, which had 42.82 grains per gallon of salt, and 16.34 grains of sulphuric acid derived from urine! 31. Such is a brief account of the leading features of the present sanitary condition of the City of Ahmedabad, and I will now show what effect it has had on the public health. I must, however, premise, that the registration of births and deaths is conducted under the management of the police who collect the returns; and perhaps I may express an opinion that the number of deaths, as far as the city itself is concerned, is as nearly accurate as possible; for at each gate a police sepoy is stationed, and no corpse can pass out of the town without being stopped; and a further check is also kept by the Secretary, who has informed me that only a very trifling difference exists between the figures he has collected and those furnished by the police. I do not think the birth-rate stated in 1874 to have only amounted to 20 per 1,000, can be accepted as correct. The regis- tration is carried on by the police, who learn from houseowners in their re- spective beats whether any birth has taken place, and no doubt many births thus escape registration. 32. The number of deaths registered in the following years in Ahmedabad will be seen below:12 than the Bombay rate from all causes, and as will be seen, the total death-rate is nearly double that of Bombay; it is almost the highest to be found in any town in the Presidency. Can there be any reason but the persistent neglect of the first pinciples of sanitation, that 45 or 46 persons should die in Ahmedabad in every 1,000 of its population, whilst at the same time Bombay is losing only 23 per 1,000 of its inhabitants ? If the Bombay rate obtained in Ahmedabad, instead of 5,331 persons dying every year on the average, only about 2,669 would suc- cumb. In ten years 26,690 lives would have been saved; and who can estimate the amount of sickness and suffering that would have been prevented ? 34. The deaths were recorded to have taken place at the different ages below mentioned:13 The difference between the death-rates of Mussulmans and Hindus may, I think, be partly ascribed to the fact, that the former eat animal food, whilst Hindus in Guzerat are almost pure vegetarians, and possess less strength and vital power than the former, so that they are less able to resist the lowering influences they are surrounded by. I am also informed by the Secretary, that the Mahomedans of Ahmedabad keep their houses and poles cleaner than the Hindus, and certainly a visit to poles occupied by them led me to consider this opinion correct. 37. Ahmedabad is celebrated for its weaving; and there is an old proverb to the effect that it hangs by three threads; meaning, that it is dependent on the weaving in cotton, silk, and gold. The hand manufactories are, however, since the establishment of spinning and weaving mills in the city, not so numerous as they were. It was also famed for its paper, but this trade, not being able to compete with the papers imported from France, is also languishing. The Shrawaks are principally employed in commerce, and the Kolis in agriculture. 38. The accounts of the Municipality for the year 1874 and 1875 are attached to the Report, and it will be seen that during the year 1874 the net income, including the balance (Rs. 52,783-11-2) at the beginning of the year, was Rs. 2,67,034-14-1. Deducting from this the above balance, Rs. 52,783-11-2, and the deposits of contractors, aggregating Rs. 3,479-5-6, and the Kakria Fund, amounting to Rs. 4,133-1-9, the net revenue for the year was Rs. 2,06,620-11-8. The expenditure during the same time amounted to Rs. 1,74,221-12-0, which shows a balance of annual income over expenditure of Rs. 32,399-10-7; but the gross balance was Rs. 87,900-11-6, of which Rs. 41,088-11-6 belonged to the Muni- cipality and the remainder, Rs. 46,812, was credited to the different funds, of which the Municipality is the trustee. The rate of municipal taxation per head of popu- lation was, in 1872, Rs. 1-4-5. 39. I think that ample cause has been shown above why the principal city of Guzerat should no longer be left in its present eminently dangerous state, and I earnestly trust that Government will insist upon immediate steps being taken to improve its sanitary condition. 40. The measures that appear to be most necessary are detailed below in their order of urgency. lst.14 beds shoulds be placed; but, from a sanitary point of view, they should, if the loss of head can be avoided, be as near the point of distribution as possible. 41. Before such a scheme could, by any possibility, be brought into opera- tion, many months must elapse, but in the meantime immediate measures might be taken to improve the condition of the river water. The General Commanding the Northern Division of the Army has kindly promised to prevent, as far as possible, the nuisances I have spoken of as arising from the cantonment. The burial of the dead in the river-bed at Dndeshwar, and elsewhere, should be at once prohibited, and corpses, either from the cantonment or the town, should not be allowed to be burnt along its bed, or in any other place except below the town on the south, where a ghát might be built and set apart for this purpose. A cremation place for Hindus from the cantonment should, in consultation with the municipal authorities, be decided upon. The different Mussulman burial- grounds on the river-bank ought to be closed. All offensive trades, such as paper-makers, tanneries, dyers, bricks and lime-kilns, &c., &c., should be at once removed from the north of the city, and from within the walls, and be located to the south east of the town, the point from which the wind hardly ever belows. The people ought not to be allowed to wash either their clothes or persons above the place where the water is drawn, and the police might patrol the river to see that its stream is not polluted. 42. Such means are, in my opinion, imperative, if the terrible death-rate is to be in any way reduced. To carry them out it will be necessary to extend the municipal limits until they join the cantonment, and for a radius of, say, 2 miles round the city. At present this tract is under the Collector, but there is no establishment allowed for its conservancy; and the numerous offensive trades car- ried on within its limits being under no supervision, render it a source of danger to the cantonment and the city. When this action is taken, the Municipality should amplify the wording of the bye-law relating to the inspection and licensing of offensive trades, passed under the provisions of Clause 2 of Section 70 of the District Municipal Act. 43. The water-supply is, as I have said, the first matter that should engage the attention of the authorities, but coincidentally with it should be considered a scheme for the abolition of the deadly khalkoowa system. The death-rate shows, in more forcible language than I can use, the awful havoc the contamina- tion of the subsoil with the ordure of the inhabitants is making in Ahmedabad. It is sad to contemplate a city with such natural advantages, gradually becoming depopulated, for no population can have such a death-rate without becoming en- feebled and degenerated. The able and intelligent Secretary to the Municipality, Mr. Raghoonath Janardhun Prabh, whose willing aid and great assistance in my investigations I beg to bring prominently to the notice of Government, has sug- gested to me that it was the filth accumulated in the khalkoowas which caused the epidemic which depopulated the ancient capital of Guzerat15 is, after Bombay, the largest city in the western presidency, and that, up to this present time, the people have not expended any money whatsoever in providing their city with any kind of channels by which their liquid refuse can be removed; that the subsoil contamination is consequently so great that the water in the wells is simply diluted urine; and that, as might be expected, the death-rate is exceptionally high. I would, therefore, earnestly ask that, at all events, estimates may be prepared to see whether a pipe-sewerage system is really financially impossible. I am very certain it would be far cheaper in the end (leaving out of the question altogether its incalculable greater efficiency) to take this action; than to attempt any system of surface drainage. 45. To obtain the necessary information to carry out either a water or sewerage scheme, there should be prepared a map of the city and its environs, showing the contour lines of levels. All now is a matter of guess, and there are no trustworthy data to work upon. I am indebted to Mr. Waite for the follow- ing remarks, showing the present state of the City Survey:16 50. I have, in paragraph 41, stated the position where, in my opinion, the cremation of dead bodies alone should be allowed, and regulations should be enforc- ed regarding the places where dhobies should wash their clothes; they should, of course, be below the point where the water-supply is now drawn. 51. The existing hollows around the city should be reclaimed with broken tiles, &c., collected in the town. The Secretary has done good work in filling in a swamp just outside the Raipur Gate in this way; and the potters should be made to cut away the earth to a flat surface. 52. The sanitary provisions of the District Municipal Act can, of course, only be enforced by a Magistrate. There have been no prosecutions under it or any other law, as, since 1873 to 30th April 1875, there was no Magistrate avail- able before whom the cases could be heard; and I am informed that the gentleman now holding the post draws no salary for his services; but that there is great need of a Magistrate will have been seen; and in my opinion it is imperative that the carrying out of these provisions should be entrusted to a duly qualified Health Officer, who should have charge of the scavenging and halalcore establishments, and all matters pertaining to the public health. There is a great want of lime-washing in the interiors of houses in the city, and he could effect much good by insisting on the periodical application of lime to them, and in putting the law in force with respect to offenders against the sanitary clauses of the Act. 53. The bye-law passed by the Municipality regarding the registration of births is a good example of how not to do it. Instead of insisting on the parent or guardian of the new-born child giving information to the officer in charge of the nearest police-station within 48 hours next after the birth, it merely insists on these persons giving information of the birth on being required so to do by the officer in charge of the nearest police-station, or by an officer of the Municipality, in this way at least 12 or 13 births per 1,000 escape registration, but the Muni- cipal Commissioners should also pass bye-laws regarding the registration of deaths under Section 72 of the Act, and regulations should be enforced as to the depth of graves. Every graveyard and cremation-ghát should be registered, and the person in charge should be compelled to keep a correct account of the num- ber of bodies disposed of, and to furnish a record of the necessary particulars regarding each death to the Health Officer. 54. It would materially help to improve the ventilation of the town if the barrier to perflation caused by the city wall was removed. For purposes of defence, I need not say, they are utterly useless; but I am informed there would be strong opposition made to this proposal by the people who believe in the security they are said to afford. The ground at their base is fouled by the resi- dents in the vicinity, who use it as a urinal, if not for baser purposes; and, from a sanitary point of view, the walls are decidedly objectionable. In order to ventilate the dense parts of the town, thoroughfares should be made from west to east; and if a broad road were made from Chundla Ole to Panchkowa, Gate, there would be a splendid ventilating avenue extending from the Bhuddar along the Karanj, through the Teen Durwaza and market place, through the densely po- pulated zillah of Karuya. I believe this line of road was devised, but it was not, as it ought to have been, carried into execution. Advantage should be taken on every occasion to widen the streets, which, especially in the poles, are, in some instances, very narrow; and the line of each street should be carefully determined upon and strictly adhered to, and whenever a house is re-built, its line of plinth should be set back to it. I may mention an instance of past mismanagement I saw in the main road leading to the Sháhpur Gate. The breadth of the road- way is 22 feet wide, when it is suddenly narrowed to 12 feet by persons having been permitted to build their houses on to the road. Again, a very crowded thoroughfare leading from Astoria Road to the Chundla Ole, is only 16 feet broad, and as the houses on each side are high, there can be but little ventilation. Several of the roads require making. Metal is not to be had except at ruinous
17 prices. The Kalupur road is during the rains simply a sewer. The mixed sul- lage and storm-water pass down over it as far as Panchkore Naka, where they are carried to the south through Mochee Ole, past the Municipal Office as far as the Oliphant Road, where they are discharged into the river. The people here, I was informed, often wade through 3 feet of diluted sullage which flow past their houses. 55. The Municipality has done its duty very commendably in providing 35 public necessaries, besides setting apart a field for natural purposes. I think the Saraspur plan of the people resorting to the field for natural purposes is for villages in India a good one, as the ordure is passed at a distance from habi- tations; but the position of the field as regards the prevailing wind should be carefully settled, and the nightsoil should be buried in trenches 1 foot deep and 1 foot broad, with an interval of 1 foot between each trench. 56. The owners of ruinous houses should be compelled to enclose their property, and to remove the debris, which might usefully be applied to fill in low- lying places. 57. There is much need of a public garden in Ahmedabad. In the Jamal- pur Zillah one might easily be formed, if any good water could be found for the watering of plants. Some of the rich Settias could not commemorate the visit of the Prince of Wales more happily than by making the city a present of a garden where persons of all classes could take recreation. 58. The bottom of the Kakria Tank should be deepened, and the mud removed, and it should afterwards be paddled. It would prove a very valuable source of drinking water, if the trades I have named be situated in that locality. There is, I believe, a large balance already collected for the improvement of the tank. 59. I would, in conclusion, desire to express my acknowledgments to the Collector of Ahmedabad, Mr. Pratt, for the aid he afforded me in conducting the above inquiry. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, T. G. HEWLETT, Acting Sanitary Commissioner, B 22118 Statement of Receipts of the Municipalily, Ahmedabad, for the Year 1874-75. RECEIPS. Amount. Total. RECEIPTS. Amount. Total. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Balance at the close of the last year19 Year 1874-75. EXPENDITURE. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. P. GENERAL ESTABLISHMENT. Municipal Office. Secretary 3,600 0 0 3,600 0 0 Assistant Secretary 890 9 4 890 9 4 Office Establishment 1,837 15 0 1,837 15 0 6,328 8 4 6,328 8 4 6,328 8 4 Inspection Establishment. Head Inspector 540 0 0 540 0 0 Public Works Establishment 523 0 0 523 0 0 Magistrate's Office do. 330 0 0 330 0 0 President's Office do. 324 0 0 324 0 0 1,717 0 0 1,717 0 0 1,717 0 0 Collection Establishment. Office Establishment 2,046 5 10 2,046 5 10 Gate do. 6,312 9 4 6,312 9 4 8,358 15 2 8,358 15 2 8,358 15 2 B.20 EXPENDITURE. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Brought forward... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 45,170 4 2 C21 EXPENDITURE. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Brought forward... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1,31,561 1 7 D.22 EXPENDITURE. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Brought forward ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 1,66,230 0 11 E.23 MEMORANDUM of Liabilities and Claims of the Municipality of Ahmedabad for the Year 1874-75. LIABILITIES. Amount. CLAIMS. Amount. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Kakurria Fund 31,174 2 0 Ellis Bridge 50,000 0 0 Conservancy 11,456 12 6 City Survey 63,032 6 6 Raipur Dispensary Fund 339 6 0 Civil Suit Advance recover- able 820 2 11 Deposits to be adjulated 3,790 9 5 Advance recoverable 189 13 2 46,760 13 11 Net amount of Debt 67,281 8 8 Total 1,14,042 6 7 Total 1,14,042 6 7 Municipal Commissioner's Office, Ahmedabad. Secretary, A. M. C.
No. 2850. GENERAL DEPARTMENT. Bombay Castle, 18th September 1875. Letter from the Acting Sanitary Commissioner, No. A.-680, dated 16th July 1875INSPECTION REPORT OF THE CITY OF POONA. No. A/591. To THE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, GENERAL DEPARTMENT, BOMBAY. Office of the Sanitary Commissioner for the Government of Bombay, 30th June 1875. SIR, I have the honour to report, for the information of Government, that I have made an inspection of the City of Poona with the view of becoming acquainted with its sanitary condition, and instituting a comparison between its present state and that as detailed in Dr. Leith's valuable and well-known report dated 8th October 1863. 2. It will be unnecessary for me to describe its topography, geology, or meteorological conditions, all of which subjects would properly form matters of special investigation in a sanitary report, as they have already been given by Dr. Leith, whose account of them may still be considered correct. It may, however, be useful to state that the City is situated on the high ground which attains an altitude of about 30 feet above the right bank of the Moota River, along which it extends for a distance of a mile and a half, and to within a quarter of a mile of its junction with the Moola River, which flows past the Cantonment of Kirkee. It stretches from the river in an easterly direction for about 2 miles, where it joins the limits of the Cantonment of Poona, which, as the prevailing winds are westerly, thus lies to leeward of it. On the south it is bound- ed by the Umbi Nullah; and on this side there are cultivated fields and open country as far as the Katruj Hills, about 6 miles away; whilst on the north- east the civil lines adjoining the Cantonment extend more or less towards the railway, and beyond it as far as the bund and the FitzGerald Bridge across the river Moota-Moola, opposite the village of Yerauda. The area under munici- pal jurisdiction is stated to be about 4 square miles, but this calculation must include the suburban and rural districts; for, as will be presently shown, the urban sections occupy an area of only about 2.5 square miles. The City proper is bisected by a deep and broad nullah called the Nagjheri, which runs from south to north; whilst along part of the eastern boundary and between Gosai- pura and Mangalwar Peth on the east, and Nana, Rastia and Somwar peths on the west, is a smaller but still a broad nullah called Manik, which receives the drainage from the sections it passes through. These two streams meet opposite the filthy village of Maharwada, on the confines of Somwar Peth, and flow into the Moota about 350 yards below the old bund. 3. According to the census of 1872 the population amounted to 90,436, which exceeds the estimate of 1863 by about 10,000; whilst the number of inhabited houses in 1872 was 11,434, against 10,245 in 1857, when a census was taken. There were 1,416 of the better class inhabited by 17,270 persons; so that in these there were 12.19 persons on an average in each house, whilst the houses of the inferior class amounted to 10,018, with 73,166 inhabitants, or 7.30 per- sons to a house. Of the 90,436 persons enumerated, 47,3332 cent of the total number3 This is the average distribution in the city:4 7. Nine peths of the City, viz:, those west of the Nagjheri, with a present population of 63,569 persons, were thus provided with sewers; but the remaining nine peths, with a present population of 26,867 persons, are entirely without pro- per means for carrying off the sullage, which either finds its way through chan- nels cut in the ground into the two nullahs, the Nagjheri and the Manik, or else too frequently remains to soak into the surface near the houses of their inhabit- ants. Some slight, but very inefficient, means have been taken, since the date of Dr. Leith's report, to improve the flow in these nullahs, and they have been, since the introduction of the Kharakwásla water, occasionally flushed with it; but the surface of their beds is so uneven that in many places the water stag- nates, and the foul matters in it emit the most offensive smell, which, however, does not prevent the people living in the vicinity from washing their persons and clothes in it. Cattle, too, are habitually taken down to drink the water in these nullahs. The main sewer, which is laid along the right bank of the river and intercepts the sewerage from the peths adjacent to it, discharges its contents into the river immediately below the old bond, within a few feet of the bank. At the time of my visit to it, a black, semi-consistent sludge of half putrid matter had collected opposite to it, and was floating on the surface of the water close along the bank, and extended, I should think, for about 200 yards; I saw, how- ever, persons bathing in the river close to the outlet, and washing their mouths out with the water. 8. There are stated to be about 7,000 privies in Poona: so that, supposing each of the 1,416 houses of the better class, with their 17,270 inhabitants, was provided with one, there would remain 5,584 attached to that number of houses of the inferior class, which, as we have before seen, were inhabited on the average by 7.3 persons. By this estimate there would only be privy accommodation for 17,270 persons living in houses of the better class, 40,763 do. do. inferior class, or a total of 58,033 person's. Since Dr. Leith's report five public necessaries have been erected:5 adjoining the principal military cantonment of Western India is not creditable. The bunghies bring the daily collections to carts stationed at the five public necessaries, and also at a depôt on the south of the city in the Shukarwar Peth, which is, however, unpaved and undrained, and not supplied with water, and where about 10 nightsoil carts stand. There are two other depôts in the town, one in Aditwar and the other in Kasba Peth, to which the bungies bring their baskets. The nightsoil is then carted away to Dhankoory, which is situated on rising ground overhanging, and about 2½ miles along the Satara road, to the south of the City. On the top of this hill there have been dug 118 pits, 43 feet long by 12 feet broad, and of a depth from 2 to 3 feet, into which the nightsoil is discharged. It is stated that it takes two or three days to fill a pit with nightsoil, which is then covered over with town sweepings, until in the course of three or four months, by evaporation and soakage, the liquid portion is absorbed, when the solid matter is taken out and sold. The smell occasioned by this unscientific method of disposal is at times very great, and extremely annoying to persons passing along the Satara road to Mahableshwar. It is even considered at certain sea- sons of the year to be carried as far as the Wanowri Barracks, which are situated 2½ miles off, directly to the north-east of the manure pits. I think it, however, right to state that personally I do not coincide in this opinion. 10. The surface of the roads in the City is well swept, and appears clean; but there is an immense quantity of rubbish lying in the back yards of the houses which is never removed. The town sweepings collected from the roads is sold to the owners of the brick-kilns, and an annual income of about Rs. 1,800 is de- rived from this source. The strength of the conservancy establishment, which works under the orders of the Health Officer, Mr. Mahadev Yeshwant Paranjpe, L.M., is as under:6 informed that the Municipality are taking steps to compel the owner to close this place, and contemplate the erection of three additional mutton markets. The dry-fish market in Aditwar Peth was clean at the time of my visit, but the smell from the places where the dry-fish is stored, is much complained of. 12. Some of the hollows caused by stone and mourum quarrries, mentioned by Dr. Leith, have been filled in, but they are still far too numerous. One near the Bolai Temple, on the northern boundary, opposite and to windward of the Sassoon Hospital, is particularly objectionable, as it contains stagnant pools of water, and, as I had proof, is constanly used as a necessary. All such places, which it is impossible on account of expense to fill in, should be made reservoirs of Kharakwásla water, after the surface had been thoroughly well cleaned. 13. The municipal authorities have also not exerted the powers entrusted to them with the view of compelling owners of ruinous houses to remove them, the consequence being, that these places become depôts of filth, where nuisances of all kinds are perpetrated. The pernicious prickly-pear, too, has been allowed to grow luxuriantly in any waste place. In Mangalwar Peth, where there is uo public latrine, the open space thus covered with prickly-pear is used as the com- mon necessary of the locality. 14. There appear to be no regulations regarding the disposal of dead cattle. In the filthy village of Maharwada, on the high ground above the confluence of the Nagjheri and Manila nullahs, I saw dead cattle lying on the roadway. It was stated the Mahars are in the habit of skinning and eating the flesh of these animals; whilst the heaps of bones, skulls, horns, &c., which were rotting in the sun, showed that this practice must be of long standing. 15. There is a cremation ground for Hindus of high caste and another for lower caste on the banks of the river, not far from Onkareshwar Temple, which is above stream. The funeral pyre is generally composed of cow-dung cakes, and after the body is burnt the ashes are thrown into the river. There are also about 75 burial-grounds inside the city, chiefly belonging to the Mahomedan com- munity, only 4 or 5 being used by low-caste Hindus. All are in the most objectionable state, and must have been filled over and over again. 16. Another nuisance is the state of the sheds where cattle are kept, the probable number of which is set down at 8,850; but hardly in a single instance did I see proper accommodation made for them. They generally are located in the back yard of the houses where their owners live, and very few of the stables had any drainage at all. 17. Although, since Dr. Leith's report, the streets have been named and 400 oil lamps erected, and some of the narrow streets in Aditwar and Budwar Peths7 posal of the body. I was informed the course pursued is, that the police attach- ed to the several peths go round their respective beats once a day, and enquire from the householders whether any birth or death has occurred. In this man- ner I have no doubt that many births and deaths are not registered at all. The number of deaths registered in the following years in Poona will be seen below:8 The deaths according to castes are thus classified:9 20. The above is a brief description of the present sanitary condition of the City of Poona, and in the following remarks I will try and indicate, in the order of urgency, the measures I think should be adopted to ameliorate it. 21. The first necessity of Poona is to place the collection and disposal of the nightsoil produced by the inhabitants on a satisfactory footing, and it is essential that public halalcores, paid for by the Municipality, should be substi- tuted for the private service that now obtains. Section 57 of Act VI. of 1873 gives this power to the Municipality, and it should be at once put into force. As has been stated, there are now only 7,000 privies in Poona, and it becomes a great question whether any more should be erected. If there were a sufficient number of public necessaries in each quarter of the town, such an arrangement would be safer for the public health than ordering, in an unsewered town, a large number of private privies to be built. If, however, permission to erect these is given, they should be built according to a standard plan, which should insist on perfect isolation by an air-space, of at least 3 feet wide all round, between the house and the privy. The seat and shaft for the ordure to drop down should be of glazed stoneware, which might be procured from England, and which would be much cheaper, I believe, than the cut-stone slabs which I have seen used. Chunam is most objectionable, because, when urine falls on it, chem- ical changes are set up which promote its putrefactive decompositions, and fetid ammoniacal products are given off. An inspection of the City show that the usual form of houses in Poona consists of a main building, facing the road, whilst at the back is an open courtyard which adjoins that of the opposite property. In the main market streets and thoroughfares, such as in Bhudwar and Aditwar peths, the privies are situated in these back yards, and the sweep- ers obtain access to them through gullies, but in other peths the privies are inside the houses, and they are cleaned from trap doors opening into the main streets, close, in many cases, to the entrance doors of the houses. A. more objec- tionable plan could not easily have been devised, especially as there are but few with drains to carry away the ablution water and urine. The Municipal Com- missioners should insist on all such privies being removed to the back court- yards, and access being given to the sweeper by means of a paved gully com- municating with a sewer. 22. It becomes, then, a matter of importance to calculate the amount of nightsoil and urine that will have to be daily collected. In a mixed population. of all ages and both sexes we may assume 2.5 ounces of f10 of the smell complained of, I should suggest that the sides and bottom of the upper portion of the trench be covered with some cheap, non-absorbent material, and that across it, about half way down, there be placed a filtering medium, such as sand, gravel and stones, enclosed between two perforated planks, so that the watery part of the nightsoil might at once, after filteration, be run off into the fields, and that the solid part be daily mixed with dry earth, or the ashes of burnt town-sweepings, and removed. It is evident that the present site is too small for the purpose intended, and that there is not a sufficient quantity of earth available; and I had much pleasure in accompanying the Committee appointed for the purpose, and in visiting a new site, which, as far as space and soil, and suitability of situation on sanitary grounds is concerned, is all that can be desired. Its distance, and the steep ascent that will have to be made to it (for at present there is no road) are, however, great drawbacks, and I am of opinion that a nearer site, but not nearer than one mile, and to the south of the City, and away from any watercourse, might be selected; or that, as Dr. Leith suggested an arrangement might be made with agriculturists for its disposal as manure, beyond the civil lines and cantonment limits. 24. In the event of the Municipality determining to dispose of the soil them- selves, it may be as well to state the area of ground that, in my opinion, should be taken up. In the North-Provinces the successful disposal of nightsoil earth is an accomplished fact; and I have thought it would be useful to give the following extract from the Report for 1874 of Dr. Walker, the Inspector-General of Prisons there:11 remove 30 tons of soil not less than 27 carts would be required in daily use. It is, therefore, manifest, that when the pay of the halalcores and that of their supervisors, as well as the maintenance charges of the carts, bullocks, plant, &c., are taken into consideration, a very large annual expenditure must necessarily be entailed. I would also, as a preface to the remarks following, earnestly invite consideration of the fact, that the system of hand removal of nightsoil, although theoretically perfect, is practically most imperfect. From long experience in Bombay I know that any idea of placing below the privy seats an iron utensil to catch everything that falls into it12 able land available for the purpose. If efficiently supervised it should prove, financially, a profitable one; and although the first outlay would be heavy, it would, I am confident, be cheaper for the Municipality to raise a loan and carry it out, than to sustain, year after year, the dead loss entailed by the maintenance of the large establishments I have above shown to be necessary; to which must be added the cost of breaking up and cleaning the present inefficient drains. I have, from information supplied me by the Secretary, roughly estimaaed that the annual expenditure on all these operations would come to something like Rs. 89,000. If this amount were capitalized, it would, at 6 per cent., represent a sum of Rs. 14,83,000. If a loan be raised, I would urge that, in order to lighten muni- cipal taxation, its repayment may be extended over at least 50 years. Even the present disgraceful out-fall of the sewers (as long as it is allowed to continue) could be improved by running it out, by means of iron pipes, into deep water and mid stream. 27. I think that the Health Officer should receive more support from the Commissioners than he has hitherto done, and that all orders to any of the staff placed under him should be given by himself alone, and not by any one else, as otherwise his authority would be weakened. I should recommened him to keep a register of all convictions under the Municipal Act in his department, and that the same plan be adopted in other departments, as I was surprised to find on my enquiry that no record of such existed. After a few years it is found in all well-managed municipalities, when the people have begun to recognize the value of sanitary work, that they pay readier attention to the legitimate require- ments of those entrusted with the supervision of matters pertaining to the public health, and that the number of summonses decrease. The Health Officer, Mr. Mahadev Yeswant, is duly impressed with the great necessity of giving the people ample and full notice of what course they should adopt in carrying out the requirements of the law, and of the advisability13 29. The line of streets should be carefully laid down, and set-backs insisted on whenever a house is re-built, and Dr. Leith's recommendations regarding forming new streets to act as ventilating avenues from west to east, ought to be steadily kept in view. A good beginning has been made in Rastia Peth, but the road should be continued straight through the heart of the City. 30. I think the plan adopted by the Municipality, of selling the town sweepings to the brick-makers, is most objectionable. These persons should pay a license, and be made to keep their places in a cleaner condition than at present; the town sweepings, which ought to amount to considerably more than 54 cart- loads a day, besides 450 donkey-loads, should be either at once applied to the fields, or be burnt, and the ashes used for distribution in the privies, and for mixing with the nightsoil, as is done at Násik. The sale of the manure and the improvements of public health would soon make up for any temporary loss of revenue that might ensue. At the same time I must notice the very ineffi- cient form of scavenging cart in use, and recommend that a pattern one should be procured from Bombay. 31. Fountains ought to be substituted for dipping wells when the Kharak- wásla water is supplied. Where accommodation is required for several persons at once, a good plan is to have a covered iron or masonry reservoir, with taps fitted all round it, with a ledge for chatty pots and vessels below the cocks. The existing dipping wells might be improved by building a low wall round them so as to prevent the water vessels being placed on the top, and by providing a proper drain to carry away the wastage water. At many of them I saw cesspools, which had become full, and from which the water was actually flowing towards the cistern. 32. The beds of the Nagjheri and Manik Nullahs should be made more even, so as to allow the flow of water, and thus prevent the stagnant pools which now exist. 33. The state of the cattle stables throughout the City should be imme- diately improved. A paved gutter to carry away the urine should be made along the plinth of each stable, and the collection of dung and litter should be removed, at least, once every day; whilst regulations regarding the disposal of dead-cattle are also required; and attempts might be made to get some of the European chemists in town to purchase them, as in Bombay, where their sale brings in a revenue of upwards of Rs. 6,000 per annum. 34. The Municipality should at once compel owners to remove or enclose ruinous buildings and vacant plots of ground; and the same body should order the immediate eradication of the prickly-pear, wherever found, as it gives shelter to all kinds of filth, and obstructs ventilation. 35. In conclusion, I have the pleasure to bring to your especial notice the great assistance I have received from Mr. Nursoo Ramchunder, the able Secretary to the Poona Municipality, to whom an expression of my acknowledgments for the aid he has afforded me is due. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, T. G. HEWLETT, Acting Sanitary Commissioner. B 221-4 b
11 Budget Estimate of Expenditure on Public Works in 1875-76. Locality. Description of Works. Estimate for 1875-76. Locality. Description of Works. Estimate for 1875-76. Poona City. ORIGINAL WORKS. Rupees. Poona city. Communications. Rupees. Civil Buildings. Ordinary repairs to roads, 27 miles, 1,620 feet long 17,000 Do. do. Brides (including 2 walls) No. 11 130 Constructing mutton markets in Nana and Fetal Peths 4,000 Do. do. urinaries No. 17 70 " Do. latrines in Mungulwar, On the Bhowani plan 4,000 Do. do. slab-stones 600 Do. do. curbing-gutters 500 " Communications. 8,000 Do. do. cleaning-gutters 2,000 Do. do. koombarvais Sluice-gates 300 " Compensation for pudvis, &c. 10,000 Removing sand from Ambil Oda, near Katruj and Parbutti Tanks 165 " Improving the road from Rastia to Mundaee Bazaar 15,000 Watering roads in the City 2,000 " Minor roads 3,000 Cleaning out and repairing sewage-drains in the City 2,000 " Miscellaneous Public Improvements. 28,000 Miscellaneous Public Improvements. 24,765 " Constructing two cisterns 3,000 Repairing reservoirs, cisterns. pipes, ooswases stop-valves, and fire-plugs 800 " General improvement of water-supply, about 20,000 Leather hoses and buckets, &c., for fire-engines... 200 " Payable to Government for Kharakwsla water 10,000 Lighting roads with 402 lamps 7,000 33,000 Head Overseer's Establishment. 8,000 REPAIRS. Contingencies for Head Overseer's Office, Rs. 100; Pump, Rs. 150; Aqueduct Rs. 100 350 Civil Buildings. Other Expenditure. Repairs to municipal buildings, pump shed, lukurkhana chowkee, three stores, and Katruj Chowkee 500 Completing 20 sheets of original copies of the Poona City Survey- 200 500 Total Rupees 1,02,815 Poona Municipal Budget for 1875-76, sanctioned in Managing Committee's Resolution No. 101, dated 10th January 1875. ABSTRACT OF RECEIPTS, Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Minor Establishments. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Opening balance on 1st April 1875 (in Bank) ..... 50,000 0 0 General Management. Assessed Taxes 20,000 0 0 Miscellaneous Establishment. Octroi 79,500 0 0 Licenses 575 0 0 (a) Miscellaneous 37,680 0 0 Miscellaneous Taxes 1,300 0 0 Contribution to other Funds. Miscellaneous Receipts. Public Works 1,02,815 0 9 Tolls ...... 1,48,175 0 0 Interest 500 0 0 Reserve 5,925 0 0 Rents 100 0 0 1,54,100 0 0 Sale of lands and houses. &c. ...... Fees and Pines 125 0 0 Total Rupees ...... 1,54,100 0 0 Voluntary contributions ...... Sundry receipts 2,000 0 0 (a) Particulars of the item " Miscellaneous" Establishmment... 27,900 0 0 1,04,100 0 0 Office contingencies Rs 1,500 0 0 Debt ...... Conservancy do. ,, 2,000 0 0 House-tax collections ,, 1,700 0 0 ABSTRACT OF EXPENDITURE. Office-rent ,, 216 0 0 Winding clock ,, 300 0 9 Collection of Taxes and Cesses. McDougall's powder ,, 1,000 0 0 Rent of police chowkee ,, 24 0 0 Police 4,880 0 0 Do. of butchers' stalls ,, 340 0 0 Education 600 0 0 Cholera.. ,, 100 0 0 Medical. 2,200 0 0 Repairs to carts " 2,000 0 0 Auditor's pay ,, 300 0 0 Bovine vaccination. ,, 300 0 0 9,780 0 0 Total Rupees... ....... 1,54,100 0 0 Rupees 37,680 0 0
No. 2079. GENERAL DEPARTMENT. Bombay Castle, 12th July 1875. Letter from the Acting Sanitary Commissioner, No. A.-591, dated 30th June 1875INSPECTION REPORT OF THE CITY OF POONA No 591 160
PLAN of AHMEDNAGAR [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75009441.tif] (Signed) A.G.F.Hogg. Major D.Q.M.G. Litho: at the Govt. Photozinco, office, Poora. 1877
INSPECTION REPORT OF THE CITY OF AHMEDNAGAR. No. A/749. To THE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, GENERAL DEPARTMENT. Office of the Sanitary Commissioner for the Government of Bombay, 14th August 1875. SIR, I have the honour to report, for the information of His Excellency the Governor in Council, that, having received a communication from the Collector of Ahmednagar relative to the establishment of a main drainage scheme in that city, I considered it my duty to proceed to the place, and to make a sanitary inspection of the town with reference to the question on which my opinion had been asked. 2. Ahmednagar is situated in latitude 19°6' north, and longitude 74°48 east, at, according to Dr. Leith (who visited and reported on the city exactly ten years ago), 126 miles from the sea. It has a mean temperature of 77°, and a mean annual rainfall of 25.68 inches. It usually rains during every month of the year, but the heaviest fall generally takes place in September. From the returns given in Dr. Leith's report from observations kept at the Civil Hospital, it is stated that, on the average, the wind blows for 261.5 days between the points south-west to north-west, and for 92.9 days from an easterly direction; whilst on 8.3 and 2.3 days only, it is said to blow from due north and south. 3. The city stands on the high ground on the left bank of the River Sina, which runs along its western side at a distance varying from 50 yards opposite the Nepti Gate, to 500 yards opposite the Delhi and Maliwara Gates; but the water in it only flows in a stream after heavy rain, and at other times it presents a sandy bed. It is stated, however, that running water is always found at a short distance below the surface; at the time of my visit it was reached at a depth of about a foot; and the dhobies take advantage of this to dig long trenches, in which it flows in a slow current. The water of the river is not used for drinking purposes, as it is said to be brackish. 4. The town is surrounded by walls about 12 or 13 feet high, the founda- tions of which are built of stone, whilst the upper part consists of white mud. It possesses an historical interest to Englishmen, as it was taken by assault on the 8th August 1803 by the force under the Duke of Wellington, then General Wellesley (which during the succeeding month won the battle of Assaye); and there is built into the walls, close to the Maliwara Gate, a memorial tablet, on the spot where Captain Humberstone Mackenzie, of the 78th Highlanders, fell in the storming of the town, which now, as then, is approached by nine gates. On the north, starting from the east, are the Mungulwar, the Surjapur, the Topekhana, and the Delhi Gates; on the west, the Nalegaon and the Nepti Gates; on the south, the Maliwara; and on the east, the Bhowa Bungali and the Jeinda Gates. 5. The limits of the adjacent military cantonment, as will be seen from the accompanying map, come close up to the walls on the east, and extend on the north as far as the Simpson Bazaar, a hamlet which is contiguous to the lines of the district police; whilst on the west there are cultivated fields and gardens B 2212 stretching down to the bed of the river. On the south, also, is arable land, extending as far as the Poona road and the bridge across the confluence of the Nepti and Sina rivers, and to the open country beyond. The municipality possesses a few acres of land on the south and south-west of the town, but it for the most part belongs to private owners. 6. Outside the city are 318 houses occupied by Mahars and Mhangs, but the area within the walls is stated to be 368 acres; and in some parts the houses are much overcrowded. It is divided for municipal purposes into four divisions, the north and south-eastern, the north and south-western. There are several minor sub-divisions, which are locally known by native names; but, unfortunately, neither as regards the larger or smaller sections is it possible to state exactly the area or population of each, as these have not been calculated. 7. At the census of 1872 the population consisted of 32,841 persons, of whom 16,619 were males and 16,222 were females; and it was composed of the following castes:3 to find one's way in a straight course. The houses are built of mud, and only about one-fifth of them have tiled roofs, the remainder being constructed of mud. They are very badly ventilated, and have but few windows. Generally speaking, the doors, which, in some instances are mere holes in the wall about 3 feet square, afford the only communication with the external air. Such were seen in Mahar- wada, near the Mungulwar Gate. Sometimes an opening has been left in the mud roofs to allow of the escape of smoke, but this means of ventilation is not universal. 11. Towards the street, except in the main thoroughfares, where goods are exposed for sale in shops, the house-wall presents no opening, but access is given by a door, on passing through which, an enclosed space is found, and on either side of this the dwelling apartments are built, an open space or chouk being left in the centre. 12. Ahmednagar was declared a city municipality, under Act VI of 1873, on 4th September 1874. There are thirty-one commissioners, nine of whom are appointed ex-officio, and the remainder are nominated by Government. Out of this electoral body, eleven members are annually chosen to form a managing committee, over whom a chairman presides. 13. A halalcore cess was imposed in 1869, but I learnt with surprise that some 40 or 50 houses are allowed to be exempt from its provisions. This is en- tirely wrong. Public service ought to be enforced, without exception, on all the inhabitants, as is done in Bombay, although any person might be permitted to have the exclusive service of a municipal halalcore by paying the full rate for his services, and a slight additional sum to cover the cost of supervision. That this course is necessary in the city is clear; for, as I chanced to see in the privy attached to the Khoja Shureef Haveli, which is served by a private halalcore, there was no basket, but decomposing nightsoil was spread over the platform to the depth of 3 inches, in which there were worms, and which was flowing over the ground at the back. 14. It is stated there are 2,000 privies in the town. These are sometimes situated inside the walled enclosure, but are too often built into the wall of the house, and are, in these cases, cleaned through a trap door opening on to the public street; whilst in many instances the owner of a house has erected a private privy on the ground outside the wall of his house, and between it and the curbstone of the adjacent street. From all these privies, as well as from the bathing-places, urine and ablution-water find their way by means of a drain or trench cut in the earth, and sometimes are discharged into the roadside gutter or an absorbent cesspit, or frequently into a small earthen vessel, which soon gets choked up, when its liquid contents are thrown over the surface of the compound or road. 15. There are also about 20 wadgas, or enclosures surrounded by a mud wall, the surface of which is composed either of the bare ground, or else a raised stone-laid platform is built on the edge, of which the inhabitants of a certain number of houses to which the wadga belongs, sit, to perform the offices of nature. The ablution-water soaks into the ground, or finds its way into the road- side gutter by means of an earthen trench. 16. An accurate register of the number of persons using the privies and wadgas is kept for the purpose of the halalcore cess, and it is stated that 2,852 families, consisting of 12,280 persons (of whom 10,335 pay the rate for privies and 1,945 the wadga rate), are provided with accommodation inside the city. In addition to the above, the municipality has erected the following necessaries inside the city, and the wadga rate (6 annas per head per annum) is charged on all persons making use of them. In Anundi Bazar a necessary containing 25 seats for men and 25 for women, or a total of 50, which, at a census taken on the 4th August, was found on that day to have been used by 1,400 persons. In
4 Sitladevi, near the Topekhana Gate, another, with 16 seats for men and 14 for women, or a total of 30, which were frequented on the same day by 1,600 persons. 17. Outside the city the municipality have erected the following public necessaries, for the use of which no fee is charged:5 At Waitagwadi, near Khakedas Muth, there are 18 pits, and at the necessaries outside the Delhi Gate, near the Málegaon Road, there are, at one place 35, and at the other 20 pits. 21. The nightsoil is collected in the town by 70 municipal halalcores, who mix ashes or earth with it, and carry it in covered baskets, and deposit it in a closed iron cart, if there is one near at hand; if not, it is thrown into a wooden box placed during the morning in the public streets, from which the cartmen re- move it, and convey it to a place about half a mile to the south of the town, where the municipality rents about 30 acres of ground, immediately to the east of the Walki road. The nightsoil is then deposited in pits 24 feet long by 4 feet broad, and 4½ to 5 feet deep. This trench is filled in to within about one foot of the surface, when about 10 cart-loads of sweepings are thrown over it, and the earth dug out of the pit is heaped on the top. About 30 cart-loads of nightsoil are brought here every day, and generally one pit holds the day's supply. There are, on the ground, 350 pits, which are left undisturbed for about a year and a-half or two years. The contents are then taken out and sold to cultivators. Last year the contents of 60 pits were sold for 400 rupees. 22. The scavengering establishment kept by the municipality consist of6 north-east, from 1/2 to 11/4 mile from the town. There is also a large tanning manufactory belonging to a Bora, situated on the south-west, nearly a mile and a-half a way. 27. The water-supply is derived from wells constructed during. Mahomedan rule, situated at distances varying from 5 to 6 miles from the city, and brought into it by three conduits, consisting of earthen pipes laid in masonry, two of which are situated on the north-east, near a village called Kapurwadi. The first is called the Kapurwadi Aqueduct, and after supplying four cisterns in the native infantry lines, and giving a branch to the Kotla, it passes into the town and supplies 10 dipping-wells. The Nagabae, which has its source also at Kapurwadi, and which has only lately been repaired and restored at a cost of Rs. 60,000, of which sum Government contributed a quarter, and Mr. Dinshaw Maneckjee Petit of Bombay gave another Rs. 15,000, the remaining half being paid for by the municipality out of town duties. It supplies 12 cisterns. The third aqueduct, brought from wells near a village called Wadgaon, about 6 miles distant on the north-east of the city, supplies 33 cisterns, and the water is said to be most excellent. The open dipping-wells, by which the drinking-water in Ahmednagar is distributed, are, however, objectionable, as they allow all kinds of impurities to be mixed with it. For example, at the time of my visit at the Gunj Fountain, there was only about one foot of water in it. This is supplied by the Kapurwadi Aqueduct, and at the bottom were seen mud, leaves, stalks of Indian corn, bottles, flowers, paper, &c. The same objectionable condition was observed in other dipping-wells. The quantity of water brought in by these aqueducts is estimated to amount to about 10 or 12 gallons per head of population. There are many wells in the town, and water was seen in them at a depth of 35 to 40 feet; but it is not potable, being brackish. 28. There are three covered market-places belonging to the municipality near the Gunj: one for the sale of green vegetables, one for groceries, and the third for petty trades; and inside the walls in Kappurpura, in the north-eastern division, is a mutton-market belonging to the municipality, which contains 27 stalls. The slaughter-house for sheep is at the back. It is paved and drained, and at the time of my visit, before the day's work began, it was perfectly clean, al- though there was an offensive smell from the tub in which the offal is kept before it is carted away. Thirty-five to forty sheep are daily slaughtered here. At the back of one of the rows of mutton-stalls, and approached from the street by a separate gate, is a raised platform where dry and salt fish are sold. Outside the walls, between the Mungulwar and Surjapur Gates, is the beef-market, with 8 stalls. It was not clean at the time of my visit, as bones were lying about; and its site has not been judiciously chosen, as it is, in my opinion, too close to the Native Infantry latrines, between the walls and the Kotla. The slaughter-house for cattle, situated at the head of a nulla at Waitagwadi, is built of stone, and is enclosed by a wall, and is paved. About 8 oxen are slaughtered daily. The offal and blood are taken in carts to the neighbouring public latrines, and buried in the same pits as the nightsoil; but the offensive washings from the paved floor escape at the rear, and are received, first of all, into a cesspit, which retains some of the coagulated blood, whilst the fluid part flows into the nulla above referred to, which is about half a mile to windward of the tombs known by the name of "The Two Sisters," where the Session Judge has his residence. 29. There are about 75 kerosine-oil lamps in the main streets, which, during the months of April and May, are watered daily; and I was much pleased at the general cleanliness of the surface inside the city. In fact, I have never seen greater attention paid to this most important duty; and the roads and bye-lanes were well swept, and every privy served by municipal halalcores that I inspected, was more than fairly clean. It appeared to me that the municipality do all in their power to keep the place as clean as the present faulty arrangements permit, and the zealous and intelligent interest in all matters connected with the city
7 displayed by the energetic chairman of the managing committee, Mr. Nusserwanji Cursetji, cannot fail to exercise a very beneficial effect on the sanitary condition of the town. 30. As before stated, the household liquid-refuse, including urine, privy ablution-water, and water used by bathing or in domestic use, is either received into an absorbent cesspit, or is thrown over the surface of the ground, or finds its way into the roadside unmade gutters, where, after running for a short distance, it is, generally speaking, absorbed. There are in the city about 8 miles of such open roadside gutters, but there are about 38 fairly accurate, as no corpse can leave the city without passing through a gate where police sepoys are situated; but the registration of births is most defective, as the number of births recorded is taken from the reports of the municipal inspectors. In 1872-73 the birth-rate was stated to be 19.85, in 1873-74 it was 15.23, and in 1874-75, 13.98 per 1,000. 34. The above brief description will show the present sanitary condition of the City of Ahmednagar; and how seriously the public health is affected by it may be gathered from a perusal of the following tables, which I have extracted from the returns supplied to the Sanitary Commissioner. The number of deaths registered in the following years, in the city, were as under; these statistics are not obtainable for a longer period:9 This table is most instructive, and points forcibly to the fact, that the children were living in unhealthy conditions, such as have been shown to exist in the unventilated houses; and in an atmosphere which was tainted by the saturation of the subsoil with the urine and sullage of the inhabitants. The deaths, accord- ing to castes, are thus classified:10 away the storm-water, might, in my opinion, wisely determine to lay glazed stone ware pipes down the centre of the streets. I think that 4-inch pipes would be ample for the house connections, through which the urine, the water used in the privy for ablution, and at the washing-places would pass clear away from the houses, and might be received in the upper part of the district into pipes 6 inches in diameter, and these again might communicate with 9-inch pipes, which, in my opinion, would affored a sufficient waterway. The level of the fields on the north-west side of the town is higher than the bed of the nulla through which the sullage now flows; arrangements would, therefore, have to be made11 Whilst standing they are constant sources of danger to passers-by; and the properties should be enclosed, as they otherwise become depôts of filth. 40. The streets should be named, and the width of each street in the city should be determined upon, and marked on the map; and whenever an application is received for building or rebuilding a house, set-backs should be most rigidly enforced; and every effort should be made to open out the covered portion of the road-side gutters, which should, in order to prevent the saturation of the sub- soil, be paved with stones laid in the form of the letter U. 41. No private privies should be allowed to be built inside houses, their erection should be discouraged as much as possible; but if permitted, their isola- tion by an air-space of 3 feet all round should be insisted upon, and no privy trap- doors should be allowed to open into a public street. Wherever two or more properties adjoin, a sweeper's passage, which should be paved and which should communicate with a drain, should be left to give access to the backs of the privies; and I am of opinion, that as the wadgas are dangerous to the public health, they ought to be abolished; but, before this action is taken, the municipa- lity ought to erect a greater number of public necessaries. 42. I also think that the burial of nightsoil at the public necessaries situated within a few yards of the Málegaon Road and at Waitagwadi is objection- able, and ought not to be continued, as, not only is it dangerous to the health of the lime-kiln burners and others in the neighbourhood, but it is too near the police lines and to the officers' quarters in the adjoining military cantonment. 43. The floor of the principal places of deposit of cutchra in the town ought to be paved, as at present, in many instances, I saw a hollow and irregular surface from which the cutchra was not removed; and the cultivators living in Maliwara ought not any longer to be allowed to store their household refuse close to their houses. If they require it for agriculture they should be made to remove it every day to their fields. 44. The indigo-dyeing manufactories are offensive, and, in my opinion, dangerous to the public health, and they ought to be removed outside the town, and the potters' places should be very carefully inspected and licensed, and no license should be granted for a new place. 45. The offensive trades outside the town ought to be carried on under a license from the municipality, and the construction of masonry-drains and the daily removal of offensive matter from these places, should be insisted upon. 46. The beef market should, for reasons stated in a former part of the report, be removed from its present site. 47. I was sorry to see the city walls being repaired in places; they obstruct the ventilation in the town, and might advantageously be removed or allowed to fall down. 48. In many vacant places prickly-pear has been allowed to grow with the luxuriance it always exhibits, but it ought to be eradicated. 49. The wooden boxes now placed in the streets, as temporary places for the deposit for nightsoil, ought not to be permitted. If it is impossible to do away with them, an iron box, holding charcoal in the lid, should be substituted for them. 50. The burning places for Hindus should be selected at some distance to the south of the town, and a site should be chosen in the same direction for Mussul- men and low-caste Hindu graveyards. 51. I am given to understand that a set of bye-laws to regulate offensive and dangerous trades, the registration of births and deaths, &c., has just been
12 drawn up; but before it is passed, I would venture to hope that it may be forwarded to the Sanitary Commissioner for any remarks he may have to offer. 52. In conclusion, I would desire to express my especial acknowledgments to Mr. Boswell, the Collector, who gave me every assistance in his power, and to Captain Daniell, the Superintendent of the District Police, who is an active Municipal Commissioner, and who was good enough to accompany me in one of my visits to the town: whilst I would again desire to bring prominently to the notice of Government the enlightened zeal of Mr. Nusserwanji Cursetji, the Chairman of the Municipal Committee, who also accompanied us round the city, and to whom I am under Obligation for much valuable information, and who is ably seconded by the Secretary, Mr. Nusserwanji Cursetji Settna. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, T. G, HEWLETT, Acting Sanitary Commissioner. [Table.
13 Comparative Statement showing the Receipts and Disbursements compared with the Budget Amount for the Year 1874-75. No. Heads. Actual Amount. Budget Amount. Increase. Decrease. Remarks. Receipts. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p, Rs. a. p. Opening Balance on 1st April 1874 9,208 0 6 7,000 0 0 2,208 0 6 ......... House Tax 9,061 0 4 5,700 0 0 3,361 0 4 ......... Octroi 14,528 12 9 12,000 0 0 2,528 12 9 ......... Bhungi Cess 11,515 4 11 9,000 0 0 2,515 4 11 ......... Miscellaneous 6,565 13 6 3,365 0 0 3,200 13 6 ......... Total 50,879 0 0 37,065 0 0 13,814 0 0 ......... Total Receipts, excluding Balance 41,670 15 6 30,065 0 0 11,605 15 6 ......... Net Increase. Advances recovered and Deposits. 2,585 9 0 ......... 2,595 9 0 ......... Total Receipts 44,256 8 6 30,065 0 0 14,191 8 6 ......... Expenditure. Permanent Establishment 6,897 5 3 6,899 0 0 ......... 1 10 9 Conservancy and Bhungi, &c. *15,120 9 8 14,119 0 0 1,001. 9 8 ......... *This item of actual expenditure includes the sum of Rs. 1,731-8-6 on account of Bhungi Cess remission; hence the Increase over the Budget amount. Medical 400 0 0 400 0 0 ......... ......... School 300 0 0 480 0 0 ......... 180 0 0 Vaccination 248 15 2 258 0 0 ......... 9 0 10 Original Works 7,358 11 4 8,043 0 0 ......... 684 4 8 Repairs 3,151 2 9 4,240 0 0 ......... 1,088 13 3 Tools and Plant 1,715 6 4 2,094 0 0 ......... 378 9 8 Total 35,192 2 6 36,533 0 0 1,001 9 8 2,342 7 2 Net Decrease He. 1,340-13-4. Advances and Deposits repaid 2,585 9 0 ......... 2,585 9 0 ......... Total 37,777 11 6 36,533 0 0 3,587 2 8 2,342 7 2 Net increase Rs. 1,244 11-6. Closing Balance 15,686 13 6 532 0 0 15,154 13 6 ........ Grand Total 53,464 9 0 37,065 0 0 18,742 0 2 2,342 7 2 Rs. a. p. Opening Balance 9,208 0 6 Receipts 44,256 8 6 Total 53,464 9 0 Deduct Expenditure 37,777 11 6 Closing Bolance 15,686 13 6 (Signed) N. CURSETJEE, Chairman, N..M. B 22114 Abstract of Articles manufactured and prepared in The City of Aldnednagar and Bhingár, 1874-75. No. Names. Average Value. Remarks. Rs. 1,50,000 Sadies and loogdas 4,50,000 Nagar and Bhingár. 2,400 Turbans 3,000 Nagar. Kumblees, or black blankets 2,875 " and Bhingár. Nagar carpets 1,000 " Brass pots and plates 1,51,200 " Copper pots do. 2,88,000 " Bell metal 64,800 " Kurdy-oil 13,600 " Oil-cakes 8,100 " Snuff 5,400 " Koonkoo 1,000 " Scented iol,. abeer, &c 500 " Burnt bricks 8,100 " and Bhingar. " tiles 9,000 " " " chunam 3,840 " " Gunpowder and fireworks 4,000 " Silk, dyed 1,00,000 " Earthen pottery 2,161 " and Bhingar Total Rs. 11,61,141 (Signed) N. CURSETJEE, Chairman, N. M. Abstract of the Trade Return of the City of Ahmednagar for the Year 1874-75 ending 31st March 1875. No. of Carts. Names. Value. Remarks. Rs. 49,800 Grain, &c. 11,51,785 Produce of district. 1,140 Metal. 2,68,800 Bombay. 1,488 Cloth and yarn 12,28,606 Do. and district. 5,255 Grocery, &c, 7,40,326 District. 280 Europe wine, ale, and store 71,500 Bombay. 286 Glass and china, &c, 46,725 Do. 14,606 Salt, cotton, &c. 24,99,4401 Bombay, Nizam, and District. 570 Dyeing bark and material 18,300 District and Bombay. 1,125 Building material 27,025 Nagar and Násik. 21,588 Cattle and animals 97,280 District. 9,178 Fruits, melon, and sugar-cane 29,562 Do. 5,209 Vegetables; &c. 56,511 Do. 228 Hides and skin 16,296 Do. 31,900 Fodder and fuel 76,200 Do. Precious metals and stones, &c. 3,50,000 Bombay and District. Total Rs 66,44,566 Articles manufactured, &c., in the city and Bhingár, 11,16,575 11,16,575...Nagar and Bhingár, Grand Total Rs. ...... 77,61,141 Estimate of a cart with two bullocks, to carry four pullas of 120 seers of grain = weighing average of 1,400 lbs. (Signed) N. CURSETJEE Chairman, N. M.
No. 3028. GENERAL DEPARTMENT. Bombay Castle, 4th October 1875. Letter from the Acting Sanitary Commissioner, No. A-749, dated the 14th August 1875PART III. REPORTS ON CIVIL STATIONS INSPECTED IN 1876. Satara. Kolhápur. Belgaum. Dharwar. Sholápur. Bijápur. B 221
REPORT ON THE SANITARY CONDITION OF THE TOWN OF SATARA. Inspected in July 1876. Satara, the principal town of the Collectorate of that name, is situated in latitude 17° 31' N. and longitude 74° 3' 45" E., at an elevation of 2,320 feet above mean sea level and at a distance of about 60 miles from the coast. The town lies 68 miles to the south of Poona, and 76 miles to the north of Kolhápur, and has been built on the slope below a range of hills which form the termination of a spur running down from the Western Gháts near the hill station of Mahableshwar, which is 29 miles distant to the north-west. 2. Table-land extends along the summit of these hills as far as Maha- bleshwar, but it varies very much in width; at Satara it terminates in a rock the highest peak of which is about 1,500 feet above the town, and below this there is the sacred temple of Yawateshwar, which gives the name to the hill from which a bold, bluff, flat-topped rock projects immediately on the north-west of the town, and from this the cliff recedes somewhat in the form of a horse-shoe, and rapidly slopes down to a point on the south-west, where it has been tun- nelled to form a roadway. 3. On the south the trap-rock has again been elevated to a height of about 900 feet, and forms a steep-sided, flat-topped cliff known as Manglai Devi, or the Fort, which extends for about 1,100 yards in length from west to east. Its summit is in the shape of a triangle, the base of which is about 660 yards broad, and is surrounded by a wall along the edge of the rock, which has been scarped for a height of about 40 feet all round. It is memorable for its defence in 1699 under Pryagji Parbhu, Havildar, when it was besieged by the Em- peror Aurungzib, and traces of the siege are to this day visible. On the top are seven tanks, which are stated to hold water all the year round; and there is one large building erected by the late Rajah, which is occasionally used as a barrack. The other buildings are in a state of decay and are falling down. 4. From the parapet wall a magnificent view of the surrounding country is obtained. Immediately below the Fort, the town attracts attention, and is seen to be well wooded, and partly sheltered on the north-west by the Yawateshwar range, and completely so on the west and south by the connecting saddle-backed ridge and the fort. The different spurs running from the Western Gháts in a south-easterly direction stand out like giant buttresses, enclosing between them fertile valleys, along the centre of which rivers, fed by the springs along the high land, and by the rain falling on the adjacent hills, run a rapid course, and are dis- charged into the river Krishna, which intercepts the water derived from the eastern slopes of the Western Gháts, and after draining an area of 94,500 square miles, at length discharges itself, after a course of 800 miles, into the Bay of Bengal. The immediate district near Satara is thus watered by the river Vena, which runs along the valley to the north-west, and joins the Krishna at Máhuli, a village belonging to the Pant Pratinidhi, and situated about 3 miles to the east of the town. On the south-western side of the Yawateshwar range is the valley of the Urmori River, which is also a tributary of the Krishna. B 2732 5. On the east, at about the distance of 12 or 15 miles, is the Mahadeo range of hills, among which Dhávadsi, sacred to Bhárgaw Rama, and the hill forts of Chandan, Wandan, and Nandgiri stand out conspicuously; whilst the huge hill of Jaranda, sacred to Hanuman, is seen raising his vast crest about 6 miles to the east of the town. 6. The rock of which the hills in the vicinity is composed consists of trap, capped in some places, as at Yawateshwar, with laterite; but in the town itself the soil varies in depth from 2 or 3 feet to perhaps 15 or 20, and consists of a soft, spongy, easily friable moorum overlying the hard trap-rock. 7. The town is, as I have stated, situated on a slope, and I am indebted to the kindness of Major Lee, R.E., the Executive Engineer at Satara, for the accompanying tracing, showing the levels in it, by which it will be seen how excel- lent the natural facilities for drainage are, and how steep the gradient between the upper and lower portions of the town is. The slope is generally from south-west to north-east, and the storm-water is carried off from the west by a large nullah called the Krineshwar, which arises in the hills beyond the Mahárdara springs in the curve formed by the Yawateshwar range; whilst that from the steep precipitous sides on the south of the fort is conveyed by six nullahs which flow through the town and, like the Krineshwar, eventually discharge themselves into the Vena River; all these nullahs dry up after the rainy season is over. 8. The following statement, for which I am indebted to the kindness of Dr. Colson, the Civil Surgeon, shows the rain-fall as registered at the Civil Hos- pital during 22 years ending 1875:3 January. February. March. April. May. June. July. August. September. October. November. December. Year. 44 .04 .10 .81 1.86 7.32 13.60 7.77 4.37 4.26 1.02 .04 41.99 9. The prevailing wind is westerly, as will be seen from the following table, which shows the average number of days during a year on which the wind blew at Satara from the undermentioned points of the compass. The figures are taken from the observations registered at the Civil Hospital:4 No. Name of Peth. Area of Peth. Total number of persons in each peth. Persons to a square mile in each peth. Number of square yards to each person in each peth. Acres. Guntas. 1 Shukrawar... 132 39 906 4,360 710 2 Venkatpura... 26 25 963 23,148 133 3 Chimanpura... 65 37 520 5,048 613 4 Yadogopal... 42 25 1,086 16,305 189 5 Máchi... 27 9 211 4,960 624 6 Bhawáni... 34 5 867 16,260 190 7 Pratápganj... 12 7 747 39,267 78 8 SadashiA... 11 9 687 39,169 79 9 Kesarkar... 27 38 589 13,486 229 10 Durga... 2 0 284 90,880 34 11 Rajaspura... 16 21 164 6,351 487 12 Pantáchágote... 10 34 195 11,502 269 13 Somwar... 26 7 1,887 46,138 67 14 Mangalwar... 86 7 2,530 18,790 164 15 Ramáchagote... 42 25 1,250 18,768 165 16 Malhar and Raviwar... 61 27 773 8,021 386 17 Raghunathpura... 11 3 439 25,368 122 18 Budhwar... 34 28 1,045 19,267 160 19 Basappa... 2 16 193 51,466 60 20 Guruwar... 77 0 3,044 25,300 122 21 Shanwar... 94 33 4,239 28,610 108 22 Sadar Bazar... 28 2 1,367 31,190 99 I must here remark that the population given in this table is taken from a Census made last year, and that these figures do not correspond with those given in the Census for 1872. Unfortunately, and as I consider wrongly, the Census papers have been destroyed by, it is said, the order of Government; the conse- quence being that I am obliged to show a different population to that on which all our statistics regarding birth and deaths are based. 14. The population of the town at the time of the Census in 1872 amount- ed to 24,484 persons, of whom 12,718 were males and 11,766 were females, being in the proportion of 108.09 males to every 100 females, and it consisted of:5 to great shifts. There are three other tanks approached by steps leading down into them in which water is stored, and in the town there are 425 wells; but they nearly all are said to run dry during the hot weather. Besides the above there are 7 other tanks in the town, the water of which is brackish and not used for drinking. It is estimated that the Yawateshwar and Mahárdara supply together yield about 20 gallons per head, except in April, May, and June, when it dwindles down to something like 3 or 4 gallons per head, or even less. 16. The public dipping-wells in Satara are raised stone cisterns, about 3 or 4 feet deep, and are divided into separate partitions, for the exclusive use of different castes of Hindus and for Musalmans, there being no less than 34 for the exclusive use of Brahmins, 35 for Marathas, and 11 for Musalmans. The despised Mahar and Mang are not allowed to enter the enclosures where Hindus of caste draw water; and in some quarters of the town, until lately, under the energetic rule of Mr. Moore, the Collector, no provision was made by which they could obtain it. Now at certain fountains persons of caste are paid by the Municipality to distribute the water to these low caste people outside the enclo- sure, and at other places separate cisterns outside have been provided for their use. 17. At most of these dipping-wells, men and women were observed clean- ing their copper vessels on the stone ledge running round the cisterns, or dipping into it dirty leathern buckets, whilst the mud off their naked feet was in some instances washed into the cistern. All this is wrong. The water should be distributed, as at Pandharpur, from brass cocks let into raised iron pipes standing about 3 feet above the surface of the ground. Or, if that plan is not feasible, as at Ahmedabad, where it is drawn off through brass cocks from a masonry (preferably from a cast-iron) cistern of such length that 26 people can draw water at one time. If this plan is adopted, a cistern in the shape of a Maltese cross will be found to afford great facilities for a large number of people to draw water simultaneously. 18. In every case the ground outside and below the cistern should be paved on a slope leading away from it, and the wastage water should be conveyed through a glazed stoneware pipe to a drain. This course is necessary to preserve the purity of the water and to prevent its getting fouled by dust being blown into it, or by leaves or flowers, &c., being thrown or dropped into it (instances of which I saw), or by dirty feet and hands, dirty utensils, &c., &c., being washed in it. 19. There are stated to be 4,426 houses in the town, 109 of which are of the better sort and 4,317 of inferior description. The better kind are built on a plinth of cut-stone on which a brick house is erected sometimes for 2 or 3 stories high. There is, I regret to say, no record to show the number. The inferior class of houses have a rubble plinth, and are built up with brick, which is in some casts plastered over with mud and cow-dung; and there is a large number of mud hovels, although I am unable to state the exact number, as no record of them has been kept. All the houses in Satara are covered with the flat brick tiles made in the town. 20. As seen in all towns which in olden times were exposed to sudden incursions of marauding bands, the principal houses present only a dead wall to the street and are approached through a gateway leading into an inclosed but open courtyard with a verandah running all round. The rooms on the upper stories have windows facing the courtyard. 21. The inferior houses, though having doors opening into the street, have, as a rule, no windows, or those only of small size, and the only means of ventila- tion is through the doorway, which is closed at night. Such places are unwhole- some. A bad instance might be mentioned, is a house I saw in Shanwar Peth, where the floor of the room, in which a Musalman lived with his wife and 3 B 2736 children, was about 2 or 3 feet below the surface of the road, and the door, the sill of which was on a level with the roadway, was about 3 feet high, and, when open, afforded the only means of entrance of air to the dark, unwholesome den these people lived in. 22. About a quarter of the houses in Satara are provided with private privies, there being 1,040 in the town. These are sometimes built inside the house, but they have been mostly erected in the corner of the compound, and are there- fore detached. They are for the most part cleaned from the street, the trap-door being screened by a wall from the public view. Below them a bamboo-basket, not cow-dunged or made water-tight, is placed over, generally speaking, a paved bot- tom; but nearly every one I saw, and I inspected some hundreds, was filthy to the last degree, because no means had been provided to carry away the urine and ablu- tion water, as there are no made drains in the town. This consequently stagnates, putrifies, and emits a very bad stench. One of the worst examples was found in the privies attached to the municipal offices. They had evidently not been cleaned for some time previously, though bhangis were in the act of hastily cleaning them when I came round after inspecting the office. The floor of the privy is some feet below the surface of the ground at the back, and there is no drain from it. The bamboo-baskets, although dinner leaves are put into them by the bhangis, do not even retain all the solid matter, as I saw some floating in the liquid filth below. This of course sinks, and a deposit is formed which is occasionally thrown out over the surrounding ground. 23. There are 25 covered public necessaries and 14 open ones in the town. Most of the covered public privies have 12 seats, 6 for men and 6 for women, and are approached by separate entrances for each sex. They were all offensive, because they are of wrong construction. The seats consist of raised stone slab-foot rests, and below the slit in the centre is an iron-bucket; but the men frequenting them do not make water in too many cases into the bucket, but over the front, so that in some places pools of urine were seen. At the back is a passage for the sweeper, and adjoining it there is a shed for dry-earth, which was not however used; for on the open ground outside, and exposed to view, a wooden cask about 3½ to 4 feet high is placed, into which the contents of the iron-buckets are emptied, and where the night-soil remains during the day until it is removed by a cart at night; and this cask is the depôt to which the bhangis bring the filth from the private privies in the neighbourhood, the consequence being that the ground around was in too many cases found to be fouled in the most horrible manner, as in the process of emptying the casks by buckets, and pouring the filth into the carts, the night-soil had been spilt on the ground. Such was seen at several of the public privies inspected, and the smell from the cask was very offensive. The water from the inside of the latrines is allowed to run into a rubble masonry cesspit about 8 feet long by 2 feet broad and 6 feet deep, in one of which 4 feet of thick black filthy decomposing slush, giving off a large amount of sulphuretted hydrogen, were measured. Many of these cesspools have been built close to nullahs. For example the one in Budhwar Peth was a few feet above the nullah, and the filth from it must percolate into this water-course, in which people were washing their clothes a little lower down at the time of my visit. The public privies have in some instances been erected too close to inhabited houses, as, for example, in Bubasabol and Timbatalli. 24. The removal of the night-soil from the town is effected under the super- intendence of 2 inspeotors; and there are only 38 bhangis in Satara for service both in the town and Sadar Bazar, 28 of whom are employed at the 1,040 private privies, so that each man has on the average 37 privies to clean. 25. There are only 2 iron and 8 wooden night-soil carts for the removal of the filth, and they make only eleven trips during the night. The filth is taken to Genda Mal, an open space on the north, but which is said to be only 633
7 yards from the town, where it is deposited in pits 10 feet long by 7 feet broad and 6 feet deep, dug in the moorum. There are here altogether 330 such pits. To this place also all dead animals are removed and buried. 26. A privy tax was introduced in 1863-64, but was abolished on the 31st July 1866, when a house-tax was substituted for it. 27. The surface conservancy is very badly performed, as there are only 13 scavengers for street sweeping, and no attempt is made to remove the cutchra from inside private properties. There are 22 enclosed places in the town where refuse is deposited by the inhabitants. The Municipality have no carts for the removal of the garbage, as a contract was entered into this year by which it was sold to the Kumbhars or Potters, who agreed to remove it daily by donkeys to their brick kilns, which are situated as under:8 to the east, and only about 2 or 300 yards distant, and the Jail is on the opposite side of the road to them. There is no artificial drainage from any of these places, which were extremely filthy, and the smell from them was very bad. The remainder of the tanners are located in Venkatpura Peth on the windward side of the town. There are also 9 dyers, 2 of whom are dyers in Indigo, and the remainder in kasumba. They are all small places, but the Indigo vats should not be allowed inside the houses. None of these persons who carry on an offensive trade are licensed. 32. There is one large fruit and vegetable market belonging to the Muni- cipality in Sadashiv Peth in which there are 284 stalls; but on Monday a market for the sale of grain, &c., is held on the open space in front of the old Palace; and on Thursdays and Saturdays on the site of the old Jail in Shanwar Peth. 33. The fish and mutton market is also in Sudashiv Peth on the bank of a nullah. It simply consists of an open space enclosed by a brick and tiled build- ing in which there are 14 stalls for mutton butchers and 10 for the vendors of dry fish. There are 34 mutton butchers in the town, and about 8 sheep and goats are slaughtered daily. The so-called slaughter-yard is on the bank of the nullah where the ground has been paved, but no arrangements have been made for the catching of blood, &c. It was indescribably filthy at the time of my visit. Pieces of offal mingled with the half liquid contents of the intes- tines were seen flowing down to the nullah. The filth is supposed to be removed by a halalcore, but, at all events, it had not been removed on the morning I inspected it. 34. These markets are a source of considerable revenue, as I find that in 1872-73 they brought in a maximum sum of Rs. 2,746 by way of fees. Last year only Rs. 1,918 were realized under this item. 35. The principal grains sold in the market are rice, jowari, and bajri, and dhall, toor, gram, mung, massur, besides ghee, are much used as food in this District. Vegetables seem to grow well in Satara, and the market is well supplied 36. There are no separate stables for milch cattle in Satara. The owners. keep them by twos or threes in their houses, or in sheds at the back. All such places inspected were extremely filthy, as there are no drains to carry off the urine, &c. 37. The number of animals counted at the Census will be seen below:9 taken to Máhuli, where they are buried; but I am informed that burials of children occasionally take place in the courtyards of houses inside the town. The Christian graveyard for Europeans is on the east of the Station, between the Rahimatpur and Máhuli Roads, and that for the Portuguese is in the north of the Station near the Roman Catholic church. The Parsees have a dokhma on the hill over the Kolhápur Road, about two miles from the Station, beyond the Godoli Tank. 39. The above is a brief description of the sanitary condition of the town of Satara, and I will now speak of the camp; but in doing so will confine my re- marks in this Report to the Sadar Bazar, which forms a distinct peth, supervised by the Municipality. It is to the north-east of the town, and covers an area of 28 acres 2 guntas. Its population is stated to amount to 1,740 persons; and although the people residing there pay the same taxes as the residents in the town, they have but few of its advantages. The water-supply, which is most inadequate, is derived from seven wells, and I am informed that when these dry up the people are obliged to go to the Vena, at the distance of about a mile. There are 425 houses in this peth and 101 privies. All of those I saw were in the same filthy condition as they are in the town. There is one covered Municipal privy to the east of the bazar, and 5 open ones, which Mr. Moore has done a great deal of good by having had placed in suitable spots near the habitations, as the people have not too far to go to obey the calls of nature. The Conservancy establishment consists of one nuisance inspector, 2 road sweepers, and 3 bhangis. There is one iron night-soil cart, and the filth is removed to Genda Mal. There are 2 dust-boxes, but the roads, 8½ miles in aggregate length, are not very clean; the slaughter-house for the bazar is simply a shed on the east, and the ground is saturated with blood and filth, and emits a very offensive odour. There are here daily slaughtered about 2 oxen and 4 sheep belonging to the 18 butchers, who live in the bazar. Their shops are bad, though the one belonging to the con- tractor is a tolerably good one. The bones and offal are buried in pits near the shed. The Native Infantry Lines are for their own safety in much too close proximity to the bazar, as only 135 yards intervene between them and it. 40. The registration of births and deaths is conducted under the manage- ment of the police, and is, I think, untrustworthy. The town is divided into 10 beats, in each of which there is a chouki in charge of a Naik, who is responsible that all births and deaths in his division are duly reported to the Fouzdar, by whom they are tabulated. All the Naik can do is to go round his division and inquire from the residents whether any birth or death has occurred. By this course I have no doubt that many births and deaths escape registration. It is right to state that last year there were 812 births registered, equal to 33.16 per 1,000 of population; but the system is for all that a wrong one. 41. The number of deaths registered in the following years will be seen below:10 So that although from its salubrious climate and from its great natural advantages, Satara ought to be one of the healthiest towns in Western India, yet it is not; and that the cause of this is due to the neglect of sanitation, will be seen from the next table, which shows the different causes of deaths:11 It is sad to think that nearly half of the total deaths occur among the young, and this statement is the key-stone of the others. The conditions under which these poor little ones are brought up are so bad that life is cut short. How impure must be the milk obtained from cattle, who eat human ordure ! How vitiated must be the atmosphere, when there is no outlet for air tainted with the exhala- tions from human beings to escape! The table affords matters for most serious thought, and deserves the best attention of the Municipal Commissioners, who must remember that their first duty is to provide for the health of the people they represent. 43. The deaths according to caste are thus classified:12 but that during last year it amounted to Rs. 37,186. The expenditure for 1875 reached Rs. 34,604, and there is a balance, I am informed by the Secretary, of Rs. 6,551. The annual expenditure for conservancy was during 1875 Rs. 10,454. The rate of Municipal taxation per head of population was in 1872 Rs. 1-3-10. 46. I think enough has been said to prove that Satara stands in need of improvement in nearly all matters pertaining to its sanitary condition, which I must say is very bad. The Collector, Mr. Moore, to whom I can never sufficiently express my acknowledgments for all the willing and zealous aid he has, to his own personal discomfort, afforded me so amply during my visit, is fully alive to the necessity of taking measures to improve the sanitary condition of the town and station. The great difficulty in the way of effecting improvement is that so universally experienced in India,13 In the same way there would be14 may be raised to night-soil carts going through the streets by day. The answer is, which is safer for the inhabitants: that they should have their night-soil putrify- ing all day long close to their habitations, or be exposed to the temporary annoyance of meeting a night-soil cart? Besides, if a night-soil cart smells, it is an evidence of carelessness. Water should be provided at the place of deposit and filling, and the cart should be thoroughly washed before leaving either. So little offence was noticeable in Bombay from these carts, that children have been observ- ed chalking on them as they were passing along the road, mistaking them for water-carts. The pit system adopted is not a good one. A very large surface is exposed, which scents the breeze for a long distance. I think Genda Mal is too near the town, and should be glad to see a site chosen at the distance of at least a mile away from it. If the returns supplied by the Civil Hospital are trust- worthy, the wind blows less frequently from the north-west than any other quarter. I should, however, be disposed to doubt the accuracy of the observations, but it is clear that the northern site of the town is the only one to which the filth can be removed, as on the west, south, and east there are no sites procur- able. I would prefer a site to the north-east, but none such, I am informed, is available. Instead of the pits now in use, I think that the system which obtains in the North-West Provinces might with advantage be adopted. "Trenches two feet wide and one foot deep being dug at intervals of a foot, 3 inches of night-soil are put into each and then covered with the original earth. A field once thoroughly manured in this way will produce a succession of crops of different vegetables if sown in proper rotation." If such a system as I have indicated is carried out, the strength of the halalcores and of the night-soil carts will have to be increased. In Bombay, it is found that a bhangi can only keep 20 houses thoroughly clean; but allowing that the 28 men are enough to clean the 1,040 existing privies, there should be at each depôt a cart, so that the number of night-soil bullocks must be somewhat increased. They now make 11 trips. Then they would have to make 25; but it is presumed that one pair of bullocks might easily work 2 carts, so that the increase, except in carts, need not be large. 51. The Municipality has done well in providing so many public necessaries, but I think even more are required. In my opinion the inexpensive open ones Mr. Moore has had put up round the Sadar Bazar are very good, as they entirely screen persons using them from the public view, and they can easily be shifted. 52. The removal of the surface garbage demands immediate attention. It is now simply not done. The potters send in their donkeys when it suits them to do so, and remove as much, or rather as little, as they please. The contract system, however convenient to the Municipality in saving trouble, is utterly opposed to every principle of sanitation and to the best interests of the inhabitants. It is the contractor's interest to get paid as highly as possible for doing as little work as he can. Here the potters simply do not carry out the terms of their contracts, and only the mildest measures are put into force to compel them. In the meantime, the health of the inhabitants suffers. The Municipality should at once provide itself with a staff of carts and road sweepers. 53. The town for conservancy purposes should be divided into not less than 2 wards, and if, as I suggest, there is an Inspector over the whole town, there should be a Sub-Inspector in each ward, which should be sub-divided into sections, over each of which there should be a Mukadam, and to each Sub-Inspec- tor should be told off a certain number of coolies and carts. And then it will be possible to fix responsibility. If a street is found dirty, the Mukadam should be fined; if it be found dirty a second time, he should be dismissed, and the Sub-In- spector should be fined. Sub-division into sections over which there is a respon- sible head, is one of the great principles of successful practical sanitation. The refuse should not be allowed to be deposited in the town, but should be taken to the place of the night-soil deposit, and there burnt. Each householder might
15 assist the work by burning on his premises the refuse that will burn, depositing the incombustible on the roadway to be removed by the Municipal carts or the ashes might be collected at the houses by the bhangis and thrown into the night- soil pan at the privies. 54. The owners of ruinous houses should be made to remove the debris and clean the surface, and enclose their properties, so as to prevent their being defiled. 55. The following offensive trades should be licensed annually, and should be removed from the interior of the town, and only allowed on a site to be approved of by the Municipality:16 neglect of this registration might be allowed to go to the informant; at the same time, as a further check, every graveyard or cremation ghat should be registered, and the person in charge should be compelled to keep a correct account of the number of bodies disposed of, and to furnish a record of the necessary particulars regarding such to the Police. 59. There is much need of a proper mutton slaughter-house; the present place is very bad. The steps leading down to the reservoirs of the Mahardara water should be at once closed; if people want to draw water from them, it should be drawn by means of an iron chain and iron bucket. 60. As an essential part of good Municipal government the streets should be named and the houses numbered. 61. I cannot, in conclusion, do better than recommend the frequent lime- washing of the interior of houses, as the application of lime effectually destroys oranic germs. This should be done at least twice a yearSTATEMENT showing the Disbursements of the Satara Municipality from. the Year 1853-54 to 1875-76. B 27318 STATEMENT Municipal Receipts from the Year 1853-54 to the Year 1875-76. No. YEAR. Town Duties Snuff Tax. Market Fees. Miscellaneous. Contribu- tions from different sources. Unadjusted Receipts. Sums received on account of Unadjusted Advances. Proceeds from the sale of Unservic- able Dead Stock. Privy Tax. House Tax. Station Fund. Pound Fund. Total Receipts. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 Rs. a. p. Rs. a p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. 1 1853-54 7,266 15 5 195 0 0 585 2 3 24 8 1 1,556 10 7 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 9,628 4 4 2 1854-55 10,020 0 0 227 8 4 1,003 1 9 29 0 3 80 0 1 56 10 8 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 11,416 5 1 3 1855-56 10,262 6 2 235 7 2 826 2 0 46 13 0 ...... ...... 106 0 0 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 11,456 12 4 4 1856-57 10,387 2 3 207 12 8 1,355 11 0 42 1 0 ...... ...... ...... ...... ..... ...... ...... ...... 11,992 10 11 5 1857-58 11,951 4 3 205 0 4 1,008 13 0 77 6 3 ...... 25 0 0 10 0 0 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 13,277 7 10 6 1858-59 12,555 5 1 207 14 9 1,039 14 0 119 1 4 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 13,922 3 2 7 1859-60 11,500 0 0 160 0 0 1,320 4 4 330 9 1 ..... 2 14 5 478 8 2 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 13,792 4 0 8 1860-61 10,950 0 0 165 0 0 1,022 3 1 403 3 5 ...... ...... 860 0 3 70 13 4 ...... ...... ...... ...... 13,471 4 1 9 1861-62 12,300 0 0 175 0 0 1,296 9 3 3.781 8 4 ...... 1,483 0 0 398 6 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 19,431 7 8 10 1862-63 12,400 0 6 170 0 0 1,533 9 2 1,808 15 6 ...... 1.084 7 0 155 0 0 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 17,151 15 8 11 1863-64 10,800 0 0 160 0 0 1,405 0 2 1,496 3 0 ...... 1.204 0 0 907 8 7 34 15 3 ...... ...... ...... ...... 16,007 11 0 12 1864-65 10,245 0 0 120 0 0 1,292 6 3 896 2 4 ..... 1.009 0 0 1,105 13 3 ..... 963 8 0 ...... ...... ...... 15,631 13 10 13 1865-66 10,460 0 0 160 0 0 1,368 14 7 633 4 3 ...... 1.030 0 9 116 10 4 2 2 6 1,868 12 9 ...... ...... ...... 15,669 13 2 14 1866-67 10,802 0 0 145 0 0 1,169 19 10 2,743 5 3 ...... 1,131 8 7 411 15 2 55 9 7 622 11 0 3,125 8 0 ...... ...... 20,507 6 5 15 1867-68 9,900 0 0 115 0 0 1,783 14 6 8.199 1 6 ...... 5,905 3 7 3.285 0 9 284 15 0 504 13 8 7,877 5 4 1017 8 6 ...... 38,372 14 10 16 1868-69 15,887 0 0 120 0 0 1,291 4 4 1,822 8 7 ...... 1,712 5 4 8,113 10 9 141 13 1 3 8 0 6,899 6 0 1000 0 0 ...... 37,051 11 10 17 1869-70 15,300 0 0 121 2 0 1,537 15 6 4,865 7 8 ...... 886 2 4 292 8 2 197 14 5 609 4 6 5,719 2 0 1000 0 0 124 4 4 30,653 12 11 18 1870-71 15,341 9 0 140 0 0 1,901 2 7 376 3 3 701 14 10 4,195 9 0 114 7 10 30 15 2 ...... 9,783 2 9 1000 0 0 98 12 4 33,743 12 9 19 1871-72 17,360 7 0 120 0 0 1,399 6 9 854 9 10 6870 13 6 1,020 15 0 2,445 3 5 1,256 0 8 ...... 4,932 2 8 1000 0 0 96 10 0 37,356 4 10 20 1872.73 16,000 0 0 120 0 0 2,746 7 3 947 9 10 ...... 1,370 5 4 1,628 7 8 116 14 3 ...... 5,942 9 4 1000 0 0 8 4 0 29,880 9 8 21 1873-74 18,055 0 0 120 0 0 1,775 6 0 754 6 6 40 0 0 1,220 13 6 364 8 11 50 8 0 ...... 4,767 5 4 1074 4 0 8 13 0 28,231 1 3 22 1874-75 15,280 7 6 100 0 0 2,165 1 11 48 4 3 ...... 3,332 0 10 ...... ...... ...... 6,167 10 7 1041 0 0 84 3 0 28,218 12 1 23 1875-76 20,854 1 9 80 0 0 1,918 9 0 1.782 2 10 ..... 2,170 10 10 2,123 2 5 ...... ...... 7,146 8 3 1000 0 0 111 4 3 37,186 7 4 Total Rs... 2,95,879 8 2 3,569 13 3 33,106 11 6 32,082 7 0 9249 7 0 28,900 11 2 22,946 15 9 2,241 15 3 4,572 9 11 62,360 12 3 9133 12 6 532 2 11 5,04,576 15 0
MAP OF TOWN AND CAMP SATARA Drewing the Reduced Levels of ranons points therein [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75009571.tif] Ex Engineer's Office Satara 15. 8. 76 Lithographel at the GovtOffice Poona 1876 (Signed)H.Lee Major RE. Act: Ex: Engineer S.D.
No. 3499. GENERAL DEPARTMENT. Bombay Castle, 8th November 1876. Letter from the Sanitary Commissioner, No. A.765, dated 24th August 1876REPORT ON THE SANITARY CONDITION OF THE TOWN OF KOLHA'PUR. Inspected in July 1876. Kolhápur, the Capital of the Native State of that name, is situated in latitude 16° 41' N. and longitude 74° 17' E., at an elevation of about 1,790 feet above the level of the sea, from which it is distant as the crow flies about 64 miles, and is 76 miles south of Satara, and 66 north of Belgaum. This ancient town occupies a position on rising ground about half a mile above the right or southern bank of one of the tributaries of the Krishna called the Panchganga, which rises between the spurs of the Western Gháts, the nearest point of these being about 28 miles distant. 2. The country immediately surrounding the town is open, and during the rains is covered with green grass; but I am informed this soon gets burnt up and the surface presents an arid appearance during the remainder of the year. The land rises gradually from the river over undulating ground to a range of low hills on the south, the drainage of which is carried off by the Jiti Nalah, which runs from the south along the eastern front of the town skirting Pet Raveewar, at a distance from the fort of about 300 yards. It then changes its direction and flows towards the north below Pet Somvar and old Budhwar until it joins the river at Bhrá- mápuri. On the south-west and above the suburbs of the town is the large Rankála tank which presents to view a fine sheet of water some 5 or 600 acres in extent, whilst the Padmála Tank is on the south-east, and at an higher elevation than the town. The land on the bank of the Jiti Nalah is cultivated on the north-east, east and south, whilst between the Rankála Tank and the river on the west the fields have been rendered marshy from causes that will be here- after alluded to. The Residency and Military Cantonment are on rising ground, at a distance of about a mile from the town. The valley of the Panchganga gradually rises on its left, or northern bank, and at about 10 miles distant there is a range of lofty hills, among which the celebrated fortress of Panála towers pre-eminent, as the hill on which it is built rises to a height of 2,500 feet; whilst at a somewhat lower elevation, but contiguous to it, is the high hill sacred to Jotiba, an incarnation of Shiva and the tutelary god of Scindia's family, who has been worshipped from time immemorial at this place. 3. The rock on which the town stands consists of moorum, overlying the trap which is found at a depth varying from a few inches to 3 or 4 feet, and which furnish building material in abundance, but which, as it requires blasting, is not now much used for that purpose by private house-owners. 4. The climate of Kolhápur is said to be extremely salubrious, and has been very favourably reported upon by the Civil Surgeon, Honorary Surgeon Sinclair (who has resided here for many years), to whom I am indebted for the following statement showing the direction of the prevailing wind and the average number of days for the last 5 years on which it blew from the undermentioned points of the compass:2 The annual rain-fall on the average of the last 5 years is 44 inches 57 cents, and is distributed over the greater part of the year, as will be seen from the fol- lowing table:3 am told, a body of intelligent and influential gentlemen, among whom I may mention the State Kárbhári, Mr. Madhaorao Wasudew Barvé, who is Vice-Presi- dent and, who accompanied me on one of my visits and evinced the greatest possible interest in all matters affecting the welfare of the town. For municipal purposes it is divided into six wards, two of which are in the more densely populated Fort, whilst the extra-mural wards are suburban and rural. It overs an area of 1,132 acres 29 guntas. 7. The population of Kolhápur, according to the census taken in 1872, is said to have amounted to 37,662 persons, of whom 19,564 were males, and 18,098 females, being in the proportion of 92.49 females to 100 males. It consisted of4 state of things to a little garden, where it is absorbed, but in other instances it Stagnate, whilst in all the enclosures there are to be seen one or two large stones on which the people stand and pour water over their bodies, all of which soaks into the ground. In some of the pets outside the Fort, especially those to the west, the level of the inside of the houses is below the road-way, which is most objectionable. The Municipality has lately provided five public privies, each con- taining 12 seats, for the accommodation of the people, in addition to three public latrines of an old and inferior construction. 10. A stranger on first visiting Kolhápur is much struck with the evidence of the careful attention that has been paid to the roads5 I have never before seen in Western India. Many unwholesome low-lying spots on the outskirts of the town were pointed out to me, which have been filled in, although several such, still exist (the moat round the walls being very foul) whilst every opportunity is taken to widen the streets, so as to provide freer; ventilation and increased space for traffic in the town. 15. The Civil Hospital is situated in the suburbs, near the entrance of the town, and not far from the Town Hall. I was shown over it by Dr. Sinclair, and it was as clean as it possibly can be kept, and the conservancy arrangements were as good as they can be in the existing buildings. But I am glad to learn that a New Hospital has been sanctioned, and that the plans are nearly completed. In the Hospital compound there is a separate female ward, and on the other side of the main building are 12 cells for the accommodation of lunatics. I also inspected the Jail which contained 237 prisoners, of whom 22 were females. It was well kept and clean, but I think the area enclosed is not sufficient. In the privies attached to, but outside the Jail, the dry earth system is adopted, which here answers perfectly, as there was an entire absence of any smell. So completely is this system carried out here that had I been blindfolded I could not have told I was inside a privy. 16. The offensive trades carried on inside the town are brick and tile- making and lime-burning; but the tanneries and leather dyers are only allowed to be established in the suburban pet Raviwar, to the east of the town. None of these places are as they should be drained, and of their number there is no record. This should be carefully ascertained, and the owners should be compelled to take out an annual license and their places should be regularly inspected. 17. There are two markets belonging to the Municipality, the principal one being in pet Shanwar outside the Fort. It contains 100 stalls, and is a general market where grain, vegetables, fruit, oil, &c., are sold. It was always thronged with customers at the time of my inspection. There is another small vegetable market containing 8 stalls inside the Fort, near the Kapila Tirtha Tank. 18. There is no beef slaughter-house or market in the town; but about 50 sheep are daily killed,6 They ought to be at once excavated, and their size, depth, and direction should be carefully laid down on the map; and though they, in all probability, would not be safe to use as sewers, yet they could be utilized at all events as channels for the storm-water. 21. There are also several objectionable tanks in the town which should be drained or filled up, among which I may particularly mention the Kapila Tirtha, which is a moderately sized tank, surrounded by houses on all sides, the consequence being that the tank is nothing more or less than a cesspool of the most dangerous description, for the filth from the privies of the houses in the neighbourhood soaks into it and fouls the water which is used for drinking. This practice should be at once stopped, and the tank should be filled in; but the open space now occupied by it should be still kept as a lung to the town, which is just here thickly populated, and a drinking fountain might with advantage be erected in the centre, around which a garden might be laid out. The Mahar Tank is also very impure. It should be drained and cleaned out, and afterwards filled with Káttyáyani water and all impurities should be rigidly excluded. I should, if it had been possible, have recommended the same course for the Kapila Tank, as water tanks in a hot dry climate are good and render the atmosphere moist; but the Kapila Tank is so situated that it must always be fouled, and I recommend the adoption of the course suggested above. 22. The bodies of Hindus of caste are taken down to the river and burnt at Brahmapuri, whilst those of Mussalmans are buried on the east near the bank of the Jiti Nulah. The grave-yards for low caste Hindus are on the north of the town. Near Maharwada the grave I saw at the Mussalman burying-place was of sufficient and safe depth. 23. The principal water supply of the town is derived from springs in the Káttyáyani Valley, which is situated about 3 miles to the south, below a range of low hills, but at a considerable elevation above the town. Water has been brought into it from this source for many years; since a duct, fed from springs in the Kátty- áyani Valley, was, between the years 1789 and 1792, built at a cost of between two and three lakhs of rupees, at the expense of one Baburao Keshav Pandit. This was distributed in the town, by the usual native method, through porous earthen- ware pipes, bound round with oiled cloth and lime, which conveyed the water to 32 dipping wells, 8 of which were situated in the Maharaja's palace. But this scheme, good as it was, did not go high enough up the valley, and stopped below the sources of the springs, the consequence being that the supply was inadequate and was rendered, from faulty construction, sometimes impure. But the present Executive Engineer of Kolhápur, Major Ducat, R.E., has, with great skill and ingenuity, thought the matter out, and was able during the hot season just past, although his scheme is still unfinished, to save the town from a water famine from which it otherwise would undoubtedly have suffered, and has thus confer- red, as many gentlemen told me, an unspeakable boon on the inhabitants. 24. From his able report on the works I have extracted the following in- formation, although I had the advantage of having each item of the scheme explain- ed to me on the spot by Major Ducat himself. From the commencement of the old duct he has run an underground channel, 1,500 feet in length, further up towards the hills and thus taps the springs themselves as they issue from the hillside; and, by a most ingenious arrangement, has built at the head works a dam across the nullah above the water bearing stratum, with the view of intercepting the water which ran to waste during the greater part of the year, and of thus saturating the subsoil springs which feed the drainage tunnel. The old masonry duct has been utilized for as long a length as possible, but it was found to enter the town at an unnecessary low point, and consequently a new channel is in course of erection, 1,938 yards in length; this will cross two masonry aqueducts over low-lying ground before it enters the service reservoir7 tower 100 feet in diameter and 6 feet deep,capable of holding 294,500 gallons, or 6 3/4gallons per head of population for one day. The water was seen from the manholes, along the line of under-ground channel, flowing as clear as the clearest crystal; but to prevent any fear of silt being washed into the service reservoir and so fouling the water, the channel has been made self-cleansing, by providing along the line a series of silt traps, which intercept any deposit which finds its way into the channel. The water flows into the manhole where the silt trap is built, and passes over it, and in doing so any foreign matter brought down is deposited in the trap below, whilst the water flows out by the exit pipe, which is not placed opposite the pipe of entrance. An iron sluice valve is fitted to the bottom of the trap, on opening which all the silt deposited there is at once discbarged. From the service tower, which is 100 feet above the town, the water will be dis- tributed under pressure through iron mains, and from these a complete system of delivery-pipes will be carried all over the town, on which stand-pipes, fitted with two self-closing taps, will be erected. This distribution has been so carefully arranged that no one in Kolhápur will have to go more than 100 yards from his house to fetch his water. The pressure in the mains will be constantly kept up, so that water can be drawn off at any hour of the day or night. Should the population increase, the scheme admits of indefinite extension, as the hills in the vicinity of the head works appear to retain water like a sponge, and the valleys are full of springs. They are practically uninhabited, and the gathering ground is as clean as it is possible to conceive, and I look upon this Kolhápur water-supply as on of the finest in India. 25. The stand-pipes have, with careful forethought, been provided with rests, on which the water vessel can stand whilst it is being filled, and the handle will not be out of the reach of women,8 28. The registration of births and deaths is conducted under the orders of the Fouzdar; but this most important duty has been neglected, and the records are most imperfect and are entirely untrustworthy. I am informed that during 1875, 332 boys and 309 girls were born; these figures only equal 17 per 1,000 of population, and are manifestly inaccurate. Probably more than half the births escape registration. In the same way the number of recorded deaths is absurd; and to show the confusion that exists, I may mention that the Municipal Secre- tary brought me, on reference being made, two different results as to the number of deaths in 1875. The following return he considers correct, in which the deaths of 407 men and 422 females, or a total of 829 persons, is recorded:9 for the evident desire to make Kolhápur worthy of being a Capital, by improving the health and convenience of its people, by sweeping away filthy villages and widening streets, &c., yet much remains to be done. 32. The whole conservancy establishment requires remodelling. The cutchra is only removed from the public roads but not from private compounds. It remains there to rot and decay, to the great danger of the inhabitants. This must be removed, and consequently the Scavenging Department must be largely increased. There are now only 6 scavenging-carts, and these not of good pattern. The Bombay scavenging tilt cart is the best I know, and is drawn by exactly the same class of bullocks. I think one such might be procured as a pattern, and the number be increased to 12, the new ones being made in Kolhápur. If the lead to the manure-yard is found too long, a place might safely be fixed upon nearer the town where the dry stable litter at all events might be burnt. I am strongly of opinion that the reclamation of the moat with the town sweepings is objection- able, as this cutchra undergoes decomposition in the very midst of houses. The moat should undoubtedly be filled up, and to effect this I think the Fort walls, which now offer a very serious barrier to the perflation of air in the town, and which are used as a latrine, should be pulled down and the earth restored to the place from which it was dug out. A broad road might be made over the ground so reclaimed, and the frontages along each side of it would be very valuable and would help to pay for the filling in. 33. In the next place the privies in the town are as bad as they possibly can be, and are simply cesspools. Being constructed within the houses, the inhabitants must constantly breathe privy air. In all new houses the isolation of the privies should be most rigidly insisted upon. An air space of not less than 3 feet should be left all round the privy, and no building should be allowed over it. If this course were insisted upon, the gully round the privy should be paved with cut- stone and the privy should be cleaned from the side out of the view of passers by the road. What can be more disgusting to a high caste Brahmin whilst walking along the road than to see a sweeper cleaning a privy from it ? Above all, every halalcore in the town should be made a municipal servant, and be paid out of the municipal fund, and a halalcore cess should be imposed. 34. It may be of service to state what is the approximate amount of fæces and urine produced daily by the inhabitants. In a given population it is safe to assume that 2.5 ozs. of fæces and 40 ozs. of urine are passed per head per day, so that in Kolhápur we have10 drink of cattle; but all of it after such use will sink into the earth in the midst of the habitations of the people where it will aid the decomposition of any particles of organic matter it comes in contact with, and will thus render the air malarious. 36. It becomes then a matter of the deepest interest to see what is the best way of removing all this water which has been brought into the town at a great expense, and which is one of the greatest blessings ever conferred on it, but which, unless properly disposed of, will prove a source of danger to the health of the people. Happily, the natural advantages of Kolhápur are so great, that the matter is not a difficult one, and the only question to be considered is that of cost. 37. The Political Agent, Colonel Schneider, has, in his able Administration Report, remarked upon the great facility that exists for sewage irrigation around Kolhápur, and there can be no doubt that a carefully prepared stone-ware pipe sewerage scheme would remove the difficulty at once, and would do away with the danger of a fouled sub-soil, and the necessity for employing bunghies at all. I have consulted Major Ducat, R.E., and he agrees with me in thinking that such a scheme is feasible. The State Kárbhári, Mr. Madhaorao Wasudev Barvé, also, I believe, approves of the scheme, and has made some valuable suggestions as to the best way of adapting it to the want of the inhabitants. 38. In the suburban districts it would not be possible to connect every house with the main sewer, but it would be quite feasible to erect a privy with 3 or 4 seats for the accommodation of each little cluster of houses, and in the same way to provide a common bathing place and a trough for washing clothes for the convenience of their residents; the same plan might be adopted in the Fort, where if there was any difficulty experienced in obtaining a site, a house might be pur- chased (if no other convenient site could be found) and converted into a public privy and bathing place, but for ladies who do not appear in public, and for private gentlemen, house connections could be made, as they would not, it is thought, be numerous. I am sure Major Ducat would provide a scheme which would prevent the danger of sewer gases escaping into the houses. The fields on three sides of the Town would be available as out-falls, so that the sewage would be discharged whilst perfectly fresh; and it would prove a very fertilizing agent, and one that the cultivators are accustomed to deal with, as they now readily purchase the mixed soil and ashes for their gardens. 39. I also think that bye-laws regarding buildings should be introduced to regulate the height of plinths, ventilation of rooms, position of privies, &c. 40. The necessity for a mutton market has been shown, and a proper slaughter-house should be provided and milch cattle stables should be erected, as the milk from animals kept in the filthy condition they now are must be very unwholesome. Should the Municipality erect cattle-stables around a market in the centre for the sale of milk, they would soon pay for the cost of the building. 41. A greater number of municipal privies should be provided. The exist- ing private privies do not supply the wants of more than 5,500 persons at the out- side. It would be easy to count the number of visitors to the public privies during any 24 hours, and then calculate the amount of night-soil every day de- posited on the surface of the town. No great expense need be incurred in their erec- tion. The trench latrine system might be adopted in suitable places, and in others a simple paved surface screened off and divided into partitions would suffice. I was glad to see the public privies open, as the smell is quickly dissipated; but there should be one such within easy reach of the people's houses, otherwise the calls of nature are more imperative than the orders of the police, and the private com- pounds and streets will be defiled.
11 42. The houses require more lime-washing internally; the application of hot lime destroys organic germs. 43. In conclusion, I would strongly advise the Municipal Commissioners to get up from Bombay a native sub-inspector in the Health Department, whom, I have no doubt, the authorities there would allow to resign on promotion. The art of cleaning a town is a matter of training, and has to be learnt as much as any other art; and those who have never had this training do not observe infringe- ments of the Act which would immediately strike a man who has been taught the rudiments of practical sanitation. T. G. HEWLETT, Acting Sanitary Commissioner.
12 Annual Income, Kolhápur Municipality. Expenditure of the Kolhápur Municipality for the Year 1875-76. Rs. Rs. a. p. Office Establishment 2,161 13 10 Toll Fund 9,450 House Tax do. 1,855 0 1 Tax on Sale of Sheep 505 Lighting do. 1,858 15 0 Do. do. Cattle 1,735 Scavengers and Bhungies, pay of 2,101 11 3 House Tax 12,485 Rent of Market 507 3 2 Grazing Fees 32 Dead Stock, purchase of 1,740 5 6 For Leaves 1,955 Miscellaneous 546 6 1 Wheel Tax 410 On account of Cholera 52 6 5 Tobacco Licenses 1,325 Watering Establishment 282 8 3 Fees collected at public privies 200 Temporary do. 13 11 6 Snuff Licenses 380 Tank Repairs 44 15 6 Opium do. 1,590 Dhurmsala Repairs 410 13 9 Poison do. 75 Contingent Bill regarding Sale of Cattle 2 4 3 Rent of standing room for Carts 10 Do. do. Wheel Tax 0 5 0 Market Fees 2,125 Cleaning the Town 466 2 11 Sale of Manure 175 Repairs 11,451 12 9 Municipal Fines 100 New Works 9,272 6 11 Salo of Dead Stock 100 Fire Engine Establishment 202 12 7 Interest and Batta 300 Refund 12 10 0 Auditors 60 0 0 Total 32,952 Total 33,044 4 9
No. 3208. GENERAL DEPARTMENT. Bombay Castle, 13th October 1876. Letter from the Sanitary Commissioner, No. A.-775, dated 28th August 1876REPORT ON THE SANITARY CONDITION OF THE TOWN OF BELGAUM. Inspected in August 1876. Belgaum, the chief town of the Collectorate of that name and the head- quarter station of the Collector of the District and of the Zillah Judge, is situated in latitude 15° 32' N. and longitude 74° 53' 30" E. at an elevation of nearly 2,500 feet above the level of the sea, from which it is distant in a straight line about 54 miles. It is 48 miles north of Dharwar, 731/2 miles west of Kaládgi, and 66 miles south of Kolhápur; whilst Vingorla, its seaport, is 77 miles on the west, the nearest summit of the line of the Western Gháts being reached by the new road at the distance of about 30 miles. 2. The town itself lies on the northern slope of the basin of a water- -course called the Bellary Nullah, an affluent of the Márkándeya River which flows into the Ghatprabha, one of the numerous tributaries of the Krishna River. The Kolhápur road crosses the line of water parting of this basin, and that of the Márkándeya River near the Collector's bungalow on the north-west at a considerable elevation above the town; and on the same hill, but farther east, is situated the double-domed Durga erected by Kishvar Khan, the son of the famous Asad Khan, which has now been converted into the hospital and guard-room of the jail, part of the external wall of which is formed by it, and which still bears the marks of shot fired from the Fort at General Munro's Batteries in March 1818. Near the jail are the Police lines, from which the ground slopes rapidly down forming the western boundary of the water-shed of Turkmuttee or one Tree Hill, below the summit of which a few springs of water are found which, with the rain falling on the hill, help to fill a large tank, which however dries up during the hot weather, but which has been formed by an earthen embankment thrown across the valley near the road to Kaládgi at a distance of about 600 yards from the town, from which it is separated by the esplanade round the northern walls of the Fort. 3. The town thus lies between the Fort on the east and the large Military Cantonment which extends along its western front, and is only separated from it by the Bhogarvis Nullah, whilst the higher ground above on the north is occupied by compounds of gentlemen in the civil employ of Government. Toward the south the country is more open, and in the immediate vicinity of the town there are cultivated fields in which jowari, sugarcane, &c., are grown; but they extend for only a short distance, and beyond, especially towards the southern side of the Fort, there are rice fields as far as the Bellary Nullah, crossing which at the distance of about three-quarters of a mile from the town on the Dharwar road the small township of Sháhpur is reached, which, with its hamlets Hosur and Hosoti, belongs to the Chief of Sángli, and is therefore foreign territory. The two towns however on the west approach each other much closer, as the main gate of Sháhpur is not by the Kapileshwar Tank road much farther than a quarter of a mile, and along the Khánápur road the western gate is reached at about the same distance. The above description refers only to the immediate neighbourhood of Belgaum; but on looking down from Mahalakhsmi's Hill, the highest point in the adjacent Military Cantonment, Belgaum is seen to be surrounded by ranges of low hills which however in some places attain a considerable elevation. Among such may be mentioned Yelloorgarh, about 5 miles to the south-west on the B 3832 Khánápur road, Belgundi Hill on the west about 6 miles distant, and Vaijnath on the north-west, where there is a temple held in peculiar reverence by the Linga- yets, whilst the Sootguttee range is on the north and the Kunbargee one on the north-east. 4. The rock on which Belgaum is built consists of laterite lying upon the hard compact trap of the Deccan. This rock, which is here erroneously called soapstone, is in some places of great thickness. For example, on the higher ground near the kutcherry I measured a well excavated in it, the depth to the water being 54 feet, and the excavation had been continued down to the trap rock, only a sufficient quantity of the latter having been brought up to form a parapet wall round the well, which was said to be about 80 feet deep. The trap rock, however, crops up in places very close to the surface, as I had the opportunity of seeing at a new well which is being made near the Artillery lines where the laterite was only about 15 feet thick. 5. The town of Belgaum has not been surveyed, and there is no map extant which shows the levels of different parts of it; but from its situation there is evidently a good fall to the south-east, and the natural drainage is carried off by the Bhogarvis Nullah, and by a smaller one which meets it, whilst on the south-east a water-course running along the side of the Dharwar road drains that portion of the town. These discharge themselves during the rains into the Bellary Nullah on the south, but are dry during the fair season. The town is well wooded,3 the comparatively heavy rainfall which usually takes place in April and May the hot weather is neither prolonged nor excessive:4 people living in each class, as this information is not forthcoming. There were therefore on the average 6.14 persons to a house, which supports the idea that the town is overcrowded. In Kolhápur there are on the average only 4.77 persons to a house. 12. By far the greatest number of houses consists only of a ground floor, there being very few upper-storied buildngs in the town. Those of a better class have a well raised plinth, in some instances made of cut-stone, but usually con- sisting of blocks of laterite, with which the walls are also constructed; whilst those of the inferior description are built of mud or of sun-dried bricks plastered over, between wooden supports, and these are but slightly raised off the ground; in fact, in many cases the floors are below the surface. All the roofs in the town are tiled. 13. The houses for the most part are built in a continuous line facing the streets, but in their rear no sort of regularity has been preserved, as some project far beyond those on either side; and they are frequently found to cover a space of about 70 feet, the only communication with the external air being by the doors in front and behind, the consequence being that the rooms in the centre are not only very dark, but have no possible means of ventilation except through the interstices of the tiles, which, I was glad to see, did not fit very well, and which are often displaced by the monkeys who wander at large over the roofs through- -out the town. There is always a back court-yard of some kind or other in which is situated generally speaking a well, and within a few feet of this there is usually a privy, which I will presently describe. 14. The water-supply of Belgaum is entirely derived from wells exca- vated in the laterite sub-soil which retains the annual rain falling over it like a sponge. On the upper side of the town the wells have an average depth of about 80 feet, and the water level was at the time of my inspection there found at about 54 feet below the surface. But in the lowest part of the town the water level was observed to be only about 3 feet below the surface, and here the wells are said to be about 30 or 40 feet deep. 15. I am informed that there are 1,323 private wells in the town, and besides these there are 11 public wells; but none of them are covered over, and all were found fouled by leaves, flowers, sticks, paper, &c., having been thrown into them. The large public well near the Mámlatár's kutcherry is open and when con- structed had several privies within a few yards of it, which I am glad to learn the municipal authorities have closed. The public well in Kalkurbagh is also not covered. The water in it is considered to be the best in Belgaum, but I very much doubt whether a chemical analysis would support this belief, as the well adjoins a temple and is surrounded by houses, and at the time of my visit bathing water and other offensive liquid were flowing from two houses opposite on to the pavement round it, though no gutter or pipe had been provided to carry away the wastage water. Alongside the public well in Baput Gulley a heap of cutchra was found stacked against the parapet wall, and the corner, in which it was built, was the receptacle for all kinds of dirt to be thrown. The Bhogarvis public well was built at a great expense by the Municipality, but shortly after it was opened, a Brahman threw himself into it and the water has not since been as much used as before. In the close proximity of another public well on the confines of the western boundary of the town, privies and other filth were found. There are also 8 tanks; but they are situated outside town limits, and the water in them is only used for agricultural purposes and for watering cattle except in Kapileswar Tank, through which the Sháhpur road passes; a well has been constructed on one side, the water of which is drunk during the dry season by the poorer classes. There are said to be no springs in the town. 16. The whole of the water-supply is, therefore, derived from surface wells, which are generally speaking of great depth; and I have no doubt that originally
5 the water in them was exceedingly pure as the laterite makes an excellent filter; but with the most horrible perversity the inhabitants of Belgaum have for many years past,6 cutchra; but at the time of my visit there were four pits exposed and the stench was excessive. No attempt is made at cultivation, and the place is covered with wild datura and other rank vegetation. 20. As it affects the town, I must here mention that the night-soil and cutchra from the Saddar Bazaar and one part of the Cantonment is taken out along the Khánápur road for about 1½ mile; but as the Khánápur road lies nearly parallel to camp, the distance in a straight line is not so far, but here too the place of deposit has been chosen within a few yards of the public road, and. the same unscientific method of dealing with the night-soil is pursued, and I am told that from such a large surface being exposed to the air, the road is nearly impassable when an easterly wind blows. The cutchra from the Saddar Bazaar and Can- tonment is deposited near this manure yard on the side of the open road without any kind of fence round the place. I saw cattle belonging to the town, which were returning from grazing, eagerly feeding on it. 21. The conservancy establishment in the town consists of 17 road-sweepers and 9 carts. This strength is manifestly insufficient. The consequence being that nearly all the cutchra in private compounds remains there until it has decom- posed. There are 12 masonry places of deposit for sweepings, and bamboo- baskets and, in some instances, round open boxes made of iron, are placed in convenient sites; but many of the iron-boxes I saw had lost their bottoms, and the bamboo- baskets were broken. Altogether there are about 78 of these quasi dust-boxes. Each cart makes on the average five trips during the day; but the cutchra never leaves the place, as the principal part is deposited in quarry holes in the heart of the upper part of the town near Narayen Swami's karkhana, and the remainder is deposited in a deep pit in rear of the Local Fund dharamshalla on the north of the town and not far from the upper road leading from camp to the Fort and directly to the north-west of the Civil Hospital, from which it is separated by a road and one field. 22. The road-side gutters are in the main streets covered with slabs of stones, which form approaches to the houses; but the filth which collects below them is never apparently removed, as they were invariably found blocked and choked with it. The gutter round the municipal office, a detached building, was found in a filthy state. There are no under-ground drains in the town. The annual expenditure on account of scavenging is Rs. 2,570. 23. The principal thoroughfares are provided with a few public lanterns, in which kerosine oil is burnt. There are only 71 in number, and the expenditure upon the cost of lighting is stated to have been Rs. 1,554 during 1875. The roads are during the fair weather watered once a day by nine carts employed for that purpose at a yearly expenditure of Rs. 650. 24. As regards offensive trades, there are 7 tanneries on the east within municipal limits; but there is no brick-kiln, and there are only two small tile and two lime kilns situated on the south. Besides the above, there are 6 dyers in indigo and two in kusamba. None of the above places are drained, and none of the owners are annually licensed. 25. There are no private markets in Belgaum, but there are four public ones, viz., beef, fish and mutton, which are in separate buildings but near each other, and a large vegetable market in the centre of a square in the heart of the town. It was erected by Mr. Grey, and is a great boon to the people. It was always at the time of my visit thronged with customers, and brings in a revenue which represents 8 per cent on the money expended. 26. The beef market consists of tworows of tiled buildings, each containing five stalls, separated by a broad centre road, which is however undrained. About
7 5 or 6 head of cattle are killed daily, but no proper slaughter-house has been pro- vided. The animals are taken to the verge of a mango tope, separated by a field from the upper road leading from Camp to the Fort and just opposite the house occupied by the Zillah Judge and close to the boundary line of the Cantonment, where they are slaughtered on the bare ground; the blood and liquid soaks into it, but the offal remains. It is said to be carted away; but I saw a quantity which had been left there, and as the dead cattle are taken to the same spot, the place is one huge Golgotha, and bones and skulls were seen thrown about in all directions and were heaped up in a ditch, from which a sickening smell arose. 27. The mutton market adjoins the beef, and like it consists of two build- ings with well raised plinths, separated by a broad centre road. From 20 to 30 sheep and goats are killed daily in a slaughter-house, which has been built at the back of the mutton market. Its floor is paved with stone sloping down to a hole in the wall, through which the blood, &c., flows into a chunamed cesspit at the back, from whence it is removed every day and is said to be used as manure in a field. The offal is placed in a stone covered pit, and it is also supposed to be removed daily; but it had not been entirely so at the time of my inspection, and smelt offensively. 28. The fish market is also in the same neighbourhood and consists of an open shed, the roof being supported by masonry pillars. It was quite clean at the time of my visit. 29. There are no large stables in the town for housing milch cattle, which are kept inside houses close to sleeping apartments. The floors of such places are fouled with cow-dung, and the urine soaks into the ground as there are no drains; and as no ventilation is provided, the stench in them was great. The number of cattle in the town was at the time of the Census as under:8 tremely deep; and as this rock is porous, they will not hold water but afford con- venient receptacles for the deposit of filth. As before noticed, the Municipality have utilized two such quarry holes which are now in process of being filled with sweepings. I may mention another in Kunjur Valli just behind the public latrines for men and women. It was covered with filth of all kinds, and had been made the receptacle, among other things, for old privy pans. 33. The daily number of births and deaths in the town. is recorded both by the Police and the Municipal ward peons, who report them daily to the office where they are registered, and the returns are compared and checked by those kept by the Police, which are compiled from information given by the Police sepoys stationed in the different Police divisions. 34. The returns of births during the last two years is as under:9 It will be seen from the above that small-pox was very prevalent and nearly ten times as fatal in Belgaum in 1875 as it was in Bombay during the same year; that in none of the years under report has it ever been as low as the Bombay rate of last year, though it was then exceptionally high in Bombay on account of its being epidemic. The bowel complaint rate is also persistently high, and corroborates the fact that the people of Belgaum are constantly drink- ing their own excrement. Mr. Grey, the Collector, has mentioned to me his belief that typhoid fever is prevalent here; and certainly the physical conditions of the place are favourable to its development. The very high death-rate re- corded last year, viz., nearly 34 per 1,000, shows, however good a climate or soil of a town may be, that the first principles of sanitation cannot be neglected, as they have been in Belgaum, without the greatest danger and risk to the people who inhabit it. 36. The deaths as they occurred among the different castes are next shewn:10 from which I have deduced the following table:11 been without becoming saturated, and it must be evident to every one even of the meanest capacity that such a sub-soil is not a proper source of water-supply for a large town. 41. A fresh water-supply is, in my opinion, of the most paramount im- portance in Belgaum, but where it can be brought from must, of course, be left to an Engineer to determine; but I should fail in my duty if I did not point out, in the most earnest manner I can, this first great all-important sanitary want. Many months must elapse before this action can be taken, but much can be done at once to improve the sanitary condition of the town; and first of all cess-pools and tank privies in the town should be cleaned out, filled in, and closed. The people, of course, must have privies, and these should not be closed until provi- sion in this respect has been made; but the Municipality should at once erect numerous open cheap public privies in convenient sites. It may be of use to state, for the information of the Municipal Commissioners, the quantity of night-soil which is produced daily by the inhabitants. It is safe to assume that in a given population 2.5 ozs. solid matter and 40 ozs. of urine are passed per head per diem. In Belgaum, therefore, 26,947 x 2.5 = 67,367 ozs. = 4,210 lbs. = 1.87 tons of f12 would render its adoption more difficult when the time came to put it into exe- cution. It may be useful to state what is the cost of glazed stoneware pipes per running foot of the following dimensions as laid down in Bombay:13 to keep clean; but if each house has a privy, then a much larger number would be required; but this is a point of detail which can best be settled by local experience. In any case whether public, punch or individual privies are erected, the establish- ment of night-soil carts must be largely increased. The present filth carts are disgusting, and proper tank carts, Bombay pattern, should be procured. As to the privies themselves, below each seat should be placed an iron receptacle suffi- ciently large to hold all the filth produced, and the bhunghi should fill his basket at the privies and carry it away to the depôt where the carts stand. The cart yoke should rest on a triangular iron stand to keep it level, and the filth should be poured into it through a wide-mouthed iron funnel, such as is used in Bombay, so as to prevent the ground being fouled. If the use of iron recepta- cles below the privies is not rigidly insisted upon, the urine and ablution water will soak into the ground, and will of necessity percolate into the wells. In fact, until sewers are provided, the bathing water will do so though it should, if pos- sible, be led into the nearest drain. The road-side gutters should be excavated and kept uncovered as much as possible, and be lined with U shaped drains which, under existing circumstances, should only be allowed to be used as channels for the conveyance of storm and bathing water, but the liquid filth from the privies should be rigidly excluded. 47. As regards the habitations, no house should be allowed to cover a depth of 70 feet without leaving a chowk in the centre for ventilation, and the plans of every new house should be examined by the municipal engineer before permission is given to build it. The following return shows the number of houses built in each of the following years:14 twon. Some of it during the dry season might be burnt, and the ashes be used in the privies; in fact, if the house-owners were ordered to do this and throw all their ashes into pit privies as long as these are allowed to continue, it would do good. The " cutchra " might be usefully employed in reclaiming the rice fields on the south, and would convert them into the most magnificent garden land. Especial care should be taken not to allow the deposit to be of too great thickness, but it should be kept at such a level that it could be irrigated with sewage from the town. 52. The keeping of the cattle inside houses should be at once stopped, and the owners should be compelled to build proper stables for their accommodation outside, and these stables should be carefully and systematically inspected. 53. The tanners' places as well as those of the dyers should be drained and regularly inspected, and the owners should be compelled to take out a licence annually. 54. The markets require more frequent lime-washing; The beef market was particularly dirty. They should be lime-washed at least once a month. The beef slaughtering-place is objectionable as it is close to a public road, and another site on the south of town, but at least a mile away, 'should be chosen. It was a mistake placing the mutton slaughtering-house inside the town; but as this has been done, great care should be taken to see that the offal is entirely removed every day. No quarry should be allowed to be excavated in the town; the existing ones might, it is thought, be enclosed after being, thoroughly well cleaned. 55. The hedges should be cut and the rank vegetation should not be allowed to grow as high as it does now, and the prickly-pear should be cut whenever found; but especially the growth of this pernicious plant should not be allowed in the close vicinity of the Police Lines. 56. The registration of births and deaths should be made compulsory on the inhabitants by a municipal bye-law, for which there is power under the Act. The occupier of a house in which either a birth or death takes plàce should be compelled under a penalty to report such birth or death without loss of time to the nearest policeman, who would then go and collect the required information, and who should give, in the case of a death, a written permit for the body to be disposed of. This could be easily and best done by the register book being printed in counterfoil, the leaf of which could be torn out and given to the person conduct- ing the funeral to be delivered up at each place of disposal to a man in charge before the body could be disposed of; and the permit should be returned to the Police Office, so that there would be an efficient check, and each place of disposal of bodies should be registered in a book kept by the Municipality into which the name of the person in charge could be entered. Burning and burial should no longer be permitted along side the Khánápur road. Another site on the south could easily be chosen. 57. The disposal of the night-soil as practised in Belgaum is, as I have stated, unscientific in the extreme, and should be at once altered. A large field distant from any well or water-course should be bought, and trenches one foot deep, two feet broad, with intervals of one foot between each trench should be "dug. The night-soil collected during each day should be deposited into this trench, commencing, if the ground is not level, at the lower end. The night-soil should not exceed. half a foot in depth, and should be covered over each day with the earth taken out of the trench alongside at the bottom end of each trench; if the night-soil is very liquid, a hole 5 feet deep should be dug to allow the ooze to escape from the trench and to be absorbed. This ooze also should be covered over with the earth dug out of the pit every day. Land must be chosen where is a sufficient depth of soil. If the ground is rocky, ashes of burnt sweepings should be thrown in sufficient quantity to absorb this ooze. When the whole
15 field has been manured in this way, it should be left for three months and then ploughed up crosswise, and it will be ready for cultivation. 58. The provisions of the Municipal Act should be regularly put into force. Section 55 is completely a dead letter. Filth is not removed from houses: for example, in a paved court-yard in the house belonging to Mr. Narayan Pandurang, one of the Municipal Commissioners, there was found a walled enclo- sure about 20 feet square in which was stocked, for a depth of about 3 or 4 feet, "cutchra" and filth of all kinds. The well from which the drinking water of the family was drawn is about 10 feet distant from this enclosure, and the water was only 5 feet below the surface of the ground. The following return shows the number of summonses and convictions in municipal cases from the year 1871 to 1875 inclusive:16 Statements of Receipts and Disbursements of the Belgaum Town Municipality for the Year 1875. Receipts. Amount. Total. Disbursements. Amount. Total. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Balance in hand at the close of last year ....... 5,248 2 1 A.17 Scavenging Department Receipts. Repairs. Sale Proceeds of street refuse 53 12 0 53 12 0 Vegetable Market 29 1 2 Municipal Fines. Mutton Market 26 4 4 Fish Market 5 11 0 On account of stray cattle 191 9 0 Beef Market 11 15 6 191 9 0 Slaughter-house 4 13 3 Sundry Receipts. Public Wells 38 15 6 116 12 9 Sale proceeds of Municipal Rules 0 4 0 Miscellaneous 1,728 1 3 Maintenance of Medical Institution. 1,728 5 3 C.18 RECEIPTS. Amount. Total. DISBURSEMENTS. Amount. Total. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Brought forward Rupees ...... 19,700 15 7 Brought forward Rupees 16,803 15 6 D.19 Other Charges. Miscellaneous Establishment 61 3 7 Contingencies 94 6 8 Printing Charges 241 11 5 Dead Stock 102 2 0 Court Fee 0 4 0 Stamps and Postage 1 6 0 Belts for Peons 18 3 0 Rent for the land used by the Municipality 134 8 0 Killing ownerless and stray Dogs 23 13 4 Cleaning the Nalla at Bogarvis 15 10 0 Miscellaneous 217 4 11 F.20 No. 1997 of 1876. FROM THE PRESIDENT OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF BELGAUM, To T. G. HEWLETT, ESQUIRE, Sanitary Commissioner, Bombay, Belgaum, Collector's Office, 12th October 1876. SIR, In returning the accompaniments to your letter No. 8976, dated 8th ultimo, I have the honour to inform you that the Municipal Commissioners have duly considered the report that you have made on the sanitary condition of the town of Belgaum, and have passed the resolutions which are annexed to this letter. 2. I beg at the same time to offer the following remarks on the sugges- tions which you have made. 3. The Civil Surgeon has been requested to take steps to procure the necessary apparatus for analysing the water of the different wells; but he informs me that there is no testing-box in his charge, and that as only one is allowed for several stations in the Deccan and Southern Mahratta Country, he cannot say when he can carry out my wishes. 4. I entirely agree with you that a fresh water-supply to this town would be an immense benefit to its inhabitants; but at present it is quite beyond the means of the Municipality. It is not even known that water can be found in the neighbourhood, and under any circumstances it could not be introduced under a cost of two or three lakhs. The Municipality could not even afford the expense of a survey for the purpose. 5. Your remarks regarding the privies in the town have received the full consideration of the Commissioners, and I wish it was as obvious to them as it is to you and the European members of the Municipality how objectionable the present system of disposing of the night-soil must be. It has been with very considerable difficulty that I have induced the Municipality to consent to a Halalkor Cess being imposed at all; and to close many of the pit privies and induce persons to make use of either public or punch privies, or bhunghi privies in their own premises, must be a work of time. It will of course be possible for the Municipality to erect more public latrines as soon as their funds will permit them to do so, and perhaps one or two blocks may be added to the town every year. As these latrines are constructed and people use them, pit privies may be closed; but I foresee many difficulties in substituting bhunghi privies for pit privies, because, as you say, there are few sweepers' gullies and it will be difficult to make them in many places. This system of pit privies has existed in Bel- -gaum from time immemorial, and it is almost impossible to convince the people of the objections to it, The Municipality have already taken steps to procure night- soil carts of an improved pattern. One is now on its way from Bombay, and others will either be made here or ordered as may be found desirable. I am afraid the plan of sewage drainage recommended in your 42nd para will be quite beyond the means of the Municipality for many years to come. 6. The Municipality has lately engaged the services of a Health Superin- tendent, Mr. Baretto, who has been in the service of the Poona Municipality for several years. He seems a very active officer, and I have no doubt that under
21 his superintendence there will be a great change for the better in the scavenger- ing arrangements of the town. The Municipality have lately engaged the services of 13 additional sweepers, and they may eventually increase the number of carts to 12. The carts now in use cannot at present be changed as they have been engaged on a contract which has still 4 years to run. It will be necessary to see how the Halalkor Cess works before the number of sub-inspectors, mucka- dums and bhunghis can be increased. 7. Your suggestions regarding the disposal of night-soil and sweepings, the markets, and other matters will engage the best attention of the Com- missioners. 8. I may add that I agree with the Commissioners that it is quite impossi- ble to prevent the owners of cattle from keeping them in their houses and to require them to build stables. It should be remembered that Belgaum contains a large number of agriculturists whose cattle in many instances constitute their sole wealth. The number of animals in the town alone shows how impossible it would be to build stables for them even if the necessary space was available. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, A. GREY, Collector and President. Resolutions passed at a General Meeting of the Municipal Commissioners held on the 6th October 1876:22 VII. The suggestion of the Sanitary Commissioner that the keeping of cattle inside houses should be at once stopped and the owners compelled to build stables for their accommodation outside is considered quite impracticable. VIII. The tanners' and dyers' places to be inspected and the owners required to take out a license. IX. The Committee are of opinion that at present the compulsory regis- tration of births and deaths would not ensure more accurate returns, and prefer the system which has been lately introduced by the District Magistrate, of divid- ing the town into sub-divisions and having the registration carried out syste- matically by the Police. X. A new site to be selected for the beef slaughtering-place. XI. The suggestions regarding the markets to be adopted. A. GREY, Collector and President.
No. 3728. GENERAL DEPARTMENT. Bombay Castle, 25th November 1876. Letter from the Acting Sanitary Commissioner, No. A.-936, dated 20th October 1876REPORT ON THE SANITARY CONDITION OF THE TOWN OF DHARWAR. Inspected in Angust 1876. Dharwar, the bead-quarter station of the Collector of the district, is situ- ated in latitude 15° 27' 3" N. and longitude 75° 2' 42" E., at an elevation of about 2,580 feet above the level of the sea, from which it is distant. about 76 miles. It is about 48 miles south of Belgaum, and 12 miles north of Hubli. The approach from the south is the most striking, as attention is immediately drawn to the prominent position occupied by the Collector's kutcherry, from which a most commanding view of the environs of the town and of the surrounding country is obtained, as it is probably the highest point for many miles around. 2. Immediately below the kutcherry, and almost adjacent to it, is seen the temple of Ulvee Basapa; and beyond the Hill of Mylarling, which slopes down towards the Bagh Talao, on the west of the town, which, with its seven straggling villages, i.s half hidden by the rising ground above the Lal Tank, and by the fort and station, which appear to be embosomed in trees. Beyond the town an ex- tensive and highly fertile plain, about 36 miles broad by 60 long, stretches across to a range of low hills towards the east, among which, in the far distance, the sacred hill of the goddess Yellamma and the hill fort of Pursgad attract atten- tion. Whilst in the south-west I was informed it is possible, on a clear day, to see as far as the Kanara jungles. The country towards the north is undulating, the town of Nargund being 30 miles on the north-east, but towards the west there are low hills running down to the plain which forth the terminating spurs of the Western Gháts, the nearest point of which is reached at a distance of about 37 miles. 3. Dharwar is built on a slight ascent, and the natural drainage is excel- lent, the slope is gradual, and the storm-water is discharged on the north into a water-course which runs in a north-easterly direction and falls into the Govankop Nullah, about 3 miles distant. About a fourth of the town, however, is situated on the S.E. side. of the hill, and the surface-drainage from this part flows into the Bagh Talao, and the rice fields which are adjacent to and below it. There is at present no map showing the levels in the different parts of the town; but a very elaborate city survey map is in course of preparation, which will give every necessary information in the greatest possible detail. Cultivated fields extend on the east, close up to the town and its dependent villages, and it is separated by a maidan on the north and west from the fort and station. The new military can- tomnent is situated at a distance of about 11/2 miles on the plain on the west side of the Belgaum road to the N.W. of the town. There are several tanks in the vicinity, among which I may particularly mention the fine Kilgiri Talao, which is about 21/2 miles to the N.W. of the town, but at a much lower elevation than it. 4. The rock on which Dharwar is built belongs to the metamorphic series, and is composed of schistic layers, which are very much contorted, the strata being in places almost vertical; but it is stated this stone is not adapted for the construction of either buildings or drains, and that, conse- quently, the material for them has to be brought in from a distance. 5. I am indebted to the kindness of Dr. Sylvester, the Civil Surgeon, for the following return, which shows the monthly rain-fall during the last ten years:2 1866. 1867. 1868. 1869. 1870. 1871. 1872. 1873. 1874. 1875. Total for 10 years. Inches. Cents. Inches. Cents. Inches. Cents. Inches. Cents. Inches. Cents. Inches. Cents. Inches. Cents. Inches. Cents. Inches. Cents. Inches. Cents. Inches. Cents. January... ... ... ... ... ... 22 ... ... ... 38 1 51 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 11 February... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23 ... 4 ... ... ... 27 March... ... ... ... 25 ... 19 ... ... ... 22 ... 12 ... 13 ... ... ... ... ... 90 1 81 April... ... 56 1 68 3 3 ... 62 1 29 2 92 ... 69 2 1 2 49 1 54 16 83 May... ... 33 4 14 3 43 7 55 ... 55 3 45 ... 42 3 21 7 77 1 88 32 73 June... 2 92 3 7 8 30 4 25 5 45 3 28 6 43 1 4 5 37 7 56 47 67 July... 6 66 4 19 4 40 4 47 6 64 2 77 6 93 5 11 7 68 7 85 56 70 August... 5 52 3 57 4 23 2 86 5 53 4 3 1 31 2 53 1 88 4 2 35 48 September... 2 14 1 84 2 95 1 1 3 7 4 82 3 62 2 10 12 13 1 3 34 71 October... 15 13 9 46 4 57 5 53 8 49 5 24 6 72 9 13 8 91 5 12 78 30 November... ... ... ... ... ... 14 ... 95 ... 92 1 23 ... 29 1 52 1 30 ... 61 6 96 December... ... 60 ... ... ... ... 2 46 ... ... ... ... 3 62 ... ... ... 41 ... 10 7 19 Total fall of rain... 33 86 28 20 31 46 29 70 32 54 29 37 30 16 26 88 47 98 30 61 320 76 Total average fall of rain. 2.82 2.35 2.62 2.48 2.71 2.45 2.51 2.24 4.0 2.5 26.73 It will be seen that the maximum fall took place in 1874, when 47.98 inches were registered, and the minimum in 1873, when only 26.88 inches fell. The average rain-fall of the ten years is 32 inches. 6. The following return shows the monthly mean temperature during the years stated:3 8 The municipality has been in existence since 1856, but it was constituted a town municipality under Act VI. of 1873 on the 7th November 1874. The Municipal Commissioners aré, I am informed, a body of influential gentlemen who evince much interest in all matters appertaining to the health of the community. The area of the town, without including the fort, station, or villages, is stated to be about 1 7/12 square miles. It is divided for municipal purposes into 5 wards, and it is estimated there are, without counting the narrow lanes and gullies, 14 miles of roads through it, 9 of which are covered with metal or moorum. 9 The population consisted, at the time of the census of 1872, of 19,575 Hindus who formed 72.13 per cent. of the entire population. 6,792 Mussulmans ,, 25.05 ,, ,, ,, 261 Buddhists ,, 0.96 ,, ,, ,, 493 Christians ,, 1.82 ,, ,, ,, 10 others ,, 0.04 ,, ,, ,, 10. These persons resided in 5,181 houses, of which were4 men have cattle-stables close to their houses. For example, one of the Munici- pal Commissioners, Mr. Vyasrao Ramrao Desai, keeps a large number of cattle in a shed adjoining his house, the atmosphere in which was so offensive that I was unable to stop there. No means of ventilation had been provided, and there were no drains by which the urine from the animals could run off, and the dung fell on to the floor and had not been removed at the time of my visit. Again, another Municipal Commissioner, the Rao Saheb Shrinivasrao Hanumunt, the Government Pleader, has built a magnificent durbar room over his cattle stable. The atmosphere in the latter was so tainted with ammonia, and occasioned such an immediate pain in my lungs, that I was unable to breathe it, and was glad to get out into the external air. I am sure I have only to bring this matter thus prominently to the notice of the two very intelligent gentlemen I have named to convince them that animals kept in such an atmosphere cannot enjoy perfect health, and that their milk cannot be wholesome or pure, or even free from danger to health, so that as the milk is the principal food of the young, the greatest care should be taken by all to provide it in the purest state possible, and such can only be done by allowing a greater amount of fresh air to each animal. I am aware that the ignorant herdsman believes that such a stifling atmosphere is necessary for his milch cattle to yield an abundant supply of milk. It is; indeed, very probable that the circulation, highly excited and stimulated by an impure atmosphere may, for a time, induce a greater amount of secretion; but it renders the milk impure, and, if given to children, the seeds of disease and death may be sown. I would, therefore, strongly advise that instant action be taken to provide both for the houses and the cattle sheds a greater means of ventilation. For the houses, windows not less than 2 x 3 feet should be let into the external walls. For the tiled roofs, openings such as are usually made in cook- houses should be made, the roof should be raised about 6inches for a length of about 4 feet, so that whilst there would be a ready escape for the fouled air there [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75009712.tif] would be no chance of thieves being able to get in. For the flat mud roofs the arrangement I have seen in Persia might be adopted, viz.5 12. Most of the houses, in fact I believe nearly all, have a back courtyard Of some kind, and in it, generally speaking, is stored the litter for the cattle I have spoken of; such was seen in the compound of the gentleman I have before named, Mr. Vyasrao Ramrao Desai. It is in direct contravention of Section 55 of the Act; but there are great difficulties in the way of enforcing its constant removal. The people are, generally speaking, very poor, and are engaged for the most part in agricultural pursuits, and this stable litter is necessary for their fields. In almost every compound there is a hole ranging in size from 3' X 3' X 3' to 10' X 10' X 3'; the number of such for the storage of stable litter is estimated to be about 2,500. It is, however, my duty to point out that the storage of manure in the close vicinity of houses adds greatly to the impurity of the atmosphere. The places where it is deposited should be paved and drained, and, if it would not inflict hardship or injury on the proprietors, it should be removed daily and deposited in places on the outskirts of the town especially set apart for it, and maintained by the municipality; or, still better, it should be taken off to the fields themselves every day. If this cannot be done, it would be better to burn it and store the ashes, which are, of course, valuable; but it is clear that, in a sanitary- point of view, there should not be a dung heap of decomposing organic matter close to each man's house. 13 In the compounds also are too often what are termed pit privies, of which there are 2,360 in the town. These consist of a pit dug for a depth of about 10 feet and about 6 feet in circumference. They have been in use from time immemorial, and are never cleaned out. It thus results that in Dharwar the inhabitants, 72 per cent. of whom are Hindus, store up their night-soil as they do their grain. Hindus, to whose religion, training, and customs any thing filthy is disgusting, are in Dharwar content to cook food and drink water which has necessarily been exposed to the emanations given off from their own night-soil; nay more, who are content to bring up their children and to live themselves in an atmosphere tainted with their own. excrement. No wonder, as I shall presently show, that 36 per cent. of the deaths take place in children under 12 years of age. In my inspection of Dharwar I was irresistibly reminded of. a honey-comb in which some of the cells were filled with night-soil instead of honey, whilst in the neighbouring cells were stored grain and water. Can any thing be worse or more revolting. I am quite aware that the reason of this is that there are no bhungies procurable in Dharwar; and that in the whole town there is actually only one privy cleaned by a bhungy; but the municipality is fortunately presided over by a gentleman like Mr. Robertson, whom no difficulties, when he is convinced he is acting for the good of his people, will deter, and he has informed me that he con- siders that it would be possible for him to procure bhungies from distant parts, if the disgusting system I have described above is stopped. Of course this change cannot be effected in a day, and proper places must be provided for the people before it can be introduced. 14 There are, on the average, 5.23 persons to a house, so that out of the 27,136 inhabitants only 12,342 use privies; the rest generally resort to the fields on the east, south-east, and north-east of the town; and it is the best thing they can do, though I regret to say I noticed a good deal of night-soil lying inside private enclosures, showing that the people were too lazy to go to the fields. There is only one public necessary in the town, the night-soil from which is de- posited in trenches near the privy. It is situated below the hill where the Mhárs live, and is on the gathering ground of the Bagh Talao, the water in which, however, is not used for drinking water. I think, as I have said, the best thing the people can do is to go to the fields to ease themselves; but I also think a greater number of public latrines might, with advantage, be put up for the convenience of the old and very young, who cannot walk the long distance to the fields. B 1576 15. Before pursuing this subject further, it will be as well to see how much night-soil is now produced in Dharwar every day. It is usual to assume that 2.5 ozs. of solid f7 and wholesome. Near the houses they have been converted into cesspools, and it is an unpleasant but a true reflection that the people really wash themselves with a diluted solution of their own excrement. If these pit privies are done away, after the lapse of a few years when the annual rain-fall has had time to wash out the impurities of the sub-soil, the water in the wells may regain its purity; but the process could not be immediate; it will take years to effect. 20. Among the public wells in which the water is potable, I may mention the Jukani well on the north of the town, the Noochambli well on the south-west, and the well built by Rao Bahadoor Venkutrao, the father of one of the most energetic of the Municipal Commissioners, Rao Bahadoor Tirmulrao, and also a well on the outskirts near the Hubli road, built by Rao Bahadoor Shrinee- wasrao Hanumunt, the Public Prosecutor. Most of the wells have steps leading down into them. At the Noochambli well, at the time of my inspection, although there was a sepoy on guard for the express purpose of preventing the practice, I saw two individuals washing their mouths on the steps, and the discoloration of the water close to the steps afforded ample evidence of the dirt that had been carried into it by the dirty vessel and the dirty feet and hands and the mud. brought down by the drawers of water. The steps should be closed and the water should be drawn by a Persian wheel and allowed to flow into a cistern preferably lined with cast-iron, and be drawn off through brass cocks, as is done in Ahmedabad. If this suggestion is carried out, a cistern, in the form of a Maltese Cross, would be found to afford a large surface for drawing water. The wells with steps are objectionable on every account, and persons using them are very liable to be attacked with that painful complaint, guinea-worm, and in my opinion they should not be allowed by Government. If the Persian wheel cistern arrangement cannot be undertaken, drawing wheels fitted with an iron chain might be put up all round the well. It would be better that an iron bucket should be attached to the chain; but if there should be any objection to its use, then the people, might be allowed to bring their own metal vessels, which should, however, not be cleaned at the well itself, but a trough near it might be provided for this purpose and for the use of cattle. All wells should be paved on the outside on a slope and a drain should be made to carry away the wastage water, and they should be covered over. 21. The principal water-supply is from what is called the Moti Talao, which is situated to the north of the town and between it and the fort. The tank is only a storage reservoir. Mr. Robertson has enormously increased the catchment area for the storm water falling on the hills to the south-west of the town which now covers an area of 384 acres instead of, as formerly, only 180 acres. The rain water is brought down by cuttings in the soil to the tank. This was, of course, the best arrangement that could be made to relieve the immediate and pressing wants of the town; but it was felt that the water was liable to be fouled in its transit, and that it was an insufficient supply. Plans have, therefore, been prepared; and Mr. Robertson has now a scheme which, I believe, has gone up for the sanction of the Government of India to make an embankment across the entrance of the valley between some low hills on the south. at a higher elevation than the town and to bring in the water under pressure. I earnestly hope that Government will sanction this scheme, as I regard the increased supply of good water one of paramount importance. 22. One of the greatest of the many improvements I saw in Dharwar was the opening out that Mr. Robertson had effected by making broad roads through- out the suburbs. There is more gained by this action than greater facilities of communication, because now it will be possible to make sweeper's passages to houses which before would not have been feasible. The road-side gutters have in some places been fitted with V-shaped slabs of smooth stone. This plan, though not so good as U-shaped drains, is a great improvement over the objec-
8 tionable |__| drains now found as road-side gutters, as the filth lodges in them, and they have in many of the principal streets been covered over with slabs of stone so as to form entrances into the houses; but on lifting up these, much filth of all kinds was invariably found, which prevented all flow of water in them. They should be uncovered and excavated. It would be better, of course, to do away with these, and to have a glazed stone-ware pipe running down the centre of the street into which the side drains could communicate; but this course would, I fear, be, beyond the means of the municipality, so that if these drains are continued they should be if possible, made U-shaped, and left open. The netrances to shops should be the only places at which cross slabs should be allowed. 23. There are, I am informed, no under-ground drains in Dharwar; but all the liquid filth flows out, as before mentioned, by the natural surface drains. 24. Outside the town on the north, and between it and the fort, Mr. Robertson has erected the most convenient and spacious fruit and vegetable markets. These are by far the finest I have seen out of Bombay, and are a great boon to the inhabitants. They consist of a quadrangular building with a corrugat- ed iron roof, containing on each side of the square 20 stalls back to back, and are of the following dimensions:9 27. The number and description of cattle is stated to have been at the time of the census10 30. The places for the disposal of the dead have been carefully and judi- ciously selected. The old English burial-ground is on the outskirts of the town, near the fort, and is overcrowded, and the houses of the people surround it on two sides. This is closed, and a new burial-ground was chosen on the south; but no interment has as yet taken place; and as the site is close to that of the pro- posed tank, a new place will be immediately, I am informed, chosen on the south- east of the town. 39 acres have been divided as follows:11 25. The station is kept pretty clean; but I was disappointed at seeing the private bunghies burying, or rather depositing, the night-soil from the bungalows in the hedges, in the very close proximity to houses; and I was not surprised to hear that some persons had lately died of typhoid fever. This practice should be stopped. A halalcore cess might be imposed on the residents of the fort and station, as is done in Bombay; and the stuff should be deposited in a cart and carried away. 36. The police are quartered in the old Native Infantry Lines, many of the old huts in which have been pulled down, and the ground has been partially cleared. The premises were clean; but the huts are not, in my opinion, sufficiently good for sepoys to live in. 37. Dr. Sylvester was kind enough to take me over the Civil Hospital, in the compound of which there are some cells devoted to the custody of lunatics. I was glad to hear that it was proposed to place the Civil Hospital in the fort, a spot so much nearer the town that its benefits will be much more widely ex- tended, and then there will be space sufficient on the site of the present Civil Hospital to build a central lunatic asylum, which is evidently much needed. I also went over the jail, and was much pleased with the order, neatness, and great attention paid to sanitary measures in it. The trench latrine in the grounds were wonderfully well kept, and there was no odour of any kind perceptible. 38. The accounts of the municipality will be found in the Appendix. It will be seen that, during 1875-76, Rs. 7,448-10-1 were spent on sanitation. 39. I have been favoured with a copy of the bye-laws which are in opera- tion in Dharwar, and I generally approve of most of these provisions; and this is the first town which I have inspected which carries out the system I have so often before recommended, regarding the registration of births and deaths, viz., the compulsory registration by the principal occupant of a building to report, within a specified time of the occurrence of a birth or death taking place in the house in which he resides. 40. Such is a brief account of the sanitary condition of Dharwar as I saw it at my inspection in August 1876. 41. The birth-rate during the last two years has been12 And the different causes of deaths are shown in the next return:13 From this I have deduced the following table showing the ratios which the deaths of children below 12 years of age bear to the total deaths:14 2. That existing cattle-stables, if not removed, be ventilated and drained. 3. That the steps leading to the wells be closed, and that the water in them be drawn up by a Persian wheel, the appurtenances of which should be made of iron, by which the water should be led into a covered reservoir, from which it should be drawn off through brass cocks. If this is done, rests for the water vessels to stand below the cocks should be provided. 4. That the system of lining the road-side gutters with slabs, be extended, if U-shaped stone or brick drains cannot be provided, and that these gutters, except at entrances into shops, be kept open. 5. That more ventilation be provided in the beef slaughter-house, and that the offal from it and mutton dressing-shed be buried in trenches and covered over with earth daily; and that a proper slaughter-house for sheep be erected, and that the flagging of the dressing-shed be com- pleted. 6. That the pits in which cutchra is deposited be closed, and that it either be burnt and the ashes thrown into the pit privies, or that it be carted to fields on the east side of the town and there deposited; but that it be no longer deposited on the west, and that the existing hole near the police station by the side of the road leading to Hebli Bahuti be closed. 7. As regards the fort15 STATEMENT of Receipts and Disbursements of the Dharwar Municipality for 1875-76. Receipts16 Receipts17 2. Loans18 Receipts19 6. Honorarium to Auditors 60 0 0 7. Notice Boards 11 4 0 8. Pound Keepers 67 8 3 9. Assessment of Government Land. 28 6 0 10. Remission of Municipal Revenue. 67 0 0 11. Other Items 19 13 0 525 7 5 525 7 5 14,443 1 11 F.20 MEMO. of LIABILITIES and CLAIMS of the DHARWAR MUNICIPALITY in the DHARWAR DISTRICT. Liabilities. Amount. Claims. Amount. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Loan ...... Advances Repayable 790 10 2 Deposits to be ajusted 1,048 0 0 Net amount of debt 275 5 10 Net amount of Claims ...... Total... 1,048 0 0 Total 1,048 0 0 (Signed) I. DRACUP, Huzur Deputy Collector and Chairman Dharwar Municipality. Dharwar Collector's Office, June 1876. (True Copy.) I. DRACUP, Chairman.
No. 1565. GENERAL DEPARTMENT. Bombay Castle, 18th May 1877. Letter from the Sanitary Commissioner, No. 1173, dated 15th May 18775 REPORT ON THE SANITARY CONDITION OF THE CITY OF SHOLAPUR. Inspected in September 1876. Sholápur, the chief City of the collectorate of that name, is reached by the G. I. P. Railway at a distance of 282 miles from Bombay, and is situated in la- titude 17° 40 and longitude 75° 56', at an elevation of about 1,800 feet above the sea, from which it is distant in a straight line about 188 miles. The town lies on the water-shed of the Adila stream, a tributary of the Sina River, into which it is discharged at Nandur, about 8, miles to the south-west of the City, and has been built on slightly rising ground in the centre of an extensive plain, the nearest hill, called Davud Mulluk, being 8 miles away on the east, whilst on the north at a distance of 12 miles is Savargaras Doongur, and further away at a distance of 24 miles is the hill of Tuljipur. The natural drainage is good, and is carried off by a large nullah, called Lenke, on the east, which empties itself into the Shelgi Nullah, which runs from east along the north towards the west, where it joins the Adila, or, as it is here called, the Baleh Nullah. The lowest part of the town is on the west. The rock on which the City is built consists of trap, which in some places is very near the surface, and barely covered by any soil at all, though on the north and east the black cotton soil is cultivated, and produces very fertile crops. On the north of the town, and at a distance of about 3 miles, the Ekruk Lake has been constructed at the expense of Government. 2. The following statement shows the monthly fall of rain from 1866 to 1875, as registered at the Civil Hospital:6 Months. 1871. 1872. 1873. 1874. 1875. Maximum. Minimum. Mean. Maximum. Minimum. Mean. Maximum. Minimum. Mean. Maximum. Minimum. Mean. Maximum. Mainimum. Mean. January... 96 61 78 98 65 81 74 66 70 92 68 80 82 58 70 February... 91 62 76 110 60 85 81 75 78 92 69 75 94 56 75 March... 98 65 81 109 71 90 86 76 81 95 72 83 96 72 84 April... 98 70 84 105 72 88 92 84 88 106 74 90 103 73 88 May... 111 78 94 105 79 92 94 84 89 98 75 86 103 78 90 June... 111 75 92 112 75 83 84 73 78 87 72 79 99 76 87 July... 99 75 87 87 74 80 84 72 78 87 69 78 85 75 80 August... 109 73 82 91 74 82 84 72 78 86 71 78 85 76 80 September... 93 72 82 91 73 82 82 72 77 85 73 75 80 75 77 October... 94 66 80 88 70 79 81 70 75 86 72 79 83 73 75 November... 103 68 85 88 83 85 85 65 75 85 63 74 81 73 77 December... 103 65 84 84 72 78 85 52 68 82 61 71 79 72 75 The prevailing wind during each month of the year may be learnt from the following return, which shows the observations taken since January 1874 up the present time. Before 1874 the returns regarding this information are stated to be not reliable:7 after the villages to which the roads through them lead. On the north is the Tuljipur gate, and on the east the Kumbhari and Dhari ves, each of which has very lately been pulled down, as also has the Bijápur ves on the south, next to which is the Pani gate, whilst on the south-west is the Killa ves. 4. The Municipality of Shoápur was first established in March 1853, but was constituted a City municipality, under the District Municipal Act, on the 7th November 1874. The City has not yet been surveyed, and no map exists which shows the levels in the town. The Municipality has jurisdiction, not only over the City, but also over the Sudder Bazaar and the hamlet of Modikhana, which were formerly included in the adjacent military Cantonment, but were transferred to the civil authorities in 1871, The area covered by the town has not been determined, but it is roughly calculated that nearly 8 square miles are includ- ed within municipal limits. The following Peits are situated inside the walls:8 whilst about 200 are said to be detached, and are situated either in the compound or outside it; beside which there are about 50 deep pit privies in the town. The Municipality has erected public latrines on the following sites:9 tract and are not of good pattern. Besides the above, 20 men are solely em- ployed. in cleaning out cesspools; and 9 large and. 2 smaller tank carts are used for the removal of the liquid filth found in them. The refuse is removed to the following places:10 from the cut throats of the cattle. This should, I think, be stopped. A mutton market was built in 1874, out of municipal funds, outside the Kumbhári yes on an open space over the Lenki Nullah, and to the west of it is the slaughter- house, where 23 sheep and 76 goats are slaughtered daily. The market is a tiled building, with a central passage, on either side of which are 8 stalls. There is another mutton slaughter-house in Begum Peit, which is also paved at the bot- tom. Mutton is also sold in a chuppered shed in Sakhar Peit, and in another near Bijápur ves, both of which belong to the Municipality, and there is also a private mutton market in Mungulwar Peit. The animals are inspected before and after slaughter by a European overseer, but the fees are collected by contract. For slaughtering cattle one anna per head, and for each sheep or goat 6 pies are charged. There are stated to be about 20 beef and 80 mutton butchers in the town; and I am informed that there are 300 grain shops and 6 liquor shops, besides two licensed places where opium is sold. 15. The following return shows the number of animals in the city at the time of the census of 1872:11 scheme prepared by Mr. Burke, Assistant Engineer for Irrigation, for providing the City with what is evidently its first requirement, namely, a plentiful supply of pure water. 18. I am indebted to Mr. Burke for the following information regarding the Ekruk Tank, which is situated about three miles due north of the town of Sholápur, and has been designed to irrigate the belt of land lying on the eastern side of the Adheela River and terminated by the river Sina. The dam is made of earth and faced with stone on the tank side; it is about 6,940 feet in length, and has a maximum height of 76 feet. The surface area of the tank, when full, is about 6.86 square miles, and its maximum depth of water equals 60 feet. Three canals have been designed and partly constructed; one at a low and two at a high level. The low level or perennial canal has been completed to the end of the 24th mile, and in order to complete it 2 miles and 817 feet have yet to be constructed. Of the high level canals, one on the left bank of the river has been completed, and is 4 miles in total length, that on the right bank has been completed up to the end of the 6th mile, and the remaining 12 miles are now in progress. Thus, when completed, the total length of the canal will be about 48 miles. Irrigation from these canals commenced in 1871-72. 19. I have extracted the following information from Mr. Burke's proposal, dated 7th June 1875, to supply the city with water from the Ekruk Tank. This proposal has met with the warm approbation of Mr. Grant, who strongly recom- mends it to be carried out, and I earnestly trust that the Municipal Commission- ers will do their utmost to push on a scheme which will prove of the greatest possible value to the inhabitants of Sholápur. A turbine is to be erected close to the mouth of the perennial canal, where the necessary head will be obtained by constructing a masonry weir across the canal. The meter will be worked in connection with two sets of direct acting treble plunger pumps so arranged that in case of accident one set can be used separately. The water will be forced through an iron pipe 6 inches in diameter and 2,000 feet in length into a masonry tower which will be constructed close to the Government bungalow. From this tower the water will flow by gravitation through iron pipes of 7 ½ and 11 inches diameter, respectively, to service reservoirs constructed in the town of Sholápur, and from which the water will be led to stand-posts erected in the prin- cipal parts for distribution to the inhabitants; 5 gallons per head being allowed for 53,400 inhabitants, or 267,000 gallons per day. The cost, including 15 per cent for the necessary establishment of the Public Works Department for supervision, is estimated at Rs. 2,13,934, and the annual amount to be paid by the Munici- pality to Government is to be levied at the rate of Rs. 15 per annum for each 1,000 gallons supplied per diem, so that as 267,000 gallons represents the daily quantity required, the amount to be paid annually would be Rs. 4,005. The Municipal Commissioners, when this project was submitted to them, resolved first of all to try and ascertain whether it would not be possible to construct a tank on the east or south of the City; but on further inquiry this latter course was found to be impossible, and the Municipal Commissioners have very wisely decided on adopting Mr. Burke's proposal, and have sanctioned expenditure of Rs. 960 for the preparation of plans and estimates. 20. I am strongly of opinion that no other permanent plan should be adopted, although I was very glad that the Municipal Commissioners, at their meeting held on the 14th September, at which I had the pleasure to be present, resolved to expend Rs. 2,500 in bringing water from the Ekruk Canal to the cistern inside the Dehgaon ves. This cistern was originally constructed as a reservoir for water to be brought from the Moti Talao. It is very deep, and should, in my opinion, be filled in for a height of 10 feet; and the sides should be carefully lined with hydraulic cement to prevent the percolation I saw taking place into it. It should be covered over, and the water should be drawn off through brass cocks let into the wall all round, the approach being made by a sub-way, and a drain to the nullah outside the wall to carry off the wastage
12 water should be provided. At the same meeting Rs. 2,000 were sanctioned for bringing water from the Ekruk Canal to the well called the Yelleshwar's Bourie, outside the Peit Balla ves. Although the drawing water from the open canal at the places nearest to the town, in order to mitigate the great distress the people are put to, owing to the scarcity of water in the Shideshwar Tank, is a proceeding, under the circumstances, to be highly commended, yet I must point out in as forcible a manner as I can that this course would not be safe for a perennial supply. The canal being open, the water is liable to be fouled, as it passes in the vicinity of a large town like Sholápur; for example, I saw persons washing themselves in it close to one of the roads leading to Hippurgeh, and the road to the same place from the Tuljipur gate is unbridged, and cattle and men pass through it; but even fouled as it is, it is a purer source of supply than the Sideshwar Tank, which is in every way unfitted for a drinking water-supply, although the Municipal Commissioners are doing their best to increase its storage capacity, as they have sanctioned the expenditure of Rs. 2,000 for deepening the tank and removing the weeds. This will do so far good that it will increase the purity of the water somewhat, and if the Ekruk water is brought into the City as proposed, the Sideshwar Tank should be kept constantly filled, as the large surface of water it would then present would materially tend to keep the air in its vicinity cool. Arrangements should, however, be made for occasionally emptying it, so that the weeds might be removed and the mud cleaned. There is at present a row of washing stones built on the embankment of the tank out- side the Panee ves. This I do not consider is a safe place as being above a source of water-supply, and it should be, in my opinion, closed, and a place chosen on the north of the town, where alone the dhobies should be allowed to wash. 21. There are several wells outside the town from which the people draw water. For example there is a well called Nagappa Kudwadde's well, which has a high wall all round it, into which none but Lingayets are allowed to enter; the water is said to be good and never to run dry; and from it men and women are to be seen carrying their copper vessels filled with water, but carefully covered over with too often a filthy rag. There is another well close by this which is used by all castes, and said to yield excellent water. There is also another much- frequented well situated in the quarry on the east, and close to Jodavibhavis Pet, nearly opposite Cheerak Ali's Takya. The well is surrounded by a low parapet wall, and men and women were drawing water all round it; but on three sides of the well there is a pool of fetid water about 3 feet deep which has collected from the washings, because no channel has been made for it to escape by. This should be provided at once. 22. Kondoba's Tank consists simply of a collection of water in an old quarry hole on the east, below the Judge's compound. The stone has not been quarried with any regularity, and immediate arrangements should be made to de- fine its outline, and then to remove the irregular surface inside of this. This could easily be done, and might perhaps be undertaken as a famine relief work. The stone so removed would be useful when drainage works are undertaken, and the tank should be, when the Ekruk water is supplied, always kept full as a cooling reservoir. It would prove a useful supply for flushing drains, watering roads, &c. 23. I also inspected the jail and civil hospital which adjoin one another. The total number of prisoners in the jail on the 9th of September was 1 China- man, and 147 Native males and 18 Native females. The jail is calculated to contain 112 male prisoners, allowing 648 cubic feet per man. There were, therefore, 38 males in excess of the authorized cubic capacity. There was only one male pri- soner sick in hospital. The women were not overcrowded, as there is space suf- ficient for 21 females, and only 18 were present. The latrines, both on the male and female side of the jail were perfectly clean and free from odour; the dry-earth system is adopted here and answers perfectly; but, in my opinion, the latrine for females is in much too close proximity to their cook-room, as it is immediately in
13 front of it, and another site should be chosen for one or other of these necessary buildings. The covered drains leading into the jail garden were found to be choked, and the solitary cells are entirely unfit for the incarceration of human beings. These are built in rows separated from each other by a distance of 3 feet, and the outer row is within 6 feet of the boundary wall, which is about 18 feet high. There is consequently no ventilation. If these places cannot be removed, as in my opinion they ought to be, to a more open site, no delay should take place in fitting the roofs with a roof ventilator and in piercing the walls on the four sides both above and below; but they are not proper places to put men into, and I hope they will be abolished. The drinking water supply for the jail and hospi- tal is derived from a deep well in the jail garden, which is said to yield excellent water, but the ground above this well and immediately behind the jail and civil hospital and close to a public road, which separates it from the houses of the town, has been used as a place where the night-soil of the jail has been buried. There was no smell perceivable, but I should fear that some of the night-soil might find its way into the well, and, in my opinion, it is too close to the habita- tions of the people in the town for this practice to be continued with safety. 24. The civil hospital is a thatched building without roof ventilation. This, I think, is required. There is a female detached ward and a ward for the police distinct from the rest, and between the police ward and the main buildings are six cells for the custody of lunatics. These cells were not occupied. The com- pound is surrounded by a prickly-pear hedge which requires cutting. There were only ten males in the main building, five of whom had cots provided for their use, but the remainder were lying on carpets spread on the mud-floor: 25. The Sudder Bazaar must be considered by itself, as it lies about a mile to the south-east of the town. It is situated on rising ground, and the road from the Collector's bungalow to the Post Office passes across an old earthen embankment, which local tradition states was the band of a tank which formerly supplied the town, but which was demolished by the order of the Emperor Aurungzib who ordered a garden which he named Nao Bagth to be planted there. It is now covered by a plantation of babul trees. The embankment passed across the two nullahs, and water is still found in wells in their course. The Sudder Bazaar contains 1,357 houses, in which 6,617 people are said to reside; there are also said to be about 1,000 privies attached to the houses. Those that I saw were in a most filthy condition, as there were no baskets, and the lanes and neighbour- ing places had been defiled. The distillery is situated in the Sudder Bazaar, and its condition was filthier than I can adequately describe, and the stench from it was very bad. There are two wells which are said to yield good water. The Kassie Bouri is said to be supplied through an aqueduct, but I could not obtain certain information on this point. It, like all wells from which drinking water is drawn, should be covered, and round the parapet wall should be fitted wheels with iron chains and bucket, and the ground below it should be paved and provision made for carrying off the wastage water to a drain. It is now allowed to form an offensive pool on the open ground. The beef slaughter- house, with its beef market at its back, is situated on the outskirts of the bazaar on the east. It was clean, but the cesspool at the back is objectionable. The vegetable market is in the middle of the bazaar and consists of a building, the roof of which is supported by masonry pillars, and the floor-space is let out to the dealers. The mutton slaughter-house is most objectionably placed, as it actually adjoins houses. It should be at once removed to the open ground beyond the market, which was clean. I noticed that the compounds in the bazaar were generally filthy, and that in many instances the floors of the houses have been allowed to be built below the surface of the ground, but few of the houses were properly ventilated at present. I was informed that no public latrine accom- modation has been provided for the use of the inhabitants, but that one for each sex has been sanctioned. I think two more will be required. B 60214 26. The hamlet of Modikhana is situated to the north-west of the Can- tonment, which was also not as clean as it should be, and where public privy accommodation is also required. Its present condition is a source of danger to the officers and residents in the station, and it should be more carefully looked after. 27. I also inspected the Police Lines, which are situated to the west of the city near the position of the old Pandharpur and Hiraj roads and close to the perennial canal from the Ekruk Tank. On the north side of the lines the em- bankment of the canal is not sufficiently high, and the water flows over the ground and forms a dangerous marsh close to them, and the water in this swamp ebbs and flows according to the height of the water in the canal. This will prove a source of great danger to the police sepoys, and the embankment should, in my opinion, be raised so as to restrain the water within the channel of the canal. It is a great pity that the canal was brought so close to the lines, as doubtless infiltration takes place along either side of its bank, and it will in course of time render the floors of the pendalls damp, and may eventually cause them to be abandoned. The lines consist of two rows, each containing 60 huts, which are not provided with any means of ventilation. This Could be easily given by making openings in the roof similar to those provided for the escape of smoke in cook-rooms. There are 9 sowars attached to the force, and these men are allowed to keep their horses in the verandahs of their houses, and as no drains are provided, the urine soaks into the ground. The horses should be either picketted outside, or be placed under a shed in the compound. The pre- sent arrangement is most improper and objectionable. There are no latrines, and the residents in the lines walk across the canal out into the fields on the other side for the purposes of nature, which is, perhaps, the best arrangement that can be made where there is no establishment allowed for the maintenance of a staff for cleaning latrines; but I think there ought to be no difficulty in arrang- ing for proper trench latrines and the requisite staff for keeping them clean. The floors of the huts are nearly on the same level with the ground, and from each row the bathing water is led from the name in the corner of the verandah. It is very desirable that nanees inside sepoys' huts should be prohibited, and that detached lavatories for each sex should be erected in convenient sites close to the lines. 28. The accounts of the Municipality will be found in the Appendix, by which it will be seen that at the close of the year ending 31st March 1876, there was a balance of Rs. 17,514, and that the expenditure during the year had amounted to Rs. 59,695, whilst the income during the same period was 55,470. When the Municipality was first established, its revenue only amounted to Rs. 18,503. At the time of the Census in 1872, the rate of municipal taxation per head of population was Rs. 0-14-3; in Ahmednagar Rs. 1-1-7; in Poona Rs. 1-1-1. In Kurrachee, a city of almost exactly similar population, it amounted to Rs. 4-14-8. The trade of Sholápur is increasing, and I was glad to see that a new spinning and weaving mill belonging to Messrs. Morarjee Goculdass and Co. was nearly completed. 29. The following return shows the number of summons issued and con- victions obtained for infringement of the provisions of the Municipal Act:15 lation, were registered, but in 1875 only 372 births, or 6.97 per 1,000 were re- corded. These figures will prove that the matter has not engaged that local attention which it should have done. 31. The number of deaths registered in the following years will be seen below:16 From this I have deduced the following table, showing the ratio of deaths of children under 12 years of age to the total deaths in each year:17 36. Before all comes the necessity of bringing in the water from the Ekruk Tank itself. If this is done, I feel confident that the bowel complaint death-rate will diminish, but coincidently with the introduction of pure water, action must be taken to carry it away after it has been fouled in domestic use by a proper system of sewers. At present the very high fever-rate is due, in my opinion, to the fact that most of the water used in houses soaks into the ground close to human habitations, and thus renders the sub-soil damp and malarious. Now Sholápur is most favourably situated in having laud on its immediate vici- nity to which the outfall of the sewers could be taken, and it is moreover on the line of railway, so that there will be no difficulty in procuring the necessary material from Bombay. It may be useful to state the cost of glazed stone-ware pipes as laid down in Bombay:18 whole conservancy establishment under the supervision of the present Superin- tendent of the manure-yard, Mr. Robson, who served under me as an Inspector in the Public Health Department in Bombay, and who knows the work thorough- ly, and who would be able to introduce the same system that obtained in Bombay. In carrying this out, the town would be divided into sections or wards, and each ward would be made entirely independent of every other ward by having its own separate establishments of carts, coolies and halalcores, who should work under the orders of a sub-inspector who should be directly responsible to the head superintendent for all the work in the ward, which would not only embrace the cleaning of the surface, the removal of the night-soil, but also the reporting of all infringements against the Act, and the cases in which it was necessary to enforce its sanitary requirements, such as lime-washing, making drains, &c. I earnestly recommend the above scheme to the favourable consideration of the President and of the Municipal Commissioners. Of course it is absolutely neces- sary in any case largely to increase the staff of carts and men, both of which are utterly insufficient for the removal of the cutchra in the town. The contract system, however convenient, is, as regards cleaning, utterly and entirely a mistake, and it ought to be put a stop to, and the Municipality should provide itself with its own staff of carts, bullocks, labourers, &c. The Bombay tilt cart is the best I know, and it holds a good load for the bullocks, and the proper amount of cutchra. One such might be procured from Bombay as a pattern, -when the remainder could be built in Sholápur. 38. The three manure-yards are all in dangerous proximity to the town, and their sites must he changed. They should not, if possible, be nearer the town than a mile. There ought to be no difficulty in choosing appropriate sites. 39. Another point to attend to is the ventilation of the town. A good work has been commenced by Mr. Bosanquet in pulling down the town-walls from Kombhari vest to Bijápur ves, and in making a fine broad road over the space so obtained, and I hope that this admirable plan will be still further carried out, as the walls not only act as a barrier to perflation but they are in a ruinous condition. 40. As regards houses, the first thing wanted is a City survey map, showing the exact position of each house. Mr. Bosanquet and Mr. Grant have taken every opportunity of widening the streets, and much good has been effected in this matter, and the existence of Goldfinch Peit perpetuates the name of the Collector who commenced laying out the town on a systematic plan; but it is desirable in my opinion to run broad streets through the labyrinthine parts of the over-crowded town to act as air avenues, and to pass stringent regulations regarding uniformity of the buildings not only as regards the frontages, but also in the rear, and to introduce bye-laws to regulate the height of plinths, ventila- tion of rooms, position of privies, &c. 41. The offensive trades which should bed removed from the town and located not nearer than a mile on the north are the lime-burners and the indigo-dyers. The latter were formerly removed according to the recommenda- tions of Dr. Leith, but were injudiciously allowed to come back. They should, in my opinion, be again removed. The tanners are in too close proximity to the Ekruk Canal, which passes within a few yards of the tanpits, where these offensive operations are carried on. They should be removed further northward. 42. Among one of the first things to be done is to provide the city with a proper vegetable market. That put up by Mr. Robertson, C.S., at Dharwar is the finest I have seen out of Bombay, and I should be glad to see a similar one erected in Sholápur, which has just double the population. A beef market also is much wanted, and the mutton market is not a good one; it is not light enough, and is too close to the slaughter-yard, which is to windward of it, and should be removed to a much further distance away either on the north or east.
OFFICE SUPDT. GOVT. PRINTING.20 APPENDIX. STATEMENT of Receipts and Disbursements of the City Municipality of Sholápur for the year ending 31st March 1876. RECEIPTS. DISBURSEMENTS. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Balance in hand at the close of last year. (A.) GENERAL ESTABLISHMENT. Deposits ...... ...... ...... Secretary 1,200 0 0 Office Establishment 993 1 7 Actual Municipal Balance ...... 21,738 15 11 21,738 15 11 Public Works Establishment 600 0 0 2,793 1 7 RECEIPTS. COLLECTION ESTABLISHMENT. (A) MUNICIPAL TAXES. Inspectors, Kárkoons, and Peons 3,274 10 4 6,067 11 11 1.21 B 60222 RECEIPTS. DISBURSEMENTS. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Brought over ...... 9,378 8 10 63,844 2 8 Brought over 1,140 3 0 3,869 4 10 9,642 1 11 Public Wells 35 6 10 6.23 Purchase of disinfecting powder 149 6 0 Trenches for depositing latrine filth 394 6 3 Removing stagnant water from the large pit outside Pani Vase 11 12 3 Trenches excavated for people for call of nature 17 11 9 Temporary Establishment during the time of cholera 948 7 4 Purchasing iron pots for removing cesspool water 15 14 9 Shed for cesspool water carts 183 2 0 Expense of separating sweeping for preparing the manure 163 2 0 4,774 2 1 7.24 RECEIPTS. DISBURSEMENTS. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Brought over ...... ...... 77,209 11 5 Brought over ...... ...... 32,583 4 5 (D)Repairs. Road from Degaon Vase to Library... 1,049 12 1 Do. Bijápur to Collector's Bungalow......... 1,180 2 7 Road from Ruheemutallee's shop to Pani Vase......... 515 10 1 Road from Mission Bungalow to Shree- put Lingoo's house...... 307 1 9 Road from Foujdar Chawdy to Pani Vase......... 285 10 1 Road from Nago Narayen's house to Kanapuray......... 262 7 1 Road from Post Office to Fulton Well. 112 1 9 Road from Dutta's Temple to Desh- mukh's house 210 3 2 Road from Cotton Depôts to the Sudder Bazaar Channel Bridge 552 13 9 Road from Degaon Vase to Ameersing's house 637 4 0 Road from Nawi Vase to Dari Vase 1,499 6 0 Road Repair Establishment 1,497 2 10 Petty repairs to the road in Municipal limits 666 10 3 Compensation 2,307 15 0 Repairs to Dhurumsallas 180 12 9 Bridges and Culverts 56 8 0 Drains, &c. 294 4 0 Marking lines in the Pacha Pait 29 5 6 11,645 2 8 (2.)RECEIPTS. DISBURSEMENTS. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Brought over... ...... ...... 77,209 11 5 Brought over... 1,618 0 0 18,700 9 10 33,633 4 5 (E)PUBLIC CONVENIENCENo. 31/1877 SANITARY DEPARTMENT. FROM T. G. HEWLETT, ESQUIRE,. Acting Sanitary Commissioner, TO F. S. CHAPMAN, ESQUIRE, Chief Secretary to Government, General Department. Camp Poona, 3rd January 1877. SIR, In forwarding the accompanying Report on the Sanitary Condition of the Town of Sholápur for the information of His Excellency the Governor in Council, together with a letter from the President of the Municipal Commissioners, Sholápur, I have the honour to answer the objections taken by the Municipal Commissioners to some of the proposals I have made. 2. Paragraph 38.2 is derived from a point below where these people reside, it is extremely desirable that all possible contamination with the animal decomposing matter inseparable from a tanning-yard should be removed from the precincts of the canal. 4.Paragraph 44.3 No. 3454 OF 1876. FROM J.H. GRANT, ESQUIRE, Acting Collector, Sholápur, To T. G. HEWLETT, ESQUIRE, Sanitary Commissioner, Bombay. Sholáipur Collector's Office, 26th December 1876. SIR, With reference to your letter No. 114/1076, dated 14th October 1876, I have the honour to inform you that I circulated your Report on the sanitary condition of the City of Sholápur for the perusal of the Municipal Commissioners of Sho- lápur, who, at a general meeting held on 20th instant, passed the following Resolutions:4 the indigo-dyers should be allowed to remain where they are at present, and also because a large number of persons are employed who would be put to great inconvenience if they had to remove to a distance from the City. With regard to the tanners, they have been removed once already by order of the Municipa- lity, who selected the present site for them, which is so much below the Ekruk Canal that it cannot be injurious to the water. And as there is no other suitable site, and the tanners have spent a good deal of money on the present one, the Committee are unwilling to interfere with them. The Irrigation Department allow the tanners to take water from the canal on payment, and have made a set of steps for them for that purpose. Paragraph 42.No. 1332. GENERAL DEPARTMENT. Bombay Castle, 27th April 1877. Letter from the Sanitary Commissioner, No. 31, dated 3rd January 1877No. A.-917 OF 1876. To F. S. CHAPMAN, ESQ., Chief Secretary to Government, Bombay, General Department. Sanitary Commissioner's Office, 17th October 1876. SIR,2 amounted to 12,935 persons; but, as will be seen from the following statement which I have received from the Mámlatdár, it would appear that it has increased since then:3 7. There are no persons living now inside the Arkilla, though near the Sat Mazli there is an ancient Hindu temple, the shrine of Bijanagar, the original name of the city which the Musalmans converted into Bijápur where the priests and their families reside. 8. The ground around all these buildings is covered with debris and with low jungle, and the old pit-privies that are to be seen attached to each house demonstrate the fact that bhunghis must have been scarce at Bijápur in the days of the Adilshahi dynasty, and this fact would tend to throw discredit on the legend connected with the erection of the Mehtri Mahal. Mr. Molecey has already filled in the low lying ground in front of the granary and the Adalut Mahal, and in my opinion this course will be necessary round all the houses chosen for the use of these officers, and the greatest attention should, I think, be especially paid to the old pit-privies I have mentioned. They should be filled in. There was, even after the lapse of so many years, a distinct privy odour about them, and I have no doubt the ground in their neighbourhood was formerly saturated with f4 aqueduct; such is not in my opinion the case. If it is supplied from either aque- duct, I believe it will be found that the water comes from that brought in from the Begam Talao. 13. The two principal wells in the town are the Chand Bavri, called after Chandabai, which is situated below a tomb close to a dharamsala. It is a large tank which is approached by steps. The water, which I am informed is liked by the natives, though I have not seen a chemical analysis of it, is liable to contamination from several sources. In my opinion the surroundings of the well should be carefully conserved, and the steps leading into it should be closed, and the water be drawn up by means of iron buckets and iron chains attached to windlasses. The other large well is the Taj Bavri, which is near "The Two Sisters," but the water in it is said to be not good, though it is drunk on market days. 14. There are besides said to be 453 wells in the town, but the principal water-supply in the days when the city was teeming with a population, if tradi- tion is to be believed, exceeding that of Bombay, was brought into it by the Torweh aqueduct, which is said to have been constructed by Afzul Khan. 15. I visited the head-works at the source of this water-supply, and the following is a brief though unprofessional description of them. The old town of Torweh is situated four miles to the west of Bijápur, and was the place chosen by Ibrahim Adil Shah II., when he deserted Bijápur in compliance with the suggestion of his astrologers in 1604. The ruins and debris of houses extending from Bijápur to Torweh can still be traced, and the former town now dwindled into a village is situated on the Shendi nullah, which is a tributary of the Bhima river, and which has its origin about a mile to the south-west of Torweh. On walking along its bed a running stream is met, on the banks of which the com- mencement of the line of air-shafts which led from the head-works into Bijápur is seen. Water was found in the first air-shaft which is known by the name of the Bhut Bavri, and behind this an old masonry dam is standing, which extended across the bed of the nullah, and which formed a saturating tank, which is now silted up. The gathering ground is entirely uninhabited, and consists of kunkur or the concretionary carbonate of lime which is here interstratified with moorum. 16. Many springs are found below the surface, and the water-supply must have been, and is, one of the finest in India. It is much to be wished that this water source could be again utilized, but it is feared that the line of aqueduct is very much out of repair. From a very interesting letter to my address from Mr. Umaji Lingoji, who at my suggestion went down and examined some of the air-shafts nearer Bijápur, I am sorry to learn that those examined were found to be in such a state of disrepair, that it is thought the necessary expenditure would prevent this aqueduct from being again used. The water channels are in places of great depth, as the sill of one was found to be 65½ feet below the surface of the ground, but it would seem desirable that a regular survey of this aqueduct and that from the Begam Talao should be made by an Engineer, because, if it were found to be financially possible to restore either, preference should be given to the Torweh one as yielding a purer and more plentiful supply, and which would prove of inestimable advantage, not only in this respect, but by enabling the numerous fountains all through the town again to exert their cooling influences on the atmosphere. 17. In conclusion, I would express my opinion as to the desirability of planting trees in the neighbourhood of the buildings to be converted, as trees will not only absorb moisture from the ground but carbonic acid from the air. I have the honour to be, &c., T. G. HEWLETT, Acting Sanitary Commissioner.
No. 3434. GENERAL DEPARTMENT. Bombay Castle, 3rd November 1876. Letter from the Acting Sanitary Commissioner, No. A.-917, dated the 17th October 1876 REPORTS ON MILITARY CANTONMETNS AND CIVIL STATIONS IN THE PRESIDENCY OF BOMBAY INSPECTED BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER IN THE YEARS 1875 AND 1876. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75009880.tif] Bombay: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1877.
