IP/13/AF.3 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY, FOR THE YEAR 1875. [THE REGIMENTS ARE PLACED A THEY STOOD IN THE ARMY LIST ON THE 1ST JULY 1875.] Bombay: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1876.
SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY, FOR THE YEAR 1875. [THE REGIMENTS ARE PLACED AS THEY STOOD 1N THE ARMY LIST ON THE 1ST JULY 1875.] Bombay: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1876.
INDEX. [The regiments are placed as they stood in the Army List on the 1st July 1875.] PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. PAGE. Detachment, 4th Regiment N. I. (Rifles), Bombay 1 Right Wing, 7th Regiment N. I., Tanna 2 20th Regiment N. I., Bombay 3 21st do. do. or Marine Battalion, Bombay 6 26th do. do. Surat 9 Aden Troop, Khor Mucksar 11 No. 5th Company, Bombay Sappers and Miners, Aden 12 2nd Grenadier Regiment N. I., Aden 14 Detachment, 2nd Grenadier Regiment N. I., Perim 18 POONA DIVISION. 1st Regiment L. C., Poona 21 1st Grenadier Regiment N. I., Poona 23 8th Regiment N. I., Poona 26 17th do. do. do. 30 Sappers and Miners, Kirkee 32 Poona Horse, Sirur 37 Detachment, Poona Horse, Dhulia 39 19th Regiment N. I., Sholápur 41 13th do. do. Ahmednagar 45 15th do. do. Málegaon 46 Detachment, 4th Regiment N. I., and Staff and Details 47 4th Rifles, Satara 52 14th Regiment N. I., Kolhápur 55 5th do. do. Belgaum 58 6th do. do. do. 60 12th do. do. Dharwar 61 NORTHERN DIVISION. 3rd Regiment N. L. I., Ahmedabad 66 1st Squadron, 1st Lancers, Baroda 68 9th Regiment N. I., Baroda 68 22nd do. do. do. 70 2nd Squadron, 2nd Regiment N. L. C., Rájkot 72 1st Company, Native Artillery, Rájkot 73 Head-quarter Wing, 7th Regiment N. I., Rájkot 75 28th Regiment N. 1., Rájkot 77 Detachment, 28th Regiment N. I., Barda Choki 80 11th Regiment, N. I., Bhuj 83 2nd do. L. C., Deesa 87 18th do. N. I., do 90 16th do. do. Mhow 91 25th do. N. L. I., do. 94 Wing, 16th and 25th Regiments N. I., Indore 99 3rd (Queen's Own) Regiment N. L. C., Neemuch 100 24th Regiment N. I., Neemuch 103 10th do. do. Mehidpur 105 Right Wing, 10th Regiment N. L. I., Augur 109 Squadron, 3rd Regiment L. C., Nusseerabad 111 23rd Regiment N. L. I., Nusseerabad 111 R 66
(ii) SIND DIVISION. PAGE. 29th or 2nd Belooch Regiment N. I., Kurrachee 114 27th or 1st do. do. N. L. I., Hyderabad 115 1st Sind Horse, Jacobabad 118 2nd do. do. 120 3rd do. do. 126 30th Regiment N. I., or Jacob's Rifles, Jacobabad 131 STATISTICAL TABLES. Statement showing the Sickness and Mortality among the Native Troops in the Bombay Presidency during the year 134 Summary of do. do. 138 APPENDICES. Annual General Return exhibiting the Sick of H. M.'s Native Troops in the Bombay Presidency for the year 1875, compared with 1874 139 Return showing the Admissions, Deaths, &c., amongst the Native Troops of the Bombay Presidency at the several stations for the year 1875, compared with 1874 140 Comparative Statement showing the Health of the Native Troops in the four Divi- sions of the Bombay Presidency 143
No. S. B./174. FROM THE SURGEON-GENERAL Indian Medical Department, To THE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, Military Department. Bombay, 26th May 1876. SIR, I have the honour to forward, for submission to His Excellency the Gover- nor in Council, the Medical History of the Native Army of Bombay for the year 1875. 2. It differs from the history of the preceding year in the omission of separate divisional reports from the Deputy Surgeons-General. The remarks and information furnished by these officers will, however, be embodied to a great extent in my general observations, and will be given partly at the end of each regi- mental report. I shall now proceed to notice a few of the points which speci- ally affect each division, reserving for the present the more general information. PRESIDENCY DIVISION AND ADEN. Years. Average Strength. Average Daily Sick. Admissions. Deaths. 1872 3,297 144.0 4,731 33 1873 3,358 140.2 4,513 28 1874 3,343 133.4 3,861 32 1875 3,288.5 125.4 3,551 36 3. The average daily strength was 3,288.5, or 54.5 less than that of the preceding year. The average daily sick was 125.4 as compared with 133.4 for 1874, and the admissions were 3,551ii 6. The average strength of the army in this division was 8,145.9, which is slightly less than it was in the previous year. The average daily sick was 224.2, and the admissions were 7,607iii the increase in the number of cases of malarious fever may with excellent reason be laid down to the extremely unhealthy conditions resulting from the unusual floods of that year. Jacobabad. 13. Dr. Miller again brings forcibly to notice the insalubrity of this station, and remarks on the wretched physical state of the troops quartered there. Epidemics. 14. There has not been a single case of epidemic disease. Sind Boil. 15. At Jacobabad 118 cases of Sind boil occurred as compared with 81 for the preceding year. Drs. Miller, Bartholomeusz, and MacRury are of opinion that this disease is merely a visible indication of a peculiar state of constitution found in the residents of Upper Sind; and this, they think, is induced by exposure to the depressing effects of high temperature, in a hypersaturated atmosphere, of persons suffering from malarious cachexia. Water. 16. At Kurrachee an unusual rainfall, in Novem- ber, of 2·5 inches was of essential service in filling the tanks and wells. Strength. Daily Sick. Admissions. 17. From the figures below it will be seen that the total strength of the army was but 69 more than that of last year. The average daily sick, in spite of the increase recorded amongst the Sind troops, was, on nearly the same strength, no less than 144·6 below the average of the preceding three years. The percentage of daily sick to strength shows a coresponding decrease, and the total admissions are less than those of last year by 1,126, or 5,140 under the average of the previous three years. A glance at the table will show that, while the strength has remained almost stationary, there has been a notable and progressive annual diminution in the number of admissions and daily sick. This seems to show satisfactorily that the measures taken to preserve the health of the army have, except in some of those notoriously insalubrious stations, borne year by year more valuable fruit:iv Malarious Fevers. 19. I shall now proceed to remark on the statistics connected with th principal diseases from which the army suffered dur- ing the past year. Chief of these are malarious fevers. Out of a total strength of 22,819 there were 10,566 of treated for these diseases as compared with 12,733 for the year before with a strength of 69 less. Of these there occurred in the Presidency division 1,280, in the Poona division 2,938, in the Northern division 4,375, and in Sind 1,973V scarlet fever in the 16th at Mhow. As was also the case last year, Sind has re- mained entirely free from any species of eruptive fever. With regard to measles the spread of the disease has been very marked, the number of cases having in- creased from 22 in 1874 to 83 for the year under report. In the Presidency divi- sion the disease has remained stationary, being almost entirely confined to Bombay; but in the Poona and Northern divisions, taken together, it has increased from 7 to 73 cases. None of the medical officers in these divisions attempt to account for the increase. or trace the sources from which the disease has emanated. Cholera. 21. The army stationed in the Presidency and Sind divisions remained wholly untouched by the cholera epidemic which raged throughout the country during the year 1875. In the Poona Division there were 22 cases and 15 deaths. 3, all fatal, occurred in the Sappers and Miners at Kirkee; 4, with 3 deaths, in the 6th N. I. at Belgaum; and 3 fatal cases in the 12th at Dharwar; 3, all of whom recovered, in the detachment of the Poona Horse at Dhulia; and 2 each in the 8th and 13th N. I. at Poona and Ahmednagar. In the Northern division there were 98 cases and 56 deaths; the 10th N. I. at Mehidpur suffered most severely, having 43 admissions with 24 deaths; the 22nd at Baroda had 14 cases and 7 deaths; the 9th, at the same station, 12, and 8 deaths; and the 16th, at Mhow, 7 admissions, of which 4 were fatal: the 25th, also, at Mhow and the 24th at Neemuch had each 2 cases. In the course of my further remarks I shall again allude to various points connect- ed with this epidemic. Rheumatism. 22. The treated for rheumatic affections show an increase on the total for the previous year; then there were 1,474 with 4 deaths, but in 1875 they amounted to 1,588 with the same number of deaths. The increase has occurred in the Poona and Sind divisions; in the first the advance is from 487 to 595, and in the second from 82 to 115, the strengths remaining as before. In the Presidency and Northern divisions the figures continue much the samevi Scurvy. 24. The total treated for scorbutic affections show a decease of 30 on those for the preceding year, the numbers being 198 and 228, and it is in the Presidency and Poona divisions that this decrease has taken place. On the other hand, however, the 2nd Grena- diers at Aden show, as might be expected, a slight increase in the number of cases from 28 in 1874 to 32 in the past yearvii Guinea-worm. 27. There was 217 cases of guinea-worm treated during the past as compared with 299 for the preceding year. In the Presidency division they have fallen from 29 to 14, a few cases occurring at Bombay and Surat. In the Poona division they have diminished from 186 to 130. The affection still prevails at Dharwar to a much greater extent than at any of the other stations of the Presidency. In the 12th N. I., which is quartered there, 64 cases are recorded in a strength of 685; this, however, is small when compared with 142 in the year 1874 This great frequency of guinea-worm at Dharwar shows how impure must be the water- supply of the troops. In Poona, Sirur, and Belgaum the cases have increased to a small extent. The percentage of treated to strength for the whole division is 1.5, which is double that for any of the other three divisions, and this higher percentage for the Poona Army corresponds with what has been recorded of the civil population of the Deccan. None of the regiments of the Northern or Sind divisions have been affected to more than a very trifling degree, the percentage of treated to strength for the former being 0.8 and that for Sind only 0.17. Injuries and Contusions. 28. The cases treated for injuries of all kinds reached a total for the year of 3,073 as compared with 2,721 for 1874. This increase is almost entirely due to the greater number of reliefs and movements which were carried out; the consequent marching in unsuit- ably, badly-fitting boots causing the admissions for shoe-bite to become much more frequent. In the 26th N. I., for example, which marched from Bombay to Poona, there were 146 treated for injury as compared with 89 for the preceding year, and the excess is put down to the cases of shoe-bite which occurred during the march. The 8th N. I. at Poona was engaged for part of the year in line- building, and had a large number of admissions from contusions, caused princi- pally through the unskilful handling of the tools used at the work. It is hardly necessary to say that this large number of admissions for slight injury, although it raises the percentage of sickness for the whole army, does not in any way affect the general health of the troops. General Health and Phy- sique. 29. The general health of the army appears to be fair, and the physique much as usual, though in some regiments it is stated. to be below par. The troops of the Sind Frontier Force, those at Mehidpur, and the wing of the 7th N. I. at Tanna are noticed as being less healthy than is desirable. In the case of Jacobabad and Mehidpur the climate is probably the chief factor. In the former the general health is nearly always unsatisfactory; then the Deccani recruit suffers much from intermittent fever during his early service; but, judging from the figures of treated in the force, it is seen that there is a great difference between the numbers admitted in the 2nd and 3rd Regiments, which indicates something special as the cause of this unhealthiness. The men of the 1st Grenadiers, Dr. Sylvester thinks, still suffer from the effects of their re- sidence in Guzerat and Aden. Contrary to the usual state of health of Native troops at Aden, the Sappers and Miners have enjoyed remarkably good health, possibly due to their being "picked men". The cantonments of Jacobabad and Mehidpur are probably incapable of being rendered healthy by sanitary improve- ments under existing circumstances. The climates of Barda Choki and Dwârka are said to be very injurious, the former giving rise to malarious fevers to such an extent as to cause permanent injury to the health of those who suffer, while that of the latter induces chest-affections and rheumatism. Deputy Surgeon-General Wyllie recommends that the station of Barda Choki be aban- doned. Movements of Corps. 30. The movements of corps are carefully detailed by the regimental medical officers. The movements were the usual reliefs, and the marching of the troops on Bombay detailed for duty during the visit of H. R. H. the Prince of Wales, and to the
viii Camp of Exercise at Poona. In addition to these the 1st Sind Horse and the 27th Belooch Regiment were out marching during the cold season; this resulted in benefit to the health of the men. Dr. Day, of the 5th Regiment N. I., brings to notice the objectionable camping ground at Karad, it being an old burial- ground with a foul tank near it. Climate. 31. In illustration of the remarks in para. 39 of my report for 1874 I notice the improvement in health of the men of the 5th and 14th Regiments at the salubrious stations of Belgaum and Kolhápur. The effects of the climate of Jacobabad is probably best indicated by the number who break down and are invalided at an early period of life. Sur- geon Bartholomeusz suggests that, were a forest planted around this camp, the great heat would be mitigated, and the station rendered less malarious. The climates of Aden and Jacobabad are both characterized by great heat, which exhausts the nervous energy, predisposing in the former to malarious diseases and in the latter to scurvy; the first almost altogether irremediable, but the latter, I consider, entirely within the power of prevention. This subject will be mentioned again under the head of scurvy. The climate of the various stations in relation to disease is carefully noted by medical officers, as will be seen in their reports. Water. 32. Many of the waters have been analysed, and some improvements made. The supply generally is reported good and abundant. Rájkot is, however, a notable exception to this. In the Northern Division many observations have been carefully made on the level of the sub-soil water which are given in the various regimental reports, but no generalization as to its influence on health has been arrived at. Dr. McDowall states that in Neemuch the theory of Pettenkoffer is not borne out, for cholera was worst when the sub-soil water was highest. On the other hand, Dr. Kiernander notices the coincidence of a sudden fall in the level of the sub-soil water with the prevalence of cholera in and about Mhow. Dr. Bartholomeusz suggests that the wells and tanks in Jacobabad be cleared out once a year, and that out-posts be supplied with filters. A scarcity of water is expected in Rájkot and Bhuj owing to deficient rainfall. Rainfall. 33. The rainfall has not had any prejudicial effect on the health of the men. At Mhow it was feared that water might be scarce, but a large fall in September banished this. The supply of water at Rájkot does not appear to be in a satisfactory state, and it is anticipated that the sowars will have to be marched out to water in the hot season. Food. 34. Food is reported to be generally cheap and good, but good vegetables are frequently mentioned as scarce, the want being mostly felt in Aden and Central India; for the former station I suggested in my last report that potatoes should be issued to the troops. I am glad to bring to the notice of Government that Colonel Pierce, Commanding the Wing of H. M.'s 10th N. L. I. at Augur, has established a regimental garden, well stocked with vegetables of all kinds, which are distribut- ed to the men at the small charge of 6 pies each per mensem. The 12th Regi- ment N. I. has also started a garden. I may be permitted to express a hope that this good movement will be favourably noticed by Government, and that the example will be followed by other regiments. In connection with the diet of the sepoy, I would ask attention to the remarks made by various medical officers regarding the custom of deducting a considerable portion of the pay of the re- cruit for his kit in the first year of his service, thus obliging him either to incur debt or underfeed himself at a time when it is most important he should be well fed. The consequence of this is, that men of inferior physique are habitually sick during their early service, and perhaps lay the foundation of after illnesses, the result of which is a large invaliding and pensioning of men at a comparatively early age.
ix Working-pay. Line-building appears in some cases to tell on the condition of the men, the ordinary diet being inadequate to meet the waste caused by this unusual labour; and I agree, in opinion, with the medical officers who have recommended that working-pay should be granted to the men so engaged. Lines, &c. 35. The lines everywhere are kept clean, but where the drainage is only surface it is hardly possible to prevent the soil from becoming impregnated with impurities. New lines are to be built in Baroda for the 22nd Regiment N. I. The ventilation in the 2nd and 3rd Regiments Sind Horse lines is said to be defective. Many improve- ments have been effected in the lines of the 20th N. I. at Bombay. The conser- vancy and sanitary arrangements, as carried out by cantonment committees, are generally satisfactory, but in Mhow Surgeon Heffernan notes a case of cholera having been caused by the proximity to an officer's quarters of the trench latrines of the grass-cutters of the 3rd (K. O.) Hussars. It is also stated that the space allotted for the trench latrines of the 25th Regiment N. I. is too limited. In Mehidpur the trench-latrine ground of the previous year was utilized for the cultivation of native vegetablesx months of the year in Cutch, yet only 2 mild cases occurred in the lines of the 11th Regiment N. I. at Bhuj. Nothing could testify in a higher degree to the care and attention of regimental medical officers in the matter of vaccination than the almost total absence of small-pox. Invaliding. 40. The number of invalided was 972, which gives 4.26 per cent. on a strength of 22,819. In last year's report I mentioned in para. 63 the progressive annual increase in the number of invalids, and noted that a large proportion were men under 20 years' service. In the year under report the percentage of invaliding to strength is somewhat less than in either of the two preceding years; but my remarks, how- ever, regarding ages and causes of invaliding hold good equally for the present year. Epidemics. 41. There was a severe epidemic of cholera, which arose in Násik in March, and gradually spread over all the districts of this Pre- sidency except Sind. The civil population of some parts suffered severely. It is remarkable that the Native troops suffered sin- gularly little from the epidemic, notwithstanding many regiments were stationed in what must be viewed as "infected localities"; and some regiments, although surrounded by civil populations struck by cholera, entirely escaped, as, for in- stance, the Native troops in Rájkot, Indore, Sholápur, Ahmednagar, Asirgarh, Satara, and Kolhápur. It would appear that the precautions taken in these stations are believed by medical officers to have kept the disease from the lines. I am disposed to agree with them, and I cannot speak too highly of the efforts of all the regimental medical officers to prevent the disease reaching the lines, to check it by careful treatment, and to thoroughly cleanse every place and article which had any connection with cholera. But, while I cheerfully accord every credit to such deserving efforts, yet I must also record that similar efforts failed to keep the disease out of the lines of the Native troops in the stations of Mehidpur, Ahmedabad, Mhow, Poona, Málegaon, Neemuch, and Baroda; still even in these places the disease was kept in check, and only in H. M.'s 10th and 3rd Regiments N. L. I. at Mehidpur and Ahmedabad did the deaths reach any considerable numberxi Commendations. 43. Dr. Wyllie commends Dr. McDougall's report, and Dr. Maitland that of Dr. Sexton. The reports, in general, have been prepared with care, and show that the medical officers perform their duties with efficiency and zeal. They have given much time and consideration to sanitary matters, both as regards their regiments and the circumstances of the localities in which they are stationed. The Deputy Surgeons- General of divisions are almost unanimous in their expressions of satisfaction with the work of the medical officers, and it affords me much pleasure in unreservedly endorsing the same. I conclude by bringing to the notice of Government my entire satisfaction with the manner in which the Deputy Surgeons-General them- selves have conducted their duties. In the case of three of these officers their tenure of office will shortly expire; and I cannot allow them to depart from India without placing on record my opinion that, during the time I have been Surgeon- General, they have zealously performed their duty to the State, and not this alone, but throughout the whole of their service they have never failed to prove them- selves good and efficient officers. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, W.THOM, Surgeon-General.
A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY FOR THE YEAR 1875. [The regiments are placed as they stood in the Army List on the 1st July 1875.] PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. Average strength present during the year, Infantry... 3,288.5 Average daily sick per cent. to the average strength... 3.8 Ratio of mortality per cent. to the average strength... 1.1 Detachment, 4th Regiment N. I. (Rifles). BOMBAY.2 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Sickness, Mortality, and Invalid- ing. 7. The average daily number of sick during the year was 6·3, and the total number of admissions was 133, which latter were furnished by 74 men in the following proportion:3 PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. Lines. 3. The lines are divided into two portions: the northern section was newly built last year, and is in excellent order; the southern section is now being pulled down, and new lines are to be built by the P. W. D., on the standard plan, before the ensuing rains; they will then be excellent, well ventilated, and roomy. There is no drainage, all refuse water being thrown out, or allowed to flow over the ground in front through small channels from the interior of the huts; there is a long masonry channel which conveys the water from the washing well to the creek running north to south. The lines are bounded on the east by the creek, on the north by the en- camping ground and jail, on the south by the fishing village of Kolliwarra, and on the west by the house of the civil residents, the Judge's Court, and the hospitals and bazaar. The cells are in the quarter-guard, and are very roomy, and the ventilation is ample and abundant. The latrines of the detachment are situate on the bank of the creek to the extreme east of the station, and are very faulty. The ordure is carted away daily to a distance in iron recep- tacles, and the seats are then flushed with water. The water, or liquid ordure, flows all over the place and down the bank into the creek, creating a most offensive stench all around the neighbourhood, and rendering the latrines so intensely objectionable as to deter the people from using them whenever they can avoid it; liquid ordure may be seen oozing through the sides of the walls of the latrine daily. I am of opinion that no system is so peculiarly well adapted to Tanna as the dry-earth system, and it should be introduced without delay. If, however, it be determined to keep up the present objectionable system, I would sug gest that a 6-inch diameter tube be fitted to each latrine, to extend down into the deep water of the creek, through which all the flushing water should flow4 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Climate. 2. Under this head I have but few remarks to offer. 76.28 inches of rain were regis- tered, being 7½ inches less than in the previous year; and I think the rainy season of 1875 was, speaking generally, more favourable to health than that of 1874. Lines. Ventilation and Drainage. 3. Having in my last report fully described the lines at Boree Buuder, it is not necessary to do so again; a few remarks, however, I may be permitted to offer. In the first place, the ground of the line enclosure remains in the same rocky and uneven condition as formerly mentioned, and urgently requires levelling; even in the day time walking through the lines is difficult and not devoid of risk, while on a dark night I should say that a severe sprain or contusion would be almost inevitable. At the beginning of the monsoon I wrote in, recommending that water-proof sheets should be issued to the men; but, as the Commissariat authorities had not sufficient in store in Bombay, it could not be done. I am glad, however, to be able to state that the men's huts were not nearly so damp during the year as in 1874; this was, no doubt, due to the fact that the rainfall was more equally distributed over the rainy months than in 1874. The P. W. D. has been engaged during the year in re-building the lines; a great many of the pendalls have been pulled down and re-constructed, and I believe the work will have been entirely completed by the end of February 1876. The newly- constructed pendalls have been built upon the same ground on which the old ones stood, and therefore contain the same amount of superficial space; but they are much superior to the old ones in some respects, being for the most part raised on plinths, and having doors of 6 feet high, which facilitate ventilation. It is, I think, however, a matter for regret that, in spite of previous reports upon the subject, the new pendalls have been constructed without any roof- ventilation, and without permanent bathing places. I believe a central drain is to be made down each street in the lines; but the drainage of individual houses can be perfect only when stone-and-lime bathing places, and tributary drains leading into the central drain, exist for each house throughout the lines. Quarter-guard. 4. No change has been made in the quarter-guard. The floor, being on the same level as the ground outside, and not being covered with lime, was very damp during the rains. School. 5. With regard to the school, I have nothing to add to my former remarks upon the subject, except that the experience of the past year has served only to prove still further the utter unsuitability of the build- ing to the purpose for which it is intended. Conservancy and Sanitary Ar- rangements. 6. The conservancy of the lines has been as well maintained during the year as the above-mentioned defects in the drainage admit of. The latrine has been kept in an excellent sanitary condition, being flushed with water several times daily. Water and Food. 7. Occasionally the supply of water has been suspended for a few hours, but with this exception it has been good and ample. I would, however, beg to repeat my suggestions of last year, especially with respect to a trough to catch the drippings from the tanks; the want of this keeps the ground in front of the tanks in a muddy and objectionable condition. The prices of food in Bombay have remained much the same since last report, except during the month of November, when, in consequence of the influx of visitors, there was a temporary rise in the market rates. As usual in a Native regiment, a large number of men seen at hospital have had their ailments aggravated, if not in many cases induced, by insufficient diet; this is perhaps more notice- able in Bombay than in up-country stations, as, the duty being harder, a weakly man has recourse to the sick list sooner than he would up-country. Duties and their Effect on Health. 8. I cannot, however, say that any of the sickness in the regiment could fairly be traced to the duties performed, except perhaps a few cases of febri- cula and ague of an irregular type among the several com- panies on their return from Bandora, where they had gone through their annual course of ball practice. The average number of consecutive nights in bed has been 4. Lock-up Rooms and Cells. 9. In the month of July the ground of the two lock-up rooms at the back of the quarter-guard, then occupied by two prisoners, was very damp, and the rooms were, in my opinion, unfit for human habitation during the rainy season. I recommended the selection of some more suitable building for the confinement of prisoners at that time. I was informed, however, that no other place was available; but, in order to diminish the risk to the men's health, cots were supplied, thus avoiding the necessity of sleeping on the ground. It is satisfactory to be able to record that the health of the men in question did not suffer.
PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. 5 Hospital and its Surroundings. Requirements. Conservancy. Hospital Water-supply. 10. The hospital was fully described in my last report; it has been kept in good order, and the accommodation has not at any time proved inadequate. There are no wards for infectious diseases, and the bath-room sanctioned by Government has not yet been constructed. I would recom- mend a tap being placed in the hospital compound; a new latrine, a dead-house, and a bath-room are required. I again venture to suggest, as a desideratum, the brick oven recommended in my last report: during the past year I have had as many as 6 cases of scabies under treatment at the same time, and re-admissions for the disease have frequently occurred. It is very difficult to properly cleanse foul cloth clothing, such as uniforms, &c.; they cannot be washed, and mere exposure to sun-light and air can never be so certain or effectual as subjecting them to a high tempera- ture would be. The conservancy of the hospital compound has been well maintained throughout the year, and the latrine has been kept in as good a sanitary condition as its faulty construction would admit of. During the year 1874 it was the custom for the hospital bhees- ties to obtain (Vehar Lake) drinking water for the sick from a tap in the compound of the Marine Battalion hospital, but early in the present year the medical officer of the Marine Battalion informed me that the supply being insufficient he could not permit this any longer. Since that date the drinking water has been brought from a well in the Marine Lines. I have not analysed this water; but, as far as look and taste are concerned, it appears excellent, and no ill-effects have followed its use. Sickness, Mortality, and In- validing. Sickness among European Offi- cers. Invaliding. 11. The total number of admissions has been 624, and these were furnished by 369 men in the following proportion:6 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. ive vision; 1 varicose veins; and 1 partial loss of power in right arm. 7 men below 15 years' service were also discharged the service on account of disabilities unfitting them for service in the ranks. Principal Causes of Sickness. 12. The principal causes of sickness during the year have been ague, diarrhPRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. 7 would be scarcely worth speaking about. All solid refuse matter is placed in a dust-bin in the north-west corner of the lines, and removed daily by municipal carts. Water, Food, Clothing, &c. 3. For drinking purposes from Vehar by means of cast-iron pipes, quality excellent, and supply constant; for washing and other purposes, from wells in and near the lines. It is impossible to say upon how little the sepoy manages to exist. There can be no doubt that the health of the men is often seri- ously impaired from want of a sufficient and nutrient diet. Rice appears to form their chief article of food to which is added a little dhall and ghee, and occasionally fish, sold cheap on account of its condition. Spirit is always indulged in, especially by the low-caste men, who make up the bulk of the regiment, and I cannot doubt it is often done at the expense of solid nutriment. Only two kinds of clothing are in use: the ordinary red-cloth tunic and cloth trowsers for parades and guard-mounting, and blue cotton cloth for ordinary drill, fatigue, and other regimental duties. The cloth is light and porous, and forms a comfortable and health-preserving dress. Country-made shoes, hard and ill-fitting, are worn by the men on all duties, and are a fruitful source of shoe-bite, which either necessitates admittance to hospital or recommendation to the Commanding Officer to excuse the wearing of boots until such time as the abrasion is healed. Duties, &c. 4. Nothing prejudicial to health has been observed. The men may be said to have had an easy time of it, having as many as five consecutive nights in bed during the year. Exercise, amusements, and occupations appear to be very little indulged in. Lock-up Rooms and Cells. 5. There are two lock-up cells, each having an area of 180 feet, and cubic space of about 1,300; they are ventilated through openings in the doors as well as raised roof-ventilators. There has never, during the year, been more than one man in a cell at a time; and the cells being in an open situation, the superficial area and cubic space appears to be sufficient. Marches. 6. No marches have taken place during the year. Hospital, &c. 7. It is sufficient to say that there has been no overcrowding during the year; the only inconvenience felt, is a want of light, which renders an exami- nation of a patient difficult in the wards. Three sweepers are employed to remove excreta from the hospital privies to the public latrines at Sonapur; liquid carbolic acid and McDougall's powder are used to prevent fermentation of excreta, and to deodorize and purify privies and drains. The hospital water-supply is from the Vehar Lake by means of a stand-pipe in the compound; it is constant and sufficient; but in the bath-room, which is on a higher level, no supply can be obtained when it is most wanted, viz., during the morning, and the shower-bath is virtually useless in consequence of there being no means of storing water at night when it might be obtained. Sickness, Mortality, and invalid- ing. Re-admissions. Invaliding. 8. 381 cases were treated, being 13 less than in the preceding year; of this number 10 were brought forward from 1874. The admissions num- bered 371. Of the total treated, 323 were discharged to duty; 22 were sent on sick certificate, being 16 less than last year; 17 were invalided from the hospital; 5 died (2 less than last year); and 16 remained under treatment on the 31st December. The year 1874, which showed a treated to strength amounting to 69.8 per cent. and of deaths to strength 1.2, and to treated 1.8, was said to have been a very healthy year. The year 1875 exhibits still more favourable results8 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. up a total of this class of disease to 159 cases. Local diseases have rather exceeded the above; of the nervous system there are 4 admissions, 2 for locomotor ataxy, 1 tetanus (idiopathic), and 1 neuralgia. Diseases of the eye furnish 12 cases of conjunctivitis, ear 3, absorbent system 1, respiratory system 29, digestive system 40, urinary organs 11, generative system 3, organs of locomotion 3, cellular tissue 12, and cutaneous system 46; total number of admis- sions of this class 164. General debility gives 5 admissions and injuries 43, viz., burns 2, contusions 24, sprain 9, wound (gun-shot) 1 (accidental and of no importance), fracture 1, wound (simple) 1, and blistered foot 5; total admissions, 48. Principal Causes of Mortality. 10. Died from hepatitis 1, remittent fever 1, general dropsy 1, pneumonia 1, and tetanus 1; total deaths, 5. Mortality according to Race. 11. 4 Hindus, or 0.9 to strength, died; and 1 Mussulman, or 0.5 to strength. Influence of Rainfall. 12. The following table gives the number of admissions month by month during the year, as well as the rainfall, and it will be observed that gene- rally the admissions during the rains are more frequent than at other periods of the year. Damp appears to be an active agent in predisposing to disease; but the exposure at night before the monsoon commences, which the men indulge in to escape the great heat of their huts and to court sleep, has a great deal to do with the increased sickness of the rainy months:PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. 9 his life, but it will be found a fact in most Native infantry regiments. The decrepit appear- ance is, no doubt, heightened by much previous starving and malingering. Medical officers would be spared much harassment if the first period of service for pension was fixed at 20 years, and sufficient care and scrutiny taken that no man was allowed to enter the service visibly above 20 years of age. Instruction of Native Medical Pupils. 18. These are daily instructed at the bed-side, and they are encouraged to keep up and advance their knowledge of English. Resumé of the whole. 19. The year 1875 has been very favourable, in a medical point of view, compared with 1874: there have been fewer admissions from disease, more men discharged to duty, many less sent on sick leave, fewer invalid- ed, fewer deaths, and a smaller daily average of sick men. H. M.'s 26th Regiment N. I. SURAT.10 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. was generally of the quotidian type and of a mild form; however some of the cases were of a more severe character, and 2 of them proved fatal. he treatment usually pursued, was the administration of quinine and liquor arsenicalis, or the hypodermic injection of quinine. The latter operation was frequently performed, and the results were generally satisfactory. It was very exceptional for the patients to complain of pain or irritation of the parts after the operation, and the site of the injection was seldom followed by inflammatory symptoms, and never by sloughing. The treatment by cinchonidine was also tried on a number of patients, and it appeared to act well in cases of a mild nature; but in those of a chronic character, or more severe type, it was generally less certain in its action as an antiperiodic than quinine. 116 cases were admitted with contusion; these were generally the result of badly-fitting shoes, and were 47 in excess of those of the previous year. Bronchitis was prevalent during the greater part of the year; 87 cases were admitted as compared with 23 in the preceding year. The disease in some instances was of a severe nature, and required a long course of treatment before the patients were able to resume their duties. One patient, who was much debilitated, was sent on sick certificate for six months. This disease, besides, formed a troublesome complication in some of the cases of ague. The rheumatic affections were chiefly of a chronic character, and generally occurred in old men. Syphilis was much less prevalent during the year in Surat than in 1874; however, during the time the regiment was in Bombay the admissions from this disease rapidly increased. There were 9 cases of primary syphilis during the year; but as 5 of these occurred in Bombay in the month of November and 3 shortly after the departure of the regiment on 2nd Decem- ber, consequently only 1 occurred in Surat as compared with 13 in the preceding year. The disease contracted in Bombay was of a severe type, and when the regiment was leaving 3 cases of primary syphilis and 2 of bubo were left, behind for treatment, and have not yet rejoined. 16 patients were admitted with secondary syphilis; the disease in some instances was of long standing and required lengthened treatment. The admissions from dysentery were 13 more than in 1874; the disease in a few of the cases was of a severe character. A patient that had been under treatment for nearly two months, and who was in a weak and debilitated condition, was sent on sick certificate for eight months. A second case, which had been in hospital for 11 days, proved fatal. The cases of splenitis were chiefly of a chronic character and generally associated with ague. During the year there were 16 admissions from pneumonia as compared with 5 in the preceding: In the month of January chiefly owing to a cold north-eastern wind which prevailed, 6 cases were admitted, 2 of which proved fatal. In August a third death occurred the patient had formerly been subject to scurvy, and his general health was much impaired in consequence. The three remaining deaths from this disease occurred in December: the first had been under treatment for cho- lera in Bombay, and was progressing favourably until he was attacked with pneumonia, which rapidly proved fatal, as the patient had been much reduced in strength from the previous disease. The second case occurred in the detachment at Surat, where the patient had been in hospital with ague for six days before this disease became associated with pneumonia. The last case was that of a Native officer who had for some time been suffering from impaired health; and though he marched with the regiment from Bombay, yet on several occasions he received treatment though not actually on the sick list. 3 cases, who were much reduced in strength and who required a change of climate for their recovery, were sent on sick cer- tificate, respectively, for six, four; and three months. The admissions from scabies, pleuritis, brow ague, and guineaworm were all of a mild character. There were 11 admissions from hepatitis; they were generally of a chronic character, and 2 of them, who had been under treatment for a considerable time without any well-marked improvement, were sent on sick certificate. Epidemics. 3. On the 26th June the first case of cholera occurred in the cantonment; the patient was a domestic servant, and died the day after attack. From this date until the 26th July 5 other cases occurred: 2 of these were sepoys, who recovered from the immediate effects of the disease, but one of the patients continued in a very weak and emaciated condition for a considerable time, and consequently was sent on sick certificate. The 3 remaining cases were camp- followers, 1 of whom died. Cholera was more or less prevalent in the city and surrounding villages for some time before the camp was attacked; this in a measure may be ascribed to the precautions which were taken to prevent the sepoys and their families having communication with affected parts. The measures taken to segregate the patients and to purify and disinfect the latrines and houses in which cases of this disease occurred, were much the same as those referred to in my report for 1872 A case of cholera occurred in the regiment on the 17th November when stationed at Bombay; the patient was progress- ing favourably, until the disease became complicated with pneumonia, when it rapidly proved fatal. Hydrate of chloral in 10 to 15-grain doses was usually administered every three or four hours during the collapsed stage, and the results were for the most part satis- factory.
PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. 11 Principal Causes of Mortality. 4. 11 deaths occurred among those under treatment in hospital, viz. 6 from pneu- monia, 2 from ague, and 1, respectively, from each of the follow- ing diseases:12 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. H. M.'s 2nd Company, Native Artillery. ADEN.13 PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. Lines. 2. No exception is taken to the lines as regards available space, bazaar, neighbouring villages, drainage, and tanks; but strong objections may be taken to the nature of the quarters which immediately after a fall of rain14 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. H. M.'s 2nd Grenadier Regiment N. I. ADEN.PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. 15 Water. 4. There are four sources of water-supply: rain water as collected in tanks, wells, Shaik Othman aqueduct, and condensed water. Tanks for collecting rain water have existed in Aden from a very early date. About 50 of such tanks are said to exist, which, if entirely cleared out, would have an aggregate capacity of nearly 30 millions imperial gallons (vide Captain Hunter's Handbook). Within the last few years some of these reservoirs have been restored, and are capable of holding 8 millions gallons of water. The uncertainty of obtaining a permanent water-supply from this source will be evident from the fact that towards the latter half of this year the tanks have been perfectly empty, and consequently only condensed water was used for drinking purposes. There are two wells from which supplies are drawn alternately for the troops. These waters are more or less brackish; when the water is drawn after a few days' rest, it is pleasant to the taste, but as the supply gets exhausted the water becomes highly brackish. An analysis by Drs. Simpson and Nolan of them is herewith appended after being reduced into grains per gallon:16 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. advantageous than the other, for the water does not get properly oxygenated, and on the other hand it acquires a chalybeate taste. I consider that alternate layers of gravel, char- coal, and sand, on the principle of the Macnamara filters, would be more suitable for this purpose; and, if the water is allowed to percolate slowly through them from a height of 8 or 10 feet, the water would be aërated and have a pleasanter taste. Food. 5. The vegetables which are sold in the bazaar and issued by the Commissariat have very little antiscorbutic properties. Potatoes should be issued twice or three times a week to every sepoy instead of pumpkins and water-melons. I would also recommend that tamarind and limes should be issued as articles of diet alternately with cocum, which, owing to its age, deteriorates in quality. In the bazaar the articles of food are very dear and often inferior in quality. Duties, &c. 6. Owing to the reduction of the strength by invaliding, sick leave, and furlough, while the duties remained the same, the men had proportion- ately increased duties to perform, so that they had scarcely 2½ nights in bed at one time; and when it is remembered that the men had been suffer- ing from scurvy, and had become very much weakened after three years' residence in a trying climate, it will be evident that many were found unequal to the work. After a prolonged residence at Aden very few were inclined for gymnastics; still about a dozen men or so used to be regularly seen practising gymnastics of an evening. Some of the men employ their leisure hours in following their favourite pursuit in the way of tailoring, carpentering; some are silversmiths and some work in leather. Marches. 7. The head-quarter detachment left Aden on the 16th November for Vingorla, where it arrived on the 27th idem. During the voyage an excellent set of rules was issued, in accordance with which the families and men were kept on deck for a certain number of hours daily so as to allow the holds to be washed and disinfected; the " tween decks" were swept twice daily, and every morning solution of carbolic acid was sprinkled over the place so as to purify the air, especially as the port holes could not be kept open owing to the weather. On board the only cases of sickness were bowel-complaints and ague; one case of the former proved serious, but he rapidly regained his health on the march. Leaving Vingorla on the 2nd December the detachment arrived at the top of Parpuli Ghát on the third day; but as the three days' continuous march had given rise to a large number of foot-sore and shoe-bite cases, and as it was deemed necessary that the men should have a little rest, a halt for an extra day was ordered on the recommendation of the medical officer. The remaining marches were made without any difficulty. There was no serious case of sickness on the way, and the detachment arrived in Belgaum on the 10th December. The halting places between Vingorla and Belgaum were Akheri, Danowli, Parpuli Ghát, Kanur, Data, and Bachi. At Danowli the encamping ground was damp, being too close to a nullah which was full and surrounded by rice-fields. The water-supply was good, except at Akheri, where it was muddy. There are wells at Akheri, Parpuli Ghát, Data, and Bachi; the one at the Ghá ts is particularly good. At Danowli the water is obtained from the nullah, and at Kanur from the Ghatprabah River. The men, on the whole, improved very much during the march. Hospital. 8. Since Dr. Simpson wrote the last report, the roof of the hospital has been thoroughly altered, and the building as it is now is as good as can be desired. The building of the new mess-house for the officers of the European regiments has not interfered with the free circulation of air. The only requirements now are a small dark room for the purpose of making ophthalmascopic examinations and a well-illuminated room facing the south for operative purposes and for examinations, as the room at present used as the office is rendered dark by the side verandahs. Sickness, Mortality, and Invaliding. 9. The total number of admissions from all causes during the year was 317; the actual number of persons treated was 204 and re-admissions 113. Of these 272 were discharged cured, 24 were sent to India on sick leave. There was only one death in hospital from remittent fever with pleurisy supervening. The patient caught a severe chill while on sentry duty at the main gate one night, when a cold breeze suddenly set in; a severe attack of fever followed. He was ill one day in the lines; on the third day after his admission pleurisy supervened, and he died on the fifth day. There were 4 deaths in the lines, of which 3 took place in one dayPRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. 17 Principai Causes of Sickness. 10. Scurvy gave 29 admissions; of these 6 were sent to India on sick leave, 6 were invalided from this cause, and a good many, shown under the heading of general debility, were also complicated with scurvy, which has been an indirect cause of a great many more admissions than are shown under its heading. Besides, a large number of men who were fit for duty were found at the period- ical inspections to be affected to some extent with a chronic form of scurvy. From the 31st July till the time of leaving Aden there were 111 cases treated in the lines by marching them every morning, when off duty, to the hospital, and serving out lime-juice. On an analysis of this number I find that of family men there were 23 cases; of single men, or whose families were in India, 88 cases. Classified according to caste there were18 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. for treatment, where he subsequently did well. Syphilis.PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. 19 Topography. Harbour. 2. The Island of Perim, called in ancient times the Isle of Dioturus, and by the Arabs El Maiyum, is situated in the narrowest part of the Straits of Babel Mandeb, being distant from the Arabian coast 1½ miles and from the African, 10 or 11. Its greatest length is about 5 miles, and its average width about 2½ Its circumference, following the sinuosities of the coast-line, would probably exceed 30 miles. It is of mixed volcanic and coral formation, formed partly by volcanic upheaval and partly by the receding of the sea at some remote period. About one-third of the island consists of plains (formerly sea-beds) formed of a substratum of old conglomerate coral beds covered with about a foot of earth and sand mixed. The plains occur principally on the northern side of the island; and are partly covered with statice or sea-lavender, wild mignonett, salsola, senna, and other plants which grow in salt sandy ground; some coarse grass also grows on the plains and in the water-courses after rain. A curious feature of the hills is that the rocks are nowhere exposed, except when here and there they descend perpendicularly into the sea; they are covered with a layer of volcanic soil from 2 to 6 feet in depth, above which is another layer of loose volcanic boulders and irregular masses of black vesicular lava, in some places so thickly set as to resemble a rude pavement. There are some outcrops of aqueous strata on N.W. side. At the head of a long-shaped bay, which runs from the harbour in a N.W. direction, are the rains of barracks built by Colonel Murray's Red Sea detachment when Perim was occu- pied by the British during the Egyptian war in 1799. Near the same spot, and about 150 yards from the beach, are the ruins of a circular masonry tank intended to hold 25,000 gal- lons. The island consists of long, low, and gradually-sloping ranges of hills, for the most part surrounding the harbour; these have formerly been intersected by bays and indenta- tions which in the course of time have become filled up with coral and sand, and are now conglomerate coral plains covered with sand blown from the beach and a little earth washed down from the hills during rain. The highest point on the island is 209 feet, the base of the fort occupied by the detachment 203 feet above sea-level, and the lighthouse at the northern extremity of the fort is 249 feet at the highest point. The harbour, which faces S. W., has natural advantages which few others possess, being almost surrounded by ranges of hills averaging about 90 feet in height; it is 1½ miles in length and 1½ in breadth. The entrance to it is 860 yards wide; it affords safe anchorage for ships in all winds. Rain-water Tank. Winds. A rain-water tank capable of containing 36,000 gallons (lately leased to a water contractor) becomes filled when rain falls, and the water is issued in lieu of purchased water. Many attempts have been made to find fresh water by digging, but without success. The prevailing winds are N. and N.W. from April or May till September or beginning of October, and E. or S.E. for the remainder of the year. The regular monsoons do not reach this neighbourhood. 3. There is no system of drainage, and none required. Climate. 4. The climate is very healthy; and there being generally a strong prevailing wind at the different seasons of the year, the atmosphere is rendered agreeably cool, except in the hot months, when sometimes it is very warm, close, and oppressive. Barracks. 5. The detachment occupies the fort, which is situated very advantageously, and live in a series of long low barracks, which are out of repair and very old; they are built on plinths. The accommodation is not sufficient; the ventilation is free, except at N.E. barracks, where windows are much needed. There is no bazaar or neighbouring villages, no system of drainage, and no tanks: all the sanitary arrangements are satisfactory. Water. 6. The water brought from the Arabian coast has been found of a very inferior de- scription, and an extra gallon per man per day of condensed water for the use of the detachment has been sanctioned by the Brigadier-General at Aden from May to September; during the remainder of the year water is brought from the neighbourhood of Zeilah, on the African coast, and is of much better description. Food. 7. Canoes from the Arabian coast bring over occasionally fowls, fruit, fresh vegetables, and other articles for sale on the is land. Sickness, &c. 8. The principal admissions have been from fever, scurvy, mumps, dysentery, and simple contusions. The fever was of intermitent type, and was treated with quinine and cinchonodine with success. There were 3 cases of scurvy admitted into hospital, but an unusual number of cases were treated as out- door patients, which is attributable to the want of fresh vegetables, the regiment having been
20 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. kept in Aden for 3 years. One severe case of dysentery nearly proved fatal owing to the weak constitution of the patient; the severe attack and a relapse was treated with the usual remedies, and after a prolonged treatment recovered convalescence, and was sent to Aden. The case shown as mumps was severe; the parotid gland and lymphatics becoming in a short time greatly swollen, hard, and extremely painful, resisted remedies, and after some days suppurated, the patient swallowing with the utmost difficulty, and becoming very weak in consequence. The relieving steamer arriving, the patient was sent to head-quarters hospital at Aden. No casualties have occurred. The general health of all detachments has been satisfactory. Owing to the short stay of each, and the relief of the medical subordinate every four months, no remak can be offered regarding the physique of the men. 9. Three cases of ague were treated with cinchonodine; the results have been already specially reported. 10. I would draw special attention to remarks made in the annual sanitary report, 1875, regarding scurvy, and would suggest that an arrangement be made for treating this disease, which has been so prevalent, and which has already been the subject of a correspond- dence, the result of which is unknown. 11. The latrine, reported last year as being erected, is now in use, and is attended to and kept clean by sweepers specially sent from Aden. The excreta is carried in closed recep- tacles, and buried some feet in the sand to the leeward of the fort. The roofs of all barracks and buildings in the fort are to be removed, and the whole made substantial. The Command- ing Officer's quarters have already been re-constructed, and a few additions made
POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 21 POONA DIVISION. Average strength present during the year... 8,145.9 Average daily sick per cent. to the average strength... 2.8 Ratio of mortality per cent. to the average strength... 0.5 H. M.'s 1st Regiment Light Cavalry. POONA.22 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Food, Quality, &c. 6. Succulent fruits and all cereals are abundant and cheap in the Poona bazaars. Clothing. 7. The present Commanding Officer is attempting, as far as practicable, to improve the dress of the men. Its faults were summed up in my last report. Duties, and their Effect on Health. 8. The general duties of the regiment for the past year have been much the same as heretofore, except while in Bombay, when they were rendered more arduous on account of the incessant escort duty required by the civil authorities Many of the weakly men were thoroughly prostrated by the sultry suffocating heat that prevailed during the first two weeks of our stay there. Lock-up Rooms and Cells. 9. All these quarters continue comfortable and in good repair. Marches. 10. On the 8th October 1875 the head-quarters with two squadrons left Poona for Bom- bay en route for Neemuch. Bombay was reached on the 19th idem. The regiment remained in Bombay till the 30th of November following, when, in consequence of the cavalry reliefs for 1875-76 being stopped, it was ordered back to Poona, where it arrived on the 11th December. Hospital and its Surroundings. 11. No improvements have been made during the year, nor do we consider any altera- tions necessary, as the building continues to fulfil the requisite conditions of a good and comfortable hospital for Native troops. Sickness, Mortality, and Invaliding. Malarial Fever. 12. The monthly reports of sick and wounded from this hospital for the past year represent an annual average strength of 301.6, while the whole number taken sick was 310. The average number of daily sick was 8.9. There were no deaths. Six sowars were invalided on surgeon's certificate of disability for further service, and one sowar was discharged with gratuity. Of the whole number taken on sick report, 276 were for disease alone, and 34 were wounds, accidents, and injuries of all kinds. The general sanitary condition of the regiment for the first seven months of the year was of the most favourable character; the various cases of sickness were of a mild nature, and devoid of any special feature of interest. Towards the middle of August, malarial fever, which had up to this time only been met with in a mild form, began gradually to increase, and, notwithstanding the most energetic mea sures used to confine its limits, it continued to prevail during the remainder of the wet season with a frequency and severity quite unparalleled as compared with former years. The highest rate of sickness from this disease occurred amongst the regimental followers, who reside in the so-called "syce lines"POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 23 Cholera chloride of sodium in drachm doses given every hour during the period of intermission, and from the way it broke up the attack in these cases it would seem to be a very reliable anti- periodic. A case assumed the congestive remittent type, and the hypodermic use of quinine was of no avail; the patient improved from the moment quinine to the amount of 20 grains was given per rectum in beef tea. All these cases eventually did well. Cholera has not been met with, although it was prevalent in the surrounding villages during the hot-weather months. Cholera infantum is common here during the hot season, and is often of a severe type. Bromide of potassium seems to be the best remedy for this disease. There was 1 case of scurvy in the month of May. The majority of cases of bronchitis occurred on the line of march to and from Bombay. Bowel-affections have been moderate in number and character. The most prevalent diseases next to fever were those of the cellular and cutaneous system, including boils, ulcers, contusions, and skin diseases. There were 2 cases of fracture of the tibia and fibula24 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. adjoining regimental lines. The water could be laid on in the lines occupied by the Grena diers without difficulty, and at little expense, thus rendering these lines independent of the wells now in use, one of which (No. 2) in the left wing has been reported by the Chemical Analyser to contain traces of nitrites and an undue proportion of solid matter. The articles of diet are abundant, and comparatively reasonable in price. The use of green vegetables to a larger extent than at present obtains, would be highly advantageous, and I am of opinion that encouragement should be given the sepoys to cultivate gardens, and thereby secure a more constant supply. Duties. &c. 4. The number of nights in bed has been nominally 3½. I believe the actual number has been less than this, owing to the men who are told off for regimental police and butt guards not being taken into account, and every man on guard at the Yerauda Jail having to be on duty each night. Although the duties have probably exercised no prejudicial effect upon men in good health, I believe many of the weaker sepoys have suffered to a greater or less extent owing to the fatigue and exposure thus entailed; many cases of the ordinary mild form of intermittent fever, together with cases of diarrhPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 25 latedperiod of service having expired, he is naturally desirous of obtaining the pension to which his length of service entitles him. Under existing regulations this coveted result of his la- bours is only attainable in the event of his being pronounced by a medical committee unfit for further service; his energies are consequently directed to deceive the medical officer, either by feigning disease which he has not, or exaggerating a complaint with which very many sepoys are affected more or less after years of exposure to climatic influences. Under these circumstances it is not surprising that medical treatment is simply useless, the patient having determined to carry his point, and to resist all treatment directed to the cure of his supposed ailment. A repeal of the present pension rules is the only remedy for this evil, which is both unfair to the medical officer and demoralizing to the Native Army. Bronchitis and bronchial catarrh were prevalent during the cold weather, 23 cases having been under treatment; there were also 5 cases of pneumonic phthisis, in 4 of which the patients were invalided. 2 cases of dementia were admitted into hospital, 1 of which terminated in an unfortunate manner. A sepoy and his wife were admitted into hospital, both labouring under the delu- sion that a conspiracy was on foot to injure them, and that they were bewitched; they were detained for treatment, and were placed under the care of an attendant, and means taken to ensure rest and quiet. Under this they appeared to be gradually recovering. The man at last seemed to be so far recovered that he was on the point of being discharged, when one mor- ning, shortly after my usual visit, both patients, in the absence of the attendant, went into the cook-room adjoining; the man, seizing a large brass cooking-pot, struck his wife several violent blows with it on the head and then ran off at his utmost speed. The woman was found to have had her skull badly fractured, and after lying in an insensible state for some hours expired, previously giving birth to a still-born child. The husband was never found, although diligent search was made for him throughout the district; it was supposed he had thrown himself down a well. The second patient was pronounced by a committee to be unfit for the duties of a soldier and recommended to be discharged the service. Local affections have occurred in 95 cases; many of these were abrasions caused by hard and ill-fitting shoes, degenerating into indolent, ill-conditioned ulcers owing to the patients' health being impover- ished by bad and insufficient food; these were frequently very tedious, and in some cases necessitated the removal of the patient for change of air. In some patients this cachectic condition was so pronounced that the application of leeches or a blister was followed by the same result, the leech-bites and vesication becoming converted into sores which required many days and even weeks, and a variety of treatment, both local and constitutional, to heal. One case of fracture of the clavicle, 1 of dislocation of the clavicle from the sterno-clavicular articulation, and 1 of dislocation of the humerus into the axilla. The number of men invalided was 24. Principal Causes of Sickness. 8. The principal causes of sickness have been malarious fevers, dysentery, and diarrh26 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. attributable to the following causes:POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 27 Conservancy and Sanitary Ar- rangements. 4. They are efficiently carried out. The latrines afford ample accommodation, additional space having being provided since last year; they are well covered in, and not situated too far from the lines28 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. the construction of a contagious ward; after some deliberation an eligible one was at length fixed on with the sanction of the Major-General commanding the station, and the construction of a building was actually commenced; but after a short time the work was suddenly stopped, and has not since been resumed. No change has been made since last year in the position or number of the latrines. I adverted last year to the want of a tiled gutter to carry off the liquid portion of the nightsoil; this want has not yet been supplied. The additional filth-cart I also recommended, has been given, and there are now two calls made regularly every day. Kharakwásla water is now supplied to the hospital; it is chiefly obtained from a stand-pipe recently erected close by for the accommo- dation of the European community living in the neighbourhood. Occasionally the hospital bheesties fetch water from the tanks in the lines, or from the staff hospital situated close at hand, where pipe-water is laid on; but in every case the water, however obtained, is supplied from the same source, and no other is ever used. Sickness, Mortality, and In- validing. 10. The total number of cases of disease treated in hospital was 1,410, of which 1,381 were admitted during the year. The total number discharged was 1,382, viz. 1,366 to duty and 16 otherwise; and the total number of deaths, 2. Sixteen convalescents were sent to their homes for change of air. These figures show a considerable increase of sickness as compared with the return for 1874. During the latter year the total number of admissions into hos- pital were 619, or 970.22 per 1,000; whereas in the year now under review the admissions stand at 1,381, or 2,001.44 per 1,000 of strength. Notwithstanding the great increase in sickness last year, and that the number of admissions into hospital increased to more than double that of 1874, it is a noteworthy fact that the number of deathsPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 29 cases of dysentery, mostly of a mild type; 18 of simple diarrh30 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. manual labour, night guards, &c., were placed exactly in the same position as that of the 8th Regiment; yet the general health of these corps remained very good throughout. This leads me to believe that climate has had a great deal to do with the sickness at Poona. Even the Sappers stationed at KirkeePOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 31 1875. 1874. Daily average number of sick 22.8 18.7 Admissions to strength 120.2 87.3 Treated to strength 122.9 Deaths to treated 0.4 Deaths to strength 0.4 Invalided 16 3 deaths in hospital32 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Influence of Rainfall. 12. The total amount of rainfall registered for the year was 28 inches 90 cents, which is somewhat above the average. As regards its influence on disease there is nothing very striking to record. The greatest number of admissions from ague took place in August and September, viz., 73 in each month. The greatest number of admissions from dysentery took place in July and AugustPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 33 differently planned; and they thus afford a cubic space of about 34,537 feet and an area of 2,659 feet. The mean level of the ground along the left flank, taking the surface of the river when ordinarily full as 0, is 14.07 feet, which on the right is about a foot higher, being 15.14; the ground sinks considerably from the front to the rear, or from south to north, and naturally so, as it leads in this direction to the river. Thus about 100 feet in front of the quarter-guard or about 260 from the front line of huts, the level is 22.59; while about 150 feet behind the Native officers' houses, or about 200 from the rear line of huts, it is 10.27. About 140 feet in front of the second right-flank block is the quarter-guard, having the Native school-room on its right and the cells on its left. These are all well- built, substantial edifices, on well-raised plinths, and having each a stone floor. The size of these is as follows:34 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. cessity to report on impure water-supply, if only the canal, which conveys this water into Poona be kept free from pollution. Food. 9. The food has been abundant and fairly cheap. Clothing. 10. The clothing of the Sappers was fully described by Dr. Davey last year, but I would add that the addition of a gaiter to their working dress is very urgently needed. The knickerbockers come to the knee, and from that to the edge of the Bluchers there is no covering. Duties; their Effect on Health not injurious. Exercise, Amusement, and Occu- pation. 11. The duties for the greater part of the year were line-building, and have not had, as far as I can judge, any injurious effect, but they have doubtless contributed to swell the number of admissions under the head of "injuries", which, however, show a total of less than half what they were last year. I think that a wrestling ground or talimkhana would be a great addition to the new lines. Hospital. 12. The new hospital, though good in many respects, is, I very much regret to say, a great disappointment to me. It consists principally of two single wards, with opposite doors and windows, communicating with each other by an arch, on a well-raised plinth surrounded by a verandah, at each corner of which is a little room, one of which has to be used as a dispensary, a second as a writing-room, a third as a small separate ward for eye-cases or any others requiring segregation, and the fourth as a store-room; but with the exception of the writing-room none of these are either large enough or well fitted for the purpose. The dimensions of the wards are 45½ x 25 x 18.6', or an area of 910 feet, and cubic space of 16,835, giving to each bed, when there is the proper number of beds in each ward, an area of nearly 57 feet and a cubic space of 1,052 feet; but with the number of beds in the plan (two beds being put, contrary to all sanitary laws, in one wall-space), each patient would only have about 32½ square feet and 601 cubic feetPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 35 Water-supply. The water-supply is the same as that of the lines36 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. The number invalided during the year, as compared with 1874, is shown in the next table:37 POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. The general health of the corps has been good. The water-supply, both for the lines and hospital cannot, under the circumstances detailed in the report, be very pure for drinking purposes, although pronounced so last year by the Analyser, and, therefore, the early importation of the Kharakwásla water is looked forward to with some anxiety. H. M.'s Poona Horse. SIRUR.38 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Duties, and their Effect on Health. 6. The duties of the regiment while stationed at Sirur are very light indeed, consisting of the ordinary parades and light guard duty. On the march to and from Bombay the men enjoyed excellent health, and so also during the stay of the regiment their, although the escort duty was hard and trying. Only one case of venereal was admitted into hospital during the absence of the regiment from Sirur; it was contracted on the march from Dhulia. Lock-up Rooms and Cells. 7. The insufficiency and unsuitability of the lock-up and guard room has been repre- sented to the military authorities through the Commanding Officer, and the subject has been alluded to in medical reports for some years past. Hospital and its Sorroundings. 8. Plans and estimates for a new hospital and subsidiary buildings have been drawn up, and are now before Government. The whole regiment is at present stationed at Sirur, and the want of hospital accom- modation is obvious, as patients with trivial complaints and con- valescents have to be treated in the lines to prevent overcrowding. Sickness. Mortality, and Invalid- ing. 9. Generally speaking the men of the regiment have enjoyed very fair health, there having been 292 admissions in an average strength of 308. Of these, 61 were re-admissions, caused chiefly by fever and rheu- matism. The ratio per cent. of admissions to average strength was 94.7 as compared with 60 for 1874. There were 2 deaths in the head-quarters hospital, and 1 occurred among the men left at Sirur when the regiment went to Bombay. For this detachment separate returns were submitted by the medical officer left in charge. 6 men were granted sick leave for periods varying from 2 months up to a year. There were 15 men passed by the annual invaliding committee out of 20 sent up. Principal Causes of Sickness. 10. Ague gave 65 admissions, all of a comparatively mild type, except 3 which were admitted on our return from Bombay, and are still in hospital. Chronic rheumatism gave 14 admissions,POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 39 Talegaon, to which it was most probably conveyed by people assembling to attend the court or the weekly market. From this it spread in all directions; and as I wish to show how it reached Sirur, I shall give the result of my own enquiries. On the 11th May some people travelled from the infected district to Phakta, a village on the Goreh about 16 miles distant from Sirur, and on the following day 3 people were attacked in that village. At the time of the outbreak the patel of Old Sirur was at Phakta, and becoming alarmed he at once re- turned to his home, where he died of cholera on the 18th, thus bringing the disease to within two miles of the cantonment. Several cases of diarrh40 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Account of Outbreak of Cholera. Precautions. Disinfection, &c. Treatment. subject, dated the 25th November last, submitted to the medical authorities. The disease broke out in the town of Dhulia on the 26th April, the first case being that of a traveller (a Dher) from Málegaon where cholera had been prevalent for some days. Immediately on the outbreak of the malady in Dhulia the men were forbidden to go into the town, and all strangers were prohibited from communicating with the lines and its en- virons. To carry out this isolation, sentries were posted. It was, however, found impossible to prevent the civil population passing to and fro between their homes and the bazaar, and in- tercourse between the two quarters was, therefore, only limited. I believe, however, that the exclusion of beggars and other strangers, and the confinement of the sowars to the neighbour- hood of the lines, were secured. It is noteworthy that the disease did not appear in the Moglai until 12 days after its commencement in the town, although intercommunication was by no means thoroughly interrupted. The disease first attacked the wife of a Lingayet Bunya, named Suckoo Appa, living in the small bazaar of the Moglai. It then spread rapidly over the whole locality as if every part of it had been affected simultaneously with the choleraic influence. The whole place being the reverse of clean, and all, or nearly all, of the houses of both the civil inhabitants arid men of the Poona Horse being small, badly built and arranged, and very much overcrowded, it was not surprising that the close unwholesome at- mosphere afforded a favourable medium for the development of the disease. The maximum violence of the epidemic in Dhulia was reached between the 11th and 22nd of May, the greatest number of admissions having taken place on the 11th, 12th, 13th, and 14th, when there were, respectively, 44, 22, 37, and 23 admissions in the town and Moglai together; and the whole of the cases in the latter quarter (inclusive of the Poona Horse), which were 73 in number, occurred between the 7th and 17th May, the epidemic ceasing entirely after the latter date so far as this locality was concerned. The camp and vicinity were cleansed as much as possible, but no special measures of disinfection or white-wash- ing were resorted to. Destruction of the evacuations and digging up the fouled floors were carried out as far as practicable, and the advisability of doing so inculcated upon the people. I advised the Officer Command- ing the detachment to be prepared to march out into camp if necessary; and tents were accordingly procured from head-quarters, there having been none here previously. The disease confined itself, however, chiefly to the women and children of the syces and followers and a few members of the men's families, and only 3 sowars were attacked, all of whom lived in different huts widely separated. 2 of these men were of decidedly feeble consti- tution, and the other, though healthy, could not be termed robust. They all suffered from a severe and prolonged form of the disease, but convalescence was tolerably rapid. None of the many men who lived near them, and who visited them and attended upon them whilst ill, were attacked with cholera or diarrh41 POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL G. G. MAITLAND. On former inspections of these lines the necessity for carrying out the measure of erect- ing new lines had always been apparent to me. Not only are the huts overcrowded and badly ventilated, but they are dangerously contiguous to a mass of hovels occupied by the civil population of what is termed the "Moglai". With the exception of an outbreak of cholera, which occurred in May last, the general health of the detachment has been very good, the admissions to hospital being only 30, or 29 per cent. to strength, with 1 death from pneumonia. Although cholera prevailed to a great extent in the Moglai between the 7th and 17th of May, yet only 3 sowars were attacked and recovered. This partial immunity amongst the fighting men no doubt was in great measure due to the prompt and judicious measures carried out by the Commanding Officer. H.M.'s 19th Regiment N. I. SHOLA PUR.42 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. site alluded to by me in last year's report, and promises to yield an ample supply of water, which, from the position of the well, ought to be of good quality and free from any organic defilement. Food. 7. Food of all kinds forming the usual diet of the sepoys and of good quality has been abundant and tolerably cheap. The favourable effect of their being able to procure vegetables at a cheap rate, is shown by the fact that only a single case of scurvy was treated during the year, though 6 cases occurred in 1874, and as many as 27 in 1873, when the regiment was stationed in Bombay. Duties. 8. During the months of November and December there were in addition, at least for the head-quarters of the regiment, brigade parades and heavy guard duties at Poona; but these had no prejudicial effect on the health of the men, which, indeed, was particularly good during our stay there. Exercise, Amusement, and Oc- cupation. 9. During a great part of the year the sepoys have their time pretty well occupied. When not on duty they are allowed to seek their own amuse- ments: many pass away the time in sleep or in the bazaars; others in athletic exercises, &c. I think it would be of great service to introduce a gymnasium for the Native troops in every station as is done for Europeans; and I believe, if encouraged by the European officers, many of the sepoys would gladly avail themselves of it, with great benefit to their health and physical development, especially amongst young soldiers. I would also suggest the formation of regimental gardens, where practicable, in which the men might work when so inclined, and raise their own vegetables. Some of the sepoys of this regiment occasionally play cricket during the monsoon with the officers and other residents of the station, and this is also, I think, worthy of encouragement, not only as a healthy exercise, but as fostering good feeling between the sepoys and their European officers. Marches. 10. The regiment marched to the Camp of Exercise at Poona and back, and sent a detachment to Tándulwári. Hospital. 11. No additions or alterations have been made during the year. I expressed a doubt last year, as to whether the ventilation was not excessive in the cold season, but there has been no special prevalence of pulmon- ary or rheumatic affections which might be referred to such a causation. Owing to a much diminished rate of sickness during the year, as compared with 1874, there has been no over- crowding. The requirements, mentioned by me last year, have already been sanctioned, and will, I believe, be commenced during the next official year, should funds be forthcoming for the purpose. The only further addition required, is a bath-room. The conservancy is carried out as described last year, and the hospital and its surroundings kept thoroughly clean. The hospital water-supply is the same as for the regiment generally. Sickness, Mortality, and In- validing. Mortality. Invaliding. 12. There has been a very marked decrease in the amount of sickness during the past year as compared with the two previousPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 43 Diseases of Nervous System. fall, the mannèr in which the rain fell44 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Principal Causes of Mortality. 14. Of the 2 deaths which occurred in hospital 1 was due to chronic pneumonic. phthisis, and 1 to quinsy. One of those occurring out of hospital was also due to phthisis; the other was, I believe, a case of sud- den death, but from what cause I am unaware. The men who died in hospital were both Hin- dus, one being a Punjabee and the other a Konkanee. Epidemics. 15. The regiment has been entirely free from epidemics during the year: cholera pre- vailed in the town of Sholápur to a considerable extent in the months of July and August, and many cases occurred even in the sadder bazaar and in the Modekhana, both of which are in close proximity to the canton- ment and regimental lines, but not a case occurred within cantonment limits. Stringent precautionary measures were adopted. All communication was, as far as possible, prohibit- ed between the lines and the town, the sepoys not being allowed to enter the latter. Scrupul- ous cleanliness was enforced, and the men and their families were cautioned against the use of unripe or over-ripe fruit and other unwholesome food, and warned to apply for medicine without delay at the first appearance of any symptoms of looseness of bowels. The hospital assistants were also directed to visit the lines frequently and inquire for cases of diarrhPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 45 This is a great falling off certainly, but it still shows that more than one-half of the admissions have been from the above cause. The comparatively light monsoon and the fact of heavy rain having fallen in January the medical officer in his report states to be the cause, in his opinion, of this marked difference in the two years. Be that as it may, I think there now can be little doubt, judging from past records of Native regiments quartered there, that Sholápur is a feverish station, and that so long as they continue to be sent there they will always suffer more or less from fever. The mortality in the regiment has been slight. H. M.'s 13th Regiment N. I. AHMEDNAGAR.46 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. was prevalent in the surrounding districts. Precautionary measures were taken to prevent the disease being imported into camp, and it never broke out as an epidemic amongst the troops. Mortality. 12. 2 Hindus died of cholera, giving a percentage of deaths to strength of 0.3. Epidemics. 13. No disease assumed an epidemic form. 14. Vaccination has been performed as much as possible: 44 cases were successful, 2 unsuccessful, and 3 unknown. 15. The general health of the regiment has been very good, as seen from the number of admissions and deaths. The physique of the men is very fair; but, of course, there are al- ways a certain number of weakly men and others who, on account of having to keep several relatives, cannot get such a nourishing diet as they require. Resumé. 16. 2 men were discharged by court-martial in 1875. The health of the regiment has been very good, the mortality small, and admissions less than for the year previous. As stated in former reports, some change should be made in the clothing and invaliding rules. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL G. G. MAITLAND. There is nothing particular to remark upon in the medical history of the regiment dur- ing the past year. It was stationed at Ahmednagar until the 2nd November, when it march- ed to Poona for the Camp of Exercise, returning to its former station in December en route to Málegaon, where it is at present. The general health of the corps is stated in the report to be remarkably good. Ague has not been prevalent. Only 61 cases and but few serious cases from other diseases have been under treatment. In the months of June and August 2 cases of cholera occurred; both proved fatal. These were the only deaths during the year. Vaccination appears to have been carefully carried on since last report. H. M.'s 15th Regiment N. I. MA'LEGAON.POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 47 three days out from Málegaon the weather was cool and pleasant; cloudy and oppressive weather was then experienced. The change was followed by an increase of the sick list, admissions from fever became frequent, and a few cases of conjunctivitis occurred. During the return march to Nagar, between the 20th and 25th December, the admissions from fever were very numerous. Sickness, Mortality, and Invalid- ing. 6. 13 cases remained in hospital at the commencement of the year. The admis- sions were 517; of these 135 were re-admissions; giving 382 as the actual number of persons treated during the year. The admissions and percentage of treated to strength were consider- ably higher than in the previous year, as under:48 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Conservancy and Sanitary Arrangements. Water-supply. 3. The conservancy and sanitary arrangements continue as satisfactory as can be ex- pected considering local deficiences and drawbacks. Nothing effectual has as yet been done to secure for this fort and garrison a larger and better supply of potable water. A masonry filter erected inthe Mamoo Banja Tank, which some years previously (1871) had proved a failure, was re-opened and somewhat modified as to the number and disposition of its filtering chambers and contents, and on the same principle as that of a filter constructed at Haripur, in the Punjab, said to have been favourably noticed in some of the published papers on Indian engineering. It seems to have consisted of one large and deep filtering chamber communicating with the cistern or settling reservoir by means of a masonry duct or tube with a syphon action. The filter here appears to have, in addition, an extra chamber, wherein the denser impurities collect and are precipitated before the water can reach the filtering chamber; the filtering medium utilised in this latter, was composed of sand and gravel of various degrees of fineness, with a good layer of charcoal placed about the middle of the filtering strata. Moreover, the finest description of sand was at considerable cost procured from Mortakka, on the Nerbudda, and the filtering trata packed so close as to ensure the slowest and most perfect percolation practicable. The filtering beds were disposed, briefly, as follows:POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 49 Colour in stratum of 2 feet Opalescent greenish yellow. Odour Earthy Taste Nil Re-action Neutral Sediment consists of a very small quantity of sandy matter. No vegetable debris or infusoria From the above analysis it will be observed that the amount of oxygen and albumenoid ammonia as representing the amount of oxidisable organic matters are still in excess, and, therefore, the filtering process is considered not sufficiently perfect to render the water good and potable. This filter will, however, at a future time, in the ensuing year, be again tried, and results analysed, as it is just possible that a filter so newly constructed may not readily afford the result which may be given when the filter is brought more into use and becomes more water-tight and compact after the lapse of a greater length of time: one can- not be over-sanguine, however, with regard to any satisfactory result in this respect, con- sidering the care and attention bestowed on this apparatus on this and many former occa- sions. In the meantime sites have been proposed and selected for two wells to be sunk along the edge of the tank; and as seemed important beforehand to ascertain the comparative merits of the quality of this tank water over that of the water similarly taken, unfiltered, from the "Sucker Bowree" tank, I forwarded specimens of both to the Chemical Analyser to Govern- ment, copy of whose report is subjoined:50 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. if filtered by the more natural and effectual process of a suitably situated and properly con- structed percolating well adjoining this tank. The immediate edge of this tank is, however, apparently objectionable from want of any available percolating medium (cleft or cleavage in rock not being sufficient), and, moreover, this experiment has been tried many years ago, and found wanting. The best sites for wells here will, I should say, be found, not on the margin of the tank, but at some distance for 80 to 100 feet in the adjoining ravine and com- pounds, the soil in some of which appears considerably below the tank-water level, even during the hot weather; and though the abundant, gravelly, silicious, and clean soil therein would be most likely to afford space sufficient for the necessary percolation and filtration required, and this I have no doubt, if realised, will yield a favourable result. Both trials (i.e., on edge and removed from tank) are now being made, the result of which will be referred to in due course. It is singular, however, that the only potable shallow well available in this fort was constructed, years gone by, under a native government,; since this, various at- tempts have been made, but all have proved, up to the present, most unsuccessful and expen- sive failures. The water used by the Native troops is still of most questionable quality, being taken from the tank and but roughly filtered, through shallow holes (jeeras) made by the men themselves beside the tank. During the ensuing year I shall try and have charcoal filters introduced in the lines. 4. In the detachment, 4th Rifles, 153 cases came under hospital treatment, the milder forms being usually treated in the lines; of these 2 remained from the previous year, 149 were discharged to duty, 3 were discharged otherwise, and 1 remained under treatment at the end of the year. Of the 3 discharged otherwise, 1 was invalided, and the diseases of 2 were changed. In the garrison staff and details 34 cases were admitted; of these 27 were discharged to duty, 3 were discharged otherwise, and 4 remained at the end of the year. Of the 3 discharged otherwise, 1 was for diarrhPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 51 Admissions for Ague in Detachment, 4th Rifles N. I. 36 men once in hospital 36 4 " twice do. 8 1 man 4 times do. 4 41 men 48 1 man remaining from last return 1 Total 49 Admissions for Ague in Garrison Staff and Details. 8 men once in hospital 8 2 " twice do. 4 1 man 3 times do. 3 11 Total 15 45 cases of chronic rheumatism were treated in detachment 4th Rifles and 4 in staff and details. The contrast, as last year, with regard to both charges, is striking. Many of the cases occurring in detachment were due, no doubt, to former climatic causes and constant attacks of ague and dengue contracted during their protracted stay of 3 years at Baroda. It does appear remarkably suggestive, however, that most of those presenting themselves for treatment (and chiefly from January to September) were not the older and apparently more debilitated sepoys, but rather the comparatively younger and more robust men between the ages of 33 and 36, whose service of 15 years or more would entitle them, if invalided, to a pension; and there appears to be no doubt that the prospect of getting this, appeared upper- most with many who seemed to make the most of and to exaggerate their ailments. All were duly discharged to duty and none invalided. The percentage of treated to strength was 32.8 in the detachment and 3.7 in staff and details. Syphilitic bubo.52 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. having been quartered here for 2 years, during which time they appeared to recover from the depressing effects of the climate of Baroda; for, whereas there were 259 admissions from a strength of 147.7 in 1874, there were but 151 admissions from a strength of 137 in 1875. 11. The exercises and amusements consist of shooting, fishing, and hunting in large parties, and wood-cutting, &c., in the distant jungles, all of which exercises they appeared latterly much to appreciate and indulge in. Treatment of Disease when special. 12. The only special treatment adopted, was that for ague with the sulphate of cin- chonidine. The number of patients treated in 6 months was 34, the number successful was 21, unsuccessful 11, and doubtful or unknown 2. It must be said the therapeutic value of this drug as a medicine was not found to yield so satisfactory a result as that usually given by the sulphate of quinine. It was generally found useful in very mild cases only. 13. The dispensary established in the petha as supplementary to the fort and garrison, and raised to check in the petha the entrance of disease into the fort, especially that of an epi- demic kind, has so far answered its purpose that, while small-pox and cholera prevailed in the villages of the vicinity (the latter since April), not a case occurred in this cantonment; this being due, no doubt, in some measure to the precautions adopted, to the early checking of premonitory diarrhPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 53 The rainfall was above the average, and amounted to 49 inches 14 cents. Lines. 5. The lines have not been improved since last report, and are over-crowded. The capacity of each hut is 810 cubic feet; and as each hut, including women, children and followers, is, on an average, occupied by 3 persons, this allows each individual 270 cubic feet only. To obviate the evil of the present system, proper accommodation should be provided for the Rifles, and new pendalls erected. Drainage. 6. The defects of drainage in the lines are obvious enough. It was proposed to intro- duce a proper system of drainage, by which the surface gutter should be widened, deepened, faced with masonry, and covered, to prevent their noisome contents from contaminating the air. The present plan of sweep- ing the gutters, redolent of much impurity and of nightsoil, judging by the sense of smell, is exceedingly offensive, and cannot be condemned in sufficiently strong terms. Conservancy. 7. On this subject I would merely reiterate what is elsewhere on record, that in the station sanitation is at a discount, and that nothing in a sanitary point of view will be done effectively until Government sanction the re-conversion of Satara from a civil to a military station. Water-supply. 8. The water in use by the sepoys and their families is obtained from three wells in the lines; these dry up in the hot weather, and the supply is then brought from neighbouring wells. Additional wells should be provided in the lines, and those already there should be deepened. The water is consider- ed good. Subjoined is an analysis of samples from the three wells, with identical results in all:54 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. certain petty repairs. On their completion the re-occupation of the building was interdicted by the Commanding Officer, as the Executive Engineer was unable to warrant its being safe for those who from illness were incapacitated from moving themselves. Consequently, during the first quarter of the year the sick were treated under canvas. From the 1st April a newly-built bungalow was hired, which stands on the northern edge of the parade-ground close to the sadder bazaar and objectionably near it. As a temporary arrangement, and until the regiment is provided with a proper hospital, no better accommodation is available in Satara. The building stands east and west, facing the north; in rear are the parade and drill grounds, the centre of which is occupied by the lines. The bungalow is tiled, and stands on a plinth 2 feet high. The house contains 6 rooms in all, or, properly speaking, 5, as the front middle room is separated from that in rear by an archway; the end rooms are utilised as office and store-rooms, one being set apart for the reception of particular cases. It is well known that the hospital for Native troops is now occupied by the sick of H.M.'s 2nd Queen's. There are under the present regime no quarters for 1st and 2nd class hospital establishment. The dry-earth system is the one pursued in the hospital latrine. The hospital water-supply is furnished by the wells in the lines, and is considered good. Sickness. 12. The amount of sickness during the year has been less than in the previous one. The average strength of the Rifles at head-quarters during the year was 352.5 with a daily sick average of 5.6. The percentage of treated to strength was 8.9 and of deaths to strength 0.2. In the list of general diseases admissions to hospital were as follows:POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 55 the result of local injury. A shoe-nail wounded the great toe. Rest, fomentations, poultices, a free use of the knife, carbolic-acid dressings, and constitutional treatment were all tried in vain. The entire limb was ultimately implicated by the gangrenous inflammation, and be- came so offensive that the patient was removed to a tent, where he was treated until he died. Amputation at an early date might have saved life. The case of perineal abscess was under treatment 60 days. On admission the symptons were obscure. There was intense headache and a peculiarly weak pulse. In 4 or 5 days he complained of severe pain and tenderness in the left testicle, in 2 days more the scrotum was greatly swelled, and there was a bulg- ing in the perineum which was laid open and a large quantity of offensive matter escaped. The urethra gave way, and a fistulous opening in the scrotum required a free use of the knife the parts, thereafter brought together by three sutures and supported by strips of adhesive plaster, are now nearly healed. The perineal communication with the urethra has closed. Old stricture, of which the patient said nothing56 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Hospital. 5. This regiment now occupies the hospital which belonged to the 5th N. L. I. while that corps was stationed at Belgaum; it has been well described by Dr. Day in his report for 1874. I agree with that officer in thinking that a ward should be built for the reception of infectious diseases. Cholera and small-pox are, doubtless, best treated in tents or chuppers; but children with measles or varicella would do better in a well-ventilated but not draughty ward. A separate ward would, moreover, be a great convenience for the observation of suspicious cases and the temporary accommodation of contagious diseases while a chupper was being erected. A covered way from the hospital to the latrines and cook-room would be a great comfort to the patients in the rains. Latrines. 6. Both here and at Kolhápur the latrines are on the dry system. Hospital Water-supply. 7. At Kolhápur the water for the hospital was drawn from the nearest regimental well; here it is obtained from a well in the hospital compound dug by Mr. Raghojee Patkur, an old hospital assistant. Sickness. 8. The health of the regiment, during its 4 years' stay at Kolhápur, has steadily im- proved. The number of admissions from all causes was 419 in 1875. The following percentages of treated to average strength show the progessive improvement in the health of the regiment:B 6658 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL G. G. MAITLAND. The general health of the men has been good since the corps arrived at Kolhápur in 1872, and there has been progressive improvement. Cholera, though very prevalent in the districts and in the town of Kolhápur, did not reach the lines or bazaar. This immunity from the epidemic the medical officer ascribes to the good supply of water, the position and sanitary condition of the lines, and to the quarantine enforced. The head-quarter wing of the regiment marched on Belgaum on the 29th November. The villages on the road had in the previous months suffered much from cholera, but were free from the epidemic before the regiment left Kolhápur. Dr. Hughes states the men bore the march well, neither suffering from exertion or exposure. Under the head of "treatment when special" Surgeon Hughes makes some interesting remarks on the use of the ipecacuanha-spray in the treatment of asthma. Vaccination was carried on assiduously. H. M.'s 5th Regiment N. L. I. BELGAUM.POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 59 in orders to march on the 15th of October; at that time of year, unless there are camping grounds (which I did not see) other than those used by us, great difficulty would have been experienced. I believe that in many of the places the ground has not yet been taken up by Government for camps, so that the crops are still cultivated. I did not see much to object to in the sites chosen, except as far as concerns the question of crops. The ground at Karád is, perhaps, objectionable, as it is situated on an old burial-ground, and there is a tank of foul water quite close to the camp: a bheestie was caught bringing this water for the use of the hospital. I need not say that means were taken to prevent its happening again. Karád is of importance, being a halting place: so that, if possible, a better site should be chosen. Hospital. 6. A bath-room was built in the verandah; this is the only change. No over-crowding. The latrines have been kept clean; the system has not been changed. In the hospital water-supply there is no change; water plentiful. Sickness and Mortality. Bronchitis. 7. There has been no marked increase or decrease this year, the daily average being 14.4, whereas last year it was 13.7. For ague there have been 145 admissions and 2 deaths; other cases, not severe, were treated with cinchonidine. The admissions for rheumatism, chronic, were 10; last year they were 16. The scorbutic taint acquired at Aden is gradually leaving the regiment. There have been 3 cases of primary syphilis, but not severe. There have been 14 admissions for scondary syphilis, but of these 4 were re-admissions. 1 short-service man had to be invalided from this cause; 4 old-service men were pensioned, syphilis being the more or less remote cause. 5 admissions from scurvy this year against 24 last year, showing the good effect of climate after leaving Aden. Of lumbago 24 cases. The old and worn-out men who come into hospital with the view to pension, are classed under this name. No pen- sion rules could be better devised, in my opinion, to encourage scheming and embarrass the surgeon in his diagnosis than the present ones. Under paralysis agitans 1 man was in- valided. 8 conjunctivitis, not severe. 12 cases of bronchitis caused by exposure to wet on guard. Asthma, 4 cases invalided out of 8 admissions; do not call for any remark. Dysentery, 12 cases, no deaths; this is seldom a formidable disease in Belgaum. There has been a large number of cases of worms, and taking those among women and children into consideration, 300. From what I witnessed myself I have a very strong belief that very many of the so-called cases of cholera occurring in the districts were nothing more than cases of worms. Before leaving Belgaum I was in hopes of obtaining some statistics concerning one taluka, which I think would have shown that a very large proportion of the deaths reported as cholera occurred among children and women. Now, according to Dr. Aitken, in an epidemic the mortality should be least among children, and in the epidemic of 1832 in Paris males died at the rate of 4 to 1 in proportion to females. Unfortunately I am not in a position to speak positively, but from what I could learn in conversation many more women and children died than male adults during the epidemic which prevailed last year (1875) in the Southern Mahratta Country. 2 men were brought into hospital. who might easily have been thought to be suffering from cholera, that disease at the time being reported all round Belgaum. They, both of them, were in a complete state of collapse; purging and vomiting, cramps of the extremities, and suppression of urine existed in both cases. Thinking at first I had to deal with a cholera case, I injected chloral hydrate subcutaneously, and with considerable relief to the spasm. Having, however, a firm conviction that many cases of so-called cholera were cases of worms, I administered san- tonine in these cases, and the cause of the severe symptoms very soon became apparent, and large numbers of round worms were passed, and both patients recovered. One child, who was treated in the hospital, vomited worms which measured over 1 foot in length. I am of opinion that the severity of the symptoms had a good deal to do with the food supply in both cases above related; the sepoys had been receiving a very insufficient diet. Other cases occurred after a fast60 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Mortality. Invaliding. 8. There have been 4 deaths in hospital, and 1 out. 2 deaths from ague have been mentioned above; the other 2 deaths arePOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 61 Lines. 3. The lines, with reference to available space, ventilation, bazaar, neighbouring villages, drainage, and tanks, are precisely as described in last year's report on the 2nd Grenadier Regiment. The conservancy and sanitary arrangements are, in my opinion, most satisfactory. Water, Rations, &c. 4. Condensed water is supplied by Government for drinking and culinary purposes and well water for other purposes. The quantity of each seems to be sufficient for the fighting men, but the lesser allowance dealt out to the public followers might be increased with advantage. Government supplies the troops with rations sufficient in quantity and of fairly good quality. The ordinary red coat, woollen forage cap, with white puggree and blue trowsers, are worn at present; in the hot weather a white American-drill patrol coat will take the place of the red. A better protection for the head would seem called for, and suggestions for an improvement in this respect are under consideration. Duties, &c. 5. The parade and guard duties, on which the troops are usually engaged, do not seem to influence their health injuriously. Gymnastics have not been practised by the troops since the arrival of the regiment in Aden, nor have they had any amusement for the same period. Some of the men are en- gaged in shoe-making, tailoring, and carpentering in leisure hours, and a workshop is being instituted. Hospital. 6. The hospital has recently been reconstructed. It is well situated in an open space, exposed to the breeze, with no unpleasant surroundings, and has through ventilation by means of doors and windows, abundant accommodation, a large amount of shade on the northern aspect secured by means of a double verandah, a plinth of about 3 feet, and the superstructure is of excellent material solidly put together. The conservancy continues to be of a most satisfactory nature. The Government supply of water is sufficient for sick fighting men, but scarcely so for the public followers. Sickness, &c. Deaths. 7. The sickness, mortality, and invaliding for the past year in percentages were62 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Topography and Physical Geo- graphy. 2. The new cantonment of Dharwar, situated about 2 miles from the town, occupies an area of about 300 acres. It is situated in 15°30' north latitude, and 75°2' east longitude. To the north of it, about 46 miles, is the military station of Belgaum; to the south is the commercial town of Hubli, distant about 14 miles; to the west, by the Tini Ghát, is the sea distant about 90 miles. Water. 3. The water for drinking purposes is derived from three wells which have been made by the P. W. D. within the past three years. Although the quantity has been sufficient during the past year, it must be remembered that the whole of the regiment was not located in the new cantonment until October 1875. It remains to be seen whether three wells will be sufficient during the year 1876; there can be no doubt that a fourth well would be a great boon. The water of two of these wells has been analysed, and the result is herewith forwarded. The analysis was made by the Acting Chemical Analyser to Government:POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 63 but drinking. Swimming has been recommended as a good, healthful exercise, developing the muscles, and at the same time cleansing the body; and I am glad to state it is resorted to by several of the men. Drainage. 4. The lines being built on the slope of the ground there is excellent surface drainage, the water in the monsoon being conveyed by a ditch into fields below the two tanks before mentioned. Effects on Climate. 5. The above topographical conditions exercise a favour- able influence on the climate. Lines. Ventilation. 6. The lines of this regiment have been completed during the past year, having been built by the regiment in about two years. They are built, I am informed, on the standard plan and space, and are all that a Native regiment can require. They are well and substantially built, and the strictest super- vision has been exercised by all the European officers, from the commandant downwards. They face towards the north-east. The prevailing wind being from N. E. and S. W. at different seasons of the year there is a fee current of air continually passing through them. There are 32 blocks for the non-commissioned rank and file; each is really a double row of huts, being divided into two rows dwellings by a central well which supports the roof. Before each hut there is a small garden plot, which is cultivated according to the taste of the occupant. On each flank of the lines there are 8 houses for the Native officers, with gardens to their flanks, in which plantains, &c., are grown. The following are the dimensions of the dwellings of the different ranks:64 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. chest would expand more freely, there would be freer movement of the arms, and the sepoy could wear under it a sufficient amount of clothing to protect his chest from variations of temperature which prevail at different seasons and periods of the day. For boots I would recommend some uniform pattern of Native shoe or sandal. Duties, &c. 10. During line-building the duties of the troops were very heavy; since the lines were built they have been the ordinary duty of the sepoy. The men have 15¼ consecutive nights in bed, The duties have not had any appreciable bad effect on the health of the men. There is an excellent workshop in the regiment, and many of the men are really excellent carpenters, smiths, &c. There is also a soldier's garden, in which are cultivated, for sale, lucerne, plantains, and country vege- tables; there is also a talimkhana. Encouragement is given to the men to excel in athletic sports by means of prizes given by the officers of the regiment annually for proficiency in wrestling, running, leaping, and vaulting; for these prizes there is a keen competition. Lock-up Rooms and Cells. 11. There are 2 cells in the new quarter-guard, sub- stantially built, dry, cool, and well ventilated. Hospital and its Surroundings. Conservancy. 12. A new hospital is being built at the new cantonment; the one at present in use is situated in the fort, and is a very good one. The ventilation is carried out by means of windows and doors, and by ventilators in the roof, and is, on the whole, satisfactory. The number of sick is rarely above what can be well accommodated in the hospital. The conservancy is by means of latrines in rear of the hospital; they are cleaned out daily, the excreta being removed in a cart to a considerable distance, nearly a mile from the hospital. They are kept free from smell by the use of McDougall's powder. Sickness, Mortality, and Invalid- ing. Invaliding. 13. During the past year there were 363 admissions, 3 being for cholera, out of an average strength of 685; of these 4 died. Of the fatal cases 3 were from cholera and 1 from bronchitis. The ratio per cent. of admissions to average strength was 53. The average daily number of sick was 18.3. The percentage of treated to strength was 54.7; deaths to strength 6, deaths to treated 1. 6 men were sent before the annual invaliding committee at Belgaum, 5 of whom were passed. Principal Causes of Sickness. 14. From ague there were 87 admissions, all of them being of a mild type, and yield- ing readily to treatment. From rheumatism there were 18 admissions, all of them being the chronic form. Primary syphilis gave 4, secondary 2 admissions. 16 cases of bronchitis, 1 of them proving fatal. DiarrhPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 65 General Health and Physique of the Men. 19. I cannot say this is as satisfactory as it might be. Many of the men have a scorbutic taint, caused, in my opinion, from insufficiency of food, especially vegetables. In some instances I have found slight ulcers difficult to heal, and on my issuing lime-juice to the patients and directing the hospital orderly to observe the amount of vegetables consumed by them, a cure has been speedily effected. Treatment of Disease when special. 20. Cinchonidine has been used as a substitute for quinine in the treatment of inter- mittent fever; but, as I have before observed, the cases were all of mild type. I am, therefore, unable to state decidedly my opinion as to its merits as compared with quinine. Resumé . 21. The regiment has enjoyed fairly good health. Since it came here it has been subjected to very hard work66 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. NORTHERN DIVISION. Average strength present during the year... 8,547.1 Do. daily sick per cent. to the average strength... 3.7 Ratio of mortality per cent. to the average strength... 0.9 H. M.'s 3rd Regiment N. L. I. AHMEDABAD.NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 67 and their families, a separate ward for women and children, and another for contagious cases. The dry-earth system is carried out; the latrine is well built, and answers the purpose admi- rably. A sweeper is always in attendance. The hospital is supplied with excellent water from a well just outside the compound. Sickness, Mortality, and Inva- liding. 11. The average daily sick was 32.4, the percentage of treated to strength 179.1, deaths to strength 2.16, deaths to treated 1.21, and 40 invalided. Principal Causes of Sickness. 12. Ague gave the larger proportion of cases. Measles prevailed to some extent during the months of March and April, followed by rather a severe visitation of cholera, by which we lost 11 men out of 18 cases and 1 European officer. Causes of Mortality. 13. Cholera 11, measles 1, meningitis 1, remittent fever 1, pneumonia 1. Mortality according to Race. 14. Hindustani Hindus 3, Mahrattas 7, Mussulmans 4, and Punjabee Hindu 1. Influence of Rainfall. 15. Ague prevailed, as usual, immediately after the monsoon. Epidemics. 16. Measles and cholera. 17. Vaccinations 64, and re-vaccinations 22. General Health and Physique of the Men. 18. The regiment has been rather unfortunate during the past year in having two epidemics to encounter; but, excluding this, the men have en- joyed good health for the most part. The work has been very hard, but it does not seem to have had any material bad effect. The admissions during the year were 1,226 against 893 in the year 1874. Treatment of Disease when special. 19. The treatment of fever cases by quinine and arsenic was found to he the most efficient, and the hypodermic injection of chloral hydrate in some cases of cholera and in others entirely failed. Sulphate of cinchonidine was used extensively, and found of much less value in the treatment of fevers than quinine. Special Observations. 20. The system of cutting half of the pay of recruits for their regimental necessaries still exercises a bad effect on their health, more especially as it occurs at a time when they have to undergo a good amount of physical exertion in learning their drill, and are unable to afford to allow themselves sufficient nourishment to keep up their strength. Native Medical Pupil how taught. 21. The Native medical pupil has been instructed in the office routine work, and has taken his share of clinical work as well as that of the dispensary. Instruction has been given from time to time at the bedside. Observations on the Mean Level of the Sub-soil Water. Locality or Designation of Well. Date and Hour of Measurement. Distance of Sub- soil Water below surface of Ground. Rainfall from Date of last Measurement. Feet in. In. ets. Front of the hospital. 15th February 1875 at 5 A.M 34 1 0 84 15th March do. 34 7 ... ... 15th April do. 35 7 0 4 15th May do. 36 8 ... ... 15th June do. 36 4 1 82 15th July do. 35 7 4 28 15th August do. 35 1 6 98 15th September do. 35 0 4 25 15th October do. 32 4 4 44 15th November do. 33 4 0 82 15th December do. 33 10 ... ... REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL D. WYLLIE, M.D. This is the only corps of those in the Northern Division that shows increase of sickness as compared with previous year68 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. rior, with eaves ventilation; water abundant and good; food cheap; masonry latrines in use throughout with dry earthNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 69 Lines. 2. The new lines, which were occupied in June, are situated in one corner of the general parade-ground to the north of the camp; they consist of 16 pendalls, arranged in two blocks of 8 each70 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. times a day for 2 or 3 days, the fever subsided. Those were cases in which fever had only occur- red one day previous to admission; the attacks recurred at regular periods, were of short dura- tion, and, as well as could be estimated, mild. As I remarked in the annual report last year, at page 270, there appears to be no treatment so efficacious as the subcutaneous injection of the neutral sulphate of quinine, and I adopted it here with great benefit; but I am now inclined to believe that the injection, subcutaneously, of so large a quantity of the quinine solution as 20 or 25 minims in some peculiar cases may lead to untoward results, and that the hypo- dermic injection of quinine, made soluble by sulphuric acid, alone should be the method adopted. In two cases, one of remittent and one of intermittent fever when the temperature of the patients stood at 105 F., the cold-bath treatment appears most decidedly to have saved life. I have tried recently the administration of aconite in the severe headache so often accompanying malarious fever, and given in 2-minim doses every 15 minutes for one hour and half; it certainly has in several cases entirely relieved that symptom. 17. I have endeavoured to give the assistants and Native medical pupil the simplest instruction and information. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL D. WYLLIE, M.D. Health was generally very satisfactory; but the year was eventful in the appearance of epidemic cholera in May, of which 12 seizures occurred with 8 deaths. There were also 2 deaths by tetanus, at the beginning of the cold weather, in men debilitated from the effects of ague, and 1 by continued fever. Inspected the hospital January 4th.NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 71 Hospital. 8. The hospital stands some 200 yards from and to the east of the lines. The building was formerly the regimental school; it has a single ward 96¾ feet long, 22 feet wide, affording accommodation for 28 sick, and giving each man a cubic space of 2,800 feet; it is well lighted and ventilated. A spacious verandah runs along the east and west sides of the building. To prevent over- crowding during the fever season these verandahs were used for the patients. They accom- modate, without any inconvenience, 16 beds. At each corner is a room used, respect- ively, as the dispensary, store-room, and quarters for a hospital assistant and Native medical pupil. The flooring of the ward is of red brick of a soft and crumbling nature. On the eastern side of the hospital, and some 30 paces only from it, is the small village of Gowleepoora, which is not in camp limits; the villagers are chiefly herdsmen, cultivators, and brick-makers. At first it was in a most filthy state on account of the number of cattle kept there, but strict measures are now taken to keep the place clean. The brick-making is now carried on at some distance from the hospital. There is accommodation for 12 people only, belonging to the hospital establishment, with their families. Wards for the treatment of contagious or any special diseases and a dead-house are required. The latrines are conveniently situated; the iron pans in use are emptied and cleaned twice a day; the excreta are carted away to some distance out of camp and burnt. The hospital water-supply is derived from wells near the regimental lines. Sickness, Mortality, and In- validing. 9. There were 779 admissions this year, being less by 391 than last year. The chief admissions were fevers, chronic rheumatism, catarrhal ophthal- mia, contusion and chest-affections. Exclusive of cholera cases there were only 2 deaths. 30 men were invalided and 3 were discharged by court-martial. The most important cause of sickness has been malaria. Of fevers there were72 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. H. M.'s 2nd Squadron, 2nd Regiment L. C. RÁJKOT.NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 73 Principal Causes of Mortality. jaundice; the other was seen to fall from his horse, and was found dead. On post-mortem, examination Dr. Batty found the semilunar valves almost com- pletely converted into cartilage, and inmediately above and be- hind them, in the aorta, there was an ulcer of about the size of 2-anna piece. Of those who died, one was a Mussulman, the other a Mahratta. Influence of Rainfall. 9 The rainfall was 17 inches 86 cents. Epidemics. 10. Cholera has been prevalent in the city, but no cases occurred in the squadron. 11. There were 23 primary vaccinations and no re-vaccinations. 12. The health of the squadron has been fairly good during the year. The physique of the men is good Resumé 13. It may be said the lines, hospital, and latrines are good, and kept clean and in good order. The supply of water, though good in quality, is insuffici- ent in quantity, and likely to become more so during the present year. The health of the men has been good, but the mortality has increased. Observations made at Rájkot on the Mean Level of the Sub-soil Water in each month of the year. Locality or Designation of Well. Date and Hour of Measurement. Distance of Sub- soil Water below Surface of Ground. Rainfall from Date of last Measurement. Well is situated in the com- pound of Bungalow No. 32. Feet in. In. cts. 23rd February 1875, at 5 A. M. 15 2 ... 15th March do. 14 10 ... 15th April do. 15 7 ... 15th May do. 17 4 ... 15th June do. 22 6 0 46 15th July do. 24 4 4 52 15th August do. 26 4½ 6 0 15th September do. 22 6 3 19 15th October do. 25 7½ 2 26 15th November do. 29 11 ... 15th December do. 30 11 0 72 REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL D. WYLLIE, M.D. The lines are satisfactory, and the huts have ample cubage. Water-supply sufficient, but likely to be short in current year, owing to small rainfall. The conservancy arrangements, as explained by the medical officer, at times inadequate for prompt service. Inspected the hospital, 9th February. The accommodation is ample and good, and its arrangements are all satisfactory, excepting the latrine, which should be removed from the vicinity of the well, as mentioned in the report. No. 1 Company, Native Artillery. RÁJKOT.47 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. 11, making a total of 44 rooms. The superficial area for non-commissioned officers' quarters is 130 square feet, cubic space is 1,350 square feet; and in gunners' quarters 108 square feet, while the cubic space is 1,392½ feet. The lines are well built with closed-in verandahs, and have a place for washing in each hut. The ventilation,. arranged with tiles in the walls, is but little used, the spaces being generally filled up by the owner; consequently the only ventilation is by the door. The lines situated to the north of the sudder bazaar, are about half a mile distant from the city; no villages are situated nearer than 3 miles off. The drainage is sur- face and natural. There are no tanks in the vicinity. Conservancy and Sanitary Ar- rangements. 4. There has been no alteration in the conservancy dur- ing the past year. Water-supply. 5. The water-supply is very scanty this year, owing to the scarcity, of rain. The water however, is good; all water for purposes of washing has to be brought from the lines. One of the wells is being deepened. Food. 6. Articles of food have been rather dear, and it has been almost impossible to procure vegetables for a great part of the year. Duties. 7. The chief duties have been line-building and the ordinary battery duties, which have not proved prejudicial to the health of the men. Lock-up Rooms and Cells. 8. There is a lock-up room belonging the batteries' guard. Its superficial area is 150 square feet, and cubic capacity 1,687.5 cubic feet. Over-crowding. 9. There has been no over-crowding in hospital. Accommodation and Defects. 10. A new dead-house is in process of construction, and will shortly be finished. Better accommodation for the hospital assistant is required; as the place in which he has to live, is not fit for the purpose; also accommodation for the hospital servants, who are obliged to live in the verandah of the hospital. Conservancy. 11. The hospital conservancy is carried out fairly, but the latrines should be visited more frequently and regularly; but this it is impossible to ex- pect with only one cart for the whole of the camp. Hospital Water-supply. 12. The water-supply is good, but is in great danger of contamination owing to the close proximity of the hospital latrine, the site of which should be moved. 13. The health of the men has been very good: only 105 were admitted as compared with 158 in 1874. 1 death occurred from pneumonic phthisis. No deaths in 1874. 5 men were invalidedNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 75 Observations on the Mean Level of the Sub-soil Water. Locality or Designation of Well. Date and Hour of Measurement. Distance of Sub- soil Water below Surface of Ground. Rainfall from Date of last Measurement. The well is situated close to the site of the old Artillery Lines, to the right rear of the Commissariat Office. Feet in. In. cts. 24th February 1875, at 5 A.M. 20 8 ... 15th March do. 22 0 ... 15th April do. 22 0 ... 15th May do. 25 8 ... 15th June do. 26 5 0 46 15th July do. 24 9 4 52 15th August do. 24 3 6 0 15th September do. 25 0 3 19 15th October do. 25 8 2 26 15th November do. 26 2 ... 15th December do. 26 2 0 72 REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL D. WYLLIE, M.D. Health was very satisfactory throughout. Sanitary surroundings generally satisfactory, and new lines on standard plan are being constructed. The sick were treated in the same hospital as the squadron of 2nd Cavalry and Wing 7th Regiment. The accommodation is ample and good. Nothing particular occurred. Vaccination was duly attended to. Head Quarter Wing, H. M.'s 7th Regiment N. I. RÁJKOT.76 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. to going on duty he complained to a comrade that he felt unwell, and had an acute pain in the small of the back: his friend suggested he should go to hospital; he replied "I will be all right tomorrow. " On the morning of 2nd, at 5-30, he was sitting in a chair under the porch of the bungalow, when he suddenly became giddy and faint, and fell out of the chair to the ground. I saw him where he lay at 6 A. m.; he was then semi-conscious, and was supported with his body bent forwards; his abdomen pressed firmly against his flexed thighs and knees. He was deathly cold and pallid, with a cold clammy perspiration over his face, neck, and body; his pulse was small, weak, and rapid; he made signs which indicated that the cause was in the abdomen high up. On placing my hand over the upper part of right side of abdomen there was a dis- tinct, loudly, pulsating tumour. I had the man conveyed to hospital, and had cold applications kept constantly applied to the part; he was so faint I had to give him stimulants almost every 10 minutes; he died at 4 P. M. the same day. On post-mortem examination, made 2 hours after death, the following notes were recorded:NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 77 Epidemics. 6. There were no epidemics. 7. Vaccination was carried on regularly. 29 successful primary, and 45 re-vaccinations, in which only 20 gave good results. The monthly Rainfall from 1st January to 31st December 1875 at Rájkot. January. February. March. April. May. June. July. August. September. October. November. December. Year. 1875 ... 0·80 ... ... 0·30 3·55 3·66 2·71 6·12 ... ... 0·72 17·86 Observations on the Mean Level of the Sub-soil Water. Locality or Designation of Well. Date and Hour of Measurement. Distance of Sub-soil Water below Sur- face of Ground. Rainfall from Date of last Measurement. Well is situated in the compound Bungalow No. 32. Feet in. In. cts. 24th February 1875 at 5 A.M. 15 2 ... 15th March do. 14 10 ... 15th April do. 15 7 ... 15th May do. 17 4 ... 15th June do. 22 6 0 46 15th July do. 24 11 4 52 15th August do. 26 4½ 6 0 15th September do. 22 6 3 19 15th October do. 25 7½ 2 26 15th November do. 29 0 ... 15th December do. 30 11 0 72 REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON78 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. consequences of these are a very high mortality and injury to the constitutions of the men, who, on their return, are unfeebled and emaciated to a very great extent. The systems of many of them are so saturated with malaria that they never again lose it, or regain their health; many suffer from greatly enlarged spleens, and all of them are rendered almost useless for active service. Conservancy. 2. During 5 months in the year the permanent latrines are in use, and at this time an extra conservancy cart is employed for the purpose of clean- ing them; these latrines are well built, and situated about 200 yards to the N. W. of the lines. In the remaining months trenches (enclosed by tatties) are dug on a piece of ground to the north of lines, about 300 yards from them. These are not po- pular with the men, but work well; there is not much smell, and fresh trenches are dug every third day. Water-supply. 3. The water-supply for drinking purposes is dependent entirely on wells; of these there are 9 public wells within cantonment limits, 4 of which only are of any use, 2 of them being situated in the lines of the regiment. Of these 2, 1 is considered justly to be the best well in camp; it has never been known to run dry, and the water is very free from organic impurities. An analysis was made of it during the month of April, the following being the result:NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 79 Sickness, Mortality, and In- validing. 8. The health of the men has been good; the number of admissions, &c., are here shown:80 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Observations on the Mean Level of the Sub-soil Water. Locality or Designation of Well. Date and Hour of Measurement. Distance of Sub-soil Water below Surface of Ground. Rainfall from Date of last Measurement. Moochies' well belonging to 7th Regi- ment N. I., situated close to Store Guard, 28th N. I. Feet in. In. cts. 24th February 1875, at 5 A. M. 25 5 ... 15th March do. 25 3 ... 15th April do. 25 6 ... 15th May do. 26 0 ... 15th June do. 26 4 0 32 15th July do. 26 7 3 9 15th August do. 24 11 4 63 15th September do. 24 9 3 65 15th October do. 26 9 1 78 15th November do. 27 3 ... 15th December do. 27 2 0 61 REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL D. WYLLIE, M.D. Results for the year show improved health, but with some increase in mortality. Sani- tary conditions generally satisfactory, water good, duties moderate, and lines the best in the division, each hut having 1,350 feet cubage. Permanent latrines are used during 5 months of the year. Vegetables have latterly been scarce, and some cases of scurvy have concurrently occurred. The regiment gives a detachment to Barda Choki. I inspected the hospital, February 9th, and found all arrangements satisfactory, with ample and good accommodation. Vaccination and re-vaccination were carried on throughout. Detachment, H. M.'s 28th Regiment N. I. BARDA CHOKI.NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 81 6. The following table will show the admissions for fever in each month compared with 1874:82 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. The sick are accommodated in the Hibbert Hospital, there being no separate building, and on occasions of crowding treated in the lines. No vaccination was performed. In regard of the fact that a number of men were invalided last year from the effects of fever contracted at Barda Choki, and that there are others broken in health and permanently un- fitted, as I realized at my recent inspection of the 28th Regiment, I am of opinion that this detachment should, if possible, be withdrawn, or moved to some other and more healthy loca- lity. Detachment H. M.'s 7th Regiment N. I. DWÁRKA.NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 83 Observations on the Level of the Sub-soil Water. Locality or Designation of Well. Date and Hour of Measurement. Distance of Sub-soil Water below Surface of Ground. Rainfall from Date of last Measurement. Feet in. In. cts. 25th February, at 5 A. M. 24 6 0 17 15th March do. 24 6 ... 15th April do. 24 6 ... 15th May do. 24 6 ... 15th June do. 25 5 0 18 15th July do. 23 0 0 59 15th August do. 24 0 0 71 15th September do. 28 7 0 42 15th October do. 29 7 ... 15th November do. 29 7 ... 15th December do. 29 7 ... REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL D. WYLLIE, M.D. Health was satisfactory, contingent circumstances regarded. The lines are reported as adequate in space and ventilation; water abundant and good; food moderately cheap; no con- servancy; duties very heavy, only 2½ nights in bed. The locality is fairly healthy, unless from September till December, when east winds and ague prevail. There is no separate hospital; the sick are treated in 2 rooms attached to the lines, both badly ventilated and insufficient, being only adapted for 5 patients. No vaccination. H. M.'s 11th Regiment N. I. BHUJ.84 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. length of time, and are less objectionable in this respect than the old style of latrine. The arrangements in private compounds are the same as last year, and conservancy has been well attended to. There was very little growth of vegetation this year consequent on the scanty rainfall. The growth of trees is being attended to, but it is very up-hill work con- sequent on peculiarities of soil and atmosphere, and for lack of funds: the young trees make very slow progress under hand-watering, especially with a scanty rainfall, rocky or sandy soil, strong winds which prevail during a considerable portion of the year almost smothering some of them in sand-drifts, and the ravages of white ants; all these tend to thwart their growth. Water, Food, and Clothing. 5. The water has been good, and the supply ample during the year, but scarcity is anticipated next hot weather. The wells are uncovered, and, therefore, exposed to some debris being blown in during the prevalence of high winds; but the contamination from this source is found in practice to be very slight. There are no other local sources of contamination, most of the wells standing out on an open plain. The local supply of grain food, at all times deficient, has been more so than usual this year, the crops having almost failed owing to the scanty rainfall. Prices rose in consequence in August and September; but ample supplies having come in from Sind and Guzerat, they have again fallen to about their former level: a rise is, however, expected soon. The quality of the grain has been good. The average amount of grain compensation for the last 12 months has been Rs. 3-15-4, against Rs. 3-14-5 in 1874. The supply of vege- tables is at all times limited, and there is but little variety; fresh fruits are obtainable at times, but with the exception of limes, which are tolerably plentiful in the hot weather, not cheap enough to be used by the men. No change has been made in the clothing; there has not been sufficient marching to show out any defect in the boot. Duties, &c. 6. The duties of the men have been light, not sufficient to harass them in any way. The average number of nights in bed has been 7.84. The gym- nasium has not been much frequented during the year; there is no inducement, such as competition with other regiments or gaining prizes, sufficient, ap- parently, to stimulate the men to engage in athletic sports. They have no occupation beyond their duties, except occasionally when repairing their lines, or on fatigue duty, re- pairing butts, &c. There is not sufficient inducement for any of them to practise any trade. Marches. 7. There were a few short route-marching parades at the beginning of the year; there is nothing special to note about them. Hospital. 8. The hospital, a fine, airy building with a double-tiled roof and roof-ventilators on a high plinth, stands isolated; its frontage is free and open to the west. The out-houses at the rear are at a distance of 50 paces; it is sheltered from N. and E. winds by a hill at the back. The floor is of beaten earth, which is cow-dunged from two to four times a month. Ventilation is amply pro- vided for, and there has been no over-crowding. The building affords accommodation for 32 patients; it has been thoroughly repaired during the year. No alterations have been made. One of the sweepers attached to the hospital is always present for conservancy duty; the arrangements are the same as last year. There are 2 bheesties attached to the hospital. The water of the hospital well, situated 120 paces to the rear, is used only for purposes of ablution. Water for other purposes is brought from a well about ¾ of a mile distant; the water stands about 48 feet from the surface, and there is a depth of 11 feet at present. Sickness, Mortality, and Inva- liding. 9. During the past year 332 cases have been treated in hospital against 377 in 1874. 18 of these remained from the previous year, and 314 were fresh admissions; of these 299 were discharged to duty, 4 died, 7 were sent before the invaliding committee, 8 were transferred under other headings of disease, and 14 remained at the end of the year. The average daily sick was 16.1, against 14 last year. The precentage of treated to strength was 49.48, of deaths to strength 0.6, and deaths to treated 1.21; against 56.4, 0.7, and 1.3. The percentage of daily average of sick to strength was 2.4 against 2.1. One case of small pox was under treatment in April; the man bore marks of vaccination: the eruption was pretty copious, but the symptoms all mild. Fever gave 81 admissions, of which 53 are entered as febricula, 25 ague, and 3 remittent fever, being a percentage of 12, against 112 admissions, or 16 per cent., last year. The cases of remittent fever were all severe, 1 died, and 1 was sent away on sick leave. The cases of ague were mostly mild, uncomplicated, and amenable to treatment by quinine, cinchonidine, and arsenic. The cases entered as febricula were those in which there was no distinct second paroxysm, but as quinine was given in most of them the disease may possibly have been cut short. Of the 81 cases 9 were re- admissions. Rheumatic affections gave 8 admissions, or 1.2 per cent., against 22, or 3.3 per cent., last year. Syphilitic 14 admissions, 10 primary and 4 secondary. GonorrhNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 85 under treatment. Only 1 case of scurvy was admitted. General dropsy gave 1 admission, which terminated fatally; the cause was believed to be hepatic, but the diagnosis could not be verified by post-mortem. An obscure case of sciatica, accompanied with wasting of the muscular tissue of the thigh, was admitted; he was subsequently invalided. A case of deafness, the result of repeated attacks of inflammation, will probably have to be invalided. The case of palpitation and irregularity of the action of the heart, remaining from last year, was invalided, there having been no improvement; the true nature of the case remained obscure. Diseases of the respiratory organs gave 35 admissions, or 5.2 per cent., against 17, or 2.5 per cent., last year. 24 of these cases are mitered under bronchial catarrh; there was a marked tendency to these affections during the last two months of the year. Most of the fever cases presented catarrhal symptoms. One case of phthisis terminated fatally. Diseases of the digestive system gave in all (64 admissions, or 9.5 per cent., against 60, or 9 per cent., last year. There were 10 cases of dysentery, or 1.5 per cent., against 17, or 2.5 per cent., in 1874; all yielded readily to treatment. Of 2 cases of abscess of the rectum one was simple and recovered rapidly; the other was much more serious. The man applied with symptoms of fissure, but none could be found: a small abscess subsequently formed inside the sphincter, and evacuated itself freely and spontaneously. The case seemed to be doing well, when erysipelatous inflammation set in, involving the surrounding parts and the scrotum, resulting in sloughing of a large portion of the cellular tissue in the neighbourhood of the anus: the man's life was in danger for some days, and his recovery, though complete, was very tedious. In the case of non-malignant tumour of the rectum the cyst was said to be of long standing, but had lately become inflamed and painful; it was excised, and found to contain a quantity of cheesy matter. 1 case of hepatitis, 1 of hepatic abscess, and 3 of simple enlargement of the liver were under treatment. The case of abscess terminated fatally; it was interesting in an anatomical point of view, there being complete transposition of the liver and spleen. 5 cases of congestion of the spleen were simple; but a case of splenitis threatens to terminate fatally, the man being in a very bad state of health generally. 3 cases appear under disease of the urinary system. A case of Bright's disease presents no symptoms of dropsy as yet, but a large amount of albumen passes off daily in the urine. The man declares that he feels Quite well. A case of calculus of the kidney was operated on last year for stone in the bladder. The diagnosis in the present instance was not confirmed by the passage of any concretion; the man was invalided. The man who was admitted with calculus in the ureter showed a number of concretions which he said he had passed when absent on furlough; the largest of them was clearly a pebble, though he declared he had passed it after considerable pain and difficulty. The others were all urinary concretions. He passed two similar ones whilst in hospital, and the symptoms disappeared. The case of contraction of tendons was transferred from under the heading "corn"; the man originally suffered from callosities on each heel, which he declared were so painful that he could not place the heel on the ground. He always walked on his toes like a case of talipes equinus; from continually doing so the tendons crossing the ankle-joint were becoming contracted and the bones displaced; the man was invalided. Diseases of the cellular tissue gave 16 admissions, or 2.4 per cent., against 15, or 2.2 per cent., last year. 10 were cases of abscess, 6 of guineaworm; the latter occurred in 3 individuals, all recruits lately joined. Diseases of the cutaneous system gave 41 ad- missions, or 6.1 per cent., against 53, or 7.9 per cent., in 1874. A case of obstinate impetigo was sent on sick leave; he derived no benefit from the change, and was, therefore, invalided. 1 case of snake-bite was admitted; one puncture only was found on the outer edge of the foot. The symptoms were local only. The man said he had killed the snake, which was about a foot long; he did not produce it. Injuries gave 25 admissions, or 3.7 per cent., against 46, or 7 per cent., last year. 18 were cases of contusion, 1 of fracture, 5 sprain, and 1 burn. Two of the cases of contusion were rather severe: the men were standing with a number of others on the top of a house in the town witnessing some wrestling; a stone gave way, and they fell a height of about 20 feet, some stones and persons falling on them. One man was insensible when brought to hospital, but speedily rallied; he was found to have received a severe contusion of the chest and a moderate blow on the head; the other had received a severe blow on the right side of the head. It was thought at first that the skull was fractured, but no serious symptoms were developed, though he was laid up for a consider- able time. The fracture, a simple one of the left upper arm, was sustained by a weakly recruit, of feeble muscular development, whilst wrestling in the gymnasium with a power- ful opponent. One case of sprain (of the loins) was caused in the same way. Mortality. 10. Four of the cases treated in hospital terminated fatally: 1 from remittent fever, 1 abscess of the liver, 1 pneumonic phthisis, and 1 from general dropsy. Invaliding. 11. Twenty-three men were sent before the invaliding committee; 7 of these were sent from hospital. Of those sent, 21 were pensioned and 2 were remanded, one of the two being a hospital case. One man was discharged by court-martial, 1 at his own request, and 1 for misconduct. B 6686 A KETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Principal Causes of Sickness. 12. There has been no particular sickness during the past year to be accounted for: most of the fever cases appeared to be caused by atmospheric variations, and were probably partly also due to malaria of local origin. Small-pox was prevalent throughout the country at the time that the case occurred. Principal Causes of Mortality. 13. Remittent fever, due to local causes, caused 1 death. A second was caused by disease, probably inherited; the 2 others due to liver disease, probably of local origin. Mortality according to Race. 14. The 4 fatal cases were Hindus. Influence of Rainfall. 15. The rainfall during the past year does not appear to have influenced the health of the men. Epidemics. 16. Small-pox was epidemic throughout the country during the first 4 months of the year: 2 cases only occurred in the lines, one a sepoy the other a sepoy's wife. Hooping-cough was prevalent amongst the children during April, May, and June, and some cases of remittent fever were met with in the lines in June. Vaccination. 17. All recruits and families joining have been examined, and vaccination performed in all doubtful cases: all infants have been vaccinated. The result obtained has been as follows:87 NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL D. WYLLIE, M.D. The 11th Regiment N. I was the healthiest in the division both during past and previous year. Sanitary surroundings favourable, unless that the men's huts are very de- ficient in capacity, having only 405 cubic feet each. Water-supply, solely by wells, sufficient and fair; duties light; trench-latrine conservancy in use throughout, sufficiently distant to be free from nuisance. The hospital, inspected 1st February, has ample and good ac- commodation; its arrangements and organization satisfactory, but no separate contagious ward. Vaccination and re-vaccination were zealously carried out both among the men and their families. Dr. McDougall's report and accompanying appendix show care and com- mendable attention. H. M.'s 2nd Regiment Light Cavalry. DEESA.88 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. 4. The unprecedented heavy rainfall so flooded the great nallah bounding camp on east and south that 15 yards of the wall of the old grave-yard were undermined and fell in. In October an earthquake shock was felt, beginning with a distant, low, rumbling sound, followed by distinct vibrations as of a subterranean wave. These phenomena were coincident with an earthquake at Mount Aboo, 49 miles distant, the formation of which is volcanic. Water. 5. Water is obtained from wells; quality fair. Drainage. 6. Only natural drainage. Climate. 7. In January north and north-west winds prevailed; the thermometer often stood as low as 35°F., being 3°F. less than the lowest recorded in 1874. The air was tonic and bracing, and any exercise a pleasure. Lowest temperature in FebruaryNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 89 Operations. after receipt of injury he was admitted into hospital with the entire thumb in a state of tumefaction, suppuration, and smelling badly. Animal-charcoal poultices, sprinkled with carbolic acid and water 1 to 20, were freely applied with marked benefit; 5 pieces of bone were afterwards extracted, and the parts took on a healthy action. He was discharged cured in 27 days. A sowar at a race meeting was knocked over by a pony at full gallop, sustained concussion of the cerebro-spinal axis, and was picked up insensible. He was discharged cured in 10 days. In May a sowar sustained Potts' fracture of left leg, his charger having fallen on him. He was able to, walk in 2 months with the help of crutches. I operated, without chloroform, on a sowar affected with 3 sebaceous tumours of left side of cheek; there was great difficulty in dissecting out the membranes of the cysts. Patient made a rapid recovery. I excised a small tumour from the side of the nose of a sowar; there was considerable bleeding, which was overcome by torsion. There were 8 men invalided at head-quarters. Malingering. 12. A sowar many months in hospital, lame from contraction of the extensors of right thigh, was found, after repeated examination, to be a malin- gerer and reported to the commandant. This man became well in a few days on being told he would be tried by court-martial, and lose all pension for simulating disease. He is a fine, well-built, muscular sowar in the prime of manhood, only 37 years old. Desiring to leave the regiment, and being over 15 years' service, he could only get his discharge by simulating disability. Early reform of the pension system is urgently required; for, so long as the present rules obtain, malingering will be practised. Recruiting. 13. 35 recruits were enlisted. The youths who seek enlistment are, as a rule, slim, ill-nourished, poorly-developed men, with narrow chests and deficient vital capacity. Only recently I rejected 8 out of 11; many of them were under 18 years old. All the highest authorities agree that no man should be enlisted until he is 20 years old; even then many processes in the vertebræ begin to ossify. According to Parkes the epiphyses of the radius and ulna, the femur, tibia, and fibula are all unjoined at 18 years of age, and are not entirely joined until the 25th year. As the first qualification of a soldier is fortitude and endurance under fatigue and privation, only hardy, muscular, well-developed men accustomed to exercise, above 20 years, should be enlisted. 14. The average strength was 288.9, daily average sick 9.4, admissions 243, and 1 death. The admissions were 39 less than in 1874, and 70 less than those in 1873. The mortality was one-fourth that of last year. Principal Causes of Sickness. 15. The principal causes of disease were malaria, expo- sure to cold, falls and kicks from horses, and badly-fitting shoes causing abrasions. Principal Causes of Mortality. 16. Dysentery caused by exposure to cold in a weak old Mussulman suffering from chronic rheumatism. Epidemics. 17. No epidemic in camp. Cholera raged in villages 20 miles from Deesa for many weeks; mortality considerable. 18. There were 27 children successfully vaccinated. 19. The average height of the sowars is 5 feet 7½ inches, weight 130 lbs. 12 ozs., age 32½ years. The majority are fairly developed. The general health of the sowars was good; as compared with 1874 there was considerable diminution of sickness and mortality. The great proximate cause of inefficiency was malarial fever, and next in importance were contu- sions always incident to mounted duty. 8 men in Deesa and 12 men in whole regiment were invalided; the chief causes of invaliding were chronic rheumatism, constitutional syphilis, long service, and effects of falls from horse-back. The great predisposing cause of disease among sepoys is deficient nourishment, due to insufficient food of inferior quality. Weak lads are enlisted who do not get sufficient to eat, having at first so many cuttings from their pay for kit, &c. &c. As they grow older in the service, either from a desire to save money or from having many mouths to feed, or too many claims on their generosity and purse, they stint themselves of the necessaries of life. They take no succulent vege- tables, and there is no variety in their food. Such men are of inferior physique, and not the soldiers for the field, where endurance is required and privation must be undergone. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL D. WYLLIE, M.D. The return of sickness compares favourably with that for previous year alike in decrease, in sickness, and in mortality. B 6690 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Surroundings sanitarily satisfactory: lines clear and open, locality well raised, each man's quarters having 1,800 cubic feet; but ventilation defective. Water by wells abundant and good, food comparatively cheap, duties involving little night work, conservancy efficient, permanent latrines throughout. The hospital (inspected November 13th) very suitable, with ample accommodation, complete out-offices, and adequate equipment. Vaccination was duly attended to. H. M.'s 18th Regiment N. I. DEESA.91 NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. served that ipecacuanha in large doses could not at first be tolerated, though, when after the febrile paroxysms were subdued, a tolerance of ipecacuanha was so established that the drug, even in 50-grain doses, was retained and with the desirable effect. Ophthalmic cases are not uncommon. Keratitis and iritis, the majority of cases, on careful examination seemed to have the syphilitic taint, the affections excited by the irritation caused by the intense glare of the sun. In addition to the men invalided the following have been struck off the strength of the regiment:92 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Duties, &c. 5. The duties are not excessive; the average number of nights in bed was about 6. There is a gymnasium in which a few of the men amuse them- selves, but it would be better if all recruits were obliged to go through a course, not in addition to their present duties, but by giving one morning a week entirely to gymnastics. Marches. 6. The regiment left Mhow by wings93 NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. fever that occurred, deserves special notice. Private Narayen Chawan, aged about 24 years, was admitted into hospital on the 23rd of August 1875 suffering from intermittent fever of a mild type,and was put on cinchonidine sulphas grs. x twice a day until the 26th of September, when, finding it perfectly useless, I changed it for quinine, grs. x twice daily. On the 27th his skin continued hot all the 24 hours, and his evening temperature was found to be 104·5, and his pulse 120. Next morning his temperature was 102·2, sordes on teeth, drowsy, bowels con- stipated, no pain in abdomen, no gurgling on pressure, tongue dry and furred, no eruption visible. On the 28th diarrh94 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. the cramps, which were unusually severe. As a last resort, in hope of giving relief, I bled the patient in the left arm; 4 ounces of black blood was all I obtained. In half an hour the relief was very marked, the pulse became more distinct, and his temperature rose one degree, and the man eventually recovered. I am acquainted with all objections that can be made to the use of blood-letting in cholera, and I do not consider it a cure for the disease; but where cramp are very severe it is a very valuable adjunct in treatment. Resumé. 16. The pay of the sepoy is insufficient. The invaliding system is radically wrong in principle; oil ought to be supplied the sepoy for softening the ammunition boot; and, lastly, a compulsory system of registra- tion of deaths ought to be introduced in the Mhow bazaar, together with a weekly note of the height of the sub-soil water. 17. The medical pupil daily writes out a portion of a standard medical work, and makes out the morning report; he also copies letters into the letter-book. He is questioned daily by the bed-side in materia medica, and the value of symptoms and the treatment ordered is ex- plained to him. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL D. WYLLIE, M.D. Health was better than in previous year, and surroundings were tolerably satisfactory, unless that the Mhow lines are insanitary, narrow, and confined, the huts as usual deficient in plinths and in capacity. Nearly half the men showed evidences of scorbutic taint at the beginning of the year, assigned mainly to dearness of vegetablesNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 95 The sub-soil water-level in the lines is, at all seasons of the year, so far from the surface as to have little influence on the health of the inhabitants. Ague was most prevalent in June, when the water was 33 feet from the surface. Lines. 3. Are old, and built without plinths on black soil, which retains moisture for a con- siderable time, and, consequently, they are damp and unhealthy in the rains. The accommodation during the year was suffi- cient. The regimental bazaar is kept clean and in a good sanitary state. The men, however, draw but a very small quantity of their supplies from it, as they can obtain them from the sudder bazaar, which is quite convenient. The drainage is all surface. A small portion of cantonment in the immediate vicinity of and to the south of the lines is badly drained, and on the verge of this is a garden in which weeds and maize vied with each other in the luxuriance of their growth during the rains. The culvert, which carries the rainfall across the road from this portion of camp, is not placed at the lowest point, and as a consequence a considerable quantity of water is left behind to sink into the ground, which is here fissured in all directions. A new culvert in the proper site is required, and the patch of underwood, called a garden, should be cleared away. In the corner of each hut or its verandah is a bathing place made of chunam, and sloping out- wards. From this a small drain runs out through the wall, and opens, sometimes on the surface of the street, but very often into a covered up cess-pool. This is in most cases made use of as a urinal, as well as for carrying off the bathing and other refuse waters, all which either sink into the streets of the lines or are evaporated at the doors of the huts. The custom cannot be prohibited until something suitable is provided in its place. Conservancy and Sanitary Ar- rangements. 4. The trench system of latrines was used by the Native troops during the greater part of the year; but in the rains the permanent ones were opened. The ground space available for this system at Mhow is not sufficient to carry it out without some danger of water pollu- tion. The space at the disposal of the 25th Regiment may be said to be about 250 yards square, having the Satair Nullah to the north, the regimental wells to the south, and the rifle range and permanent latrines to the west. It is, therefore, very limited, and in a few years the same ground will have to be used over and over again. Even if the water in the wells escape contamination, will the soil retain its deodorizing and assimilating powers for an indefinite period, or will it after a time become saturated and emit noxious gases, as suggest- ed by Deputy Surgeon-General Wyllie in his report for 1874 ? I am strongly of opinion that the latter event will take place. I beg most particularly to call attention to the following fact in connection with trench latrines, which shows them to be very dangerous. In August last a lady of the regiment in my charge was attacked by cholera. On entering the house, the front doors of which were open at the time, I perceived a foul sickly odour, which could not be accounted for. Two medical officers, called in consultation, at once detected it also. We could not imagine where it came from at first, but on going to the front of the house we discovered its source. The wind was blowing from the west, and almost due west of the house is the 3rd (K. O.) Hussars' grass-cutters' trench latrine. Cholera prevailed about the time amongst the grass-cutters, as I have been since informed. I have no doubt that the lady's illness was due to breathing the impregnated air from the trench latrine. In addition to the facts of the system being filthy and more or less dangerous, it does not supply the want for which it is intended, as, at least, half the men take their lotas and go out into the nullahs and fields rather than use the place. I think the system thoroughly unsuited to a large permanent cantonment; and Mhow, where money has been largely expended on palatial barracks and hospital, is now flanked on all sides by trench latrines. Water-supply. 5. The water-supply, which is derived from wells, is of fair quality, but it was rather scarce in the hot months. Two temporary dams were thrown across the Satair Nullah, and by this means a certain amount of water was retained, which the sepoys used for bathing and washing purposes. It seems strange that a large and important military station like Mhow should be allowed to go on year after year, depending on a few wells for its water-supply. The wells are, of course, de- pendent on the rainfall, and when the latter is scant, the former run dry. The cavalry and artillery horses have been on more than one occasion sent out of camp on account of a scarcity of water. Food. 6. The several articles which compose the diet of the sepoy were obtainable at Mhow in abundance, at moderately cheap rates, and of good quality. The compensation granted to the men averaged from 1 Rupee to 1 Rupee 7 annas. Vegetables were more plentiful, and could be procured at cheaper rates than in 1874. Although good food was obtainable at moderate rates, I suspect many of the men were underfed, and particularly the recruits. The latter, most of whom are growing lads, ill-fed, anæmic, and in many cases showing a scorbutic taint, join from their
96 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. native villages, and are at once cut 3 rupees a month for an outfit. Nothing could be more unwise than this, for you compel the young lad, whom you wish to develop into a stout healthy soldier, to live on 4 rupees a month for the first year of his service. The consequence of this proceeding is, that he cannot feed himself on his pay, he is weakly, and on the slightest exposure he gets fever and is admitted into hospital. The recruits and men under 2 years' service furnished 80 admissions into hospital from fever and 2 for splenitis during the past year. Duties and their Effects. 7. The duties were considerable, as the men were kept pretty constantly at drill and parade work. In addition to this the lines were repaired, and all the tiles turned by the sepoys in the hot weather. I certainly attributed some of the fever cases to exposure at tile-turning. There was little or no amusement, a few games of cricket being the only thing I am aware of. Marches. 8. The left half battalion marched from Indore to Mhow in January, and the right half battalion from Mhow to Indore in July 1875. Hospital. 9. During the past year both the hospital and its surroundings were healthy. The ventilation is good. There has been no over-crowding, the average daily sick being 22·58, and the space for their accom- modation 32,480 cubic feet, or about 1,476 cubic feet per patient. There have been no changes made in the building since last year. A small ward for eye and other particular cases is still required. It is impossible to treat acute bronchitis successfully during the cold months in a large ward all windows and doors; a small one, in which the temperature can be raised to a certain point, is required. The dead-house is still in the same condition as reported last year, devoid of all suitable fittings, and having only a common clay floor. The latrine is now provided with a channel in the rear, which carries all the fluids that do not fall into the privy pans into a dammered receptacle placed in a small tank outside the building. The place is kept clean and in a good sanitary condition. There is no particular well marked off for the hospital. The water-supply, which was drawn from the wells in the vicinity, was sufficient, and the quality good. Sickness, Mortality, and Invaliding. 10. I am glad to be able to report that a great improvement in the health of the regiment has been steadily going on since our arrival at Mhow. A number of men, who were broken down chiefly by Mehidpur fever, have been pensioned, and the others may be said to have now nearly shaken off the effects of the ague contracted at that station. There are, of course, a few men still in the ranks whose systems have not thrown off the malarial blood-poisoning; and these are the subjects who on the slightest exposure furnish admissions into hospital from ague, splenitis, and bronchitis. On the whole the health of the regiment may be considered as having reach- ed a normal standard. The average strength of corps during the year amounted to 517, the total number of admissions into hospital to 744, the daily average of sick to 22·58, the propor- tion of sick to strength per cent. to 4·36, the proportion of admissions to strength per cent. 143·88, the proportion of treated to strength per cent. 145·82, the percentage of deaths to strength to 0·19, and the percentage of deaths to treated to 0·13. The following table shows the percentages of sickness and mortality for the last three years:NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 97 Simple continued Fever. Diseases of the Respiratory System. Pneumonia. Diseases of the Digestive Sys- tem. Diarrh98 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. sepoys, and 1 that of the lady above mentioned, and all of them recovered. No special line of treatment was pursued; but symptoms were treated as they appeared. Hydrate of chloral was found useful in relieving cramps, producing sleep, and also it seemed in one case to encourage re-action. Mortality, &c. 11. Only 1 death occurred: a man committed suicide by shooting himself in the lines. 43 men were invalided and pensioned, and 1 man dis- charged with a gratuity. The chief causes of invaliding were debility, bronchitis, enlargement of the spleen, and old and worn out. The three first-mention- ed complaints were in a great measure due to previous suffering from ague at Mehidpur. 5 men of less than 5 years' service were discharged as unfit without a gratuity and 4 by court-martial. 13 recruits, who were passed by committees at the Presidency and in the Deccan, were brought before medical committees at Mhow and declared unfit for the ranks. Principal Causes of Sickness. 12. The prevailing diseases during the year were fevers and lung-complaints. The fevers were mainly due to three causes, and these were malarial blood- poisoning, insufficient food, and exposure. Thelung-complaints, chiefly bronchitis, were due to the exposure to cold and damp of men whose systems exhibit- ed a well-marked malarial cachexia. Principal Causes of Mortality. 13. Pneumonia supervening on ague in a broken-down and badly-nourished man, caused the only death which occurred in hospital during year. He was a Mahratta Hindu. Influence of Rainfall. 14. The rainfall of the year was only a little over 3 inches less than that of 1874; but the monsoon came late, and the climate was hot and oppressive in June, and, consequently, there was an increase in the amount of fever in that month. During the rains, owing chiefly to the damp state of the lines, there was an increase in the amount of fever and bronchitis. The rainfall was sufficient for the crops, water-supply, and the wants of the country generally. Epidemics. 15. In the hot months cholera prevailed in an epidemic form on the works of the Holkar State Railway to the east of Mhow, at Indore to the north, and at Mehidpur to the west or slightly north-west; yet only a few cases occurred amongst the troops here. A cordon of sentries was thrown round cantonment, and no one was allowed to enter except by the main roads. On these roads temporary hospitals with a medical subordinate and guard of police were established, where all suspicious characters and people coming from tainted localities were detained. The first cases, which occurred in the Native infantry lines, were amongst men lately arrived in camp who came through Choral. Chowkey, where the disease prevailed. The 2 sepoys of this regiment who were attacked, had not been out of camp for a considerable time previously, and lived in different parts of the lines. The cases, although occurring about the same time, had no connection with one another. The third case occurred long afterwards, and was, in my opinion, caused by impregnated air from a trench latrine, which blew right through the patient's house. 16. Vaccination and re-vaccination were steadily practised, and there is not a single unprotected man at head-quarters. 18 children were vaccinated, and of these 17 were successful and 1 unsuccessful. 22 recruits were re-vaccinated, and of these 14 were successful and 8 unsuccessful. General Health and Physique of the Men. 17. The general health has improved wonderfully since our arrival here, and parti- cularly within the last year. I have alluded to the great decrease in ague. In 1873, at Mehidpur, from a strength of 337 there were 713 admissions into hospital from it; while during the year under review, with an average strength of 517, there were only 147 men admitted for that disease. I consider the climate of Mhow more subject to rapid changes of temperature than that of Mehidpur; yet the men are, comparatively, free from intermittent fever here. This fact has an important significance as regards the existence, or not, of local malaria. The physique of the men has been very much improved also by the change. The young sepoys who were constant sufferers from intermittent fever at Mehidpur and Dhulia, having to a great extent shaken (off that disease, are now filling out. The recruiting during the year was very carefully carried out, and all unlikely lads were brought before a medical board at Mhow on their arrival at regimental head-quarters and rejected, although they had been already passed by boards at the Presidency and in the Deccan. With all this care in recruiting the proper stamp of man is not obtainable, and we need not be surprised when the pay of the sepoys is compared with that of the same class of men in civil employ- ment. The only attraction is the pension, which the Mahratta sepoy hopes to obtain after 15
NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 99 or 16 years' service. A higher scale of pay and a pension, which increased according to the number of years a man served over 15, would induce a better class of men to enlist, and prevent malingering. Treatment of Disease when special. 18. Cinchonidine was tried as a substitute for quinine in intermittent fever, and was found to be far inferior to that drug. Resumé of the whole. 19. One of the most important subjects brought to notice in this report, is the great improvement which has taken place in the health of the men owing to the decrease in the number of admissions from ague since our arrival at Mhow; I anticipate a still greater improvement in 1876. The food, particularly of the recruit, is a subject of very great importance, and one which urgently calls for some remedy. I have already noticed the evil effects of putting these men under stoppages during the first year of their service. It is impossible for them to procure any- thing but grain food, on their pay, at a time when they require good milk, vegetables, and meat to nourish their growing tissues. Every recruit should have a free kit to start with. The trench latrine system does not suit the place, and has proved itself to be dangerous. 20. The Native medical pupil has done all the writing and copying of forms. He has been daily instructed by the first hospital assistant in materia medica and compounding; I have instructed him in the rules of spelling, elementary anatomy, and ordinary diseases about twice a week. I have asked him questions at the bed-side as symptoms or events arose sug- gesting them. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL D. WYLLIE, M.D. Health was far more satisfactory than in previous year, due mainly to decrease in ague. A number of men, as the report mentions, "who were broken down chiefly by Mehidpur fever, have been pensioned, and the others may be said to have now nearly shaken off the effects of the ague contracted at that station." Lines indifferent, damp, and unhealthy in the rains; cubage of each hut about 800 feet; water fair, but the supply occasionally scarce; food moderately cheap; duties heavier than average; permanent latrines during the rains, at other seasons trenches. Vaccination and re-vaccination were steadily practised. The hospital, inspected 23rd December, has ample accommodation,100 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. 5. The duties are moderate, and do not appear to have any injurious effect on the health of the men. The men seem to have scarcely any amusements: a few go out shooting occa- sionally. The lock-up rooms are very good, but scarcely ever occupied. 6. The detachments made no marches during the year, except when on relief from Mhow to Indore. 7. There is a small permanent latrine for the hospital, which is kept very clean, The soil is buried in the regimental latrine trenches. 8. The hospital water-supply is good and plentiful from the wells before noted. 9. There has been no sickness, except a little mild intermittent fever. 1 death occur- red from fatty disease of the heart in a Hindu. 15 men were ordered to head-quarters and invalided there; they were all worn-out men of from 20 to 30 years' service. One man was discharged by court-martial. Influence of Rainfall. 10. During the continuance of the rains this had no marked influence on the health of the men. In July, August, and September, in which nearly all the rain falls, the admissions for all causes was considerably below the average. In August the admission for all causes was 14, for fevers 5, in Septem- ber 11 and 5 respectivelyCANTONMENT of NEEMUCH Table showing depth of Water in Wells below surface of Ground (Platform of Well) 1875 1876 Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec. Jan. 14 5 13 1 10 Well No. 1 4 46 92 83 9.10 2 6 94 9 7.6 8.7 10.6 3 8 6 7.2 8.2 11 4 7 4 6.2 6 10 9-3 5 14 6.2 9 10 4 14 6 13 5 10 7.2 8.6 11.7 7 11 6.2 8.2 8.3 11.6 8 3.10 8.1 9.6 15.6 9 12 4.5 1.1 8.9 13.3 10 9.3 14.5 20 11 7 8.9 10.3 Scale of 400 Yards to an Inch. To accompany Annual Report, Native 3rd Light Cavalry Regiment. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75007709.tif] As seen here the Station is surrounded by water courses with black soil (on thin banks) Extensive drainage has been suggested by me and sanctioned. B.66:
NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 101 During the rain the water rises in them to within a few feet of the surface in some, but much less in others, according as they are situated in or near under-ground streams between. rocky barriers or in the trap tufa itself. Drains. 3. There was no side drain on the main road, viz., on the side where it skirts the bazaar, and the rainfall frequently flowed into the bazaar at the entrance of the streets. A good open saucer drain, with culverts at the main streets, has been made, and the bazaar was kept much drier in consequence, it only receiv- ing thus the direct rainfall. One of the bazaar drains flowed into the western rivulet, sometimes (in years of draught) used for drinking, above the bund. I was successful in getting a cutting made which diverted the outflow of this drain to a point considerably below the bund, thus securing the water stored there from, at least, one source of contamination. The eastern rivulet is not used for drinking. All the wells in cantonment are surrounded by masonry platforms. Water-supply. 4. The water is drunk solely from 4 wells, sufficiently protected from pollution, and is considered good. It has been sent to Bombay for analysis. 5. The number of fever cases is only about half of the number which occurred last year, viz., 144, instead of 269; that local injuries from kicks, fractures, &c., occurring on parade make up the next largest item; then follow skin diseases from saddle-friction, &c. &c. There were 13 cases of lung diseases as is usual in the cold months. A case of aneurism of the aorta died. Dysentery and diarrh102 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY 0F BOMBAY. bourhood, and although I removed the left lachrymal and nasal bones (both carious from pressure of the tumour) and scraped the carious bone away from supra-orbital plate, I fear the return of the tumour. It was decided in consultation that nothing more could be done at present, at all events in so old a woman. During the cholera epidemic in the bazaar and Royal Artillery a bottle of a mixture of known strength containing chloroform, morphia, sulphuric ether, and tincture of Indian hemp suspended in caromel (a solution of burnt sugar) with a little mucilage, or in treacle, was given the hospital orderly, who lives in the lines, with a proper measure. Every man suffering from diarrhNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 103 Sub-soil Water-Level. Locality or Designation of Well. Date and Hour of Measurement. Distance of Sub-soil Water below Surface of Ground. Rainfall from last date of Measurement. Feet in. In. cts. No. 14 Well104 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. 7. The sickness this year has been very slight. Died in hospital 11, out of hospital 2, invalided 25, obtained sick leave 3, discharged by court-martial 1. Of the deaths 9 were Hindus and 2 were Mussulmans. Influence of Rainfall. 8. The rainfall last year was 46 inches, less than in 1874 by 12 inches, and the water- mark in the wells was 6 feet from the surface in the month of October; its present height from the surface is 12 feet. On the 1st of March the water was 15 feet from the surface, and we had 88 cents of rain in Feb- ruary. On the 11th of July the water-height was 20 feet from the surface, and we had 10 inches of rain; but the rain had taken some time to be absorbed, for we find that not until the 23rd of September was the water 6 feet from the surface. The last rainfall was on the 30th of September, and on the 6th of October the water was only 5 feet and 6 inches from the surface, and it continued so till the 10th, when it gradually got less at the rate of about 1 inch every day. Epidemics. 9. We had an invasion of cholera this year of a most malignant type, the Natives dy- ing in proportion of 2 to 3 attacked, and the Europeans at the rate of 19 out of 20. The cause of it was not traceable to any known agent. It appeared at different parts of the station at the same time; that is to say, there was no contact of persons previously attacked with healthy persons; it was, therefore, sporadic. 16 Natives died in the bazaar and 2 in the 24th N. I. It is to be noted that there was very little fever this year in the cantonment: so that these two diseases seldom, if ever, appear in the same year at this station. 10. Vaccination has been thoroughly well done in the regiment, but very few cases of re-vaccination were required, as nearly the whole regiment has been vaccinated, or has had the small-pox. 11. The general health of the men has been good. Physically they are a fine-looking regiment. Treatment of Disease when special. 12. For the special attack of cholera we had 5 detached cholera huts built, large and well ventilated, 12 feet by 12 and 12 high, each to hold 1 person only; they were placed beyond the bazaar on a piece of waste ground near the river. For the two cases that were attacked in our lines a tent was pitched on a vacant piece of ground about 300 yards from the hospital. Every precaution was adopted to prevent the disease spreading. Resume 13. I have only to remark that I consider Neemuch a healthy station, although a long residence here certainly does deteriorate the constitution, but for two or three years the climate would not have a bad effect on the health. After that period Europeans have not the spirit and life in them they had on arrival. 14. The Native medical pupil I had, has gone to the Grant Medical College. He was regularly examined in anatomy twice a week. Meteorological Observations. Months. Barometer. Thermometer. Rain. Maximum. Minimum. Maximum. Minimum. In. cts. January 1875 ... ... ... ... 29. 28.70 74. 44. ... February " ... ... ... ... 29. 28.90 84. 46. 0 88 March " ... ... ... ... 29. 28.62 100. 60. ... April " ... ... ... ... 29. 28.60 107. 75. ... May " ... ... ... ... 28.70 28.50 106. 74. 0 52 June " ... ... ... ... 28.60 28.40 106. 78. 3 48 July " ... ... ... ... 28.50 28.20 96. 72. 16 11 August " ... ... ... ... 28.70 28.50 92. 70. 4 83 September " ... ... ... ... 28.80 28.50 100. 71. 20 51 October " ... ... ... ... 29. 28.80 86. 65. 0 30 November " ... ... ... ... 29. 28.90 82. 62. ... December " ... ... ... ... 29.10 29. 80. 52. ... Total ... ... ... ... ... 46 63
NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 105 REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL D. WYLLIE, M.D. Health much more satisfactory than in previous year, although the return still evidences undue sickness. Lines defective in construction and ventilation; cubage of huts only 500 feet; floors mostly below ground-level; water-supply by wells ample and good; food abundant and cheap; duties moderate; masonry latrines, with tolerably efficient conservancy. The hospital, inspected December 8th, has ample and good accommodation for all ordinary requirements; but there is no dead-house or contagious ward. Establishment and equipment complete. Vaccination was attended to. H. M.'s 10th Regiment N. L. I. MEHIDPUR.106 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Duties, and their Effect upon Health. 6. The men have been fully employed either at drill or in improving the sanitary condition of their lines by making drains and raised roads through them. The returns obtained from the Adjutant's office show the average number of nights the men have had in bed to be 5 1/4; but these figures hardly represent the matter fairly, as there are, at least, 10 men on night duty in the lines that have not been counted in those returns: so that, if these men be counted, the average number of nights in bed would not be over 3. Exercise, Amusements, and Occupation. 7. Amusement there has been none. Last year, paper-chases, foot-races, and other sports were enjoyed by the men; there is a gymnasium with the usual appliances close to the lines in which the men frequently passed their leisure time last year. But during the year under report sports and gymnasium alike remain unpatronized: the men say that they feel so exhausted and used up from the climate that when their ordinary duties are over they are only too glad to be down and rest. Some of the men work more or less at trades. Marches. 8. The left wing at Agar was relieved during the months of January and February (by companies) by the right wing, which had been stationed at Mehidpur since the arrival of the regiment from Mhow in March 1873. The movement of a detachment to Jawra has already been referred to. Hospital and its Surroundings. Accommodation and Defects. Conservancy. Hospital Water-supply. 9. The building that was reported upon last year has continued to be used as the regi- mental hospital, and no attempt has been made to improve it in any way. The want of light and ventilation are serious defects. As the daily average of sick during the year was 24.3, and the number was sometimes nearly 50, it can well be understood that in a hospital containing only cubic space enough for 20 patients there must of necessity have been over-crowding. A separate isolation ward has been in course of erection during the year, and is nearly completed, but any building less calculated for the purpose could hardly be imagined. Quarters for the medical subordi- nates and hospital servants have been completed during the year. But there is no dead-house or bath-room, and it would be well to have these deficiencies remedied. No change has taken place in the hospital conservancy during the past year. The water- supply to the hospital remains unaltered. sickness, mortality, and In- validing. 10. The following table contains a comparative statement of sickness, mortality, and invaliding, &c., between the year under report and that preced- ing it:NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 107 Principal cause of Sickness. 11. The numbers and varieties of the diseases treated during the year are shown in the printed summary accompanying this report, from which it will be seen that fever contributed 500, rheumatism 24, diarrh108 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Vaccination and Re-vaccination. 16. The protection afforded by vaccination has been so well attended to in former years that the number of vaccinations and re-vaccinations during the year has been small. Of the former there were 9 operations, and of the latter 39. General Health and Physique of the Men. 17. The physique of the men is all that could be desired, the average height being some- what over 5 feet 7 inches, and the average chest measurement about 34 inches. During the year 98 recruits joined, and as re- gards physique they are in no way inferior to their older comrades. Their average age was 19 years, and they had an average height of 5 feet 7 5/6 inches. The general health of the men has already been alluded to as more or less broken down by the effects of climate. The great majority of the men have a cachectic and sickly appearance. They are unable to undergo much fatigue, and scarcely a parade takes place that some do not fall out from sheer weakness and giddiness. Treatment of Disease when special. 18. 101 cases of fever were treated with the sulphate of cinchonidine in doses of 20 to 25 grs. thrice daily, but the results were not calculated to enhance the reputation of the drug as a febrifuge. The sub- cutaneous injection of quinine was resorted to in many obstinate cases of fever, and always with a successful result. Special Observations. 19. It will be seen from this report that cinchonidine was exhibited in a large number of fever cases, but with anything but favourable results. 20. The average time each patient spent in hospital during the year under report was 10 days 12 hours, as against 11 days and 17 hours during the preceding year. If the fever, cases alone be taken, it is found that their average stay in hospital during the year 1875 was 6 days 20 hours, against 7 days and 10 hours in 1874. Considering the unhealthiness of this station the hospital accommodation is quite insufficient for even the wing of a regiment, There is only space for 20 men, whereas the number on the sick list is invariably more: at one time there were 74. An isolation ward, with accommodation for 8 patients suffering from in- aectious diseases, has just been completed. But in its construction no regard whatever has been faid to ventilation; and when the doors are closed, as they must be in the months when the pot winds are prevalent, as also in the cold weather, air can find neither ingress nor egress, and what is within must remain stagnant, and momentarily become more impure from the exhalations from the patients. The same objections apply to the main hospital, which, in addition to want of ventilation, is in total darkness when the doors are closed. Both 1st and 2nd class hospital servants are now comfortably lodged, as quarters for them have been completed during the year. The want of a bath-room in connection with the hospital is much felt. A dead-house should also be provided. Instruction of Medical Pupil. 21. Due attention has been paid to the training of the medical pupil in clinical medi- cine, surgery, and therapeutics. He is also practised in the method of keeping the various hospital returns and records. Observations on Level of the Sub-soil Water. Locality or Designation of Well. Date and Hour of Measurement. Distance of Sub- soil Water below Surface of Ground. Rainfall from Date of last Measurement. Feet in. In. cts. Well in the mess Officers' Compound. 15th February at 5 A.M. ... ... 37 0 ... 15th March do. ... ... ... 38 0 0 25 15th April do. ... ... ... 38 6 ... 15th May do. ... ... ... 39 6 ... 15th June do. .... ... ... 40 0 1 45 15th July do. ... ... ... 40 6 9 31 15th August do. ... ... ... 39 0 14 14 15th September do. ... ... ... 38 0 11 26 15th October do. ... ... ... 36 6 4 01 15th November do. ... ... ... 36 0 ... 15th December do. ... ... ... 36 0 0 8
NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 109 REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL D. WYLLIE, M.D. Surroundings sanitarily are very unsatisfactory, and although great efforts have been made, and not without material success, since arrival of the regiment, to remedy defects of site and improve the condition of the lines, &c., still the natural disadvantages of the locality are such as to defeat effectual drainage, partly from hollowness of ground, but mainly owing to beds of clay and marl lying close to the surface. The lines are exceptional in not being back to back, huts 700 feet each of cubage, ventilation defective, and drainage bad, water- supply indifferent at best, food comparatively dear, duties heavier than average, temporary covered latrines during the rains, at other times ordinary trenches. The hospital was inspected 13th December. Establishment and equipment complete, but its accommodation, generally insufficient in autumn, should be extended, and a dead-house provided. A seperate conta- gious ward has just been completed, but the plan differs from others in this circle, and is less. satisfactory. Vaccination was attended to. Dr. Hojel's report is careful and precise. He mentions that his experience with cinchonidine in ague has not been such as "to enhance the reputation of the drug as a febrifuge", but that the subcutaneous injection of quinine was tried in many obstinate cases, and always with success. The very malarious characteer of Mehidpur cantonment is indubitably established by ample observation; and, having regrad to the fact that malarial poisoning contracted there has proved a fruitful source of inefficiency, eventuating in invaliding, I fully concur with Dr. Hojel that, on public grounds, the tour of duty at that station should not exceed 2 years. H. M.'s Right Wing 10th Regiment N. L. I. AGAR.110 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. is kept scrupulously clean. Water-supply. The water-supply is ample and good. There are three good wells near the officers' quarters, and one close by the jail guard. There are no imperfections or sources of impurity. The dis- tance of the sub-soil water from the surface varied from 37 feet 6 inches on the 15th June to 18 feet 8 inches on 15th October. Food. 5. Food is plentiful and good. Vegetables are procurable. Through the exertions of Lieutenant-Colonel Pierce, commanding the wing, a garden has been made for the men amongst the trees to the north of the lines, which promises to answer exceedingly well. It was only commenced about March last; and though there were great difficulties in making a garden on the red soil near the lines, it was finished by July, and is now well stocked with vegetables of every description, which are distributed amongst the men. For this each man is charged only 6 pies per month. Duties, &c. 6. It has not been observed that the duties have had any prejudicial effect on the health of the men. The men get plenty of exercise at parades, &c Amusements they seem to have none, nor am I aware of their having any occupation when off duty. Lock-up, &c. 7. The lock-up room and cell, described in last year's report, will be shortly abandoned. A new building is now in course of completion; it will contain 1,300 feet cubic capacity and 100 square feet of superficial area. It is well ventilated by two gratings. Hospital and its Surroundings. 8. No alterations have been made in the hospital or its out-buildings. The site is, with the exception of its distance from the lines, an excellent one, and the hospital itself and its out-buildings are all that can be desired. There has been no over-crowding. This may be seen from the fact that dur- ing the month of October, when the average number of daily sick was greatest, each patient in the hospital had an average of 69.5 square feet of superficial area and 2,364 cubic feet of space. The quality of the water is good, and the supply abundant. Sickness, Mortality, and In- validing. 9. There were in all 392 admissions into hospital during the year; of these 247 were cases of fever, of which 83 were re-admissions. The average number of days each man suffering from fever remained under treatment in hospital, was 10.85 Chronic rheumatism gave 12 admissions, lumbago 8, dysentery gave only 4, with 1 exception extremely mild cases; diarrhNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 111 as efficaciously as quinine. The hypodermic injection of quinine has been extensively employed. The Native Medical Pupil has been instructed frequently in the uses and doses of the drugs. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL D. WYLLIE, M.D. Health was less favourable than in previous year, owing, as the report explains, to excess in admissions from ague, the wing having been quartered at Mehidpur, where the men suf- fered greatly from malaria, from which many of them have not yet recovered. Surroundings sanitarily satisfactory; lines in very good repair; huts of 744 feet cubage; water-supply good by wells; food abundant; duties moderate; permanent latrines; conservancy efficient and good. A regimental garden has been established, and supplies the men with vegetables. Hospital, inspected December 15th, has excellent and sufficient accommodation, and is com- plete in establishment and appointments: the site, however, is inconveniently distant from the new lines. Squadron H. M.'s 3rd Regiment Light Cavalry. NUSSEERABAD.112 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. found at a depth varying from 30 to 40 feet in the higher parts of the cantonment to about 15 feet in the less elevated parts of the plain beyond. It is in nearly every instance of a brackish character, and unfit for drinking purposes. Drainage of camp is good, owing to the natural slope of the ground. The climate is hot and dry, and not unhealthy, except during two or three months immediately succeeding the rains, when malarial fevers are prevalent. Lines. 2. The lines are good and well built, with broad roads separating the huts; each hut is about 10 feet square. Ventilation is confined to such circula- tion of air as can take place through the doors. There is a small bazaar near the lines; but it is only a few minutes' walk from the lines to the general bazaar. There are no villages near the lines. The lines being situated at the lowest end of the camp, drainage is not so perfect as in other parts, but the rain does not collect in the lines. A small temporary tank is formed near the lines in the rainy season; it is certainly desirable that this should no longer be the case. There are no other tanks near. Trench latrines are used, situated a short distance from the lines. Water-supply. 3. The fact that the whole supply of drinking water for Nusseerabad cantonment is obtained from only two sources, one of which is at a consider- able distance, is a sufficient indication of the imperfections of the water-supply, at any rate as to quantity; its quality is good. Food. 4. Good and abundant. The sepoy on an average gets about annas 11 per mensem as grain compensation. Duties, &c. 5. The health of the men does not seem to have been affected by their duties. There is a gymnasium at Nusseerabad at which many attended. Marches. 6. From Nusseerabad to Mhow. The left wing arrived at Mhow on the 24th Decem- ber 1875; the right wing is at the present date still on the march. Very little of interest occurred on the march. The cases were chiefly ague and foot-soreness, which occurred chiefly among the recruits. A severe hail-storm was experienced one day, which completely wetted the tents. No bad result followed, chiefly, I am inclined to think, owing to the issue of some hay to each tent for the men to lie upon. 2 cases of pneumonia occurred, but were brought into Mhow convalescent. Hospital. 7. The hospital is a large building, on the Bengal standard plan, situated in an isolated position some distance from the lines; it is surrounded by a compound wall, within which are the various offices and quarters for the hospital staff. The ventilation is by numerous doors as well as openings in the roof, and very free when these openings are not closed. There was no over-crowding. Accom- modation is ample113 NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. Special Observations. 14. There has been a decrease of 293 in the number of admissions as compared with 1874. The greatest decrease (216) occurs under the head of malarial fevers. In all other classes of disease, with the exception of " local injuries ", the decrease is more or less marked; in this class there is an increase of 8, which is due to the number of cases of foot-soreness which occurred on the march. The year may thus be said to have been healthy. Resume. 15. With regard to the trench latrine system as carried out at Nusseerabad, it is. I think, open to objection, more especially during the rains. My reasons for this opinion are, the limited extent of ground, the situation being in a slight hollow and in close proximity to the temporary tank mentioned in the earlier part of this report. I may state that, though not a recognised source of water- supply, I believe the water of this tank is used for drinking purposes. As a system generally in use, that of trench latrines appears to be open to objection from the difficulty of getting the sepoys to use the trench: this was prominently brought to notice when the head- quarters of this regiment arrived in Mhow, and found the huts they were to occupy in many cases apparently but recently used for latrine purposes. As the regiment is now in Mhow, I may mention that the huts at this station are but a poor substitute for those at Nusseera- bad. They are lower, closer together, not so well built, and are not at all raised from the ground, and I think it is exceedingly doubtful if the roofs would prove waterproof in the rains. The hospital is also inferior, and even at the present season it is often found close at the time of the evening visit, though the opening in the roof and some of the doors are always kept open. Referring to an observation, made under the head of marches, about the issue of grass on an occasion of wet, I will take the liberty of stating that in Native regi- mental hospitals on the march I am of opinion that an issue of grass or straw for the sick to lie upon, would be conducive to their more rapid recovery. Patients suffering from fevers, lung diseases, and bowel complaints are likely to be much longer under treatment when compelled to lie on the ground only protected by the scanty bedding of the sepoy, which seldom consists of more than a small carpet, a sheet and a quilt, the last being used as a cover. 16. The medical pupil is taught the application of bandages and dressing, dispensing, preparation of hospital forms, and the value of physical examination of patients at the bed-side. Observations made at the Hospital of H. M.'s 3rd Regiment Native Light Infantry, at Nusseerabad, on the Mean Level of the Sub-soil Water. Locality or Designation of Well. Date and Hour of Measurement. Distance of Sub-soil Water below Surface of Ground. Rainfall from Date of last Measurement. Feet. in In. cts. Well in hospital compound 15th January 1875, at 5 A.M. ... ... ... ... 15th February do. ... ... ... ... 15th March do. ... ... 24 0 ... 15th April do. ... ... 25 0 ... 15th May do. ... ... 28 0 ... 15th June do. ... ... 24 4 3 5 15th July do. ... ... 21 2 3 89 15th August do. ... ... 15 10 7 10 15th September do. ... ... 16 10 2 33 15th October do. ... ... 5 3 8 85 15th November do. ... ... 13 0 ... 15th December do. ... ... ... ... REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON114 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. SIND DIVISION. Average strength present during the year... 2,837.5 Do. daily sick per cent. to the average strength... 3.7 Ratio of mortality per cent. to the average strength... 1.1 H. M.'s 29th or 2nd Belooch Regiment N. I. KURRACHEE.SIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 115 Principal Causes of Sickness. 8. Malaria and exposure to cold were the chief causes of sickness. Principal Cause of Mortality. 9. Chest-affections was the only cause of mortality this year. The 4 deaths were all in Mahomedans. Influence of Rainfall. 10. The rainfall was 9 inches and 22 cents; it did not exert any particular influence. Epidemic. 11. No epidemic. There were 2 cases reported as cholera, which terminated fatally at Ghizri. 12. Vaccination was regularly practised; all recruits on joining are vaccinated. 32 cases successful and 66 re-vaccinated. General Health and Physique of the Men. 13. The men are in excellent health and of physique. Resumé. 14. On comparing this with last year the health of the regiment has evidently improv- ed: the strength for both years being about the same, there were 799 admissions last year to 538 for 1875. This diminu- tion in the number of admissions is due to the reduction of cases of malarious fever, there being 563 on the register for 1874, while this year there are only 311. It is to be hoped by next year there will be a further reduction from this cause, as by that time the regiment will have had the advantage of being two years in a very healthy station. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL J. R. MILLER, M. D. The lines are the old European depôt barracks, fully reported on when occupied by the 27th Regiment in 1874; no alterations have been made in these. Latrines are on the standard plan, are fairly clean; night-soil removed daily in tank carts, and buried a couple of miles off. Water as formerly reported, supplied from the Commissariat well, is brackish. A former analysis showed it to be far from pure. The municipality have decided to bring water in from the Mullir River, some 15 miles distant, and Government have agreed to lend the money necessary for the purpose; so that in a couple of years hence pure water will be ob- tained. Drainage is satisfactory, the lines being on slight incline. The hospital is large and commodious; ventilation good. It requires, however, to be supplied with a dead-house and accommodation for 2nd class establishment: this has been formerly reported. Conservancy of latrine improved. The health of the regiment has unquestionably benefited by its change to Kurrachee; it suffered severely when at Hyderabad in 1874. The physique of the men is good. Their duties are not severe, and they are exercised in gymnastics and athletic sports, in which they take considerable interest. H. M.'s 27th or 1st Belooch Regiment N. L. I. HYDERABAD.116 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. 3. The water is derived from the Indus, distant about 3 miles, either by branches, canals, or percolation; it commences to rise in April from the melting Himalyan snow aided by rain, and gradually increases until it obtains an average height of 16½ feet above average low- water mark, being then about 1 foot only below the surface of the country adjacent to the eastern bank; it fills all the tanks, canals, &c., and saturates the sub-soil from which the wells obtain their supply, and it gradually falls about August. Analysis of Indus water:SIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 117 Duties, &c. 10. Consisted of the usual parades, guards, and escort duty, which had no special effect on health. Wrestling, parallel and horizontal bars; of the first the natives are particularly fond. There was a public ex- hibition of all the exercises every Thursday afternoon, in which all comers were allowed to compete with the sepoys: a large number of competitors for wrestling always entered the arena, the victors receiving turbans as prizes from Colonel Hogg. About 1,000 spectators weekly assembled to witness the sports. Marches. There were 16 marches, the average distance of each about 9 miles, and the pace about 3½ miles an hour. There were 6 halts, during which the men were man118 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. consequence are often damp. Sanitary arrangements are carefully superintended, but the regimental latrines are very defective: pans are too small, the chunam breaks up, and gets saturated with urine and excreta, and the latrines in consequence are very offensive. Hospital accommodation is sufficient, except in seasons of unusual sickness. Its position is bad, being to leeward of the lines, is much too close to them, and on a slightly lower level. In addition to this it is built on the ground, and the floors are of mud. In last year's report I mentioned that the General Commanding was favourable to the sick of the Belooch Regi- ment being moved into the General Hospital, and those of the latter into the Belooch Hospital; but the measure has not been carried out. The building and out-houses are clean and in a fair state of repair. The latrine is old and badly constructed; dry-earth conser- vancy is partially carried out; sewage is removed in a tank cart and buried. H. M.'s 1st Regiment Sind Horse. JACOBABAD.119 SIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. Malarious fever in its various forms gave the greatest number of admissions, 362 in number, or 74 less than last year:120 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. present carried on, is most defective and objectionable; the same may with equal truth be said of the pension regulations; and I may remark that the recruiting of the regiments from the Deccan has proved to be a total failure, the recruits deserting in numbers as many as 3 on one day. 2 men were discharged: 1 by court-martial the other for being absent without leave. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL J. R. MILLER, M.D. The new lines were completed during the year. They are not, however, "everything that could be desired", inasmuch as they are wanting in separate accommodation for the men's horse accoutrements; and the ventilation would have been more scientific and less annoying to the men had it been arranged to traverse from side to side under the roof, in place of from each door to the opening above. Conservancy most objectionable. There are 6 open enclosures down the centre of each troop; twice a day these are cleaned out, but the soil is, of course, saturated with filth. A late analysis of the water shows it to be charged with earthy salts and otherwise impure; filters would greatly improve it. The duties have been light, and have not exercised any prejudicial effects on the health of the men. The Surgeon in charge recommends the introduction of a gymnasium under proper supervision; and I quite agree with him that regular daily exercise should become a recognised part of the soldier's duties. In addition to the defects in the hospital I formerly reported, I observed at my late inspection that the floor, which is level with the ground, and the lower portion of the walls were damp and crumbling, owing to the quantity of salt in the soil. An extra ward has been proposed to be added to provide the accommodation required, but it would leave un- touched the other defects just mentioned. Hospital conservancy improved. Disinfectants much less sparingly used, and the dry-earth system making progress. The latrine, however, is much too small, and on a wrong principle. Water-supply is the same as for the lines. Analysis has shown it to be far from good. Thermometer readings are not of any value, as they are taken from an instrument hang- ing up in the hospital verandah, from which heat is, of course, communicated to the instrument. With regard to the general health and physique of the men, the surgeon in charge says:SIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 121 Conservancy. tacles for the excreta in each. The dry-earth system has not succeeded here, as the men cannot be compelled to use the earth on every occasion they visit the latrine, and the sweepers are insufficient for the task: this being the case, I repeat the suggestion, made last year, that the existing six small latrines in proximity to the lines be done away with, and two large ones be built in lieu of them at some distance from the lines. If this suggestion is carried out, and a sweeper or more be permanently placed on duty at the latrines, with instructions for their guidance as to the disposal of the dry earth and the punctual removal of the discharges morning and evening, it would be a simple matter to carry out this system of conservancy in a satisfactory manner. Water. 4. The water for drinking purposes is derived from the best well in camp. I have analysed the water from this source, and found it to contain an excess of dissolved organic matter, as would be expected in all alluvial soils. Having analysed the potable waters of Jacobabad from different sources, I may be justified in reviewing the quality of the water-supply in camp; it may be pronounced impure on account of the excess of oxidizable organic matter as detected by the action of permanganate of potash in presence of sulphuric acid. The well which supplies this regiment contained no other impurities at the period of examination, so far as I was able to find out; it deteriorates little, if at all, during the dry season, as its source of supply is a tank in close proximity, which never dries up, and from which the water enters the well by percolation through the soil. The water from other sources was found to contain, in addition to an excess of oxidizable organic matter, a large amount of chloride of sodium, and the salts of magnesia and lime; indeed, during the beginning of the hot weather, when the chief source of supply through the canals isnil and the water appears in a concentrated form, the saline taste alone renders it quite unpalatable. With regard to suggestions for improving the water-supply for drinking purposes, I beg to recommend that all the wells in camp be thoroughly cleaned out, at least once a year; and the large tank, which acts as a reservoir of water during the dry season, be cleared of the multitude of fish that accumulate in it, and steps be taken for preventing its pollution by the inhabitants. While on this subject it would not be out of place to suggest the supply of filters to the different out-posts where the drinking water is highly charged with impurities, both organic and mineral, and very unpalatable, owing to the large amount of chloride of sodium in solution. I append a table of analysis showing the chief elements of impurity in the potable waters of Jacobabad, and regret that a deficiency of apparatus prevented me from rendering the analysis more complete. The exceedingly small number of cases of dysentery and diarrh122 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. troops is concerned, that would follow were annual marches more regularly carried out; indeed, I think that it should be a standing order that regiments stationed in Jacobabad should be compelled to march out of camp every year. Hospital. 8. The building is seldom full during 6 months in the year; but when fever cases prevail to a great extent, as it does for about 4 months, and these are supplemented by chest-affections and ulcers peculiar to this locality, the hospital accommodation is found to be very inadequate, and a hut has to be utilized as a temporary ward. The number of cases admitted into hospital with ulcers is considerable. As most of these occur in the lower extremity, the absence of a cook-room is not only a great source of inconvenience to the patients, but also in a great measure defeats the object of treatment, by compelling them to walk to their lines for their meals. The hospital latrine has been improved by better ventilation, and the dry-earth system of conser- vancy is carried out here. Sickness, Mortality, and Inva- liding. Mortality. 9. The average daily strength present at head-quarters was 287, the total number of cases treated was 343, and the actual number of individuals treated was 241. As usual malarious fever furnished the largest number of admissions: under this head there were 127 treated. The fever season began in September, arrived at its maximum in November, and gradually decreased towards December; while in the months between March and August, (both inclusive,) only 9 admissions occurred, while in the other months there were 118. Next comes ulcers, abscesses, boils, and contusions, which in a great measure supervened upon injuries caused by horses. These accidents, which in healthy individuals would be unattended with any bad results, are in the inhabitants of this climate invariably followed by ulcers characterized by extreme feebleness of healing action. There were only 5 cases of pneumonia, of which 2 proved fatal on the third day after admission, which sufficiently indicates the severity of the disease and the rapid tendency to a fatal termination. 18 cases of venereal affec- tions were treated, including primary and secondary syphilis and gonorrhSIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 123 Physique of the Men Recruits. 14. Number recruited in camp 19, and elsewhere 24. The type of recruits who have been passed and sent up from the Deccan is very inferior124 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Analyses of Well Water in the Camp and Town of Jacobabad, used by the Military and Civil Populations respectively. Two Wells chiefly used by the Population in Camp. Two Wells chiefly used by the Civil Population in Town and Bazaar. N. B .B 66126 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. REPORT ON SIND SORE FOR THE YEAR 1875. The Sind ulcer may have either an idiopathic or traumatic origin: in the first instance as a small vesicle or papule, which suppurates and gives rise to an unhealthy, purulent dis- charge, and gradually extending by undermining the tissues in the immediate neighbour- hood, and forming sinuses under the integument. The ulcer having a traumatic origin generally supervenes upon ordinary injuries, whether it be a simple contusion resulting from the kick of a horse or the apparently trivial abrasion of the skin which follows the scratching of a mosquito sting. The ulcer which results (generally situated in one of the extremities), is characterized in both instances by defective action and low vitality of the part affected, and exhibits the extreme feebleness of the vis medicatrix naturSIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 127 Topography and Physical Geo- graphy. Water. Drainage. 2. The cantonment of Jacobabad is the head-quarters of the Sind Frontier Force, and is situated in latitude 28°16' north, longitude 68°28' east. It stands about 180 feet above the level of the sea, but is about 50 feet below the level of the bed of the Indus at Kashmor, on the right bank of that river, distant about 80 miles. The whole of the Indus Valley is an alluvial plain formed by the deposit from the river or its branches, which have swept over almost every portion of it at some time or other. As is the case in the valleys of all large rivers, the land is highest at the banks of the Indus from the accumulation of detritus brought down by the hill torrents, which settles as the velocity of the current decreases; and lowest the further the bank is receded from, the slope of the plain from the river-bank being a foot per mile in some places. Like nearly all newly-formed land, the soil consists of stiff clay and loose sand, which with little labour yields rich crops of cereals, pulses, and vegetables. It also produces fruit trees when cultivated; but, although the soil is very fertile, the fruit in general is of inferior quality. Not so, however, the esculent vegetables, which are so welcome in the cold season, when they can only be grown; among them may be mentioned potatoes, cabbages, peas, turnips, carrots, beet, and several kinds of cucumbers, &c. There are two harvests128 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Conservancy and Sanitary Ar- rangements. feet and a superficial area of 72 feet. There being no regimental bazaar, the men obtain their supplies from the brigade bazaar. Drainage is carried out by means of surface gut- ters; there are neither tanks nor villages in the neigh bourhood. There are 3 latrines, each divided into 12 compartments, and provided with iron pans and chunam gutters and pits. The contents are removed twice a day, and deposited beyond camp limits, earth and lime being used as disinfectants. The lines are kept clean, and sanitary arrangements are attended to as well as can be. Water. 5. The water-supply is plentiful, the source being wells, which are fed by percolation. On being analysed by Surgeon Bartholomeusz lately the water in most of the wells was found to contain a considerable amount of organic matter, probably of vegetable origin, as the wells are uncovered, and are receptacles of various kinds of filth blown into them during dust-storms. Besides, they have not been cleared out properly since they were dug, and it is not surprising to find the water contaminated; indeed it may be pronounced suspicious, if not impure; the quantity of dead leaves that drop into the wells from trees that surround and overhang them being alone sufficient to pollute the water, and account for the organic matter, especially as the deposit has been allowed to accumulate and left undisturbed for years. I would recommend that the wells be thoroughly cleared out and afterwards covered in, and the water pumped into troughs for distribution.; special wells protected by trap-doors should be set apart for drinking water and dietetic purposes; the bheestie's mussucks kept under strict surveillance as regards their internal cleanliness, and disinfected when necessary, as it is feared the same skin is in- discriminately used to carry water either for drinking or building purposes, and of qualities widely different. Food. 6. Food is abundant, of good quality, and moderate in price. The following table shows the description and average quantity consumed daily by a healthy sowar:SIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 129 Duties, &c. 8. Out-post duty has an injurious effect on the health of the men, as they are exposed to extremes of temperature in unsuitable quarters and often in the open air, where water is scanty and bad; hence their weak and anæmic condition on their return to head-quarters. To the trying service at the out-post stations may be attributed a large proportion of the sickness and mortality of the Frontier Force, as the most intractable cases of fever that I ever met with were contracted at these places. There is no gymnasium, but the men often engage in such sports as tent-pegging, tilting at the ring, and lime-cutting on brigade holidays, when prizes are awarded to those who distinguish themselves most. These games have only been introduced lately, and are much enjoyed by the best riders. Lock-up Rooms and Cells. 9. A new standard guard has been erected since last year, which consists of a guard- room and a cell, with a verandah on one side only. The wall between the cell and guard-room should be loop-holed for ventilation purposes, and the verandah should be extended all round to protect the build- ing from the fierce rays of the sun. Marches. 10. The regiment has not been out marching this year, but is next for duty, and will probably go round the out-posts, or into the frontier districts, be- fore the end of the cold season. Hospital. Conservancy. Hospital Water-supply. 11. Nothing has been done to improve or extend the only ward that constitutes the hospital; and as I drew attention to its defects in my annual reports for 1873 and 1874 it is unnecessary to allude to the subject again. To prevent over-crowding I had two tents pitched at the end of the hospital, and used them during the months of October, November, and December in addition to the hospital ward. Owing to the disproportion between the cubic capacity and superficial area of the ward, only 12 patients can be accommodated in it without over-crowding the beds, as the roof is unnecessarily high compared with the floor space. The roof of the hospital latrine has been raised since last year130 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Vaccination. 17. 14 cases were vaccinated, and 28 re-vaccinated suc- cessfully. General Health and Physique of the Men. 18. The general health of the men has been unsatisfactory, as will be seen from the large number of re-admissionsSIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 131 unsuitable quarters, are much exposed to climatic influences, water is often bad and of limited quantity; and on their return to head-quarters their weakly and anæmic condition fit them rather for the hospital than the parade-ground. The surgeon still "supplements " the dry-earth system with disinfectants; but this he explains. When the new hospital is built, the dry-earth system can then be carried out without these adventitious aids. Water is from a neighbouring well, of a quality similar to those elsewhere described. Filters are recommended. Vaccination. In this corps vaccination shows more favourably than in the others. 14 primary and 28 cases of re-vaccination were successfully performed. Physique and General Health. The physique of the men is as described in my former report; nor is it likely to be im- proved under the present system of recruiting, as also retain- ing the regiment continuously in Jacobabad. While the mor- tality has been less, the general health has been worse than for 1874, as is seen by the list of treated, which gives a total of 724 for the last, against 503 for the previous year, and which is further strengthened by the significant fact of 434 admissions to 290 persons. H. M.'s 30th Regiment N. I., or Jacob's Rifles. JACOBABAD.132 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. which is within 30 yards of the hospital, is kept clean and neat. The water-supply of the hospital is good and abundant from a well near the hospital. Sickness and Mortality. 7. There have been 829 admissions during the year, which show an increase of 202 over last year's. This is mainly due to fever. The number of cases of ague in 1874 was 249, and this year 427; the cases were mostly of the quotidian type, and generally uncomplicated, except in the months of November and December, when bronchitis and pneumonia were apt to supervene. Except in the ratio of deaths to treated, this year's sickness contrasts badly with that of the last 2 years, as is seen in the following table:SIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 133 Vaccination and Re vaccination. 10. Primary vaccinations 6, successful 1, re-vaccinated 6; successful 4 and unsuccessful 2. Return showing Degree of Protection by Small-pox and Vaccination. Strength. Protected by Small-pox. Protected by Vaccination. Unprotected Europeans. Natives. Europeans. Natives. Europeans. Natives. Europeans. Natives. Remarks. Males Regiment ... 6 656 ... 473 6 183 ... ... Sickly; not fit. Females ... 1 138 ... 128 1 10 ... ... Children ... ... 110 ... 8 ... 100 ... 2 Regimental Lines or Bazaar. Males ... ... 188 ... 151 ... 37 ... ... Females ... ... 15 ... 12 ... 3 ... ... Children ... ... 17 ... 4 ... 13 ... ... Total... 7 1,124 ... 776 7 346 ... 2 Health and Physique. 11. Health of regiment worse than last year, but ap- pearance of men on the whole fairly good. Sind Sore. 12. There have been no cases of Sind sore under treatment since I have been in medical charge. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL J. R.MILLER., M.D. Lines unchanged, are in good condition, and the accommodation is sufficient. The great want previously noticed134 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. STATEMENT showing the SICKNESS and MORTALITY among the NATIVE N.B. STATEMENT SHOWING THE SICKNESS AND MORTALITY DURING THE YEAR 1875. 135 TROOPS serving in the BOMBAY PRESIDENCY during the Year 1875. they stood on the 1st July 1875. Hindus. Mahomedans. Strength present on 31st December 1875. Regiment. Average Number of consecutive Nights in Bed. Number of Recruits joined during the year. CASTES. Christians. Hindus. Mahome- dans. Others. Europeans. Eurasians. Natives. Average Daily Strength. Died in Hospital. Died out of Hospital. Average Daily Strength. Died in Hospital. Died out of Hospital. Average Daily Strength. Died in Hospital. Died out of Hospital. REMARKS. Average Daily Strength. Died in Hospital. Died out of Hospital. Average Daily Strength. Died in Hospital. Died out of Hospital. Average Daily Strength. Died in Hospital. Died out of Hospital. Strength. Died per Cent. to Strength in and out of Hospital and on Leave Strength. Died per Cent. to Strength in and out of Hospital and on Leave AND BOMBAY MARINE. 550 1.6 71 .... 630 20th Regiment N. I. 4 37 6.9 .. .. .. .. .. 10.2 .. .. 533.4 9 .. 8.1 .. .. .. .. .. 411 1.4 164 1.8 578 21st do. 5 50 5.0 .. .. .. .. .. 1.0 .. .. 405.0 4 2 178.0 1 2 2.0 .. .. 67 1.5 10 .... 77 Details, 21st Regiment N. I. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 27.0 1 .. 8.0 .. .. .. .. .. 119 3.3 16 .... 135 .. 3.5 .. 1.0 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 125.6 2 2 15.9 .. .. .. .. .. 259 2.3 19 .. 284 Right Wing, 7th Regiment N.I. 3.5 2 2.0 .. .. .. .. .. 3.0 .. .. 278.0 5 1 17.0 .. .. 3.0 .. .. 471 2.4 75 1.3 563 26th Regiment N, I. 4.5 44 6.0 .. .. .. .. .. 13.0 .. .. 512.2 10 1 75.8 1 .. 13.0 .. .. 8 .... .... .... 8 Detachment, 21st Regt. N. I. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 8.0 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 12 .... .... .... 12 Do. do. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 11.5 .. .. 0.2 .. .. 0.3 .. .. .... .... 2 .... 10 Do. do. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..... .. .. 0.7 .. .. 1.6 .. .. 7.7 .. .. 8 .... .... .... 8 Do. do. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 8.0 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 8 .... .... .... 8 Do. do. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 8.0 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 16 .... .... .... 16 Do. do. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1.0 .. .. 3.0 .. .. 12.0 1 .. 8 .... .... .... 8 Do. do. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 7.0 .. .. 1.0 .. .. .. .. .. .... .... 2 .... 10 Do. do. 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 7.0 .. .. 3.0 .. .. 13 .... 4 .... 17 Do. 20th Regt. N. I. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 16.0 .. .. 1.0 .. .. .. .. .. 1,950 1.8 363 1.1 2,364 .. 133 20.9 .. .. .. .. .. 27.2 .. .. 1,941.4 31 6 386.6 2 2 41.0 1 .. 600 0.5 84 2.3 716 2nd Grenadier Regiment N. I. 4 102 6.2 .. .. .. .. .. 9.5 .. .. 500.0 1 2 59.0 .. 2 23.5 .. .. .... .... .... .... .. Detachment do. 3.6 .. 10 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 40.3 .. .. 5.5 .. .. .. .. .. 68 3.4 9 .... 68 2nd Company, Native Artil-lery. 5 .. 1.0 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 54.9 1 1 10.7 .. .. 1.2 .. .. 79 .... 12 .... 94 5th Company, Sappers and Miners. 4 .. 0.7 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 83.0 .. .. 11.0 .. .. 3.0 .. .. 25 .... 61 .... 86 Aden Troop 8.4 6 1.0 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 26.9 .. .. 63.8 .. .. .. .. .. 762 0.6 166 1.2 964 .. 108 16.2 .. .. .. .. .. 9.5 .. .. 705.1 2 3 150.0 .. 2 27.7 .. .. 2,712 1.5 529 1.1 3,328 .. 241 37.1 .. .. .. .. .. 36.7 .. .. 2,646.5 33 9 536.6 2 4 68.7 1 .. DIVISION. 537 1.5 68 .... 628 1st Grenadier Regiment N. I. 3.7 18 6.1 .. .. .. .. .. 19.9 .. .. 537.9 3 .. 69.7 .. .. 2.0 .. .. 513 0.5 77 .... 669 8th Regiment N. I. 5 24 6.0 .. .. .. .. .. 12.0 .. .. 529.0 2 1 74.0 .. .. 75.0 .. .. 627 1.1 32 .... 673 17th do. 3 29 6.5 .. .. .. .. .. 9.0 .. .. 611.0 3 4 34.5 .. .. 4.0 .. .. 182 0.5 118 .... 308 1st do. N.L. C. 5.7 14 5.3 .. .. .. .. .. 8.6 .. .. 184.0 .. 1 109.0 .. .. .. .. .. 334 1.2 54 .... 389 Sappers and Miners 4 9 10.0 .. .. .. .. .. 1.0 .. .. 417.2 4 .. 68.1 .. .. 2.2 .. .. .... .... .... .... .. Detachment, Poona Horse 9.2 .. 0.8 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 24.0 1 .. 67.5 .. .. .. .. .. 140 0.7 19 .... 231 Head-quarters, 4th Regiment N. I. 5.5 51 4.6 .. .. .. .. .. 8.5 .. .. 222.0 1 .. 37.8 .. .. 84.2 .. .. 559 0.7 83 .... 686 19th Regiment N. I. 6.2 23 5.0 .. .. .. .. .. 4.0 .. .. 528.0 2 2 87.0 .. .. 49.0 .. .. 357 0.5 79 .... 686 13th do. 5.3 13 7.0 .. .. 1.0 .. .. 9.4 .. .. 3011 2 .. 79.3 .. .. 283.2 .. .. 554 0.9 73 .... 648 5th do. 5.7 23 6.0 .. .. .. .. .. 7.0 .. .. 545.0 4 1 68.0 .. .. 14.0 .. .. 610 1.0 85 1.1 .. 6th do. 8.0 80 6.0 .. .. .. .. .. 7.1 .. .. 520.8 3 3 78.2 1 .. 4.4 .. .. 83 1.2 374 0.5 457 Poona Horse 11.8 18 5.2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 59.2 1 .. 24.1 2 . .. .. .. 551 0.7 119 ... 711 12th Regiment N. I. 15.2 14 5.8 .. .. 1.0 .. .. 13.0 .. .. 532.0 4 .. 112.0 .. .. 27.0 .. .. 98 ..... 18 ..... 151 Detachment, 4th Regt. N. I. 4.3 .. 1.0 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 80..0 .. .. 12.0 .. .. 45.0 .. .. 338 1.4 61 1.6 533 14th Regiment N. I. 15 12 6.0 .. .. 2.6 .. .. 62.1 1 .. 338.0 3 2 53.8 .. 1 67.5 .. .. 596 0.1 69 1.4 684 15th do. 13.2 19 7.4 .. .. .. .. .. 13.0 .. .. 524.0 1 .. 66.0 1 .. 5.0 .. .. 53 .... 10 10.0 78 Detachment, 14th Regt. N. I. 4.4 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1.2 .. .. 59.2 .. .. 12.1 1 .. 12.5 .. .. 6,132 0.7 1,339 0.4 7,532 ... 347 88.7 .. .. 4.6 .. .. 175.8 1 .. 6,012.4 34 14 1,278.1 5 1 675.0 .. ..
136 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. STATEMENT showing the SICKNESS and MORTALITY among the NATIVE Regiment. Station. Movements during the year. Average Daily Sick. Average Daily Strength present during the year. Remained on 1st January 1875. Admitted during the year. Total treated. Discharged cured. Discharged otherwise. Died in Hospital. Died out of Hospital. Remaining. Average Daily Sick per Cent. to Average Strength. Ratio per Cent. of Admissions to Average Strength. Ratio per Cent, of Death. In- valided. In Hospital. Out of Hos- pital. For Discharge the Service. To Change of Climate. To treated. To Average Strength. To treated. To Average Strength. NORTHERN 3rd Regiment N. I. Ahmedabad None. 32.4 700.5 20 1,226 1,246 1,167 41 15 .. 23 4.9 175.0 1.2 2.1 .. .. 40 22 Detachment, 18th Regiment N. I. Sádra Arrived from Deesa on 20th March. 0.4 41.8 .. 39 39 39 .. .. .. .. 0.9 93.3 .... .. .. .. .. .. 7th Regiment N. I. Rájkot None. 6.8 247.0 7 284 291 260 .. 4 1 9 2.8 114.9 1.4 1.6 0.3 0.4 25 4 28th do. Do. None. 15.9 551.2 16 550 566 500 44 9 .. 13 2.9 99.7 1.6 1.6 .. .. 30 15 1st Company, Native Artil- lery. Do. None. 2.6 124.0 1 105 106 100 5 1 .. .. 2.4 84.6 0.9 0.8 .. .. 5 .. Squadron, 2nd Regiment L. C. Do. None. 3.9 146.0 5 119 124 114 6 1 1 3 2.7 81.5 0.8 0.6 0.8 0.7 4 2 11th Regiment N. I. Bhuj None. 16.1 671.0 18 314 332 299 15 4 .. 14 2.4 46.8 1.2 0.5 .. .. 21 2 2nd do. N. L. C. Deesa None. 9.4 288.9 9 243 252 234 10 1 .. 7 3.4 84.1 0.4 0.3. .. .. 8 .. 18th do. N. I. Do. None. 21.2 583.0 23 732 755 714 18 .. 3 23 3.6 125.5 .... .. 0.4 0.5 30 8 16th do. do. Mhow Marched to Nusseerabad in November. 24.7 547.7 32 749 781 730 34 5 2 12 4.5 136.7 0.6 0.9 0.3 0.3 59 3 25th do. do. Do. None. 22.5 517.0 10 744 754 725 18 1 3 10 4.4 143.9 0.1 0.1 0.4 0.5 44 17 3rd do. L. C. Neemuch None. 12.3 316.0 18 361 379 367 2 1 .. 9 3.7 114.2 0.3 0.3 .. .. 13 1 24th do. N. I. Do. None. 23.2 622.0 20 1,015 1,035 996 3 11 2 25 3.6 166.4 1.1 1.1 0.2 0.3 25 3 Squadron, 3rd Regiment L C. Nusseerabad None. 3.7 122.6 9 152 161 153 4 .. 1 4 3.2 123.9 .... .. 0.6 0.8 .. 4 23rd Regiment N. I. Do. Left in November for Mhow 17.9 629.0 10 665 675 624 17 1 3 33 2.8 105.7 0.1 0.1 0.4 0.4 27 5 Detachment, 10th Regiment N. I. Augur None. 15.4 223.3 10 392 402 361 27 .. .. 14 6.7 175.5 .... .. .. .. 18 13 Squadron, 1st Regt. N. L. C. Baroda None. 6.6 158.1 .. 233 233 223 1 .. .. 9 4.4 147.3 .... .. .. .. 3 1 22nd Regiment N. I. Do. None. 26.8 662.2 27 779 806 758 17 9 4 22 4.0 117.6 1.1 1.3 0.5 0.6 30 11 9th do. do. Do. Arrived at Baroda from Ahmedabad in January. 15.6 648.3 15 481 496 421 53 11 6 11 2.6 74.2 2.2 1.6 1.2 0.9 25 8 Detachment, 7th Regiment N. I. Dwárka Arrived at Dwárka on 1st February. 2.8 80.7 .. 115 115 112 2 .. .. 1 3.9 142.5 .... .. .. .. .. 2 10th Regiment N. I. Mehidpur None. 24.3 361.0 17 858 875 793 35 25 1 22 6.6 237.7 2.9 6.9 0.1 0.3 26 21 Detachment, 28th Regiment N. I. Barda Choki On 1st September 1875 marched to Porebunder and returned on the 2nd December. 7.7 87.9 7 283 290 274 4 5 .. 7 9.0 321.9 1.7 5.7 .. .. 4 4 Detachments 16th and 25th Regiments N. I. Indore None. 6.0 217.9 6 275 281 264 13 1 .. 3 2.7 126.2 0.3 0.4 .. .. .. 2 Total 318.2 8,547.1 280 10,714 10,994 10,228 387 105 27 274 3.7 125.3 0.9 1.2 0.2 0.3 437 148 SIND 29th Regiment N.I. Kurrachee From Hyderabad to Kurrachee. 20.8 627.8 27 538 565 537 5 4 2 19 3.3 85.7 0.7 0.6 0.4 0.3 22 5 27th do. Hyderabad From Kurrachee to Hyder- abad. 27.8 679.0 32 629 661 624 3 2 1 32 4.1 92.6 0.3 0.1 0.2 0.1 38 3 30th do. Jacobabad None. 25.9 533.2 30 829 859 802 14 13 .. 30 4.4 142.1 1.5 2.2 .. .. 49 4 1st Sind Horse Do. None. 10.1 304.5 12 570 582 544 18 6 3 14 3.3 187.2 1.0 1.9 0.5 0.9 17 18 2nd do. Do. None. 9.6 287.0 9 334 343 312 6 3 2 22 3.4 116.0 0.9 1.0 0.5 0.7 18 6 3rd do. Do. None. 10.7 356.0 21 703 724 704 4 4 3 12 3.0 197.4 0.6 1.1 0.4 0.8 26 4 Total 104.9 2,837.5 131 3,603 3,734 3,523 50 32 11 129 3.7 126.9 0.9 1.1 0.3 0.4 170 40 Grand Total 772.7 22,819 682 25,475 26,157 24,282 946 213 66 716 3.4 111.6 0.8 0.9 0.2 0.3 972 418
STATEMENT SHOWING THE SICKNESS AND MORTALITY DURING THE YEAR 1875. 137 TROOPS serving in the BOMBAY PRESIDENCY during the Year 1875138 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Summary of the Statistics for the Year 1875 and 5 previous years. Years. Average Daily Strength. Admissions into Hos- pitals. Ratio per Cent. of Admissions to Average Strength, Mean of all. Average Daily Sick per Cent. to Average Strength, Mean of all. Deaths in Hospital. Ratio of Deaths in Hospital per Cent. to Average Strength. Ratio of Deaths in Hospital per Cent. to Admis- sions. Deaths out of Hospital and on Leave. Total Deaths out of the Average strength in the year. Ratio per Cent. of Total Deaths to the Average Strength. Ratio per Cent. to Strength of Hindus who died in and out of Hospital and on Leave. Ratio per Cent. to Strength of Mahomedans who died in and out of Hospital and on Leave. Ratio per Cent. to Strength in- valided for Discharge the Service. Ratio per Cent. to Strength invalided for Change of Climate. 1875 22,819 25,475 111.63 3.38 213 0.93 0.83 66 279 1.22 1.30 1.18 4.27 1.83 1874 22,750 26,601 116.92 3.67 176 0.77 0.66 72 248 1.09 0.99 1.12 4.60 1.73 1873 22,967 29,035 126.86 3.82 165 0.71 0.56 81. 246 1.07 * * 4.35 2.11 1872 22,903 36,209 158.09 4.54 226 0.98 0.62 95 321 1.40 3.98 2.13 1871 22,959 29,733 129.50 4.31 236 1.03 0.79 97 333 1.45 3.12 2.10 1870 22,715 28,380 139.08 4.33 191 0.84 0.68 95 286 1.26 3.71 2.33
139 APPENDIX I. ANNUAL GENERAL RETURN exhibiting the Sick of H. M.'s Native Troops in the Bombay Presidency for the Year1875,compared with1874,arranged according to authorized Classification and Nomenclature. Regiment. Station. Average Strength. Average Daily Sick. 1875. Station. Average Strength. Average Daily Sick. 1874. CLASSES OF DISEASES. CLASSES OF DISEASES. Total. GENERAL DISEASES. LOCAL DISEASES. Old Age and Debility, 904 and 905. Poisons, 906 to 991. INJURIES. Total. SURGICAL OPERA- TIONS. GENERAL DISEASES. LOCAL DISEASES. Old Age and Debility, 904 and 905. Poisons, 906 to 991. INJURIES. Sub-Division A. Sub-Division B. Diseases of the Nervous System, 59 to 104. Insanity, 105 to 110. Diseases of the Eye, 111 to 185. Diseases of the Heart, 219 to 244 and 250 to 258. Diseases of the Lungs 290 to 337. Diseases of the Stomach and Intestines 449 to 500. Diseases of the Liver, 501 to 520. Diseases of the Spleen, 524 to 530. GonorrhAPPENDIX II. 140 APPENDIX II B 66141 APPENDIX II. 1875. 1874. Division. Regiment. Station. Average Strength. Average Daily Sick. Admis- sions. Deaths in Hospital. Regiment. Station. Average Strength. Average Daily Sick. Admis- sions. Deaths in Hospital. POONA DIVISION. 1st Gr. Regiment N. I.... Poona... 629.5 24.6 779 3 1st Gr. Regiment N. I.... Poona... 661 21.6 605 4 8th Regiment N. I.... Do.... 690.0 28.1 1,381 2 8th Regiment N. I.... Do.... 665 19.2 619 2 17th do.... Do.... 658.5 22.8 791 3 17th do.... Do.... 579 18.7 506 5 1st Regiment N. L. C.... Do.... 301.6 8.9 310 1 1st Regiment N. L. C.... Do.... 420 19.2 408 3 Sappers and Miners... Kirkee... 488.5 9.2 281 4 Sappers and Miners... Kirkee... 397 7.9 344 1 Detachment, Poona Horse... Dhulia... 91.5 1.9 31 1 Detachment, Poona Horse... Dhulia... 148 1.8 36 1 Hd.-qrs., 4th Regt. N. I.... Satara... 352.5 5.6 308 1 Hd.-qrs., 4th Regt. N. I.... Satara... 350 9.1 362 1 19th Regiment N. I.... Sholápur... 668.0 14.0 625 2 19th Regiment N. I.... Sholápur... 652 27.0 950 4 13th do.... Ahmednagar... 674.0 14.7 543 2 13th do.... Ahmednagar... 613 15.7 527 ... 5th do.... Belgaum... 634.0 14.4 407 4 5th do.... Belgaum... 575 13.7 409 2 6th do.... Do.... 610.5 11.1 356 4 6th do.... Do.... 631 7.5 236 3 Poona Horse... Sirur... 308.3 10.6 292 3 Poona Horse... Sirur... 295 7.5 177 ... 12th Regiment N. I.... Dharwar... 685.0 18.3 363 4 12th Regiment N. I.... Dharwar... 678 30.8 616 4 Detachment,14th Regt. N. I.... Kaládgi... 85.0 1.4 53 1 Detachment, 5th Regt. N. I.... Kaládgi... 89 0.5 8 ... 14th Regiment N. I.... Kolhápur... 524.0 20.2 419 4 14th Regiment N. I.... Kolhápur... 683 20.3 458 4 15th do.... Málegaon... 608.0 14.4 517 2 15th do.... Málegaon... 614 13.2 334 1 Detachment, 4th Regt. N. I. Asirgarh... 137.0 4.0 151 ... Detachment, 4th Regt. N. I. Asirgarh... 147 7.5 260 1 Total... 8,145.9 224.2 7,607 40 Total... 8,197 241.2 6,855 36 DIVISION. 3rd Regiment N. L. I.... Ahmedabad... 700.5 32.4 1,226 15 3rd Regiment N. L. I.... Ahmedabad... 642 26.0 893 2 9th do.... Do.... 637 15.5 396 2 Dett., 3rd Regt. N. I.... Sadra... 25 0.4 27 ... Detachment, 18th Regt. N. I. Sadra... 41.80 0.4 39 ... Dett., 9th do.... Do.... 50 0.5 21 ... 28th Regiment N. L. I.... Rájkot... 551.2 15.9 550 9 28th Regiment N. L. I.... Rájkot... 475 15.2 623 3 1st Co., Native Artillery... Do.... 124.0 2.6 105 1 1st Co., Native Artillery... Do.... 133 3.4 158 ... Squadron, 2nd Regt.N. L. C. Do.... 146.0 3.9 119 1 Squadron, 2nd Regt. N.L. C. Do.... 136 3.5 116 ... 7th Regiment N. I.... Do.... 247.0 6.8 284 4 Hd.-qrs., 7th Regt. N. I.... Do.... 324 10.0 407 2 11th do.... Bhuj... 671.0 16.1 314 4 11th Regiment N. I.... Bhuj... 668 14.0 368 5 2nd Regiment N. L. C.... Deesa... 288.9 9.4 243 1 2nd do. N. L. C.... Deesa... 257 10.9 282 4 18th do. N. I.... Do.... 583.0 21.2 732 ... 18th do.N. I.... Do.... 620 28.0 1,028 4 25th do. do.... Mhow... 517.0 22.5 744 1 25th do. do.... Mhow... 528 33.2 1,029 4 16th do. do.... Do.... 547.7 24.7 749 5 16th do.do.... Do.... 528 38.2 1,010 2
APPENDIX II. 142 NORTHERN 3rd Regiment N. L. C.... Neemuch... 316.0 12.3 361 1 3rd Regiment N. L. C.... Neemuch... 302 15.6 502 3 24th Regiment N. I.... Do.... 622.0 23.2 1,010 11 24th Regiment N. I.... Do.... 646 41.0 1,346 6 23rd do.... Nuseerabad... 629.0 17.9 665 1 23rd do.... Nuseerabad... 687 25.4 897 7 Squadron, 3rd Regt. N. L. C. Do.... 122.6 3.7 152 ... Squadron, 3rd Regt. N. L. C. Do.... 127 1.7 162 ... Detachment,10th Regt. N. I. Augur... 223.3 15.4 392 ... Detachment,10th Regt. N. I. Augur... 206 13.2 334 ... 22nd Regiment N. I.... Baroda... 662.2 26.8 779 9 22nd Regiment N. I.... Baroda... 623 32.7 1,130 5 Detachment, 7th Regt. N. 1. Dwárka... 80.7 2.8 115 ... Detachment., 7th Regt. N. I. Dwárka... 7 0.4 19 ... Detachment, 28th do.... Do.... 79 4.3 136 ... 10th Regiment N. I.... Mehidpur... 361.0 24.3 858 25 Hd.-qrs., 10th Regt. N. I.... Mehidpur... 389 29.4 997 ... Detachment, 28th Regt. N. I. Barda Choki.... 87.9 7.7 283 5 Detachment, 28th Regt. N. I. Barda Choki... 79 10.0 355 2 Do. 16th and 25th Do. 16th and 25th Regiments N. I.... Indore... 217.9 6.0 275 1 Regiments N. I.... Indore... 194 3.7 190 2 9th Regiment N. I.... Baroda... 648.3 15.6 481 11 Squadron, 1st Regt. N. L. C. Do.... 158.1 6.6 233 ... Total... 8,547.1 318.2 10,714 105 Total... 8,362 376.2 12,426 53 SIND DISTRICT. 27th Regiment N. I.... Hyderabad... 679.0 27.8 629 2 27th Regiment N. I.... Kurrachee... 652 11.9 490 2 29th do.... Kurrachee... 627.8 20.8 538 4 29th do.... Hyderabad... 636 21.5 799 3 30th do.... Jacobabad... 583.2 25.9 829 13 30th do.... Jacobabad... 592 20.0 627 15 1st Sind Horse... Do.... 304.5 10.1 570 6 1st Sind Horse... Do.... 343 13.3 671 7 2nd do.... Do.... 287.0 9.6 334 3 2nd do.... Do.... 334 8.8 375 16 3rd do.... Do.... 356.0 10.7 703 4 3rd do.... Do.... 291 9.4 497 12 Total... 2,857.5 104.9 3,603 32 Total... 2,848 84.9 3,459 55 Grand Total... 22,819.0 772.7 25,475 213 Grand Total... 22,750 835.7 26,601 176
143 APPENDIX III. APPENDIX III. COMPARATIVE STATEMENT showing the Health of the Native Troops in the four Divisions of the Bombay Presidency. 1875. 1874. Average Strength. Admissions. Deaths. Average Daily Sick. Ratio per Cent. of Admissions to Average Strength. Ratio of Deaths per Cent. Average Daily Sick per Cent. to Average Strength Average Strength Admis- sions. Deaths. Average Daily Sick. Ratio per Cent of Admissions to Average Strength. Ratio of Deaths per Cent. Average Daily Sick per Cent. to Average Strength. In Hospital. In Hospital. To Ad- missions. To. Strength To Strength To ad- missions. Presidency Division Bombay Circle. 2,396.2 2,904 34 102.7 125.4 1.2 1.4 4.3 2,400 2,959 26 104.4 123.2 0.8 1.1 4.3 Aden... 892.3 647 2 22.7 72.5 0.3 0.2 2.5 943 902 6 29.0 95.6 0.6 0.6 3.0 Poona Division... 8,145.9 7,607 40 224.2 90.3 0.5 0.4 2.7 8,197 6,855 36 241.2 83.6 0.5 0.4 2.9 Northern Division... 8,547.1 10,714 105 318.2 125.3 0.9 1.2 3.7 8,362 12,426 53 376.2 148.6 0.4 0.6 4.4 Sind Division... 2,837.5 3,603 32 104.9 126.9 0.8 1.1 3.6 2,848 3,459 55 84.9 121.4 1.5 1.9 2.9 Total... 2,281.9 25,475 213 772.7 111.6 0.8 0.9 3.3 22,750 26,601 176 835.7 116.9 0.6 0.7 3.6 Bomabay: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS.
