IP/13/AF.3 SKETCH FOR THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY, FOR THE YEAR 1876. [THE REGIMENTS ARE PLACED AS THEY STOOD IN THE ARMY LIST ON THE 1st JULY 1876.] Bombay. PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1877.
SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY, POR THE YEAR 1876. [THE REGIMENTS ARE PLACED AS THEY STOOD IN THE ARMY LIST ON THE 1ST JULY 1876.] Bombay: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1877.
INDEX. [The regiments are placed as they stood in the Army List on the 1st July 1876.] PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. PAGE. 20th Regiment N. I., Bombay 1 21st do. do. or Marine Battalion, Bombay 3 Right Wing, 7th Regiment N. I., Tanna 6 17th Regiment N. I., Surat 7 Aden Troop, Khor Mucksar 10 No. 4th Company, Sappers and Miners, Aden 10 6th Regiment N. I., Aden 12 Detachment, 6th Regiment N. I., Perim 14 POONA DIVISION. 1st Regiment Light Cavalry, Poona 16 5th do. N. I., Poona 18 8th do. do. do. 21 26th do. do. do. 23 Sappers and Miners, Kirkee 26 Poona Horse, Sirur 30 15th Regiment N. I., Ahmednagar 33 13th do. do. Málegaon 36 Detachment, Poona Horse, Dhulia 37 Detachment, 4th Rifles N. I., with Garrison Staff and Details, Asirgarh 138 4th Rifles, Satara 42 2nd (Prince of Wales' Own) Grenadier Regiment N. I., Belgaum 44 14th Regiment N. I., Belgaum 50 3rd do. do. Kolhápur 51 Det. 3rd do. do. Kaládgi 53 19th do. do. Sholápur 53 12th do. do. Dharwar 58 NORTHERN DIVISION. 1st Grenadier Regiment N. I., Ahmedabad 62 Left Wing, 13th do. do. do. 69 1st Squadron, 1st Lancers, Baroda 71 9th Regiment N. I., Baroda 72 22nd do. do. do. 74 Squadron, 2nd Regiment Light Cavalry, Rájkot 76 No. 1 Mountain Battery, Rájkot 78 7th Regiment N. I., Rájkot 80 28th do. do. do. 81 11th do. do. Bhuj 84 2nd Regiment Light Cavalry, Deesa 86 18th do. N. I., Deesa 88 23rd do. do. Mhow 89 25th do. do. do. 93 Wings, 25th and 23rd Regiments N. I., Indore 99 10th Regiment N. I., Mehidpur 102 3rd Queen's Own Regiment Light Cavalry, Neemuch 107 24th Regiment N. I., Neemuch 112 Squadron, 3rd Queen's Own Light Cavalry, Nusseerabad 115 Left Wing, 10th Regiment N. I., Agar 116 16th Regiment N.I., Nusseerabad 118
( ii ) SIND DIVISION. PAGE. 29th Regiment or 2nd Belooch Regiment N. I., Kurrachee 121 27th do. or 1st do. do. do. Hyedrabad 122 1st Sind Horse, Jacobabad 123 2nd do. do. do. 125 Detachment, 3rd Sind Horse, Jacobabad 126 Do. 2nd Mountain Battery, Jacobabad 127 30th Regiment N. I., or Jacob's Rifles, Jacobabad 127 Head Quarter Wing, 3rd Sind Horse, Mitri 129 No. 2 Mountain Battery, Khelat. 134 Left Wing, 30th Regiment N. I., or Jacob's Rifles, Mitri 134 Report on the outbreak of cholera among the troops of the Sind Frontier Field Force, 135 Remarks by Deputy Surgeon,General F. G. Joynt on the proposed site for a military cantonment at Mittri 137 STATISTICAL TABLES. Statement showing the Sickness and Mortality among the Native Troops in the Bom- bay Presidency during the year 1876 140 Summary of do. do. do. 144 APPENDICES. Annual General Return exhibiting the Sick of H. M.'s Native Troops in the Bombay Presidency for the year 1876, compared with 1874 145 Return showing the Admissions, Deaths, &c., among the Native Troops of the Bom- bay Presidency at the several stations for the year 1876, compared with 1875 146 Comparative Statement showing the Health of the Native Troops in the four Divi- sions of the Bombay Presidency 149
No.S.B./182 of 1876. FROM THE SURGEON-GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75007911.tif] TO THE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, MILITARY DEPARTMENT. Bombay, 5th June 1877. SIR, I have the honour to forward, for submission to His Excellency the Gover- nor in Council, the Medical History of the Native Army of Bombay for the year 1876. 2. The convenient arrangement adopted last year is followed as closely as possible in the present history. In order to avoid useless repetitions the separate reports of the Medical Officers have been somewhat abridged, while all informa- tion of importance has been retained. Bombay Presidency. Years. Average strength. Average daily sick. Average daily sick per cent. to aver- age daily strength. Admis- sions. Deaths. 1872 ... 22,903 1,040.0 4.54 36,209 226 1873 ... 22,967 876.2 3.82 29,035 165 1874 ... 22,750 835.7 3.66 26,601 176 1875 ... 22,819 772.7 3.38 25,475 213 1876 ... 22,583 856.8 3.79 26,918 247 3. The figures in the margin show that the total strength of the army was 236 below the strength for the preceding year. With this diminished strength, however, the average daily sick was 84.1 above the average for 1875, and 28.6 above that for the past three years. A corresponding increase is seen in the percentage of daily sick to average daily strength, while the total admissions have increased by 1,443, equivalent to a percentage on strength of 119.2, as compared with one of 111.6 for the year previous. This increased sick- ness was principally due to the greater prevalence of malarious fevers, especially amongst the troops of the Sind division. Mortality 4. The total number of deaths was 296. as compared with a mortality of 279 for 1875. Of these 247 occurred in hospital, and 49 out of hospital and on leave; the numbers for the year before were 213 and 66, respectively. Invaliding 5. The total number invalided, for discharge from the service, was 1,013. or a percentage on average strength of 4.48; the correspond- ing figures for the preceding year were 972 and 4.26. For change of climate 515 were invalided; last year the number was 418. Presidency Division and Aden. Years. Average strength. Average daily sick. Admissions. Deaths. 1872 ... ... 3,297 144.0 4,731 33 1873 ... ... 3,358 140.2 4,513 28 1874 ... ... 3,343 133.4 3,861 32 1 875 ... ... 3,288.5 125.4 3,551 36 1876 ... ... 3,207 128.7 3,363 45 6. The figures, as they affect divisions, are as follows:ii Poona Division. Years. Average strength. Average daily sick. Admis- sions. Deaths. 1872 ... ... 8,577 319.7 10,703 51 1873 ... ... 8,209 250.4 7,334 35 1874 ... ... 8,197 241.2 6,855 36 1875 ... ... 8,145.9 224.2 7,607 40 1876 ... ... 7,448.6 220.4 7,249 42 7. In the Poona division the average strength was 7,448.6ii division 3,083, in the Northern division 5,111, and in Sind 2,844iv 24 cases, with a mortality of 6. In the wing of the 13th N. I. at Ahmedabad 12 cases and 2 deaths occurred, and in the 1st Grenadiers at the same station there were 5 cases and 2 deaths. Amongst the troops at Rájkot there were 6 cases and 2 deaths, and in the detachment of the 28th at Dwárka 1 case occurred. The Sind Army, which escaped altogether in 1875, suffered severely during the past year. A fatal outbreak of cholera occurred in the troops of the Frontier Field Force. In the Sind regiments of the force there were 68 cases, with 35 deaths; 33 cases and 21 deaths occurred in the 30th N. I., 26 cases and 9 deaths in the 3rd Sind Horse, and 9 cases and 5 deaths in the company of Native Artillery. Rheumatic affections. 14. An increase is again shown in the total treated for rheumatic affections. For the year under report they amounted to 1,665, as compared with 1,588 for the preceding year; in each year there were 4 deaths. In the Presidency division there were 260 treated, in the Poona division 392, in the Northern division 822, and in Sind 191. The corresponding figures for 1875 were 203, 595, 675, and 115. The percentage of treated to strength for the Presidency, Poona, Northern, and Sind divisions was 8.1, 5.2, 9.2, and 6.3, respectively; whilst the figures for 1875 were 6.1, 7.3, 7.8, and 4.0. The 20th N.I. at Bombay, the 17th at Surat, the 22nd at Baroda, and the 28th at Rájkot have had the largest proportion of admissions from this class of affections. The remarks made at the latter part of paragraph 22 of the History for 1875 apply equally well to the year now under report. Syphilis. 15. It is satisfactory to note a decrease in the total number treated for syphi- lis. The figures for 1876 and the preceding year are, for the Presidency division 97 and 92, respectively; for the Poona division 193 and 213; for the Northern division 142 and 155; and for Sind 74 and 81; the respective totals for both years being 506 and 541. The per- centage of treated to strength for 1876 was for each of the divisions 3.0, 2.5, 1.5, and 2.4, respectively; while the corresponding figures for the year previous were 2.7, 2.6, 1.8, and 2.8. The increase shown for the Presidency division is due to the greater prevalence of syphilis in the regiments stationed at Bombay. In the 21st N. I., for example, the percentage of treated to strength was 5.9; the year before it was 4.1. Although the total treated for the Poona division is somewhat less, yet the number of cases in the regiments stationed at Poona itself has in- creased. In 1875 there were 88 cases, while in the year under report there were 101. The 26th N. I. shows a percentage of treated to strength of 8.1. The regiments at Sholápur and Ahmednagar show a larger proportion of cases than do those stationed at the other Deccan townsv deaths, to 123 and 4 deaths. In the Poona division there were 463 treated, with a mortality of 13, as compared with a treated of 443 and 6 deaths in 1875. The 8th and 26th N. I. at Poona, the 14th at Belgaum, and the 3rd at Kolhápur, had the greatest number of admissions. In the Northern division the total treated for lung diseases has risen from 586 in 1875 to 727 in the year under report; the respective mortalities were 13 and 9. The 24th N.I. at Neemuch and the 25th at Mhow have again suffered a good deal. The two regiments at Ahmedabad show also a considerable number of admissions. In Sind there has been a total treated of 180 and a mortality of 29, or a percentage of deaths to treated of 16.1. This large death-rate is chiefly due to the prevalence of pneumonia amongst the troops stationed in Upper Sind. For 1875 the corresponding figures were 142, 15, and 10.5. Bowel diseases. 18. For diarrhvi of the 10th N. I. I am glad to notice that Barda Choki has been abandoned. Surat appears to be an exceedingly malarious station; the 17th N. I. had no less than 684 admissions from fever there during the past year; while in 1874, at Poona, a reputed malarious: station toovii Food. 25. Towards the end of the year the effects of the famine became apparent in raising the price of food at many of the stations in the Poona division. One or two of the medical officers report that sepoys with large families are obliged to curtail their own allowance; in other instances the quality of the food is said to be inferior. The medical officer in charge of the 15th N. I. at Ahmednagar states that, in his opinion, much of the bowel disease which prevailed in the regiment was due to the consump- tion of damaged grain. The full effects of the scarcity on the health of the troops will not, however, become apparent till later in the season. In the other divisions food is generally reported as cheap and good. The want of fresh vege- tables at Aden is evidenced in the number of men who suffer from scurvy. A similar scarcity is experienced at Rájkot; measures should be undertaken to provide supplies of fresh vegetables or potatoes at both these stations. Clothing. 26. The annual loss in efficiency from shoe-bite, due to unsuitable and ill-fit- ting boots, has been frequently brought to notice, and the remedy suggested. As yet, however, nothing appears to have been done towards effecting an improvement in this direction. It would add much to the general health and well-being of the army were the sepoys possessed of a better supply of warm undress clothing in order to guard against the ill effects of chill when heated after exercise. The Sind troops, who are exposed to greater vicissitudes of climate than those of the other divisions, should be exceptionally well provided in this respect. Duties. 27. The duties do not appear to have been heavy, nor have they had any pre- judicial effect on the general health. Gymnasia and other means for affording salutary exercise, thus im- proving the health and physique of the men, are not, in my opinion, so generally available as they should be. Hospitals. 28. The regimental hospitals are, as a rule, favourably reported on, and, with a few exceptions, their ventilation and accommodation. are pronounced sufficient. Some necessary alterations and improvements have been carried out, and others will be attended to. At Satara and Sirur new hospitals are required. Deputy Surgeon-General Joynt brings to notice the dampness of the hospitals at Jacobabad, which, he states, is due to defective construction. This condition needs to be remedied with as little delay as possible. At Jacobabad, above all places, a removable source of unhealthi- ness, like this, should not be allowed to continue. Vaccination. 29. In every regiment vaccination and re-vaccination, both of sepoys and their families, have been most strictly attended to. Con- sidering what a virulent epidemic of small-pox raged among the civil population of the Presidency during part of the past year, the comparative immunity of the army from the disease speaks well for the manner in which protective measures were carried out by the medical officers. Epidemics. 30. Surgeon MacRury, of the 3rd Sind Horse, gives an interesting and instruc- tive account of the outbreak of cholera which occurred among the troops of the Sind Frontier Field Force. Although the data are not quite complete, there can still, I think, be little doubt that this outbreak was due to the use of contaminated drinking water. Dr. MacRury's remarks regarding the immunity of the troops from cholera while at Khelat and Mustoong, although the disease was everywhere raging around them, are full of interest. He does not attribute this immunity to any special precautions in the way of quarantine, but believes that it was due more to the strict cleanliness which was enforced throughout the camp, and to the protection of the water- supply from contamination. While fully sharing in this opinion, I may take the opportunity of offering some further observations in connection with the subject of quarantine in cholera. The contagion, by means of which a disease like this is spread, is of so subtle a nature, that it may be carried from place to place in
viii numberless ways; food itself is not infrequently a vehicle. Therefore, unless all communication of every sort and kind between a body of men and an infected locali- ty is absolutely cut off, quarantine cannot be said to be thoroughly established. It is plain that, in this country at least, the application of quarantine, as described above, is impracticable. Still, though quarantine cannot be established, much may be done to prevent the spread of cholera; communication with infect- ed places should, as far as possible, be cut off; but the chief means of safety con- sists in the strictest attention being paid to the conservancy of the cantonment and its surroundings, while all insanitary conditions, whether existing in the im- mediate locality or among a body of men, should, as far as practicable, be got rid of. Above all, the water-supply should be preserved from contamination. All precautionary measures should be taken beforehand, and the better the sanitary state of the camp, the less likelihood is there of its being visited by cholera or other contagious disease. In the majority of cases where cholera appears in a camp, I believe that the outbreak is due chiefly to some local insanitary condition, and that its arrest may be attributed more to the renewed and successful efforts to ensure thorough cleanliness than to any precautions that may have been taken in the direction of quarantine. The history of the outbreaks in the 13th N. I. at Ahmedabad and in the 17th at Surat, as detailed in the medical officers' reports, is instructive on these points. In every regiment, when cholera appeared, due precautions were taken to prevent the disease from spreading, and in all cases with success. 31. There are other points on which I am tempted to remark; but the date is so recent since I took charge of the office of Surgeon-GeneralA SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE AMY OF BOMBAY FOR THE YEAR 1876. [The regiments are placed as they stood in the Army List on the 1st July 1876.] PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. Average strength present during the year... 3,207.0 Average daily sick per cent. to the average strength... 3.9 Ratio of mortality per cent. to the average strength... 1.4 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75007935.tif] H. M.'s 20th Regiment N. I. BOMBAY.2 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Food. 6. Food has been abundant, but not cheapPRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. 3 consider unfit for soldiers' work, and for the discharge of whom this procedure is under- stood to be right, they having not served for a period entitling them to be invalided with pension. Resumé 17. It is believed that the native regiments which are periodically stationed in Bombay always present a larger sick list than the Marine Battalion al- ways in this large city. Some men stint their stomachs and hoard their cash, with a view to furlough leave; others spend their money in indulging passion, the result being a very large taint of scorbutic and syphilitic diathesis. Among the wives and families of the men in the rank and file of the regiment, there has been some consi- derable sickness from debility. Several children have died, in my opinion, simply from inanition. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL W. G. HUNTER, M.D. Visited the hospital of H. M.'s 20th Regiment N. I. two or three times, and also inspected the regimental lines twice from the time I assumed charge of the office of the Deputy Surgeon-Gene- ral in June to the close of the year 1876. The conservancy of the hospital is satisfactory, and its capacity has not been tested, the number of sick being few. Its surroundings are, however, exceedingly bad; in its immediate vicinity is Sonapore, one of the most unhealthy parts of the city; to its east, distant some 20 yards, is the Scotch Burial-ground; to its west is the sea, and to its exposure to the sea-breeze is in all likelihood to be attributed its freedom from epi- demic disease. The sanitary surroundings of the regimental lines are of the worst description. They have, however, been so frequently reported on as not to call for further notice. The detachment of the 4th Rifles N. I., doing duty in Bombay, is quartered with the 20th Regiment N. I., and their sick are accommodated in the hospital of the same regiment. The general remarks above made apply equally to this corps. H. M.'s 21st Regiment N. I. or Marine Battalion. BOMBAY.4 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Exercise, Amusement, & c. 5. Cricket and gymnastic exercise are to a very limited extent indulged in. Sickness, mortality, and inva- liding 6. The total number of cases treated in hospital was 299, or 82 less than in the preced- ing year. Of the total number treated 16 remained on the 31st December 1875 and 283 were fresh cases received during the year. Of the total treated 257 were discharged to duty; 22 sent for change of air, chiefly for debility following serious illness; 6 were invalided from the hos- pital; 3 died 2 less than in the previous year; and 10 remain under treatment on the 31st December 1876. These figures compare very favourably with the last or preceding year. The following table shows that the sanitary state of the regiment (luring the year contrasts very favourably with its condition during the five previous years, and the reduction of the daily number of non-effectives is very noticeable:PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. 5 affections, 13 of the former and 29 of the latter. I regret to say syphilis of a very bad type is exceedingly prevalent in Bombay, and the men of the regiment of loose morals, who resort to the town, have suffered very severely; not only have the primary attacks been of the sloughing variety of the disease, but nearly all the cases have been affected in quick succession with secondary and tertiary forms of the disease. I believe I am not the only medical officer at the Presidency who thinks this disease ought not to be allowed to reign rampant in Bombay, without any attempt to check its ravages. Eruptive fevers give only 2 admissions for chicken-pox as last year, both mild cases, and calling for no remark; scurvy gives 4 admissions, and these not furnished by the detachments serving in the Persian Gulf or on board the Indian Government vessels, but contracted on shore from low living. This form of scurvy is much more intractable than that contracted on boardship; the men suffer for months before any signs of impaired health become visible, and it is only when they fear to be invalided that those not entitled to pension allow themselves a more sustaining diet, and then begin to improve in health. Local disease contribu tes 136 admissions, of which the skin, which includes that most fre- quent disease amongst natives6 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL W. G. HUNTER, M.D. Visited the hospital several times, and made a thorough inspection once since JunePRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. 7 H. M.'s 17th Regiment N. I. SURAT.8 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. enlargement, and some in chronic diarrhPRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. 9 huts purified and white-washed, fires were burnt to windward of the lines, and the same measure was carried out in the left wing. Quarantine was established as much as possible; but this was, of course, most imperfect: the lines are situated close upon the main road of the traffic, and if men were disposed they could evade the picquet, and get into the city, as in fact they did, for I frequently saw them there. However, what promised at first to be a formidable epidemic gradually subsided. After these measures were adopted, the most noticeable feature about this epidemic was the great mortality of the men compared to the women and children; it is, I think, unusual. I have always observed in former epidemics the reverse to be the case. How far this has been influenced by the habits of the men, as noticed in my remarks on dysen- tery and diarrh10 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. H. M.'s Aden Troop. KHOR MUKSAR.PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. 11 Lines. 2. The lines occupied by the Sappers have been con- demned, and estimates made for construction of new ones. Conservancy. 3. No changes have been made in conservancy or sanitary arrangements, which continue satisfactory. Water. 4. Condensed water is issued by Government for drinking purposes, and water for ablution is obtained from a well close to the lines. Food. 5. The rations, with exception of the vegetables, are good, and of sufficient quantity. The vegetables, however, that are sowed out during the hot weather, are of very little use as anti-scorbutic agents, and pota- toes, limes, and tamarinds ought to be served out during that season. Clothing. 6. The clothing is the same nearly as that worn by native regiments, but the men are supplied with a suit of blue coarse cloth as a working uniform. Guards. 7. The men supply their own guards and a few orderlies, but they have been employed during the greater part of the year in assisting in building the fortifications and making roads. The work does not influence their health unfavourably. Amusements. 8. I have seen no amusements or gymnastics exercised by the men. Cells. 9. There are no cells, but prisoners are locked up in the guard-room. Marches. 10. The company has not moved since its arrival. Hospital. 11. Any sick are admitted and treated in the hospital at tached to the native regiment, which has been already described Sickness, mortality, and invalid ing. 12. There have been 43 admissions during the year, and 2 re-admissions. Percentage of treated to strength is 44.1, daily average of sick 2.2. There have been no deaths in hospital; but one man, who was on sick certi- ficate, died at Poona. Eight men were invalided. Cause of sickness. 13. Ague has given 15 admissions, none of them severe, and yielding easily to treatment. Seven rheumatic affections amongst men who had served sufficient- ly long to entitle them to pension. Syphilis gave 4 admissions. One infecting chancre brought from India and one non-infecting contracted in Aden, and 2 cases of secondary syphilis, one of whom was sent on sick certificate, and died some time after arrival at Poona. There were 3 admissions from scurvy, and 19 men received lime-juice in the lines. One case of dysentery and 1 of diarrh12 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. H. M.'s 6th Regiment N. I. ADEN.PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. 13 one case of remittent fever. Bowel complaints gave rise to 57 admissions, of which 21 were cases of dysentery, mostly slight, and easily cured; diarrh14 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. General health and physique. 16. The general health of the men, notwithstanding the trying climate of Aden, may be said to be very fair; the largest number of admissions are amongst the older men of 20 and 25 years' service. The largest number of men are recruits of 2 or 3 years' service, who have not as yet finished grow- ing, and filled out; but in a few years, if scurvy does not weaken them here, there will be a very fine set of men in the regiment. Special treatment of disease. 17. Cinchonidine was tried in the treatment of intermittent fever, but it was found to be of very little use, unless given in very large doses, when it caused bad symptoms of cinchonism. Hypodermic injection of quinine has proved very successful; and although it has been used in many cases, in not one single instance was there any sloughing of integument, or unpleasant result, except in one or two cases where a small hard swelling formed at point of operations, but which rapidly sub- sided when poulticed. All cases of dysentery were treated with ipecacuanha. A small quan- tity of Warburg's tincture was obtained towards the end of the year, and was immediately successful in stopping cases of intermittent fever in which it was exhibited. Resumé. 18. On considering the facts already stated it will be seen that, although there appear to be a large number of admissions into hospital, still, as so many of them; are only trivial affections, it cannot be said that the regiment has suffered much from its first year's residence in Aden; and I believe that if some change was made in pension rules, by which men were allowed to retire after having completed a certain number of years on an ascending scale of retiring pension, that the admissions to hospital would be lessened at least one-third. 19. There was only one native pupil attached to the hospital during the year, who was instructed in the practical work in the wards; but owing to the fact that I was performing the civil duties as well as my own for a great part of my time, I was unable to give him much assistance in his reading. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL W. G. HUNTER, M.D. Inspected the hospital and lines of H. M.'s 6th Regiment Native Infantry on 26th December 1876, Surgeon Dane, M.B., Officiating Medical Officer. The hospital is a large well-constructed building, with asphalte floors; ventilation good, and accommodation very ample. The quarters in the lines are well built and ventilated; the absence of a plinth is objectionable, as the quarters are liable to be flooded in the event of heavy rain. The latrines are to windward,PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN, AND BOMBAY MARINE. 15 Conservancy. 3. A latrine for the troops has been erected on the western side of the fort containing eight partitions, to hold the same number of iron receptacles, and all sanitary arrangements are satisfactory; the excreta being daily removed in closed receptacles and buried to leeward of the fort. Water supply. 4. The water-supply for drinking purposes is condensed on the island, and is of good quality. The troops receive a liberal allowance, viz., 2 gallons condensed and 3 of brackish or purchased water daily per head, and during the hot months16 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Causes of sickness. 9. The principal causes of sickness are due to the north- westerly winds which prevail during the months of June, July and August. General health. 10. The general health of the several detachments has been good. Special treatment. 11. One case of ague has been successfully treated with cinchonidine, and when scurvy occurs the ordinary anti-scor- butic mixture is resorted to. I would again draw special attention to the treatment and prevention of scurvy; though a comparatively small number have attended the dispensary during the year under report, some arrangement in the supply of fresh vegetables is very much needed., which would, indeed, be a great boon. On this subject being referred to at Aden, an extra allowance of vegetables has been sanctioned when essentially necessary, but a corresponding reduction is made in some othe articles of the rations.
POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 17 POONA DIVISION. Average strength present during the year ... ... ... ... 7,448.6 Average daily sick per cent. to the average strength ... ... 2.9 Ratio of mortality per cent. to the average strength ... ... 0.5 H. M.'s 1st Regiment Light Cavalry. POONA..18 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. matter in the shape of new accessions of horse-dung, urine, and silt; these diluted by rain foment and form putrescent organic mire, becoming in course of time a source of noxious miasms. This subject was referred to at considerable length in special reports to the local authorities in 1875, and the suggestions then made may be advantageously repeated in order to bring more directly to the attention of the Surgeon-General the necessity which exists for a good system of paving and perfect surface drainage in order to place our lines in a proper sanitary condition. With the view of remedying these evils, I would beg to suggest that the present gutters in rear of the lines should be paved with flag-stones, as was done in certain places in the Ghorpuri Barracks last year, with great advantage to cleanliness. Glazed tiles would answer the purpose still better. Larger channels should be provided in front and rear of lines for the conveyance of the contents of the smaller gutters to points below the Syce Lines in the line of fall. These should be paved in the same manner as the smaller gutters between the line of huts, and conducted to the nullahs by means of large open saucer drains. Conservancy. 5. The Commanding Officer has directed a constant supervision to securing good sanitary condition of lines and huts at all seasons. The fact has also been recognised that the modifications of infectious deseases may sometimes elude the most vigilant sanitary inspection, and hence the Colonel has considered it desirable that the native officers should consider it part of their duty to give prompt in- formation about any suspicious case of sickness which may come under their observation. The regimental latrines, though constructed after a standard plan, present some well-grounded sanitary defects. Practically, however, they have answered the purpose fairly well. The collection of horse-dung, litter, and lime rubbish has been generally well attended to; an im- provement has been noticed during the year in the disposal of the rubbish after collection Complaint of its non-removal was made by the Sanitary Commissioner at his inspection Since then people have been found willing to remove it for manure. Water-supply. 6. The water-supply is directly from the Kharakwasla water works, but the well water is largely preferred by many of the men for domestic purposes. The unsatisfactory condition of the stand pipes is now receiving attention, and such action was much needed, as the waste was excessive, and the mire caused thereby very disagreeable. The Kharakwasla wáter is eminently a pure and wholesome water, and in all respects well suited for domestic purposes. Food. 7. Up to the present time there has been no difficulty in obtaining a sufficiency of various kinds of food in the Poona bazaar, but the prices have risen owing to the famine in surrounding districts. Hospital and its surroundings. 8. The building and other property at the hospital are in a good condition; very few repairs have been required during the year. The drainage has been very satisfactory since the improvements made in the previous year, and the annoyances which were formerly complained of have ceased to exist. The hospital receives an ample supply of water from the main supply pipe. The dry-earth system has been well maintained in hospital latrines. Sickness and mortality and invaliding. 9. The year which has just closed has been remarkably exempt from the prevalence of any grave form of disease since the arrival of the regiment in Poona; the rate of admissions for zymotic disease has never been so small as in the past year. With an average strength of 291 there have been 282 admissions, which is rather more favourable than last year, when the same percentage was 310. The great bulk of the admissions have been from malarial fever 116; dysentery caused 14 admissions, ophthalmia 3, syphilis 10, and 73 were from various affections of the surface, wounds, contusions, inflammation and ulcerations, the imme- diate cause of all of which is connected with the work of the sowar, and the accidents to which his work subjects him. Boils and indolent sores are very prevalent amongst the poorly- fed men. Mortality and in validing. 10. There have been 3 deaths during the year: 1 from abscess of liver, 1 from tetanus, and the third from pneumonia. The particulars of these cases were given in the monthly reports. Twelve men were pensioned during the year,POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 19 Resumé. 13. The health of the regiment has been good, owing, no doubt, to the generally healthy season, and the absence of prolonged heat and mois- ture in the months of August and September, as ordinarily owing to imperfect drainage and the want of ventilation, these months have furnished a high rate of admission from miasmatic diseases. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL BEATTY, M.D. The head-quarters of the regiment has been stationed at Poona since 1875, the 1st Squadron being located at Baroda. The average strength of the corps at Poona was 291, whilst the total treated in hospital during the year, notwithstanding the improvements made by the cantonment authorities in cleaning out and widening the drains in the lines, was 289, or 99.3 per cent of the entire strength. The sanitary condition of the camp and cavalry lines have engaged the earnest atten- tion of the Sanitary Commissioner, whose valuable report on the subject is already before Government. The hospital itself is admirably situated, and can give accommodation to 29 patients- The latrines were kept perfectly clean, and the whole management of the hospital and estab- lishment was highly creditable to Surgeon Keith, the medical officer in charge at the time of my inspection. H. M.'s 5th Regiment N. L. I. POONA.20 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. 4th, office; 5th, store-room; 6th, passage into second door; and 7th, room used for the private examination of patients; so that on the west side there is ventilation only by 2 doors in a wall 96 feet long. This is the only fault the hospital has. The hospital assistants' quarters are all that can be desired, if they had liberty to build a small privy. The compound is large, length 122 yards, breadth 80 yards, which gives an area of 9,760 square yards. The site is good, the ground being rocky beneath, without any sub-soil, and slopes towards a small rivulet which runs northwards. The drainage is thus natural and good. The plinth is about 1 foot high on the west side, and 3 1/2 feet on the east, roof tiled, with Howard's ventilator on the top. There is also a separate ward in the compound 40 feet long, 22 broad, height of wall 11 feet, cubic capacity 9,680, has a plinth of 2 feet, and a verandah of 5 feet all round. The ward is used for surgical cases and cases of ophthalmia, &c., requiring segregation. Ventilation is by three windows on the east, and three on the west side, a door on the south, and a window on the north gable. It is sufficient. For the treatment of contagious disease, as small-pox, there is erected a chupper hut, built on a permanent plinth of about 1 foot in height, and measuring 50 feet in length, 21 in breadth, height of outer wall 7 feet, giving 1,050 square feet and 10,500 cubic feet, but the gables instead of the sides of this erection have been turned towards the direction of the prevailing winds. It has ventilation by two doors on each side. Conservancy. 8. The system is the same, and the latrines have been kept scrupulously clean. Hospital water-supply. 9. Is Kharakwásla water, pipes having been laid on since the 8th of October 1876 Formerly well water was used; it was also good. 10. Sickness and Mortality. Year. Average strength. Admis- sions. Deaths. Average daily sick. Treated to strength. Total treated. Admitted per 1,000 of strength. No. daily sick per 1,000 of strength. 1875 ... ... 634 407 5 14.4 66.2 420 641.9 227.1 1876 ... ... 589 1,106 ... 22.1 189.9 1,119 1,877.7 375.2 There were 5 cases of small-pox treated. These were of a mild type, having all been previously vaccinated. There were also 9 children and 3 women, the former all recovered; 2 of the latter died. They were also vaccinated. These cases were treated in the chupper ward. Admissions for Ague. 234 men once in hospital ... ... ... ... ... 234 88 " twice " ... ... ... ... ... 176 66 " three times in hospital ... ... ... ... 198 26 " four " " ... ... ... ... 104 8 " five " " ... ... ... ... 40 2 " six " " ... ... ... ... 12 1 " seven " " ... ... ... ... 7 1 " eight " " ... ... ... ... 8 426 Total... 779 There were thus 163 men of the regiment not in hospital during the year. These cases were all of a mild type, and yielded readily to the usual treatment and change of air. Four men were sent to their homes on this account. One case of remittent fever was sent for change of air for six months. There was one case of mumps treated; the same man was also treated for diarrhPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 21 were treated. These patients came into hospital with pain in the lumbar region. They are men who have been frequently attacked by ague (1 having been attacked seven times during the year) and rheumatism. These are mostly old and weak. One was invalided under syphilis secondary, 3 for old age and debility, and 1 for rheumatism. There were 2 admissions from sciatica; 1 of these suffered also from ague and erysipelas. They were slight cases. One case of dementia from smoking ganja was admitted; symptoms on admis- sion22 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Treatment of diseases when special. 15. For slight attacks of ague, cinchonidine is used in place of quinine in small doses as a tonic; but it must be given in large and frequent doses when intended as a substitute for quinine and as an anti-periodic. The cold bath when ague is approaching, or during the cold stage, is a therapeutic agent of great value. Medical pupils. 16. The native medical pupils receive clinical instruction, English dictation, instruc- tion in materia medica, the doses of medicine and their thera- peutic use and action; but they are changed so frequently that it is impossible to say whether they derive much benefit. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL T. B. BEATTY, M.D. Since the arrival of the regiment at Poona its general health has not been satisfactory, the men having suffered severely from fever, which, however, has not been of a fatal form. During the year under report the total number of cases treated in hospital was 1,119, com- pared with 420 in the previous one, when the regiment was stationed at Belgaum. The number of deaths in 1875 (including 6 from surgical operations) amounted to 10, whilst in 1876 no casualty has been recorded. The hospital is commodious, being capable of accommodating 30 patients without over- crowding; and at the time of inspection was remarkably clean, and the arrangements for pre- serving the sanitary condition good. H. M.'s 8th Regiment N. I. POONA.POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 23 Duties. 10. The labour to which this regiment has been subjected during the year 1876, in the construction of new lines, no doubt accounts for the large num -ber of admissions into hospital. Although large, they compare favourably with the previous year. The strength of the regiment for the years 1875 and 1876 was almost identical, being, respectively, 690 and 684. The total admissions into hospital for the former year was 1,381, of which 328 were from contusions; for the latter the number was 1,311, of which 187 were from contusions, showing a considerable falling off in the number of admis- sions from this cause, which, I presume, is to be attributed to the fact that the men are now become more adept labourers at duties to which at first they were comparative strangers. Exercise, amusement, and oc- cupation. 11. The regiment has been kept fully occupied during the past year in the construction of the lines. Lockup rooms and cells. 12. Proper to the regiment such buildings do not exist, but when circumstances demand, solitary cells situated near the staff hospital are used. Guard rooms, lock-up rooms, and cells are to be built in the new lines. Marches. 13. None have taken place during the past year. Hospital and its surroundings. 14. There is nothing further to state under this head than has been already narrated in previous reports. Ventilation. 15. Arrangements in this respect are, in my opinion, very good indeed. The roof is pro- vided with ridge ventilation, and there is always a free ciru- lation of air through the wards. Over-crowding. 16. This does not exist; there is at all times ample accom- modation for the ordinary sick. Requirements. 17. The fact of the non-existence of either a dead-house or contagious ward in connec- tion with the hospital has been brought to notice in previous reports. The same state of affairs still exists. I again beg to urge that such requirements are absolutely necessary, the latter not only for the health of the regiment, but for the safety of the surrounding populace. Conservancy 18.This subject has been fully treated in previous reports. A tiled gutter, as advised by Dr. Sexton, to carry off the liquid portion of the night-soil, would be, indeed, a great advantage, as the soakage of nitro- genous elements adjacent to an establishment for the treatment of disease is not to be desired. Hospital water-supply. 19. The water-supply of the hospital is obtained from a stand-pipe erected in front of the adjacent staff hospital. It derives its supply from the Kharakwásla reservior. This is the whole source of supply. I understand that a scheme for the supply of the hospital has been proposed, viz., the erection of four stand-pipes, two in front of, and two behind, the hospital; this proposition has not yet been carried out practically. A stand-pipe did exist some short time ago in front of the hospital, by which it was in part supplied, but that has been removed. Sickness, mortality, and invalid- ing. 20. The total number of cases of diseases treated in hospital during the year 1.876 was 1,337, of which 1,311 were admitted between the 1st of January and 31st December. The total number of patients discharged was 1,325, namely, 1,307 to duty, and 18 otherwise. The total number of deaths was 2. Seventeen convalescents were sent to their homes for change of air. On the whole, these figures show a diminution in the sick rate as compared with last year. Two deaths have occurred in the regiment during the year under review24 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Causes of sickness. 22. Of the total number of admissions into hospital malarious fevers figure conspieuously, ague furnishing 631, and remittent fever 7POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 25 dence in Poona; and it is to be hoped that a longer stay in the invigorating climate of the Deccan will completely shake off the tendency. Lines. 2. The state of the lines and topography of the surrounding country having already been fully reported on by medical officers in charge of the different regiments stationed at Poona, there is nothing further to be added. Sickness. 3. The following table, contrasting the admission from various diseases during the years 1875 and 1876, clearly shows, as a rule, that the general health of the regiment has considerably improved during the latter year:26 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. A few of the cases were of a severe type, and in some instances the secondary symptoms required a long course of treatment. Six patients who had been in hospital for lengthened periods and were in a weak and debilitated condition from the effects of this disease were sent on sick certificate. The majority of these derived little or no advantage from the change, and it was found necessary to re-admit them on their return. One naique was invalided for syphil- itic rheumatism, and 5 sepoys who had not served for pension were discharged the service, as they were completely incapacitated for the performance of their duty, owing to the results of this disease. It is very difficult to ascertain correctly from sepoys where they contract this disease; but from inquiry I am of opinion that the majority of cases are contracted in the native city, and not in the vicinity of the lines. Dysentery .POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 27 Food. 7 Owing to the unusually small amount of rain during the months of September and October, a famine occurred over the greater part of the Deccan; and though large quantities of grain, &c., have been brought in from other districts, the food for some months past has been very expensive, and many put to great hardships. Duties. 8. The duties of the sepoys have not been excessive, and on an average each man has had 3 9/41 consecutive nights in bed. Vaccination. 9. Vaccination has been regularly carried on during the year. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL T. B. BEATTY, M.D. Since the arrival of this regiment from Surat to the Deccan, the general health of the men, as was anticipated, has become much improved. In the year 1875 and 1874, the number treated was 1,264 and 1,287, respectively, the deaths being 11 and 6. During the past year the total treated was only 827, whilst the casualties amounted to 5. The hospital, which is built to accommodate 30 patients, was found at the time of inspec- tion clean, and in all respects admirably managed by Surgeon McConaghy, who, however pointed out the great disadvantages of continuing the use of clay-washing for the floors. The latrines attached to the hospital, though carefully attended to, are capable of much improve- ment as regards construction. H. M.'s Bombay Sappers and Miners. KIRKEE.28 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Clothing. 8. There is no change in the clothing, and I need not reiterate my opinions on that subject, expressed now for some years. Duties. 9. The duties have only differed from last year in there being no line-building, but earth-works instead, with about the same result in injuries generally, but about half as to injuries of the lower extremities. Means of amusement. 10. There are no means of amusement, such as a gymnasium or wrestling ground, which, as said last year, would be a very desirable addition to the new lines. Hospital. 11. Of the hospital I have little to add since last report. Of the five principal defects then enumerated, two have been to a certain extent set right. A temporary building of lath and plaster, containing three small wards, each 10´ x 10´ x 10´, have been erected for cases of contagious disease, and they answer the purpose fairly. A wire fence of very slender proportions has just been erected all round the hospital compound instead of the wall asked for. This answers the purpose but indiffer- ently, as it can be climbed over with great ease; and animals are unable to distinguish the wires, and so are apt to run against it and damage it, as has already happened once. There is a great want of trees round the hospital. I pointed this out soon after we took possession, and the holes for them were made, but no trees have yet been planted. Hospital conservancy and water- supply. 12. The conservancy is as before. The water-supply has been happily changed to the Kharakwásla system, but it has not as yet been brought into the building; there being two stand-pipes outside. This will, I trust, be some day improved by pipes and taps inside the bath- rooms. Sickness, mortality, and invalid- ing. 13. The amount of sickness shows a decrease in the ratio of percentage to strength, which has been 50, as compared to 58.8 last year. The per- centage of deaths to strength is the same, 0.8, and of deaths to treated, a fraction higher, namely, 1.6 to 1.3 of 1875. Eight men were invalidedPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 29 of the lower extremity, due to the nature of the men's work. The next largest, affections of the eye, 22; of these 20 were conjunctivitis, of which there were only 8 cases recorded in 1875. This would, therefore, be attributable to the much larger amount of dust there has been, owing to the small amount of rainfall. The cutaneous and digestive systems, each with a total of 19 and 18, respectively, form the next largest group. Diseases of the respiratory system, 8, and of the urinary organs 7, follow next. The rest of the classes show only one or two each. Causes of mortality. 15. The causes of mortality were30 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Tabular Statement of Fever Cases treated with Cinchonidine Sulphate in the Hospital of Bombay Sappers and Miners for the year from 1st January to 31st December 1876. Total num- ber of cases. Average number of at- tacks in each case. Average number of hours of each attack. Total amount of cinchoni- dine used. Average amount in each case. Average amount given by mouth. Average amount hypo- dermi- cally. Remarks. Grs. Total number of cases treated......... 68 2.4 6.7 3, 470 51.0 ... ... This shows that the average given by the mouth is much greater (the average number of attacks and duration of each attack being about the same) than what is given hypodermically, being 70.6 to 9.3 or about 9 to 1. The number of re-ad- missions were six times greater in cases treated by the mouth (12) than in those treated hypo- dermically (2); but of this there has hardly been time enough yet to judge sufficiently. Number treated by mouth 41 ... ... 3,148 ... 76.7 ... Do. hypoder- mically......... 27 ... ... 322 ... ... 11.9 Number of 1st admissions. 54 2.5 6.9 3,163 58.5 ... ... Number treated by mouth. 36 ... ... 2,913 ... 80.9 ... Do. hypoder- mically......... 18 ... ... 250 ... ... 13.8 Number of 2nd admissions 13 2.3 6.1 340 26.1 ... ... Number treated by mouth. 5 ... ... 271 ... 54.2 ... Do. hypoder- mically......... 8 ... ... 69 ... ... 8.6 Number of 3rd admissions 1 1 4 3 3 ... ... Number treated by mouth ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Do. hypoder- mically......... 1 ... ... 3 ... ... 3 On the whole, my opinion of the use of the drug is that in moderately severe cases of fever it is fairly useful; but that it is powerless in cases of any severity. There were few cases during the period under notice to test this; but in 2 cases I had to stop the cinchoni- dine, which was doing no good, and to resort to quinine, which in a few doses, administered. subcutaneously, checked the recurrence of the attacks. Syphilis. 21. The number of cases of syphilis was unusually large and in almost every case the man had concealed the disease for a considerable time before applying for admission, and only came to hospital when he could no longer stand, thus, of course, making his symptoms very much worse, and prolonging his stay in hospital considerably. To endeavour tocheck this, all the cases were reported to the regimental authorities. When this disease seems likely to become constitutional, I gene- rally now prescribe mercury in the shape of the perchloride, 1/20 of a grain, combined with sulphate of iron, grains 2 or 3, and a slight tenderness of gums is kept up till all symptoms disappear, iodide of potassium being given at the same time if secondary symptoms appear. Poisons. 22. Two cases of hemp poisoning were kept for a considerable time in hospital; they were treated with tonics and sedatives, good food and gentle treatment, but showed scarcely any sign of improvement, and so were brought before a committee and sent to the Colaba Asylum. The form of derange- ment seems to be a chronic melancholy, without any violence as a rule, nor any suicidal or homicidal tendency. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL T. B. BEATTY, M.D. The general health of the corps was good during the past year. Out of a strength of 360.3, the daily average sick was 7.3, and the total treated 180. Only 3 deaths occurred. The hospital is remarkably well situated, facing north-east, with clear open spaces on each side. The great objection to the building is its earthen floor, the washing of which with clay had, for the reasons specified by the medical officers in charge of the other Native Infantry regiments in Poona, to be discontinued. A flagged floor should be substituted.
POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 31 H. M.'s Poona Horse. SIRUR.32 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. being impossible to regulate the ingress and egress of air so as to avoid draughts; obviously objectionable in that it consists of one apartment only; and, in short, utterly unfitted as a place for the reception and treatment of the sick. Hospital conservancy and water- supply. 13. A small but adequate latrine, in which the dry-earth system of conservancy is prac- tised, is the only building appurtenant to the hospital; the hos- pital water-supply is conveyed from its source, the river Soreh, by a bheestie, specially retained for this purpose; and is ample and fairly good. Sickness, mortality, and invalid- ing. 14. The total admissions into hospital for the year amounted to 247, being 82.6 per cent. to strength; and the average daily sick 10, being 3.17 per cent. to strength. Most sickness prevailed in July, ague bearing to the maximum of disease a pretty parallel degree of preva- lence. Dysentery has been comparatively rare in the regiment, and hepatitis by no means common; only 1 death occurred in hospital, and was due to cholera. The percentage of mortality to strength and treated is thus reduced to.31 and.38, respectively. Eighteen men were invalided. To twenty men it was deemed expedient to grant sick leave of absence, Principal causes of sickness. 15. Ague, the principal cause of inefficiency, though amounting only to 92 cases, yet stands pre-eminently the greatest factor in the aggregate of disease. The physical condition of this district is not what is generally supposed to conduce to the generation of malaria, and the comparatively mild phase which ague assumes here would point to the impossibility of malarial virus being present in the atmosphere in anything like a concentrated form. This is the more evident from the fact that those who are careful to guard against sudden chills are seldom or never affected with a paroxysm; indeed, I ascribe fully two-thirds of our sickness from ague to neglect, avoidable or otherwise, of this precaution. I believe that were the men, on coming heated off parade, im- mediately to change their clothing, wiping the perspiration off their bodies, and replacing the mounted kit by apparel equally warm, intermittent fever would become very rare amongst them. But the meagre pay of a sowar is barely enough for his single maintenance, and it can hardly be expected that he, having himself and, generally, a family to support on, say, on an average eight rupees per mensem, is in constant possession of wherewithal to prevent his suffering from the dangers incident on the sudden cooling of his body; hence he is doomed, amongst other things, to be liable to occasional attacks of ague. And this danger is enhanced by the remarkably dry climate of Sirur, together with its high range of temperature, which some- times reaches to 38 degrees in the shade. This entails a high measure of evaporation and consequent rapidity of abstraction of heat from all objects subject to its influence. July was the month in which most fever cases occurred. This, I think, may be accounted for by the fact that the greater portion of the rainfall took place towards the end of the preceding month; and as only two inches fell in July, the sun acting on the moist condition of the soil, resulting from what fell in June, gave a greater scope for the generation of malaria, the other necessary element for the production of which, viz., vegetable matter, being also present, in increased quantity, as an additional result of the same cause. Mortality. 16. As stated above, cholera was the cause of the only death that occurred. Epidemics. 17. In June small-pox made its appearance in the adjacent town, but did not affect the troops. In September cholera seized one of the men and carried him off quickly; but this was the only fatal case, indeed the only case that occurred among the fighting men, the few other persons that were affected in the regiment being followers. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 18. Amongst the children of the regiment there were in all 70 primary vaccinations, 3 of which were unsuccessful; and of re-vaccinations 24, only 2 of which produced the vaccine disease. Among the children of followers there were 28 primary vaccinations, 1 being unsuccessful; and re-vaccinations 3, 2 of which proved failures. This makes a total of 97 successful operations for the year. General health and physique of the regiment. 19. The general health of the regiment has been very good, it being in this respect about the most fortunate native corps with which I am acquainted. I am afraid that the minimum standard of chest circumfer- ence is not at all universally attained, even by the fully-grown sowars, and I venture to think that the present system of recruiting has not a little to do with this defect, The system I mean is that of confining the field of enlistment to the sons of
POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 33 those already serving in the regiment. Whilst fully alive to the merits of the time-honoured custom of giving a preference to those candidates for enlistment whose parents are or have been soldiers, I am convinced that the practice, if persevered in much longer, must eventually impair the physical efficiency of the native army. There are, no doubt, many advantages attending extra-regimental enlistment; but, on the other hand, it has its disadvantages also; and chiefest of these is the tendency it has to dwarf the stature of the regiment as a whole, and, at the same time, create diversity of size and inequality of height; for it stands to reason that the male offspring of, say, 400 men are not at all likely to compare well with recruits selected from the flower of the youth of a province. Of course, height is comparatively un- important; but, except for band purposes, I consider a minimum chest circumference of 32 inches indispensable, even in growing boys. Special treatment. 20. As an instance of special treatment I may mention the marked benefit which, after counter-irritants, stimulants, diaphoretics, and antispas- modics had failed, accrued on the administration of 20 grains of hydrate of chloral, with an ounce of brandy in a little water, in a case of asthma which had assumed the gravest features. The dose was repeated several times on succeeding days, with like effect, and eventually recovery took place, so far as that attack was concerned, and the man continues well. A child 10 months of age was brought to hospital, supposed to have swal- lowed at least 12 grains of opium, all the symptoms of opium-poisoning being present in a marked degree. The stomach-pump was first used, but failed to act, being out of repair. Mechanical irritation of the fauces produced vomiting, as did also emetics of mustard and warm water frequently administered. Strong ammonia was held to the nose, and the child at intervals shaken with more or less violence, but all apparently to no effect, for the stupor passed irresistibly into coma, too profound to be even stertorous. These measures occupied about two and a half hours. I now injected hypodermically ten,minims of the strongest solution of ammonia into the left arm, and repeated the injection, a quarter of an hour after- wards, into the other; and then allowed the child to sleep undisturbed. I had recourse to this treatment, in the hope that during sleep (which in itself facilitates perspiration) the combined effect of the opium and ammonia would tend to unload the system of the former drug by a drastic diaphoretic action, while the stimulating property of the latter would sus- tain the vital powers, The result was all that could be desired. Special observatious. 21. After all deductions are made from the pay of a private in a native cavalry regiment, some 6 rupees per mensem only remain for the maintenance of himself and family. This pittance is barely enough to meet his every-day wants, and when these are increased by the additional reel uirements of grave sickness, the chances of recovery become remote. Fortunately, however, the same privilege as regards hospital comforts that other corps enjoy has recently been extended to this, so that the case is not so hard as it used to be. There being no commissariat staff at this sta- tion, I asked and obtained, through the conjoint action of my immediate military and medical superiors, the permission of the Commissary General to purchase in the bazaar such articles as are necessary for the comfort and nourishment of the sick. This boon is very much appre- ciated by the regiment. As regards the sanitary arrangements in use here, I strongly endores Surgeon Gordon's recommendation, that instead of the sewage being allowed to touch the ground in the back court-yards, as at present, vessels of some sort should be used to contain both liquids and solid matters, which would be emptied, morning and evening, into the night- soil cart, thus obviating the possibility of the formation of cess-pools or even surface moisture. The rules at present in force as regards the means to be adopted with a view to dispensing with the services of a useless man, together with the present scale of service for pension, which makes no difference as regards retiring allowance between those who have served only 15, and those who have served upwards of 30 years, are open to objections, too obvious for me to stop to particularise. At present a man may be physically competent for the duties of a soldier, but so stupid as to be worse than useless in the ranks, and yet, so long as his conduct is blameless, the commanding officer has not the means of getting rid of him. Again, there being no difference between the pension for a service of 15 and that of 30 years, those men who have no prospects of promotion after completion of the lesser period, flock to the medical officer for the purpose of being invalided. And thus the services of many of the most useful men are yearly lost to Government. It must be understood that it is impossible for medical boards to prevent this, it being a very easy matter to see that a man is ill, but by no means so to declare him a malingerer. The only other observation I have to make is, that I consider it undesirable that there should be no accommodation for the 1st and 2nd class hospital servants, other than such vacant huts as may happen to be available in the lines, and from which they are always liable to ejection. B 19634 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Resumé, of the whole. 22. From the foregoing it will be seen that sickness in this regiment is rather under, than above the average, as compared with other corps. The few cases of dysentery that have been under treatment were not of an aggravated type, excepting one, the gravity of which was due to the co-existence of scurvy. Of the latter there was no prevalence to speak of. With reference to the unsatisfactory nature of the lock-up room, I learn that the present hospital was originally intended for a standard guard, and that owing to the building having been appropriated for the use of the sick, a guard-room with appurtenances has long been the second great want of the regiment. The construction of a new hospital would thus meet two great defects, the present building reverting to the purpose for which it was erected. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL T. B. BEATTY, M.D. The regiment has been stationary at Sirur since December 1875. The general health of the men has been fair, only one death, and that from cholera, having occurred during the year. The number treated was 260, which gives a percentage of 82.6 to the total strength of the corps, which was 314.5. As far as means will admit of, the conservancy arrangements for the regiment appeared to be good. Beyond the preparing of plans and estimates for a new hospital, which is badly needed, no further steps had been taken for building one. The site selected by Deputy Surgeon- General Maitland has been objected to by the officer commanding, on the grounds of its being too near the public road, and also being to leeward of the cavalry lines. H. M.'s 15th Regiment N. I. AHMEDNAGAR.35 POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. standard plan, and are in good order throughout. Some of the pendals are raised on plinths; the floors of others are level with the ground; but from the rocky nature of the site the rooms of none of these are ever damp from soakage from below. The single tiling of the roof, how- ever, lets in a considerable amount of water during heavy rainfall. Ventilation. 4. The roofs have no opening for ventilation, and when the doors of the huts are closed, the interiors are dark; and though the single tiling admits some air (as it does the rain), it is insufficient to render them well ventilated dwellings. Conservancy of lines. 5. The conservancy of the lines, and especially of the married men's quarters, has lat- terly been much improved. Dammered pans have been sub- stituted for the small chunamed latrine pits formerly found in front of the married quarters for use of young children. The pans are cleaned early in the morning, and left open after 7 A.M. for inspection and report by a responsible non-com- missioned officer. Water supply. 6. The water-supply to the lines is entirely dependent on the Kapurwaree aqueduct, which conveys water collected from springs near the village of that name, situated about four miles to the north of camp, at the foot of a range of hills, which forms part of the water-shed of the district. The springs are reached at a depth of about 30 feet from the surface, and are found in a soft reddish coloured layer of trap, beneath a hard one of gray. The water is of excellent quality, and the supply usually ample; but, owing to the exceptionally scanty rainfall in the past year (8 inches and 44 cents, only were registered at my hospital) the springs are unusually low, and great doubts are felt whether they will last until the next rains. The municipality of the town, in whose charge the aqueduct is, are taking energetic measures by sinking new wells at the source, and cleaning out old reservoirs, to supplement the supply as far as pos- sible. Food. As is usual in seasons of scanty rainfall and consequent failing of crops, such as has oc- curred in the year under report in this, and the surrounding districts, much old and damaged grain has been brought into the markets, and which, owing to the greatly increased prices of better sorts, sepoys have bought and eaten. In September, when cases of diarrh36 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. often varies over 20° F. in a few hours, affords neither patient nor surgeon a fair change of good results. I would suggest the partitioning off of one end of the ward for the treatment of such cases. A light partition reaching to the cross beams would answer the purpose, and if fitted with a broad central door and side windows37 POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. H. M.'s 13th Regiment N. I. MA'LEGAON.38 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. out, 8 cases; chronic rheumatic affections,; lung disease, 1; and 1 from weakness of eye-sight. Two men were sent on sick leave to their own country and 1 was discharged by sentence of court-martial. Epidemics. 12.There has been no epidemic disease amongst the men or followers. No cases of cholera occurred in camp or neighbourhood. Four cases of mild modified small-pox were under treatment during the course of the year, but it never took an epidemic form. Rainfall and its influence 13. As before stated, the total rainfall was 16 inches 36 cents, the average for some time back being 21 inches. The greatest fall was 2 inches 48 cents on the 28th June. The influence of the rainfall seemed to cause an increase in cases of intermittent fever, the number admitted for the months of July, August, and September, after rain had fallen, being almost double the number of admissions during the hot months, March, April, and May. Vaccination. 14. This has been carried on regularly during the year; 42 children were vaccinated, and of these 38 cases were successful, and 4 unsuccessful. Re-vacci- nation was also performed on 119 sepoys; and of these 84 cases were successful, and 35 unsuccessful. General health and physique. 15. The general health of the wing is very good, and the physique of the men fair; many of them, however, are getting elderly and worn-out. 25 recruits were enlisted, the average height being 5 feet 5 inches, and their chest measurement over 33 inches. Special treatment of disease. 16. The sulphate of cinchonidine has been chiefly used in the treatment of the ordi nary cases of intermittent fever, and found to answer. In many cases I have used it also as a tonic. No other special treatment, except the subcutaneous injection of liquor morphia in rheumatic affections. The injection generally gave great relief. Resumé . From what has been stated it will be seen that the general health of the wing has been good, mortality small, and that there has been no epidemic dis- ease in camp; also that the condition of the lines occupied is good, and the conservancy properly looked to, and a supply of water good and sufficient. With the exception of a guard-room for the hospital guard, nothing seems at present to be required. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL T. B. BEATTY, M.D. This regiment had marched from the camp of exercise at Poona in November of the pre- ceding year, and was stationed in Málegaon during the entire of 1876. The general health of the men had been excellent. Only two casualties had been recorded, and those were from non-zymotic diseases. Surgeon-Major Miller, the medical officer in charge, complained of the want of a guard-room for the use of the hospital guard, who are obliged at present to sleep in the hospital verandah, which, for many reasons, is extremely objectionable. The water-supply is obtained entirely from wells, and is generally sufficient; but this year, owing to want of rain, a great scarcity was felt. The amount of rain registered in 1876 was 36 inches, compared with 91 in the previous year. The hospital was clean, is never over-crowded, and the arrangements and organization were satisfactory. There being no regular bath-room attached, patients were obliged to bathe in a corner of the verandah, which practice should be discontinued, and a separate bath-room erected. At the time of inspection there were 10 sick in hospital, but from only trivial complaints. Thirty-eight primary successful vaccinations and 84 successful re-vaccinations had been performed amongst the men and children during the year. A gymnasium is required for the use of the men in the lines. Detachment H. M.'s Poona Horse. DHULIA.POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 39 2. I reported fully for 1874 on the topography and sanitation of the camp; and I have now only to reiterate my remarks made in the reports for that and several other past years, and again to mention with regret that the building of lines for the detachment has not yet been commenced. Epidemics. 3. I am happy to state that no epidemic disease occurred in the camp or neighbourhood during the year. Sickness and mortality. 4. The total treated was 41, all these cases being admitted during the year; 37 men were discharged cured, 1 died, 1 was sent on sick leave, and 2 remained. The only serious or important case was that of Bangeer Tepal Sing, a man of weak frame, aged 25, who died from remittent fever. He was taken ill on the march up from Sirur in September whilst proceeding to this station with a relief party, and was admitted into hospital on the 24th of that month in a very prostrate condition, having suffered for several days previously from severe fever, and having received no nourishment or medicine. The fever was a good deal subdued under the use of quinine and diffusible stimulants; but the system seemed to have been too much exhausted before treat- ment was commenced, and the case ended fatally, with cerebral effusion and coma on the 3rd October. Detachment H. M.'s 4th Rifles N. I., with Garrison Staff and Details. ASIRGARH.40 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. little depth of soil are during the rains washed into the tanks and contaminate the water there. The depth of water in the well after the rains was from 18 to 19 feet; this was a small quantity, as compared with some other years, because the rainfall was very deficient. The present depth is 15 feet. The well was cleaned out in 1872, when owing to the extremely small fall of rain in the previous rains (1871) it dried. The nearest houses to this well are the bakery and the post office, both buildings being not very many yards away. The post office is occupied by natives, and being so, I would very strongly recommend its being removed. At the bakery, also, there are natives during the day, and I would recommend the building of latrines for their use. The third tank is called the " Mamoo Banja," and in reality consists of two tanks which are united when the water rises beyond a certain level. This tank was cleaned out during the last hot weather at the recommendation of Dr. Lumsdaine, the Sanitary Com- missioner. The cost of cleaning out was, I believe, over Rs. 26,000. Work-people to the number of 2,000 were employed day and night at the works so as to get it completed before the rains set in. The time taken for the whole of the work was about two months. Mud, &c., to the depth of 24 feet was taken out and thrown over the walls at the south-eastern side of the fort. The bed of the tank is stone, and this was, I am told, washed over after the clean- ing, so as to ensure the removal of all impurities. The scheme for supplying potable water is as follows: a well is being sunk in a ravine to the south-west of the tank and about thirty yards away. The water from the tank will, on the same principle as the Sucker well, percolate through natural media and filter into the well. About 30 feet of the well has already been sunk, and 1 believe the total depth will be 50 feet. The amount of water measured in the " Mamoo Banja" tank immediately after the rains was 12 feet. The water has never been used or disturbed since the cleaning. A sample of this water, unfiltered, was sent by the Executive Engineer here for analysis to Bombay, and the following is the result:POONA DIVISON OF THE ARMY. 41 Or in parts per million:42 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. the sepoy lines, on the other side of the fort. They consist of a row of houses which have been rented out to merchants, who sell all that is required for the native soldier. The men used formerly to go down into the pettah bazaar to obtain their requirements, but since the partial quarantine which was placed on all people coming from infected districts was put a stop to, they were induced to settle in the fort, and thus save as much as possible communi- cation between the two places; there are two shops on the hill which supply necessaries for the Europeans also. Effects of climate. 6. The climate is, on the whole, very healthy during the cold weather. There are more cases of fever; but many of these cases are, I am inclined to think, due to the exposure to malaria in the jungles, where they go to cut wood. It would, I have no doubt, very much reduce the ratio of fever cases if this practice were put a stop to. During the rains there are many cases admitted for rheumatism. Food. 7. Food is good and prices moderate. I believe the lack of grain food in the hot months has been felt by the men. Duties. 8. The duties during the time that the European Troop were absent were heavy, and they had to supply 14 men as guard for the State prisoners, 7 men as main guard at the south-western gate, a guard of 1 man at the south-eastern gate; but now that the Europeans have arrived, they are relieved from the main gate guard. Average nights in bed: native officers 2; havildars 3½; naiques 4; privates 4. The duties seem to have no injurious effect on their health. Exercise, amusements, occupation. 9. The chief exercises and amusements are wrestling, sword exercise, wood-cutting, and card-playing and native music. Hospital and its surroundings. 10. The hospital building, which consists of the hospital, the hospital assistant, and native medical pupil's quarters, and the doolywallas' quarters, is a long line of buildings (or rather huts) which extend about 50 yards along the south-eastern wall. The hospital is first of the huts in the line, and is small, ill-ventilated, and most unsuited for such a building; there is no dead-house, no operating-room, and the light is very deficient. Improvements necessary. 11. If the sanction that Government gave for a new hospital is not renewed, it would be a good plan to raise the plinth of the hospital so as to allow more air to circulate, and also have a ventilator at the apex of the roof. Epidemic. 12. An epidemic of small-pox was found out in the pettah about a fortnight ago. The fact of there being small-pox in the pettah was concealed, and it was not found out for some time. Since then, 7 cases have been treated, all being children. The fort has been quarantined, and communication between the two places cut off. The cases have been isolated, and it is to be hoped that the quarantine will be taken off in a day or two. All the children of the detachment 4th Rifles have been vaccinated, and the sepoys also are being vaccinated, the vaccine being diluted with an equal part of glycerine. There have been no other epidemics. Mortality according to race. 13. Four deaths during the year, all among the details. Three cases amongst Purwar- ris, and one Bhil; 2 cases of severe remittent fever, 1 primary amputation of right arm; 1 case of drowning, which occurred here during the cleaning out of the tank. General health and physique of the men. 14. The health has been generally good. No mortality amongst troops. Sickness, mortality, and invaliding. 15. There were 12 cases sent off before the annual invaliding board at Bombay; out of these 9 were passed, most of the cases being unfit for duty on the score of old age and debility. The number of cases treated for ague were 44 amongst the detachment, and 1 remittent fever; dysentery cases 5; diarrhPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 43 H. M.44 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. on sick leave. A case of guinea-worm occurred, contracted, no doubt, in Bombay, where the sepoy had been on detachment duty for two years. One case of hemiplegia occurred on November 9th. The patient was an old sepoy of 38 years' service. Up to the end of the year there was no improvement, the whole of his left side being still completely paralysed. One case of jaundice occurred worthy of remark. The patient was admitted with bronchitis, complicated with jaundice. He was in a critical state for some days, dis- tressing hiccough set in, which lasted for 72 hours, with scarcely an intermission, resisting many remedies. Calomel and opium, tinct. of asafPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 45 H. M.'s 2nd (Prince of Wales' Own) Grenadier Regiment N. I. BELGAUM.46 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. become contaminated with liquid sewage which found its way by percolation into the well. The well has been closed, but no improvements have been made to remedy the faulty construction of the latrine. Those used by the left wing and the bazaar people are built on the double block system, and an attempt made to assimilate them to the stand- ard plan. They seem to be of very old construction, and the effluvia emanating from them and the adjoining grounds baffle all description. These two latrines, unless broken down and built entirely on the improved plan, will always be a source of nuisance. On the arival of the head-quarters of this regiment here the subject was reported by me; but my suggestions for improvement were set aside on the plea that the present latrines were built according to the latest "standard plan." However, Dr. Hewlett, the Sanitary Commissioner, who inspected them during the cholera epidemic, has reported against them, and has suggested, if possible, the building of new latrines. It is to be hoped that his suggestions will shortly be carried out. Water-supply. 6. There are six wells in use by the men of this regiment, the water of two of them having been considered suspicious on account of the large amount of oxygen consumed in the permanganate test. I caused a sample of each to be sent to the Chemical Analyser to Government for analysis; the results are given below:POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 47 Duties. 9. The duties have been comparatively light, the sepoys having on an average 4¼ nights in bed, and the men have en- joyed very fair health. Exercise, amusement, and occu- pation. 10. The men attend the gymnasium, the school-room, and the workshop, and some have been practising for the rifle mat- ches during their leisure hours. Marches. 11. The 2nd, 3rd, and 4th detachments marched from Vingorla to Belgaum in January, February, and March, and the men enjoyed good health, with the exception of a considerable taint of scurvy, which they brought from Aden. Hospital. 12. Since Dr. Rogers submitted his report of this hospital in 1874, a new bath-room has been added to the eastern side of the northern verandah. Its capacity is about 144 square feet. The hospital is well ven- tilated. There is room for 20 sick, and this number has not been exceeded. During the month of December the maximum number of patients has been, however, over 20; but the increase being due to chicken-pox, those so suffering were treated in tents. The hospital accommodation for persons suffering from ordinary diseases is very fair; but there is no accommodation now for patients suffering from epidemic diseases, except in tents, which do not afford sufficient protection from the rains, and the difficulty was very much felt during the last monsoon during the cholera epidemic. It would seem highly desirable to build a tem- porary shed with a well-raised floor flagged with stone for the treatment of such cases,48 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. 21 cases, 3 measles, and 18 chicken-pox, out of which 12 were admitted during December; the other cases occurred in January and June, October and November, and measles in May and June; all were slight cases, and were treated in tents pitched in the hospital compound. Rheumatic affections 12; one of these cases was a severe case of acute rheumatism, with great constitutional disturbance, and is alluded to under the heading of special treatment. Vene- reals: soft chancre 1, secondary syphilis 1; the subject of this was a recruit; he had disease of the palate and nose when he joined the head-quarters of the regiment, and has been discharged from the service since; gonorrhPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 49 attributed to the use of this water. Two other cases had occurred amongst the followers during the month of April, and both recovered. One other epidemic disease which has sent in a large number of cases into hospital early in the year and during November and December, was chicken-pox; the subjects were mostly children and recruit boys, and 8 privates. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 19. There were 60 vaccinations and 90 re-vaccinations, including the recruits recently admitted into the regiment; of the latter 43 were successful; the rest were insusceptible to the influence of vaccination. Of the primary vaccinations 53 cases were successful and 7 unsuccessful, who subsequently took it on re-vaccination. General health and physique of the men. 20. The general health of the men has improved very much during the year; but the scorbutic taint is so deeply implanted in them, that, directly the prices of grain rose high in September, a large number of men was found to have spongy gums, and at the close of the year about 21 men were on the scurvy list, who all regularly marched to the hospital when off duty to drink lime-juice. Treatment of disease when special. 21. Salycilic acid has been given in a case of acute rheumatic fever with swelling of all the principal joints of the body, when colchicum and other medicines had failed, and it had the desired effect. This acid was given in half-gramme (about 7½ grs.) doses twice or three times daily; the fever, pain, and swelling of the joints all rapidly disappeared under its use. The boracic lint, which is prepar- ed by dipping a piece of lint in a saturated solution of boracic acid, according to Dr. Lister's directions, has been used successfully in the treatment of shoe-bite and other superficial abrasions, and has been found a very successful application in these cases. I believe that it heals the sores more rapidly than carbolic oil, or the other ordinary applications. Special observations 22. It will be observed under the heading of scurvy that there were 6 admissions into hospital (being aggravated forms of this disease), and 76 slighter cases treated in the lines. Three invalided for chronic scurvy, and a few of the 14 invalided for old age and debility being affected more or less with scurvy, the question arises what can be done to prevent so much loss to the service arising from this one particular form of disease in regiments that have served in Aden? The constitution of the Maratha sepoy appears to be ill-adapted to bear the privations arising from a want of the kind of food to which he is accustomed, and to which is superadded the difference of climate; a few months' residence in Aden at once produces a change in the solid elements of his body, which is kept up by the want of nutritious food, fresh vegetables, and I may say (of those who are accustomed to take it) of animal food, since he is not supplied with mutton by the Commissariat, and the high price in the bazaar almost prevents his using it as a daily article of diet. He suffers in consequence, not only while he is serving in Aden, but for years after his return to India. The only solution that appears to my mind is, the Maratha being so ill-adapted for prolonged service in a climate so unlike his own, whether somebody else could be found to do his work; and from my experience of the Beloochee constitution I would not hesitate to say that he is best suited for such service, The nature of his native climate is not unlike that of Aden; in fact, his native soil forms part of that barren arid tract which extends along the sea-coast from the Runn of Cutch to the east coast of Africa. The Beloochee thrives consequently as well in Aden, Muscat, the Meckran coast, and Sind, as in his native country, and I believe there would be much saving to Government if annually or biennially a regiment of Beloochees were sent to Aden instead of the Maratha regiments, and their place in Kurrachee supplied by a Maratha regiment Resumé of the whole. 23. The health of the regiment has much improved since its arrival in Belgaum from Aden. Although there is still a taint of scurvy among the men in the proportion of 13 per cent, the actual admissions under this head have been about one-sixth; but the cases for malarial fevers have been twice as large as in Aden, and there is a similar increase in the number of skin diseases and also in vene- real and eruptive fevers. The men have good lines to live in, the water-supply is good, but the conservancy requires improvement. The rainfall during the year has been below the average, and there has been a consequent rise in the prices of grain; this affected the health of the men temporarily, by increasing the scorbutic taint; and, lastly, that it is believed that there would be much saving of service to Government if, instead of a Maratha regiment a regiment of Beloochees were to be sent to Aden, and their place in Kurrachee occupied by the former; the Beloochee being well adapted, by the nature of his native climate, food, and habits, to stand the privations to which a sepoy is liable in Aden. B 19650 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Medical pupils. 24. There were two senior medical pupils, who used to be taught once or twice a week in medicine, surgery, materia medica, and toxicology, besides lessons at the bedside of patients. These passed the half-yearly examination successfully; and one of them, Eleazer Ezekiel, is now undergoing a course at th Grant Medical College. Two new pupils have been received towards the end of the year; they are now learning to compound medicines and minor dressing, and some elementary lessons from materia medica. (In this report no mention of the numbers of treated, castes, &c., of the detachment noted in para. 1 is made.) H. M.'s 14th Regiment N. I. BELGAUM.POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 5l Epidemic. 11. Cholera was prevalent during the year throughout the districts, and also in the town and Sudder Bazaar. It was, therefore considered, advis- able to keep all men returning from leave or furlough with their families in quarantine in the hospital compound for three days. In the month of May, 2 children and 2 women were attacked with cholera while detained in the quarantine tents. There was 1 death; but the disease never made its appearance in the lines. Vaccination. 12. Vaccination and re-vaccination have been assiduously carried out. All recruits are vaccinated as soon as possible after enlistment, and the sepoys who are not scarred with small-pox are being gradually protect- ed by vaccination. Vaccination52 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Food. 5. The food is good and wholesome, but since the arrival of the regiment has been very expensive, more especially since the districts have been afflicted with famine. The amount of grain compensation has latterly been increased to the troops with marked good effect, and there is now no reason to complain of any great hardship on this account. Duties, and their effect on health. 6. The duties are moderate, though rather more severe since the famine commenced, as the regiment has had to take the jail and residency guards to allow the Kolhápur Infantry to be employed on out-post all throughout the famine district. This does not seem to have had any bad effects on the health of the men, who are remarkably healthy, though the number of nights in bed at present is only two. Exercise, amusement, and occu- pation. 7. The men have their native gymnastics and amuse- ments, and their military duty gives them plenty of occupation. Lock-up rooms and cells. 8. Are well adapted for the purpose; are lofty, well built and ventilated, and roomy. Hospital accommodation, &c. 9. There has been no over-crowding, the hospital accommodation being ample, and the best I have ever seen for native troops. The conservancy and water-supply are good. Sickness, mortality, and invalid- ing. 10. Average strength 547 Percentage of Treated to strength 103.6 Deaths to strength 0.36 Deaths to treated 0.35 Average daily sick 16.0 Invalided 10, percentage 1.8 Principal causes of mortality. 11. Bronchitis and malaria. Influence of rainfall. 12. The rainfall during the past year has been much below the average, being only 22 inches 42 cents, the effect of which has been to increase the price of provisions all over the district, and create a famine in some parts. The rain, as well as being scanty, was not well distributed over the season. Epidemics. 13. There has been no epidemic in the regiment. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 14. Vaccination has been thoroughly carried out in the regiment. The total number of vaccinations being 153,POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 53 Detachment H. M.'s 3rd Regiment N. L. I. KALA'DGI.54 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Detachment. 2. Two or three small parties, under non-commissioned officers, have been detached into the districts for the purpose of guarding treasuries; with these exceptions there have been no detachments from head-quarters. Climate. 3. There has been a very marked deficiency of rain during the year, only about a third of the average fall having been gauged, and the climate has, therefore, been unusually dry. The heat during April and May was very great, and during the monsoon months the temperature was higher than usual owing to the want of moisture. During the last two months the cold has been greater than I have ever previously experienced in Sholápur, and strong, dry, easterly and north- easterly winds have prevailed. Lines, available space. 4. The available space has been found quite sufficient during the year. Neighbouring village. The nuisance complained of in former reports, viz., that of the people resorting to a nullah in dangerously close proximity to the lines for purposes of nature has been almost entirely put a stop to during the past year, peons having been placed at various points by the municipality to prevent the practice. The general sanitary state of the Sadder Bazaar is fairly satisfactory; but no public latrines have been erected, though plans and estimates for them have been prepared, and sites chosen. I trust that in my next report I may be able to say that this want has been remedied. Conservancy. 5. There has been no change made in these arrangements during the year. The lines are kept scrupulously clean, and the latrines regularly cleaned out, and the nightsoil removed in closed carts and buried at a distance. The Sanitary Commissioner, at his recent inspection, expressed an opinion that the latrines, especially those for the women and children, were too far from the lines; but I do not think they could safely be brought nearer, and, even as they now are, I believe the water in one of the line wells, which is situated almost immediately below the male latrines, is very liable to be contaminated through soakage from them. The latrines are not free from odour, but I believe it to be unavoidable, owing to their construction and the use of water for ablution purposes. Water-supply. 6. Notwithstanding the very scanty rainfall, no inconvenience has been felt in the matter of water-supply during the greater part of the year, which has been, in great measure, owing to the completion of the new well alluded to in last year's report, which has yielded an ample supply of, apparently, excel- lent water, and has been a great boon to the sepoys. The well used by the Parwári sepoys dried up towards the close of the year, and the Executive Engineer has been requested to have it cleared out. I have lately received the necessary apparatus, but have not yet had time to analyse the water of the different line wells, but hope to do so shortly. Food. 7. Food of good quality is generally abundant and cheap in Sholápur; but during the last three months, owing to the failure of the crops, the price has risen something like 300 per cent., and the quality of the grain imported is not, I fear, of the best. Compensation is given by Government; but I fear those of the sepoys who have large families to maintain are obliged to curtail their allowance of food, though I have not as yet observed any injurious effects on their health in consequence. It was, I believe, in contemplation at one time that the sepoys in this and other stations situated in the districts afflicted with scarcity, should be provided with rations by the Commissariat Department, but no such arrangement has as yet been carried out here. Clothing. 8. I would beg to refer to remarks made in previous years' reports on this subject, to which I have no further addition to make. Duties. 9. These have been the ordinary duties of a native regiment in cantonment. Latterly the guard duties have been heavier than usual, a regimental guard having relieved the police one at the treasury. No in- jurious effects on the health of the corps have been apparent; indeed, as will be seen under the appropriate heading, the health of the regiment has been remarkably good during the year. Exercise, amusement, and occu- pation. 10. With regard to these points, I can only repeat the suggestion made by me last year as to the desirability of constructing a gymnasium in the lines of every native regiment, and the introduction of regimental gardens. Cricket has been much encouraged in this regiment by the Adjutant, and many of the sepoys have frequently played during the last season. They seemed to take great interest in the game, and many of them acquitted themselves most creditably.
POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 55 Marches. 11. There have been none during the year. Hospital. 12. The only addition made to the hospital during the year has been a bath-room. A ward for contagious diseases and a dead-house are required. Owing to the diminished number of sick, as compared with previous years, the accommodation has been ample. Over-crowding. 13. There has been none at any time during the year. Accommodation. 14. The additions alluded to in Section 12 are all that are now required to render the hospital in every way suitable for the wants of a native regiment. Water-supply. 15. There is no special water-supply for the hospital, its wants being supplied from the line wells and tanks. Sickness. 16. The improvement in the health of the regiment, which was so marked in 1875 as compared with the two previous years, has, I am glad to say, continued during the year just past, in which the sickness has been less than for some years previously. This will be shown at once by a glance at the following table, which gives the rates of sickness for the three years during which the regi- ment has been stationed at Sholápur:56 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. a slight increase of secondary syphilis. The cases of lumbago also show a marked decrease. The fatal case of diabetes is the same that was alluded to in last year's report. He returned from sick leave in the early part of the year, and I recommended him for discharge at the time of the yearly inspection of the regiment; but the General directed him to be kept on until the annual invaliding committee was assembled. Before that time, however, he had succumbed to disease. Diseases of the nervous system. Only 3 cases of disease of nervous system have been under treatment, of which 1 remained from the previous year. They comprised 1 of hemiplegia, 1 of cephalalgia, and 1 of pleurodynia, the two former occurring in the same individual, a young soldier, the subject of constitutional syphilis. He was admitted into hospital on two occasions suffering from intense headache, and a certain amount of obtuseness of intellect. He improved considerably under the administration of bromide and iodide of potassium, and was discharged to duty, but ultimately was attacked with left hemiplegia, and well-marked aphasia. He was again put upon large doses of iodide of potassium with perchloride of mercury, and by degrees has regained a certain amount of power; but the aphasia still continues, and there is considerable tendency to rigidity of muscles, so that he will, probably, not be fit for the duties of a soldier, and will have to be discharged. Diseases of the eye. These comprise 17 cases, against 21 in 1875, and include 12 of conjunctivitis, 2 of sequelæ of iritis, 2 of impaired vision, and 1 ocular tumour. The latter was the case referred to at some length in last year's report, and the man was sent before the general invaliding committee on 1st November, and ischarged the service with a gratuity, not being entitled to pension. Diseases of the ear. Two cases of simple inflammation of the external meatus were treated during the year. Diseases of the absorbent system. This class also gives 2 cases, 1 of which was a case of most obstinate chronic inflam- mation of the inguinal glands (non-specific), which necessitated the man being sent away on sick leave. Respiratory system. This class of diseases shows a considerable reduction as compared with the previous year, only 17 cases having been treated, against 31 in 1875. They included 9 cases of bronchitis, 2 of asthma, 1 of pneu- monia, 1 of pleurisy, 1 of chronic pneumonic phthisis, and 3 of bronchial catarrh. One of the cases of bronchitis proved fatal, but I can give no details concerning it, as it occurred during my absence on leave. None of the other cases call for special remark. Of " diseases of the digestive system" 38 cases have come under observation, viz., 3 of gum-boil, 1 of ulcer of tongue (syphilitic), 1 of quinsy, 1 of tonsillitis, 1 of enlarged tonsils, 10 of dyspepsia, 1 of enteritis, 15 of dysentery, 3 of diarrh57 POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. Injuries. Lastly, under the head of "Injuries," come 39 cases of various kinds chiefly the result of slight accidents on parade, or in the lines during dark nights, all of which were of a trivial character, and not requiring special notice. Operations. Only 11 minor operations were required during the year. Not a single European officer has been on the sick list during the year. Causes of mortality. 18. The 3 deaths which occurred were due, respectively, to cholera, bronchitis, and diabetes mellitus. Mortality according to race. 19. The 3 men who died were all Hindus from the Konkan. Epidemics. 20. The regiment did not quite escape unscathed this year from the cholera epidemic which prevailed in the city of Sholápur and the surrounding districts in the monsoon months, notwithstanding that the usual precautions were taken to prevent, as far as possible, communication between the lines and cantonment and the affected localities. The first case occurred on the 23rd July and the last on 26th August, after which the disease disappeared. Three men were attacked, of whom 1 died; also 1 woman and 1 child, of whom the former died, and the latter re- covered. At the same time a great many cases of severe diarrh58 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL T. B. BEATTY, M.D. This regiment has been stationary since the commencement of 1876, and during this period the general health of the men has been, on the whole, satisfactory. Out of an average strength of 631, there were 338 treated in hospital, with 3 deathsPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 59 Small wards, and it would be a great comfort to the patients if they were supplied to all the windows and doors of the hospital, especially in the hot weather, to keep out the glare, there being no trees near the hospital, and, indeed, scarcely any in the cantonments. The dimensions of the wards are 78 × 20 × 18½ and 72 × 20 × 18½, giving a superficial area of 1,560 feet and cubic space of 28,860 feet for the larger ward, and a superficial area of 1,440 feet and cubic space of 26,640 for the smaller ward. The larger ward is intended for 26 beds, the smaller one for 24 beds; so that each bed has a superficial area of 60 feet and cubic space of 1,110 feet. The building is well situated with an open space on all sides, and fces S. S. W. Ventilation. Ventilation is ample, being derived from opposite doors and windows, and by 5 ventilators in the roof of the building. Over-crowding. There has been no over-crowding during the year under report. At each rear corner of the hospital there are two washing rooms and a privy; they are connected with the rear verandah by a covered passage; each privy contains three receptacles for dammered iron pans. To the north-west of the hospital are the quarters for the hospital assistants and native medical pupils. The oc- cupants complain that the quarters are too small, and that there is no place for them or their families to bathe. This could be provided at a very slight cost to Government, and I would recommend that the accommodation be given them. Near this building is a privy and cook-room for these subordinates; but the cook-room is not used, because different castes cannot cook in the same place. To the north of the hospital is the cook-room for the patients and the quarters for the 2nd class servants. These are very good. There are two wards at some distance from the hospital for the treatment of infectious diseases. There is also an out-door lavatory at a convenient distance from the north end of the hospital. A dead-house is about to be built. I think the mud floor to the hospital objectionable, and would recommend that a wooden one be supplied. Hospital conservancy. The excreta are removed twice a day, or oftener, if necessary, to the filth cart (which stands some distance from the hospital in receptacles, dry earth being placed in the latter as often as is required) in which they are taken to the trench latrines. There is no wall built round the premises. This should be done to keep out cattle and people who have no business there, also to prevent patients leaving without permission. If a wall will not be allowed, an aloe hedge might be planted during the next monsoon. Hospital water-supply. The water is derived from the nearest well which is in the officers' lines, and this is between 800 and 900 yards from the hospital. In my last report I recommended the construction of another well near the hospital, and the Deputy Surgeon-General, Doctor Maitland, concurred in this opinion. It has not yet been commenced, although I believe the Public Works Department is estimat- ing the cost of one on a site recommended by me. Sickness, mortality, and in- validing. 8. During the past year there were 303 admissions, 2 being for cholera, out of an aver- age strength of 613.6. Of these 4 died. Of the fatal cases 2 were from cholera, 1 from pneumonic phthisis, and 1 from bronchitis. The ratio per cent. of admissions to average strength was 47.1. The average daily number of sick was 13.6. The percentage of treated to strength was 60, deaths to strength 0.6, deaths to treated 1.4. Twenty-seven men were sent before the annual invaliding committee at Belgaum, 15 of whom were passed. One of the men was returned to his duty with the remark that "change of air might be tried." This was a case of constitutional syphilis. The man had been one year in hospital at various times during the past two years; and I stated that, in my opinion, he would never be of any use as a soldier. Shortly after the man returned to the regiment, his old syphilitic ulcers began again to trouble him, and he was admitted into hospital, where he remained until a few days ago. In accordance with the recommendation of the annual invaliding committee, Bel- gaum, at my recommendation he has been sent to Bombay to be placed under the medical officer of the Marine Battalion, to be reported upon by that officer at the end of three months; but, in my opinion, to keep such a man in the service is a useless expense to the State.
60 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Principal causes of sickness. 9. From ague there were 61 admissions, most of them yielding to treatment with cin- chonidine, after the usual emetic and purgative on admission. In 3 cases cinchonidine seemed to have no effect, and I was oblig- ed to have recourse to quinine. From rheumatism there were 19 admissions, 2 of them being of the acute form. Only 1 case of primary syphilis and 4 of secondary syphilis were ad- mitted. Diseases of the eye .POONA DIVISTON OF THE ARMY. 61 General health and physique of the men. 14. The health of the regiment has been tolerably good during the year, as will be seen from the following table:62 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. NORTHERN DIVISION. Average strength present during the year 8,937.3 Average daily sick per cent. to the average strength 4.1 Ratio of mortality per cent. to the average strength 0.7 H. M.'s 1st (Grenadier) Regiment N. I. AHMEDABAD.NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 63 Neighbouring villages. There are small villages within two miles all round the camp both on this side of the river and on the other, viz., 1 to the north, 2 to the south, 2 to the east, and 3 to the west; but there is no village near enough to exert any evil influence upon the health of those in the lines or bazaar, supposing it to be in an unsanitary state. Drainage. The natural drainage I consider fairly good; as regards artificial drainage, I wrote in and recommended that the main open drain running down the centre of each street should be deepened and sloped gradually down towards the river, so that the water might run off with greater facility, and that the sub-drains running from the huts towards the main central drain should be carried quite up to it and be regularly well flushed and disinfected. Previously the main drain had not a suffi- cient incline towards the river; indeed, in some cases it sloped in the wrong direction, and the house drains did not extend to the main one. I also recommended that hollows should be filled in. This recommendation was made, because I found that water lodged at certain points. Conservancy and sanitary ar- rangements. 6. The system of conservancy adopted in the regimental lines is that of pucka built latrines (4 in number, viz., 2 for males and 2 for females); all care is taken that they are kept in a clean state: dry earth is thrown down, disinfectants are used, and from frequent personal supervision I am able to testify to their good sanitary condition. As many cases of fever occurred during and after the rains, I made several suggestions; amongst others, that the huts should be white-washed both inside and outside, that moorum should be laid down to make the ground level and so obviate the collection of surface water, that the bathing stones in front of the huts should all be lifted up, as in one instance a cess-pool was formed under one of them close to a hut in which cholera had occurred, and that the floors of the huts should be raised a few inches, with, perhaps, a two brick floor to ensure a dryer state of floor- ing than obtains now in the rainy seasons. The cubic capacity of the huts is enough to allow of this being done without unduly encroaching upon the space. Water-supply. 7. The water-supply is from wells built with pucka walls, and covered in; and although it contains chlorides, they are not in such proportion as to make it unwholesome. It may be described as of good quality, and in sufficient quantity. Food. 8. The quality of the various foods is good, and supplies are abundant, except in the important article of green meat; but prices are high, indeed all grain is dear, and latterly, since the famine commenced, very dear, which to the sepoy, with his not large pay, is a serious point. Considering that the scorbutic taint is so prevalent among the men of this regiment, since they were quartered at Aden, it is a matter for regret that vegetables are not more plentiful and cheaper; there is no public garden, and I think it would be a great health gain if a piece of ground near the lines could be cultivated, so that a better supply of esculents might be forthcoming, and at the same time the men have healthy occupation. Family men certainly do not live well enough, nor do recruits, who are cut rupees 2 for 21 or 22 months on account of their necessaries, and have, therefore, during that period only Rs. 5 or grain compensation to live on, and amongst the Deccanis and Konkanis they are often family men. I may add that 4 bad cases of fever of a very low type among recruits were under treat- ment; the lads were fine young fellows to look at, but perhaps insufficient food may have mpaired their strength. Clothing. 9. As clothing is a very important branch of military hygiene, I venture to offer a few practical remarks on ertain articles of dress. Suitable clothing where soldiers are concerned, means freer use and easier play of the limbs, increased quickness of motion, better health, gain in comfort, and greater efficiency in every way. As the main essential of success in campaigning is the facility of making long and rapid marches, it becomes absolutely necessary that the infantry soldier should be well shod. I proceed, therefore, to make one or two suggestions as to the best method, in my opinion, of protecting the feet, which has been so long a vexed question with those upon whom the clothing of our troops devolves; I do this with all deference, and shall be glad if I can give a useful hint or two. The boot, as at present issued, is of inferior leather, clumsy, too heavy, hard, and spoils by water,64 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. shrunk, and doubled at the toes, with strong elastic let in on each side of the instep. The advantages of this shoe would be lightness, durability, and enhanced comfort; it would not gall,NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 65 treated in the same building. It is expected, however, that the new European hospital will be soon ready, so that the Native one, which has been diverted from its legitimate purpose, may be set free for the reception of the sick of the Native wing. Accomodation and defects. As before remarked, the building was not at all times sufficiently roomy for the accomo- dation of the sick of both regiments. The larger ward, which is allotted to the 1st Regiment, is capable of accommodating 22, and the smaller ward, which is reserved for the wing, 12. There is one small room, which is usually occupied by females or cases requiring isolation. Improvements. The dead-house, which was asked for by my predecessor is now completed. Requirements. A separate building at some distance from the hospital for the isolation and treatment of contagious and infectious cases, and a female ward, are great desiderata. Privies and cook-houses are also required for the hospital assistants. Conservancy. The hospital latrine is conveniently near and well ventilated; at my suggestion it has been partitioned into 5 compartments, the central one having 3 seats, two on either side 2 seats, and the two corner ones, 1 seat each66 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Malignant cholera. On 24th May the first case of malignant cholera in a private was admitted into the hos- pital 1st (Grenadier) Regiment N. I.; the patient was isolated, and all needful sanitary arrangements were made, and precau- tions against its spread adopted, both in the hospital and in the lines; the case recovered. In August another case occurred, which ended fatally, and in September a third, which also died, and it was found necessary on 3rd September to move part of a company into camp; the men, however, were brought in again after a few days, and no more cases occurred. I may mention as a curious fact, for which I am indebted to the Deputy Surgeon-General, that when cholera occurred in the camp it ceased in the city for a time, re-appearing in the latter as it died out in camp. This coincidence was noticed on two occasions. There were 2 cases of choleraic diarrhNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 67 Emphysema. The case of emphysema is a bad one; the man broke down suddenly at the "double," and is now under treatment. Dysentery. Twenty-seven cases were treated, some of them showing very acute symptoms; however, as usually obtains, large doses of ipecacuanha controlled the disease, and all recovered. In 2 cases of tedious convalescence the men were sent away on sick leave. Intussusception of the intestines. This case of intussusception occurred in a regimental bheestee, admitted with pain and tumour in the right iliac region, extending into the umbilical. While drawing water the above symptoms suddenly appeared, and he said he suffered so eighteen years previously. He was treated with castor oil, opium, morphia, gentle manipulations and kneading, warm injections thrown high up; but all was useless, and he sank seven days after. A post-mortem, examination revealed an intussusception of the ileum into the c68 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Resumé of the whole. 20. Looking at the previous history of this regiment, and the present condition of the men, I do not think a prolonged residence in this climate advis- able. The regiment is largely tainted with scurvy. That they are not a healthy-looking corps, has been a subject of frequent comment on the part of those qualified to give an opinion. I have noticed, too, that severe cases either sink rapidly, or, if they rally, convalesce very slowly. The lines are spacious, and well laid out, and. with huts better than at most places, but still the site is old. Malarious fever has prevailed. to a great extent among the men, and cholera, which appears to be an annual scourge, carried. off 2 men in the regiment (and 7 persons in the wing). It may, therefore, be worth considering whether the present site is not unhealthy, and a new one desirable. I have made many sanitary suggestions during the year; amongst others to raise the floors of the huts, to improve surface drainage, to search for and fill up old cess-poolsNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 69 H.M.'s Left Wing, 13th Regiment N. I. AHMEDABAD.70 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Syphilis. Seven cases of primary syphilis occurred, which were suc- cessfully treated by mercurial vapour baths. Scurvy. One case of scurvy was admitted, and was sent away on sick leave. Phthisis pulmonalis. Three cases occurred; 1 proved fatal; he was much ema- ciated, and had been ailing for the last three years; 2 were sent away on sick leave. Neuralgia. Seven cases were treated, of which 1 was invalided; he had frequently suffered from neural- gic pain, having been more or less under treatment for the last eight years. His father and brother died from the same disease. He was treated with hydrate of chloral, chloroform, poppy seeds, oleum cinnamomi, potassæ bromide, but with no marked benefit; and as his health was completely undermined by the attacks, he was invalided. Conjunctivitis. Fourteen cases, treatedwith lead, opium, collyria, and quinine Bronchitis. Seventy-eight cases of bronchitis in long-service men of bad constitution were treated. Indeed after ague this disease was the most frequent cause of admission. Thirteen were invalided, and 5 were sent away on sick leave. Asthma. One case was admitted with functional disorder, and sent away on sick leave. Dysen tery. Nineteen cases were treated, some of these showing very acute symptoms; but large doses of ipecacuanha controlled the disease, and all recovered. One case of tedious convalescence was sent away on sick leave. DiarrhNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 71 as overcrowding occurred during the year. I hope, also, that a building, a little distance off, for infectious cases and a female ward may be sanctioned. Invaliding was heavy, 30 out of 33 taken before the invaliding committee having been pronounced unfit. When small-pox was raging at Bombay I re-vaccinated the whole regiment and wing. I am happy to state that, although the disease reached this place, only 3 cases occurred in the lines, and they recovered. I wish to express my entire approval of the very satisfactory manner in which 3rd class hospital assistant Shaik Ameen has performed his duties during the year. During cholera, and when much sickness was prevalent, he was untiring in his exertions. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL D. WYLLIE, M.D. Health, as tested by treated, was only indifferent, admissions showing considerably in excess of average. But there was little serious sickness, except the occurrence of cholera in June. Bronchitis, however, and rheumatism figure unduly in the returns. Mortality moder- ate. Surroundings fairly good, unless that the sanitary condition of the huts, particularly the lines in which cholera happened, proved unsatisfactory. They have adequate cubage, are com- paratively modern, and had previously been healthy. But they are altogether exceptional in possessing ridge-ventilation, and the frequency of the latter-named ailments would suggest that this may possibly, under certain conditions, be in excess of requirements. Sick accom- modation throughout restricted, and occasionally straitened, as referred to in the report; but the new hospital, Royal Artillery, will now soon be ready, and that of the corps made again available. Re-vaccination was exhaustively carried out among the men, and vaccination in the families. H. M.'s 1st Squadron, 1st Lancers. BARODA.72 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. H. M.NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 73 hazard, and extending over 40 days, gave only from 80 to 90 grains of nitrogen, and 2,050 grains of carbon as the amount consumed daily. The largest diets were composed of 1.74 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. These results are not so satisfactory; an antiseptic remedy does not appear to nullify the malarial poison. In the Practitioner for June 1873, carbolic acid was spoken of (page 394) as being successful in 3 to 7-grain doses; also 3/4 minim injected hypodermically; but the above cases do not seem specially favourable. I have noticed, too, that several of these cases were re-admitted after the interval of from a fortnight to three weeks. The number of cases treated with Eucalyptus globalus have only been five. No. 1, quartan ague: 2 previous attacks, tinct. eucalypt. glob. 1 teaspoonful three times a day; no return. No. 2, quotidian: admission temperature, 104.2; same treatment, no return. No. 3, quotidian: admission tem- perature 97.2; first day 1 teaspoonful, afterwards 2 teaspoonfuls three times a day; fever recur- red three times; then 20 grains quinine for three successive days; the fever recurred twice, and then did not return. No. 4, quotidian: admission temperature 97.1. The treatment as, above for three days, during which the attacks recurred; afterwards quinine for three days in 20, 15, and 20-grain doses, respectively; fever did not return after first dose of quinine. No. 5, quotidian: admission temperature 97.3. Eucalyptus globulus as above for nine days; the attacks recurred every day; on the tenth 20 grains quinine were given; no recurrence of fever. The cold baths were used in 2 cases of a more remittent than intermittent type, and owing to strong objection on the part of the patients they were not continued. The tem- perature of the baths could not be altered conveniently to the degree required as in cold climates: thus 85° to 81° here the coldest that they could be made; the patients were immersed at a temperature of from 98° to 100°, and then the baths cooled as low as possible. The temperature ran down at once from well-marked pyrexia (104NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 75 Water-supply. 4. The water-supply is from wells. It is of fair quality and sufficient in quantity, except during the hot months, when some of the wells fail in the supply. Food. 5. The meat is indifferent in quality. Country vege- tables have been abundant and cheap this year. Duties and their effect on health. 6. The duties have not been heavy. The average num- ber of nights in bed 6¾. Exercise, amusement, and oc- cupation. 7. The men are exercised at athletic sports. There is a "talimkhana" attached to the lines. Some of the sepoys are occupied in carpentering, shoe-making, and tailoring. Lock-up rooms and cells. 8. The lock-up rooms and cells are kept clean and well ventilated. Marches. 9. There were no marches during the year. Over-crowding. 10. There is no over-crowding in the hospital, except after the rains, when the increas- ed number of sick were obliged to be accommodated in the two verandahs. Accommodation and defects. A bath-room, dead-house, and a contagious ward are required. Conservancy. The latrines, which are distant 112 yards from the hospital, are kept clean and in good order. The iron pans in use are emptied twice daily, and their contents are carried away to some distance from camp. Sickness, mortality, and invaliding. 11. The following tabular statement shows the number of admissions to hospital, deaths, and the average strength during the past two years:76 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Resumé of the whole. 19. On the whole there has been less sickness than last year, but with new lines for the men the number of admissions to hospital would decrease. Education of medical pupil. 20. The native medical pupil who has lately joined the regiment is making satisfactory progress. He is daily instruc- ted in materia medica and dispensing. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL D. WYLLIE, M.D. Health was better than in previous year, and ague less notable than ordinary. Syphilis also shows a large decrease. Unless in autumn there was no pressure on hospital accom- modation. Lines old, defective, and in poor repair: too much overshadowed by trees for due perflation. This, it appears by the medical officer's report, has since been remedied. Trench latrines in use, but objectionably near to hospital, and apt to prove a nuisance when winds are northerly. Hospital site badNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 77 Marches. 11. The 2nd Squadron marched for Deesa on the 17th January, having been relieved by the 1st Squadron; the 3rd Squadron arrived from Deesa on the 13th November and relieved the 1st Squadron, which marched for Deesa on the 15th November. Hospital and its surroundings. 12. The hospital, which also accommodates No. 1 Mountain Battery and a Wing of the 7th Regiment N. I., together with the Staff, is a comfort- able airy building on a good open site; no alterations have been made in it during the year. The accommodation for the hospital assistant is of an inferior description, and that for the 2nd class servants is merely an open pendal. The hospital latrine should be removed. from its present site; the walls of the building and the ground are impregnated with impurities, and it is in close proximity to the well, which, as it usually contains a fair supply of good water, is much frequented by those living near it. A station dead-house has been erected during the year near the hospital. Conservancy. The conservancy is as well attended to as possible. More frequent visits of the night-soil cart would be desirable. Hospital water-supply. The water-supply is obtained from a well close by; the supply is fair at present, and the quality good; as has been already mentioned, it is exposed to the danger of contamination from the proximity of the hospital latrine. Sickness and mortality, &c. In- validing. 13. During the past year the average strength of the squadron was 145, the admis- sions were 98, giving, with 3 remaining from the previous year, a total treated of 101: of whom 1 died, 91 were discharged to duty, 4 were otherwise discharged, 2 were transferred to other hospitals, and 3 remained under treatment at the end of the year. Of the 4 otherwise discharged, 1 obtained sick leave, 1 was entered under another heading, 2 were sent before the invaliding committee; the 2 transferred to other hospitals belonged to the 2nd. Squadron, and marched with it to Deesa. Thedaily average number of sick was 3.97 Percentage of treated to strength... 69.65 Deaths to strength... .69 Deaths to treated... .99 showing a decrease in the percentage of treated to strength ot 15.28 as compared with last year. One death occurred in the month of February from pneumonia; the man, an emaciated subject, was admitted with rheumatism with cardiac complications; pneumonia supervened and carried him off. Febricula gave 2 admissions, and ague 30, against 26 of the former and 16 of the latter in 187578 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Resumé of the whole. 19. The 1st Squadron was relieved by the 3rd Squadron in November. The whole squadron has been stationed at Rájkot during the year. The amount of sickness has been below that of last year. One case of cholera occurred amongst the fighting men, in May; the man recovered. Six cases with 4 deaths occurred amongst the followers. One death from pneumonia took place in hospital. The lines are in good order, and sanitation as well attended as was possible. The hospital accommodation has been ample. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL D. WYLLIE, M.D. Sickness was very moderate, and materially less than in previous year. Cholera appear- ed in the lines at the close of April, and the squadron was promptly moved out of canton- ments, remaining under canvas till May 6th. Only 1 sowar was attacked, but there were 4 deaths among followers. The huts were meanwhile thoroughly cleansed and purified. The lines are in good order, have much more than average room, and their sanitation is properly attended to. Among defects it is complained that there is some difficulty respecting the efficient conservancy of the permanent latrines which are in use, as referred to by the medi- cal officer, and that the water-supply is apt to prove short in summer when the wells are mostly very low. Hospital has good and sufficient accommodation, which is shared by the sick of the head-quarters wing, 7th Regiment, N. I., No. 1 Mountain Battery, and Staff. The position of its latrine within some 20 paces of the well is unquestionably objectionable,NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 79 Accommodation and defects. There is accommodation for six beds for the battery in the hospital, and the verandah could be utilized, if necessary; no improvements have been carried out in the building during the year. I have no recom- mendation to make regarding the building itself, but the latrine should be removed to a greater distance from the well, and the quarters for the hospital assistant might be improv- ed, and better accommodation supplied for tha 2nd class servants. Conservancy. The conservancy is attended to as well as possible, but there is sometimes irregularity in the latrine accumulations being removed, in consequence of the amount of work required to be done by the one cart. Hospital water-supply. The water is obtained from a well close to the hospital; the water is good, and the supply, as a rule, sufficient; but the well is open to contamina- tion from the proximity of the hospital latrine. Sickness, mortality, and inva- liding. 9.The return for the past year shows that, with an average strength of 120, there were 84 admissions, being the total treated during the year, there being none remaining from last year: of this number 1 died, 78 were discharged to duty, 2 were otherwise discharged, and 3 remained in hospital at the close of the year. The average daily number of sick 3.0 Percentage of treated to strength 70.00 deaths to strength .83 deaths to treated 1.19 showing a slight decrease as compared with 1875. Ague gave 24 admissions, against 32 last year. No cases are entered under febricula, for which there were 19 admissions last year. There was one case of remittent fever, which recovered. A case of cholera recovered. Rheumatic affections gave 11 cases, one of which was of gonorrh80 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. H. M.NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 81 43 entered in the register during October were Burda Chokey men, who returned to head- quarters greatly debilitated by malaria. In several of these cases diagnosed as ague, scor- butic symptoms were apparent. There were 11 admissions in October and 9 in November, and 3 in December, of scurvy, chiefly from the Burda Chokey Detachment. The ipecacuanha treatment proved successful in every case of dysentery. As the medical officer in charge of the regiment for the greater portion of the year has not as yet supplied me with a report of the hospital-work carried. on during his tenure of office, I cannot enter fully or to my satis- faction into the history, &c., of the diseases treated by him. Twenty-four men were invalided during the year, principally on account of old age and length of service; 1 was discharged with a gratuity, and I was dismissed by court-martial. Principal causes of sickness. 14. The chief causes of ague are exposure to wet, damps and malaria, which is suppos- ed to exist especially at the end of the rainy season. Ague at Burda Chokey is said to be brought on by drinking well-waters, which, during and immediately after the rains, contain a peculiar brownish oily liquid. The cause of lung diseases and bowel complaints may be traced to the constant and sudden changes of temperature. Colic is frequently produced by the consumption of half-baked wheat and bájri cakes. The want of a sufficient supply of fresh meat and vegetables at Burda Chokey has helped to increase the number of scurvy cases. Principal causes of mortality. 15. One death from compound fracture of the vault of the skull without depression, caused accidentally by a fall into a deep well. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 16. There were 19 successful cases of vaccination. No cases were re-vaccinated during the year. General health and physique of the men. 17. General health and physique of the men, No. 8 Com- pany excepted, are good. Special observations. 18. The Burda Chokey Detachment (No. 8 Company) consisting of 86 men, suffered severely during their stay at that very unhealthy station from fever and scurvy. Very few of these have regained their former stamina and fitness for work, their constitutions having been completely undermined by malaria and scurvy. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL D. WYLLIE, M.D. The sick were materially in excess of average, ague and scorbutus figuring unduly mostly referrible to detachment duty at the very malarious post of Burda Chokey82 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. water is allowed to run. The native officersNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 83 Febricula and ague gave, respectively, 17 and 159 admissions, against 6 and 204 in the previous year; remittent fever gave 4 admissions, 2 of which terminated fatally, against 2 cases only in 1875. Cholera gave 3 admissions, with 2 deaths; there were no cases in the previous year. Rheumatic affections gave 64 admissions, against 53 in 1875. Syphilis shows an increase of 3 cases. Scurvy gave 29 cases, against 5 in the previous year. Conjunc- tivitis gave 11 admissions only, against 29 last year. Disease of the respiratory organs gave 48 admissions, of which 1 case of pneumonic phthisis terminated fatally, against 20 cases, of which 2 of pneumonic phthisis and 1 of pleurisy died, in the previous year. There were 29 admissions for dysentery, being 12 more than last year. Diarrh84 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL D. WYLLIE, M.D. Scorbutus is of common occurrence in the detachments that have served at Burda Chokey and Dwárka, and particularly at the former. Thus a good many of the men are tainted, and 30 cases required hospital relief, while the wing 7th Regiment N. I. had relatively more; the two contributing nearly double the number of cases that occurred in the rest of the native force within this circle. Otherwise, health was tolerably good, and the only unusual incident was the occurrence of cholera in summer, from which there were 2 deaths. The lines, of recent construction, are the best I have seen; and collateral conditions are all sani- tarily favourable, unless that here, as at Bhuj and in the stations of the Mhow command, vegetables are scarce and dear. Ample hospital accommodation; but the building is not in good repair, and quarters for establishment are very defective and insufficient, a shed open on all sides being all that is provided for 2nd class servants. Iron ridge-ventilators have been added during the year. Conservancy scarcely so efficient as it should be, the medical officer remarking that there is occasionally some delay and difficulty in getting the filth receptacles emptied, the conservancy cart having more work to do than it can well perform. The same complaint of delay has from time to time been made by his predecessors. (In this report no mention of the numbers of treated, died, &c., of the detachment station- ed at Burda Chokey from 1st January to 9th March 1876, is made.) H. M.'s 11th Regiment N. I. BHUJ.NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 85 Food. 8. The supply of grain has been fair, and the quality good, though little rain fell in the vicinity of Bhuj. The fall in other parts was ample to raise fair crops; the average amount of grain compensation for the last twelve months has been Rs. 3-13-4 against Rs.3-14-2 for the same period in 1875. The supply of vegetables has, as usual, been scanty, and the variety limited: fresh fruits are, as a rule, not obtainable by the men. Duties. 9. The duties of the men have been light, not sufficient to harass them at all; the parades just afford healthy exercise. Exercise, amusement, and occu- pation. 10. The gymnasium was rather more patronized than last year, a stimulus being afforded by prizes being subscribed for amongst the officers, at the sug- gestion of the commanding officer. The men have no occupa- tion beyond their duties and occasionally repairing the lines, butts, &c. There is not sufficient inducement to practise any trade; some extra occupation was afforded this year in the workshop, during the process of rebrowning the rifles. Hospital and its surroundings. 11. The hospital and attached buildings have been thoroughly repaired during the year. The tiles were removed and repaired, and new matting placed under the tiles. No alterations or additions have been made. The building affords accommodation for 32 beds without overcrowding, and with the exception of a few days during the past month, when fever was prevalent, that has been found ample. The ventilation of the building is amply provided for by side doors and windows and three large roof-ventilators. The conservancy is attended to by two sweepers, one of whom is always present. The conservancy cart attends daily. There are two bhees- ties who bring drinking-water from a well about ¾ of a mile distant. A well, 120 paces to the rear of the hospital, supplies ablution water. The water is at a distance of about 45 feet from the surface, and the well at present contains 10 ft. 6 in. of water. A meteorological observatory having been lately sanctioned for Bhuj, a shed has just been erected in front of the hospital for the instruments; it will in no way interfere with the ventilation of the building. Sickness, mortality, and invalid- ing. 12. During the past 12 months 485 cases have been admitted making, with 14 remain- ing from last year, a total treated of 499; of these 452 have returned to duty, 1 went on furlough, 2 on sick leave, 10 were sent before invaliding committee, and 2 died. The daily aver- age number of sick has been 19.2. The percentage of treated to strength, 73.59; of deaths to treated, 0.40. One case of chronic diarrh86 A SKETCH OP THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Influence of rainfall. 16. The rain fall during the past year (5 inches 66 cents.) does not appear to have influ- enced the men's health, unless thelast fall has caused the recent fever. Epidemics. 17. Cholera was more or less prevalent in various parts of the country from January to September. Some cases of hooping cough were met with in the lines and suddur, during the hot season. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 18. As in former years, all Kunbi recruits on joining, and families on arriving from their country, are examined, and all doubtful cases re-vaccinated. Vaccination is steadily carried on amongst the children born in the lines. The results obtained during the past 12 months are as follows:NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 87 Hospital. 3. No alteration since 1874; buildings and arrangements leave nothing to be desired. Sickness, mortality, and invalid- ing. 4. The great cause of inefficiency was malarial fever, of which 47 admissions were cases of ague and 2 of the remittent type. The cases of remittent were characterized by an intense hot stage, violent headache, severe gastric irritation followed by great depression of the nervous and ganglionic systems. In one case delirium set in, which under careful treatment soon passed off. Both were discharged to duty. These were 2 cases of measles of the variety "morbilli mitiores." In one case bronchitis supervened, but after a few days' treatment convalescence was established. There were 10 cases of rheumatism, bron- chitis 6, dysentery 4, colic 21, hæmorrhoids 5, jaundice 1, gonorrh88 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. H. M.89 NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. The principal diseases in the order of frequency of admission were90 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Space. Is sufficient. Ventilation. Is only such as can take place through the doors and roofs. Bazaar. A new regimental bazaar has lately been built to the south of the lines, and the old one, which consisted of a few very dilapidated-looking huts removed, as it was situated exactly in front of the quarter-guard of the 25th Regiment. The effect of this is to open up the whole front of the lines, and is a decid- ed improvement. Drainage. The lines being situated on the northern and eastern slopes of a slight ridge, allows of free drainage. The soil, however, as stated above, is black and, therefore, somewhat retentive of moisture in the rains. Conservancy and sanitary ar- rangements. 2. The system of trench latrines is in use for the sepoys. The trenches are used for the greater part of the year; but during the rains permanent latrines are used, a crop of grain being grown on the trench ground, the filth being at this time carted away and deposit- ed in large trenches with the rest of the night-soil of the station. Water-supply. 3. Is derived from wells occurring at short intervals all round the lines and throughout the station. The quality, so far as I can judge, is good, and the quantity sufficient. I am given to understand that a scheme for collecting and storing water in the hills a few miles to the south-west of Mhow, for the supply of the whole cantonment, has been sanctioned by Government; and I believe that preliminary steps in the undertaking have already commenced. This scheme, it is thought, will do away with all present imperfections in the water-supply. Food. 4. The several articles of a sepoy's diet are obtainable in the Mhow bazaar, of good quality and quantity. The sepoy gets on an average about Rs. 1-1-4 grain compensation every month. Clothing. 5. The boots are a general source of complaint, and some change is necessary that would lessen or do away with the large amount of inefficiency caused by injuries to the feet from ill-fitting boots. Duties. 6. The ordinary parades, guards, and occasional escort duty. They have exercised no bad effect on the health of the men. Exercise, amusement, and occu- pation. 7. The time not employed on duty is by the majority of the sepoys spent in idleness. A few employ themselves in trades. There is a horizontal bar upon which some men are very fair performers; these men also indulge in other athletic exercises, such as wrestling and club exercise. Lock-up rooms and cells. 8. There are two cells, 10 feet by 10 feet square and 12 feet high. They are well ventilated, but are very hot during the day-time in the hot weather. Marches. 9. During January the Right Wing was on the march from Nusseerabad: nothing of importance occurred. On 12th July the Left Wing marched to Indore. Since that time, owing to the fact of there being no range at Indore, the wing has been marched in by companies for ball practice. This has tended to increase the number of cases of foot-soreness. Hospital and its surroundings. 10. The regimental hospital is a large building, strongly built with arched roofs. It is well adapted for a hospital for native troops. There is an open space all round the building. There is a separate con- tagious diseases hospital about 150 yards to the north-east of the main building. Ventilation. Is free and satisfactory by the doors, and by openings in the roof. Overcrowding. On no occasion has there been any overcrowding. Accommodation and defects. The accommodation is ample, consisting of two large wards placed side by side, with small rooms at the ends of each suitable for cases requiring quiet. There are two verandahs. The one to the east is blue-washed on the inside and is used for cases of eye diseases. At the four corners of the building are small rooms used as office, dispensary, store-room and bath-room: all are complete in their arrangements. The contagious diseases hospital consists of two wards.
91 NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. Improvements. The dead-house has been much improved during the year by being floored with asphalt, and by having a sink for water built, and by being furnished with a leaden-topped table for dissections. The hospital is in a satisfactory state and may be said to be complete. Conservancy. There are two latrines in the hospital compound, one for the use of the patients and the other for the hospital staff and their families. The pans are emptied into closed receptacles three times daily, and carted away and buried at night. Hospital water. Is obtained from a well in the hospital compound. For the greater part of the year there is a sufficient quantity; but during the hot weather the level of the water is very low, there being only a few inches in the well. Sickness, mortality, and invalid- ing. 11. Total treated 714, of whom 17 remained over from last year; died in hospital, 4; invalidid, 46; discharged by court-martial, 2; discharged at their own request, 1; deserted, 2. Of the causes of admission the following are the chief:92 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Ulcer gave 21 admissions; 18 were cured and 3 remained. For boil there were 24 admissions: all recovered. Injuries. Under this head there were 109 admissions; 3 remained from last year, making the total treated 112. Of these 109 returned to duty, 1 was discharged otherwise, and 2 remain for treatment. Of these 112 injuries no less than 78 were returned as contusions of the lower extremity,NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 93 The dose in nearly every case was grains 10, given during the intermission. The average amount administered in each case was 47.75 grains. The largest amount given to any one case was 140 grains; the smallest, 15 grains (this was the case of a recruit boy). The average number of days in hospital was 4.75 days. The longest stay in hospital was 15 days; the shortest, 2 days. The patients in all, except 11 cases, were sent back to their duty cured. In 4 cases the drug failed to make any impression upon the disease (in one case during three days, in the second during four days, in the third during ten days, in the fourth during five days) quinine being afterwards administered with satisfactory results. In the other 7 cases not sent back to duty the fever was cured, but the patients were retained in hospital; 3 for anæmia and debility were treated with tonics, 1 for lumbago, 1 for inflammation of the ear not caused by the cinchonidine having existed previously, 1 for chronic bronchitis, and 1 for diarrh94 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Locality or designation of the well. Depth of water. Date and hour of measurement. Distance of sub-soil water from surface. Rainfall since last measurement. Admissions from ague during each month. Regimental Well No.3, outside the Lines and about 100 yards from them. Ft. In. Ft. In. In. C. 11 6 15th of January 1876, 5 A.M. 26 6 ...... 2 10 6 " February" " 27 0 ...... 8 9 0 " March" " 29 0 ...... 2 8 0 " April" " 30 0 ...... 23 5 6 " May" " 32 6 ...... 23 5 0 " June" " 33 0 1 4 27 4 6 " July" " 33 6 7 57 31 4 6 " August" " 33 6 9 55 26 5 0 " September" " 33 0 10 24 38 11 6 " October" " 26 6 0 10 33 11 6 " November" " 26 6 ...... 27 10 0 " December" " 28 0 ...... 13 The lines, &c. 4. These are situated at the northern end of the camp. The site is good. On the whole the huts have not been in good repair during the year. Walls occasionally fell during wet weather. One pendall was recently vacated because the central wall was cracked and dangerous. The huts are low and single- tiled, and built of mud and sunburnt bricks, without plinths, and on black soil. Hence during the rains the walls and floor get very damp. The roofs are not very waterproof, and so there is an additional source of dampness. Cubic space in each hut is barely enough. Ventilation is defective, the door and the crevices in the roof being the only inlets and outlets for the air. There is very little light in the huts, and this circumstance cannot be without some effect on the health of the men. The means of disposing of the foul water from the hut is defective; all the dirty water is thrown out round about the hut; the per- manent latrine, which is opened only during the rains, being too far from the lines, and there being a general dislike to the trench system. Conservancy, &c. 5. From the beginning of the year up to the 1st of August the trench system of latrines was in use. I have very little experience to say much of its merits or demerits; but I submit it as my impression that it cannot be quite safe, unless the following conditions are fulfilled:NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 95 Food, &c. 7. At the regimental bazaar different kinds of grain, indifferent mutton, and indifferent common variety of vegetables were sold. The demand was little, and so the supply was very limited. The sepoy preferred, ex- cept in cases of emergency, to buy his provisions in the sudder bazaar, where he had a greater variety of them to select from, and greater scope for the exercise of his peculiarly well-de- veloped faculty of buying them at the cheapest possible rates, totally regardless of their quality and altogether mindful of their quantity. As obtained from the sudder bazaar, the food was of good quality, and (except for a period of one or two months; when the famine in the Decean exercised its injurious influence on the market) could be had moderately cheap. Vegetables were rather scarce and dear. Clothing. 8. Most of the cases entered as "contusion " were cases of shoe-bite. In a few cases they were due to neglect in keeping the boots well greased and soft; in others to the bad make of the boot; but in most cases I believe they were due to the necessary amount of friction which the skin in place of the sock had to bear. Hence, I think nothing short of supplying the sepoy with coarse and cheap socks and well-made English ammunition boots could prevent the great disability caused by shoe-bite. Exercise, amusement, &c. 9. There are no gymnasia, reading nor recreation rooms in connection with the regi- ment. The officers have been recently thinking of having some parallel bars put up for the men. They occasionally play at cricket. Lock-up rooms and cells. 10. There are two cells, and they are in a good sanitary condition. Marches. 11. The left half battalion marched from Indore to Mhow, and a detachment of two companies marched from Mhow to Mehidpore during the year. Nothing unusual happened on the line of march or otherwise to call for any remarks. Hospital. 12. No changes have been made in the hospital buildings during the year, save sundry repairs to the roof and windows, and whitewashing. The ventilation was, in fact, too good; so much so, that I was inclined to attribute not a few intercurrent attacks of lung and bowel complaints that occurred in cases admitted from other diseases, to the unpleasantly perceptible movement of the cold air in the wards during the rains and the cold weather; and that I was compelled to remove the bad cases to an isolated room at the back of the hospital, where alone I could regulate the temperature and movement of the air to the requirements of the patient. The hospital assistant's quarters, on the other hand, are defective in ventilation. There was no overcrowd- ing in hospital; the accommodation was ample, the verandah space being taken into consider- ation. The dead-house had a sink and a trough added to it, and the floor was made of asphalte. An impervious leaden or other covering is required for the dead-house table to prevent its getting impregnated with organic matters by soakage. A separate ward to treat eye cases, with appliances to darken it, is very much wanted. Filters are very much needed in hospital, at least for purifying the water wherewith the medicines are made. The cook- house is kept nice and clean. The hospital latrine is kept clean and well disinfected by McDougal's powder and carbolic acid, and works well. The water-supply for the hospital was derived from one of the best regimental wells. The water was brought by bheesties, whose mussaks were carefully looked after as to their cleanliness. Sickness, mortality, and invaliding. 13. The improvement in the health of the regiment, alluded to by Dr. Heffernan in his report for 1875, is still kept up, I am happy to say. The aver- age strength of the corps during the year amounted to 496; the total number of admissions into hospital is 722; the total number treated is 732; the daily average of sick is 26.30; the proportion of sick to strength per cent. 5.9; the proportion of admissions to strength per cent., 145.57; the proportion of treated to strength per cent., 147.58; the percentage of deaths to strength,.20; the percentage of deaths to treated,.14. Malarious fevers. These stand prëeminently as the great cause of sickness and the cachexia resulting there- from that of invaliding. There were 253 admissions from ague, 17 from simple continuous fever, and 4 from remit- tent fever. The year before,96 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Most of these cases were complicated with bronchitis. Often, after the fever had left the patient, the bronchitis continued and gave rise to emphysema, as in many of the cases invalid- ed. I often noticed a regular alternation of dysentery with ague, the fit of the latter being replaced by an attack of the former. The 4 cases of remittent fever were all complicated with severe bronchitis. In all these the severe gastric irritability was most painful to witness. The only case of death that occurred in hospital was a case of remittent fever complicated with extensive bronchitis. The patient, a naik, when admitted was very much emaciated and weak, according to his account, from having taken some native medicine from a quack. The fever, the headache, and the incessant vomiting were so severe, that in spite of stimulants both internal and external, enemas, &c., he had not the power to expel the increased and morbid secretions in his bronchi, and he died half exhausted, half suffocated. Rheumatic affections. Twenty-four cases of chronic rheumatism, 1 of gonorrhNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 97 Diseases of the spleen. Three cases of splenitis; 1 was invalided and 2 were dis- charged. Eight admissions. Guineaworm. All were Deccan Mahrattas, some of whom had recently been to the Deccan on leave, where they contracted the disease and brought it here. Injuries. Seventy-nine cases of contusion, of which most were from shoe-bite; I case of sprain of the shoulder-joint; 6 cases of sprain of the knee; 2 punishment cases; 1 synovitis; and 1 periostitis. All discharged cured, except 2 cases of shoe-bite which are now in hospital. Five cases of injuries from thorns were cured. Burns and scalds furnished 5 cases, all cured. Mortality. One death occurred in hospital, 1 in the lines, and 2 out of Mhow in cases sent on sick leave.98 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. disinfected in the usual way. The members of their families are protected. There were 4 admissions from chicken-pox during the year. These cases were all protected by vaccina- tion. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 19. This was carefully done. Thirty-six cases of primary vaccination, of which 32 were successful and 4 unsuccessful. Twenty-three cases of re-vacci- nation, of which 6 were successful and 17 unsuccessful. The recruits could not be spared from ball practice, for vaccination, until very recently. Most of them are now fully protected, as are all the sepoys at head-quarters. General health, &c., &c. 20. The general health of the men has been, on the whole, good. The recruits were tolerably well made, and possessed the requisite amount of intelligence; but I confess I did not admire their physique. They are principally Konkani Mahrattas and Mahomedans from the Bombay side of India. Treatment of disease when spe- cial. 21. Cinchonidine was tried by me in this hospital. It seemed to me to be useful in mild cases and in 1st or 2nd attacks of quotidian ague if given in large doses; but I hardly think it can even replace quinine in the treatment of malarious fevers. Having seen the almost magical powers of the nitrite of amyl in cases of angina pectoris, asthma, and in vaso- motor disturbances in women suffering from uterine disease, and having heard that a medical officer of the British Army had been trying the drug in ague with great success, I was in- duced to give it a trial in the latter disease. I have given it in the cold stage in doses of from 1 to 3 minims held on sugar. In all the cases this stage, which, there was reason to believe, would have lasted for upwards of an hour, was cut short within 10 minutes, in most cases within 4 minutes; the patient experiencing the grateful sensation of warmth, throwing off his numerous bed-clothes, and perspiring pretty freely. The subjects chosen for experi- ment were free from heart disease or arterial degeneration. Beyond flushing of the face and quickening of the pulse nothing occurred to cause the slightest anxiety. The temperature was at first raised a little, but subsequently lowered by the drug. In only two cases out of several so treated was the disease cut short and the patients discharged. In all the rest the cold stage was cut short, and the other stages subdued, but the fits recurred. Hence the amyl administered internally only relieved a symptom, and so far proved itself a valuable drug. I have not given yet the inhalation a trial in ague. It and the ipecacuanha-wine spray were found useful in the dyspnNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 99 Education of medical pupils, &c. 23. The medical pupils had instruction imparted to them, whenever they were free from ball practice and other duties, in arithmetic, elementary anatomy, materia medica, and in the English language. As cases occurred in hospital which were considered fit for clinical demonstration, they were taught medicine and surgery at the bed-side. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL D. WYLLIE, M.D. There is little room for comparison between the past and previous year, for the aggregates of admissions to treated closely correspond; average health was fairly maintained, and the only notable features are relative excess in bowel complaints and increase in ague, the latter explained by decrease under continued fever. Lines much in the same unsatisfactory state as before, and there is the same common complaint of dampness in the rains from want of plinths, and resulting predisposition to disease. Remedy is perhaps more called for here than at Deesa or Baroda, in so far as at no other station are streets so constructed and con- fined, and perflation concurrently so imperfect. In any reconstruction permanent latrines should be located within reasonable distance; at present they are so inconveniently far as to be practically unavailable for families after dark,100 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. rainy season is full of water, and for some time after that season has terminated it con- tains stagnant water. The supply is plentiful. There are no means of making any analysis either at the hospital or in the station. Many of the men bring their drinking water from the bazaar. Food. 6. This is abundant and good, but remarkably dear. All kinds of vegetables are far too expensive for the men to purchase them, and as a result most of them when admitted into hospital are scorbutic. The following were the average prices of grain pounds per rupee for the past year:NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 101 Sickness and mortality and in- validing. The following are the diseases that occurred in both wings during the year:102 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL D. WYLLIE, M.D. The station was healthier than in previous year. Bowel complaints still show unduly; but under other heads the admissions were moderate, and comparatively few of the cases were serious. There was no mortality. Line accommodation indifferent; but other condi- tions generally favourable to health, excepting that natural drainage is defective, and that storm-waters lodge on the adjacent ground, as its fissured appearance sufficiently indicates. Flatness of surface, however, renders remedy difficult; vegetables are scarce, and indications of incipient scorbutus are noted as not infrequent. Hospital, inspected December 9th; its ac- commodation suitable, although limited, but, saving some crowding in autumn, hitherto adequate; establishment and equipment complete; conservancy efficient. H. M.'s 10th Regiment N. L. I. MEHIDPORE.NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 103 Duties and their effect upon health. 8. The duties at Mehidpore were moderate and not otherwise than beneficial. Those at Neemuch were rather more than usual and more trying, owing to the absence of the other wing and another regiment from the station. The average number of nights in bed while at Mehidpore was 4½. The average at Neemuch was 2½. The average for the whole 41/6. Exercise, amusements, and occu- pations. 9. The amusements have been few during the year, the men apparently being so weakened from effects of the climate of Mehidpore as to feel little inclination for exercise. The usual trades of shoe-making, tailoring, lithographing, bookbinding, carpentery, &c., have been carried out, and as usual those having trades being excused guard duties but not the usual parades. Marches. 10. The only movements which took place during the year were the relief of the head- quarters wing by companies from Agar. The head-quarters marched from Mehidpore on the 28th of October, and reached Neemuch on the morning of the 7th November. Hospital and its surroundings. 11. At Mehidpore these buildings remain as given in former report; another building, accommodating 8 patients, in a centre ward, with 4 small rooms for one patient each, was added during the year, and a conta- gious disease ward for 3 patients, with latrine complete, was being erected; a bath-room and dead-house are still required at Neemuch. The hospital accommodation generally is good, as used by the 24th N. I., and no change has been made since last report, with the exception of a modification of the floor-ventilators (originally planned for Europeans) being provided with boarded doors to regulate the draught, which for native troops was found at times, and especially in the cold weather, excessive. Ventilation. The want of air, light, and adequate ventilation, are much felt in the hospitals at Mehidpore, as has already been suggested. The ventilation of the hospital, at this station, is in every respect satisfactory, particularly since the floor-ventilators, previously alluded to, have been introduced since the arrival of the regiment. Overcrowding. At Mehidpore overcrowding, due to want of space, has been frequently unavoidable both during and after the rains, owing to an increase of sick, many of the patients having been accommodated in the veran- dahs, which were fitted with chicks and mat-frames for the occasion. The additional new ward has, to some extent, relieved the overcrowding; but the accommodation is still insuffi- cient, especially on occasions of much sickness, when the men in excess had sometimes to be treated both in their lines and verandahs of the hospital. At Neemuch no overcrowding whatever has occurred, for the accommodation was adequate, as far as it refers to the strength present at head-quarters; probably when the regiment is all together, the other block adjoining may be required. It is now used by the regiment as a school-room, tai- lors' and band-room. Accommodation and defects. The hospital accommodation has been so far satisfactory with the exception of defects at Mehidpore, already mentioned. Since arrival here a consi- derable improvement has been effected, in the ventilation of the wards, by the addition of boarded doors fixed to the entrance outlets of the lateral floor- ventilators, which are now so adjusted that, by closing or opening, the draught is moderated or accelerated through the wards almost at pleasure. During the cold weather these venti- lators have been found by me too uncomfortable and overdraughty for native troops, and being now somewhat modified are kept, as a rule, constantly closed, especially at night and during the early morning. A contagious disease ward and a dead-house are much requir- ed here and have been recommended. Quarters complete for the 1st and 2nd class hospital assistants and medical pupils; that for the former is deficient chiefly in a bath-room, but for the latter there seems no accommodation whatever, as these boys are obliged to live in the lines, far away and inconveniently removed from their duties. Conservancy. With the exception, at Mehidpore, of the latrine trenches, which were too close, having been removed to a more reasonable distance from the lines, no change has taken place at either station, and under this head all remains in statu quo. Hospital water-supply. The hospital water-supply remains the same as given in last year's report for both stations, respectively; that at Mehidpore is very defective both as to quantity and quality. This was already unfa- vourably reported upon by the Chemical Analyser to Government, and in the hot weather the dipping-wells do not contain more than a foot or two of water, and that either brackish
104 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. or of most indifferent quality. During the period the river water is preferably taken and considered more potable and of better quality, though doubtless liable to considerable sources of contamination, from the number of towns, villages, and herds of cattle situated or encamp- ed, at that period, along its fertile banks. The water-supply at Neemuch is chiefly from wells; it is generally abundant, (except during seasons of drought, which are rare,) and of good quality. Sickness, mortality, and inva- liding. 12. From the accompanying table will be seen much of what is required to be given briefly under this head:NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 105 readily recover health, vigor and stamina in a climate such as Neemuch. I am of opinion, that the troops, after being quartered for two years at Mehidpore, should equally with those from Aden be sent to a good, healthy and non-malarious station. I would, therefore, again strongly recommend that no troops, in future, be allowed to remain beyond two years, under any consideration, in that (more especially for natives) highly malarious locality, which, despite every sanitary effort made in the direction of general surface drainage, roads, lines, food, water, removal of over vegetation, &c., it must be said continues still a very focus and hotbed of malarial disease; and I would respectfully add, that should Govern- ment feel it requisite to retain the station as a permanency, that the present lines should, without hesitation, be removed to a better chosen and more elevated site, adjoining the old Cavalry lines, which in every respect seem comparatively good, healthy, and more eligible for a camp, and where open, raised, and healthy ground is available, with deep and good wells already provided, the water of which seems to be both good, potable and much more abun- dant than that of the lines. On this site a few of the Irregular Cavalry are always stationed, and I find they seldom or never complain of fever, and seem to enjoy and speak highly of the salubrity of the place comparatively with that of the present low-lying Infantry lines, situated close to and between the main nullah and river Seepra, which, during heavy rains, is liable to overflow, swamping the parade-ground, lines, and officers' quarters. This year, the married people and families had to vacate the lines, as a precautionary measure, and seek, by boats, a hasty shelter outside the cantonment or elsewhere. The general total number of cases treated during the past year was 1,096; of these 22 remained from the year 1875. 1,074 were admitted; 3 died, 1,012 were discharged to duty, 34 were discharged in column "otherwise," 17 were transferred to Agar in February and March with the relieving detachment, and 30 were remaining in hospital at the close of the year. Of the 34 men discharged "otherwise," 18 were hospital cases invalided, 8 were sent on sick certificate, and 8 men were detained in hospital at Mehidpore, being unable to march, viz., 4 ague, 1 remittent fever, 2 ulcers, 1 lumbago; these latter have since rejoined. Besides the above, there were 4 cases of minor surgical operations, viz., one reduction of in- guinal hernia and the radical cure of hydrocele; these 4 cases occurred to 2 individuals oper- ated on twice in succession. The largest number of admissions and treated, as usual, appears under the head of general diseases, especially ague 720 and remittent fever 14, giving a ratio of 194 per cent of treated to average strength. Nine cases of chicken-pox are recorded, viz., 7 in April and 2 in June, with 21 cases of mumps occurring chiefly both during and after S. W. monsoons, and due, in a great measure, to the depressing effects of climate with cold, damp, and general debility combined; 16 cases of rheumatism, of which 3 were acute, caused in the rains by cold, damp, and over exposure at night. Ten cases of lumbago are recorded, chiefly occurring during the rains from similar causes, together with general debility combined; most of the above cases were mild and amenable to ordinary treatment, with the exception of one man, who had to be invalided, from liability to frequent attacks of this disease. Fifteen cases of soft chancre and 4 of secondary syphilis were treated, giving the large ratio of 5 per cent to average strength; all were contracted in the adjoining filthy large native town, where syphilitic disease, in its various forms, is rampant, and seems to reign uncontrolled in the absence of a lock hospital or other medical institution. One case of true leprosy, admitted in December 1875, was invalided in March after 17 years' service; 5 cases of scorbutus are recorded, apparently the result of climate and malaria, together probably with indifferent food, clothing, and other imperfect hygienic conditions; they were all, how- ever, mild in character, attended with some congestion and sponginess of gums and general debility, but all were, in due course, discharged to duty. The case of dementia occurred to a short-service man, having only 10 years' service; he was invalided by special committee and discharged the service with a gratuity. Under diseases of the respiratory system were 12 of bronchitis, of whom 6 were invalided and 6 discharged to duty; 3 of asthma, of whom 1 died, 1 invalided, and 1 returned to duty. There were 4 cases of bronchial catarrh, which were treated and duly discharged to duty. Most, if not all, of the above affections of the lungs were either caused or aggravated by the persistent effects of malaria in constitu- tions already debilitated from constant attacks of ague, together with the cold, damp and general discomforts incidental to the rains in that unhealthy locality. One case of pleu- rodynia accompanied with chroinc dyspepsia was treated; but when somewhat improved had ultimately, owing to extreme general debility and suffering, to be sent on medical certificate for 12 months to his native climate, Madras. Of dysentery 10 cases are recorded, due chiefly to repeated attacks of ague and pro- bably some malarial cachexia. Most of these cases were severe and protracted; 9 were discharged to duty, and 1 sent on sick certificate to the Konkan. The treatment chiefly consisted in gs. xv. ipecacuanha moderated by ms. x. tinct. opii, sinapisms to epigastrium, fomentations, and an occasional dose of pulvis creta aromatic, with or without opium. The case of hernia inguinal, owing to abnormally patulus ring, together B 196106 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. with chronic hydrocele (operated on twice), was discharged the service with gratuity. Eighteen cases of diarrhNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 107 Treatment of diseases when spe- cial. 19. The treatment with cinchonidine has not been a success. This drug appears unfit to grapple with the confirmed local miasmatic fevers. In mild cases it has been found occasionally useful, but more particularly as a tonic or an adjunct to the febrifuge action of quinine. The hypodermic injection of 5-grain doses of neutral sulphate quinine, dissolved in water with citric acid, and carefully filtered, was found almost in every case successful both at Mehidpore and Neemuch. This injection was only used in those cases where the use of quinine in 3 ten-grain doses up to 30 grains and over daily was found in- effectual. The bromide of potassium was administered with marked effect to a patient long suffering from jaundice and intense pain with violent tetanic-like spasms (opistho- tenos), apparently the result of the passage of a gall stone. The spasms seemed effectually controlled by the action of the remedy, given in full doses gr. xv. Resumé of the whole. 20. From the foregoing it will be seen that the general health and sanitary state of the head-quarters while at Mehidpore was most unsa- tisfactory,108 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Water. 3. The following are the analyses of the military (most used) potable well waters, &c., as examined by the Government Analyser:NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 109 Food, quality of, and whether abundant and cheap. 6. The food has been abundant and cheap. Clothing, &c. 7. The clothing is of excellent European cloth. The boots and buckled shoes, of Cawn- pore make, cause frequent sores, over the instep, &c., which is at least curious, as there is little foot duty. Duties and effects on health. 8. The men110 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. causation of cholera or typhoid, as the same and almost average amount produced very different effects; thusNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 111 In spite of police and commissariat precautions, unhealthy milk, from foul-feeding cattle was, or might have been, an item in the etiology of the outbreak. The men, however, it was said, used chiefly goat's milk. Certain it is, however, also, that the regiment, which is the subject of this report, escaped the epidemic (which raged close by) with only the occurrence of some cases of feverish diarrh112 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL D. WYLLIE, M.D. This regiment was stationed at Neemuch up to 9th November, when it marched for Delhi. I had thus no opportunity of seeing it. Health satisfactorily maintained throughout, the percentage of hospital admissions to strength 121.15 to 114.24 in previous year, the return shewing decrease in rheumatism, scorbutus, and other zymotic heads, with increase under dysentery, conjunctivitis, and injury, the latter large. Only 1 death as in 1875, and the lapses by invaliding and discharge, in close approximation for both years, were only 11 as against 13. The defective state of the lines, as adverted to in the report, has its counterpart at every other station. The very inconvenient distance of the permanent latrines is also a source of common complaint in the Mhow Division. It is to be hoped, however, that when the Artillery move to their new barracks, this matter may have remedy, in so far as it is more pressingly required at Neemuch than elsewhere, trench latrines being inadmissible by reason of rocky ground. (In this report no mention of the numbers of the treated, died, &c., of the Detachment stationed at Neemuch for November and December last, is made.) H. M.'s 24th Regiment B. N. I. NEEMUCH.NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 113 Accommodation and defects. The accommodation, as above said, is ample, but the following may be enumerated amongst the principal defects; the want of a suitable broad verandah on the south-west side of the building renders the latter excessively hot in the summer months when temperature averages a maximum of degrees 91. There is no dead-house, and this I consider a no little deficiency in an hospital, not only for the removal of the dead but likewise for the performance of autopsies. Conservancy. The hospital latrines are at a desirable distance from the hospital, and built of permanent masonry; receptacles are provided for the reception of the excreta, which are removed daily; deodorization and disinfection are properly carried out. A small urinal placed in or near the hospital will prevent the frequent practice of sepoys and others in hospital voiding urine on the ground surrounding it. Hospital water-supply. The water from the hospital well is good, the sub-soil depth of which and the influence of rain-fall on it is shewn in the subjoined table:114 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. cinchonidine or the two drugs combined, in the proportion of from 3 to 5 of the former to from 10 to 20 or 30 of the latter. In several cases of simple febricula cure was effected in a few days by a little aperient medicine. The admissions and re-admissions from dysentery numbered 20, being a percentage of 2.48 against 15, or 1.45 percentage last year. The treatment adopted was what is now well established, viz., by large doses of ipecacuanha. I am in the habit of prescribing in cases of genuine dysentery that drug in doses varying from 15 to 50 grains of the powder either alone or combined with opium, and either by mouth, or the former administered half an hour or thereabouts after an enema of the latter drug, not only to prevent the ipecacuanha from being ejected but likewise to allay the pain, tormina, tenesmus, and other distressing intestinal symptoms. Hepatitis gave 8 admissions, or per- centage 0.99 against 5, or 0.48 per cent. of last year. The majority of admissions of inflamma- tion of the liver were subacute or chronic. Rheumatic affections gave 27 admissions, or percentage 3.35 against 27, or 2.61 per cent. of last year. Syphilis, admissions 19, (inclusive of phimosis and bubo, which were symptoms), being a percentage of 36 against 9 admissions, or 0.87 per cent. of last year. Of these cases there were 14 of what may be designated primary infection and 5 secondary or constitutional syphilis. GonorrhNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 115 Mortality according to race. 12. Hindus... 5 Mussulmans... 2 Influence of rainfall. 13. The rains commenced somewhat unusually late on the 7th July 1876. Total rainfall 46 inches and 44 cents. The effect was to increase the number of admissions from ague and bowel complaints. Epidemics. 14. No epidemic disease came under observation. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 15. Vaccination was efficiently carried out by 2nd Class Hospital Assistants Reuben Samson and Heera Swamee; there were 17 operations performed. General health and physique of the men. 16. The physique of the men of this regiment is not what it might be. A certain proportion116 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Sickness, mortality, and invalid- ing. 3. Total admissions during the year, 177. Fever as usual ranks highest, being 62; this is also an increase of 18 in the admissions from this disease, as compared with that of last year. Contusions of upper and lower extremity gives 36 admissions, boils 20, rheumatism 11, dysentery 8, lumbago 4, neuralgia 3, &c. One death took place from perforation of the intestines. Three men were sent on medical certificate to their country, and 1 discharged by court-martial, and 8 were invalided. Vaccination and re-vaccination. 4. Total vaccination successful 20; re-vaccination, none. Resumé of the whole. 5. Referring to the records it is perceived that although there has been a slight increase in the admissions over the former year, the health of the squadron at this station has been, on the whole, good. No epidemic occurred during the year. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL D. WYLLIE, M.D. Not inspected; health was less satisfactory than in previous year, owing to greater prevalance of ague; nothing unusual appears to have occurred. Left Wing of H. M.NORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 117 Food, quality of, and whether abundant and cheap. Vegetables were always procurable both in the bazaar and in the wing garden, which latter was got up in 1875 by Lieutenant-Colonel Pierce, then commanding the wing. As the regiment marched without any relief, no means were left behind for its continuance nor any one left in charge; and I fear there will be very little trace of this really useful institution when the 24th Regiment arrives there from Delhi. Clothing. 5. The ammunition boot as now worn without stockings is the cause of the frequent admissions into hospital of men suffering from shoe-bite. This would be in a great measure obviated if stockings were issued to the men, or if, as adopted by some of the continental armies of Europe, rags were folded smoothly over the feet. Duties and their effects on health. 6. The duties consist principally of the ordinary parades, musketry, and sentry duty, and has had no prejudicial effect on the men's health. Exercise, amusement, and occu- pation. 7. Amusements were got up during the rains for the men (wrestling and other athletic sports). Although some of the men take an interest in gymnas- tics, they will not voluntarily engage in them unless some en- couragement in the shape of prizes is given. Lock-up rooms and cells. 8. A new lock-up room was built during the past year; it gives 1,300 feet of cubic capacity and 100 square feet superficial area, and is well venti- lated by means of gratings. Hospital and its surroundings. 9. The hospital is a comparatively new one, and is ample for the sick of the wing of a regiment. At no period of the year was there overcrowding. The building itself, site, &c., have been fully described in for- mer reports, and it is, together with the out-buildings, all that can be desired. Conservancy. The hospital latrines are good. Excreta is carried away and buried to the north of cantonment and outside camp limits; one sweeper is kept on the hospital establishment, and is always at hand, and twice a day removed the excreta. Hospital water-supply. Close to the hospital is a large pucca built well, the water of which is very pure and abundant at all seasons of the year; it is well protected by a chunam coping, and there is no source of impurity. Sickness, mortality, and invaliding. 10. There were in all 360 admissions into hospital during the year; of these the greatest number was from intermittent fever, viz., 199. Chronic rheumatism gives the second highest number of admissions, 40; then follows bronchitis, 21; contusion, 19. There were 4 cases of dysentery, the same of syphilis (primary and secondary), 1 case of small-pox, and 1 case of remittent fever. No case of hepatitis occurred. Two deaths occurred during the year. Nine men were invalided and 7 sent on medical certificate to their country. None discharged by court-martial. Principal cause of sickness. 11. The principal cause of the large number of admissions from intermittent fever was, as previously remarked in former reports, the fact of the men being located for the previous year in the very malarious station of Mehidpore, at which station every regiment suffers severely from malarious fever at all seasons of the year, and the men's system is so saturated with the poison that from time to time they get renewed attacks. The number of admissions under the head of contusion (or shoe-bite) was mainly occasioned by the long march from Agar to Nusseerabad, and from the practice of the sepoy walking in thick ammunition boots without socks or some protect- ing covering for the foot. The case of small-pox occurred in that of a man returning from furlough in the Konkan, at which place small-pox prevailed during the early portion, of the year, and he doubtless contracted it there or at some village on his way to rejoin his regi- ment. He was at once isolated, and the usual methods adopted to prevent contagion, and fortunately the disease was confined to him alone. Principal causes of mortality. 12. As previously remarked, there were 2 fatal cases, 1 caused by remittent fever on the line of march; this man had previously suffered from frequent attacks of remittent fever in Mehidpore and Agar, and also was ill when the march commenced. The second fatal case was in that of an old man recommended for pension: he had suffered from time to time from ague, rheumatism, and bronchitis, and for some months before his death great wasting of the body. An attack of dysentery supervening on his already exhausted system was the actual cause of his death. B 196118 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Mortality according to race. 13. Both men were of low casteNORTHERN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 119 Food. 5. Cheap and abundant, except in the hot season, when vegetables are scarce and very dear. Duties and their effect on health. 6. Duties not excessive. Exercise, amusement, and oc- cupation. 7. A gymnasium taken over from the 23rd Regiment when we relieved them, affords amusement and exercise unfortunately only to a few men who go in for gymnastics. If all recruits and men up to 15 years' service were obliged to go through a few exercises daily, it would improve the physique of the men greatly. Lock-up rooms and cells. 8. Lock-up rooms and cells according to the standard plan. Marches. 9. We marched on Delhi in November, and were obliged to leave over a 100 men in hospital who were suffering from intermittent and remittent fever; even then we had a great many admissions on the march from the same diseases. Hospital and its surroundings. 10. The hospital is placed in an open plain on high ground without a tree near it: the consequence is, that in the hot weather it is a perfect oven, and in the cold season it is exceedingly cold. I brought this to the notice of the Cantonment Committee, and they very kindly gave Rs. 50 to plant trees as I liked round the hospital. The ground, however, is hard rock, and blasting is necessary, so that it took over a month to make the holes necessary for putting in trees and filling them with earth. Overcrowding, accommodation, and defects. The hospital is well built and ventilated, and the verandahs were used for patients to prevent overcrowding in the wards. Hospital water-supply. Water-supply from the hospital well, the water of which at certain seasons is slightly brackish. Sickness, mortality, and invaliding. 11. There were 1,140 admissions and 4 deaths; the per- centage of treated to strength was 172.8, and the average number of daily sick was 33.24. Thirty men were invalided. Principal causes of sickness. 12. The principal cause of sickness was fever, generally of the intermittent type, which in about 20 per cent. of the cases, merged into a low form of remittent fever; there were 730 admissions from this cause with 1 death. I have an idea that the well water of the Mahadeo tank, which contains much vegetable matter from decomposition of the leaves, &c., which fall into it, is in some way a predisposing cause of the fever, as the greater number of cases were drinkers of this water. Steps will be taken on our return to ascertain this and any other likely cause. To the same causes probably are attributable the diarrh120 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY General health and physique of the men. 17. The regiment is in a very weak state at present, owing to the large number of men who have suffered from fever, which leaves much pros- tration and liability to recurrence as its sequlæ, unfitting a man for service for from two to three months at least, and even after this time exposure to cold at night invariably brings on a second attack with a prolonged convalescence. Most of the men who have not suffered from fever are fine, well- made men, and could march anywhere. Treatment of disease when special. 18. In the cases of fever described in a previous para., where a man was admitted with vomiting and purging of ricewater character, with eyes sunken, violent cramps, and weak small pulse, the similarity to a case of cholera was almost perfect; the only diagnostic sign, however, was that his skin was warm instead of being cold and clammy. I found that an ounce and a half of castor-oil always re- lieved and checked the symptoms; violent fever setting in within six hours, which was amenable to ordinary treatment. The turpentine treatment of typhoid fever was tried in the only case that occurred; but in spite of it the man died exhausted after severe hæmorrhage from the bowels. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL D. WYLLIE, M.D. I did not see this regiment, as it had left for Delhi before I could have reached Nussee- rabad; the duties of the General Invaliding Committee retarded me, and thus that station re- mained unvisited. It will be remarked that the corps suffered excessively from fever, particularly during the latter months of the year, and that the type was far more than ordinarily severe. It will be remembered also that a large number of the men were affected with scurvy some two years ago at Mhow, the other native regiment there being then free. The circumstances may possibly have no relation, as no scorbutus appears in the returns, but they are sufficiently significant to claim a watchful attention to all that concerns sani- tation and physical well-being, and in particular to the condition of the tank water-supply. (In this report no mention of the numbers of the treated, invalided, &c., of the portion of this regiment that was at Nusseerabad for November and December last, when the head- quarters had marched to Delhi, is made.)
SIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 121 SIND DIVISION. Average strength present during the year 2990.4 Average daily sick per cent. to the average strength 4.7 Ratio of mortality per cent. to the average strength 3.1 H. M.'s 29th or 2nd Belooch Regiment N. I. KURRACHEE.122 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. 2 admissions from pneumonia: 1 case terminated fatally; in both the disease was most exten- sive, and the patients weak from previous attacks of fever. There were 18 admissions for intestinal disorder, chiefly diarrhSIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 123 supply the Belooch wells. It has been recommended to divert the drainage referred to above to a distance from the tank. Food. 3. Good and abundant, but somewhat dearer than last year. Grain compensation made up for increase of price. Duties. 4. Consisted of the usual parades, guards, and escort duty, which had no special effect on health. Exercise, amusement, and occupa- tion. 5. Wrestling, horizontal and parallel bars, &c. Lock-up rooms and cells. 6. The quarter-guard is unsuitable,and the cells are much too small, especially in the hot weather; a new quarter-guard is urgently required. Hospital and its surrounding ventilation. 7. These have been fully described last year, and no change has occurred,since the new hospital, which was reported as under consideration last year, has not been built and is much required. Overcrowding. On account of the excessive number of cases of ague, tents had to be pitched near the hospital for additional accommodation. Sickness, mortality, and invalid- ing. 8. The chief diseases were the following, arranged in the order of their frequency:124 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Detachments. 2. An average of 113 sabres on out-post duty during the year. Clothing. 3. The clothing has been changed in two particulars. The overalls, which were for- merly made of broad cloth, are now made of double dungaree. The head-dress now worn is of the Afghan pattern, and is everything which could be desired as a protection against heat and cold, and most likely a sabre cut. Duties and their effect on health. 4. Cannot be said to have exercised an unfavourable influence on health. Hospital overcrowding 5. With only 13 patients in hospital the available space, cubic and superficial, was only 92 and 2,276, very much under what it ought to be. Though the daily average sick for the year was only 14.3, it must be remembered that the daily average since October has been, respectively, October 21.8, Novem- ber 28.5, and December 26.3. The verandahs and tents had to be used, and the hospital reserved for the more serious cases, particularly chest affections. Sickness, mortality, and invalid- ing. 6. Out of an average present at head-quarters of 325.2 sabres, 687 admissions took place, being an increase of 117 over the previous year. Malarious fevers, as usual, were the chief cause of admissions, being 432SIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 125 REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL F. G. JOYNT, M.D. The sanitary condition of the lines is fair and accommodation is ample. The water- supply is abundant, but laden with salts. Malaria has been worse than usual during the past year. Hospital visited 17th January 1877. Sanitary state fair, accommodation sufficient under ordinary circumstances, but hospital liable to overcrowding when malaria is rife; the other buildings appear to be somewhat too close to it. I noticed that the walls were damp for two feet from the floor, which, considering the nature of the soil, is not to be wondered at. The plinth is insufficient, and ought to be of burnt bricks. H. M.'s 2nd Sind Horse. JACOBABAD.126 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. from ague. In analysing the principal causes of admissions into hospital it will be observed that more than half the cases were due to malarious affections. The rest were ulcers, injuries and accidents, venereal complaints, pneumonia and bronchitis, skin-diseases, and dysentery. There were 2 deaths in hospital, both from pneumonia, and 3 out of hospital-one in the case of a suicide who shot himself with his carbine through the abdomen, causing death in a few hours from fatal injury to the liver. Percentage of mortality to strength, 0.5 per cent. Influence of rainfall. 10. The amount of rainfall during the year has been registered as 6.08 inches. This fell during the months of January, February, March, June, July, August, October, November and December. The largest amount fell in July (3.65 in.) The sanitary condition of the surroundings of the regimental lines and hospital during the rainy season is extremely defective consequent upon the accumulation of water after heavy showers of rain and the defective drainage which permits such collection to stagnate over a large surface of ground for several days, or such time until the water gradually disappears by subsidence and evaporation. All the conditions for the generation of malaria and the production of fevers which undermine the constitution of the native soldiers of this district prevailed under these circumstances in an eminent degree during the last rainy season, which was comparatively a severe one; 3.65 inches of rain fell on three consecutive days, flooding a great part of the horse lines, and submerging most of the surrounding men's lines. The water, not having any ready means of exit, only disappeared gradually, though completely, through the porous soil. The regimental hospital suffered more or less from the accumula- tion of rain-water, which stagnated in its neighbourhood; and owing to the high temperature of the air at this season, combined with the presence of vegetable matter used in road-mak- ing, and other organic matters present by accidental circumstances, the noxious gas evolved by putrefaction became disagreeably perceptible to the senses of the inmates and those whose duty compelled them to visit this neighbourhood. Whether diseases increased or not at this particular period of the year, it may not be easy to demonstrate; but there can be little doubt that the conditions above described cannot be conducive to health, such conditions being in total antagonism with the ordinary principles of hygiene. With the view of discovering the true cause of this accumulation of water in this part of camp, perhaps I cannot do better than compare it with the remaining portion of camps where the drainage is of a more satisfactory nature, and where little, if any, water is found to accu- mulate. Presuming that the general ground level within camp limits is pretty equal in all direc- tions, I cannot but attribute the accumulation, confinement, and stagnation of the rain water in the neighbourhood of the regimental lines and hospital to the absence of a proper system of surface drainage. As to the practicability of introducing the necessary drainage for carrying away the surface-water from camp limits in a country remarkable for the general levelness of its sur- face, there may exist a difference of opinion; but engineering skill, I have no doubt, will over- come all obstacles, if the expenditure necessary for establishing a system of drainage is sanc- tioned, and measures were adopted for filling up the hollows which may exist in the neigh- bourhood of the hospital and lines, not merely by having recourse to the silt and refuse from drains, but by the more effectual method of carting the necessary amount of earth from be- yond camp limits. Vaccination. 11. Primary vaccinations 52, re-vaccinations 470, successfully. REMARKS BY DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL F. G. JOYNT, M. D. The lines are well built, but the ventilation is defective; accommodation is ample; no change has yet been made in the objectionable conservancy arrangements. Hospital visited 18th January 1877; its sanitary condition is fair, accommodation sufficient for the wants of the sick. Detachment H.M.'s 3rd Regiment Sind Horse. JACOBABAD.SIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 127 Sickness and mortality. 2. The total admitted into hospital for treatment has been 230. The strength of the detachment is 148, showing the large number of re-admissions, chiefly from ague, which caused 162 admissions into hospital. There were 5 cases of dysentery, out of which 1 proved fatal. This has been the only casualty in the detachment for the year. The large amount of sickness may be accounted for by the fact of the sick and weakly portion of the regiment having been left behind, when the head-quarters marched to Khelat. Detachment of H. M.'s No. 2 Mountain Battery. JACOBABAD.128 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. tan, stopping at Mustoong and Khelat for a few months; from the latter town it left for Mittree, where it is at present under canvas. There are two detachments, consisting of 14 men each, one stationed at Thul, the other at Kashmere. Lines. 2. For the accommodation of the non-married men of the regiment there are, at the east end ot camp, nine parallel buildings ot equal length, the one in the right and that on the left being half the width of the other seven. They are supposed to hold a thousand men, giving each man about 800 cubic feet of air space. Cross ventilation under the roofs was established last April. The barracks are all built on the ground and not raised on plinths, so that the flooring in the inundation season becomes quite damp, and crumbles away in parts. A row of trees in front of the doors of the barracks, under which the men sleep for six months of the year, is gradually decaying from want of water, and, unless verandahs are constructed as recommended in the Deputy Surgeon- General's report for last year, the men will be badly off for shade. The quarters in the family lines are not open to inspection; but from their outward appearance, and a knowledge of the habits of the occupants, no hesitation is felt in saying that they are not in a strictly hygienic condition. The bazaar, which is a little too near the hospital, is kept in very good order. Conservancy. 3. There is at about 1,000 yards from the lines a latrine which is simply a portion of the plain enclosed by a mud Nall and divided into two com- partments; it is used only by the prisoners; all the other men resorted for purposes of nature to the surrounding jungle. Attached to each of the married men's huts is a private latrine cleaned twice daily by a staff of sweepers kept up by the regiment. Proper latrines should he built on a site at a reasonable distance from the men's quarters. Water-supply. 4. The water is good, except in the inundation season, when some of the wells become brackish, but even then very fair water can be had at some distance from the lines. Food. 5. Food of good quality and sufficient in quantity, is obtained at moderate prices in the Brigade and city bazaars, the regimental one being only resorted to by those who wish to purchase it on credit. From the beginning of May to the end of September vegetables are not obtainable; fruits, of which the water-melon is the most plentiful, taking their place. Duties 6. Out-post duty is the only one which seems particularly to have an ill effect on the health of the men. Exercise. 7. Besides the usual drills and parades of an infantry regiment each recruit is compel- led to go through a gymnastic course. Many of the sepoys also resort to the gymnasium for exercise arid amusement. Wrestling is the favourite pastime, and on one day in the week the matches got up for the occasion draw crowds of spectaters. A few of the men work at trades, such as carpentry, shoe-making, &c. Hospital and its surroundings. 8. The hospital is situated in a large compound which, owing to there being no surround- ing wall, becomes a thoroughfare for the people passing between the lines and regimental bazaar. Its want of accommodation was brought forward in the annual report of the regiment for last year, and I believe a new ward has been sanctioned, but it has root been yet commenced. A cook-room and dead-house are urgently required, the former More especially, as at present those patients Who are well enough to do so, leave the hospital for two hours each day for the purpose of procuring and cooking their food, while those who are confined to their beds must have men to attend them: this latter fact, of course, throws extra duty on the men out of hospital. A ward for the treatment of infectious diseases is also required. The hospital latrines are well built and are kept in very good order; they are cleaned out twice a day, McDougall's powder being used in conjunction with dry earth. Sickness and mortality. 9. There were 1,023 admissions during the year, showing an increase of 194 over those for last year; this has been mainly due to the increase in the number of cases of ague, the number treated being 137 more than that for last year. Dysentery and diarrhSIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 129 three foregoing diseases, as may be seen by the following, have increased considerably during the last four years:130 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. form of annual report on account of the regiment having been marching about for the last nine months. The long and trying marches through Cutchee and the Bolan I have described in my cholera report, and recommended a line of wells to be dug between Jacobabad and Dádur, for the use and safety of troops. Topography and climate. 2. The first standing camp was at Mustoong, a pleasant, open, well-cultivated valley with abundance of fruit of various kinds, grain and artificial grass (lucerne), an unlimited water-supply of good quality, and an altitude of about 6,000 feet. We halted here from 27th April to 20th July, and enjoyed the change of climate from the burning plains immensely. Being under canvas, we felt the heat considerably during the day; but a cool breeze always sprang up in the evening, and the nights were invariably so cold that we found it necessary to sleep under blankets. The tableland of Mustoong is the most fertile and productive of the Beloochistan plateaux; the soil is alluvial, consisting of detritus from the surrounding hills; and the peculiar system of irrigation by means of "krazes," or pits dug at different levels till water is struck and con- nected by subterranean channels, admits of its being cultivated in sloping terraces, which to a certain extent fertilize each other, and preclude the possibility of the ground becoming exhausted; as when the upper slopes of the valley are flooded by rain or artificially from the water-courses, fresh soil is washed down to the lower fields. The "dewars" or tillers of the ground in these parts are industrious and skilled agriculturists; they manure their fields care- fully, and seem to appreciate the advantages of the system of rotation of crops. Wine and silk could be produced here on an extensive scale if one might judge by the gigantic specimen of the vine and mulberry trees growing in the different orchards and gardens throughout the valley; the vine also flourishes luxuriantly in the open fields, which is sufficient to indicate the mildness of the climate as well as the fertility of the soil. 3. From the latitude of the Beloochistan hills their climate cannot be compared in its bracing effects with that of the Himalayas; but taking their elevation, average temperature, and dryness into consideration, I should say the valleys of Mustoong and Shawlcote are quite capable of being colonized by Europeans. Irrespective of the importance of these places in a political point of view, I am convinced they will in future be appreciated as a valuable sanitaria for troops serving on the North-West Frontier; indeed, it is difficult to understand why they have not been utilized as such since our treaty with Khelat existed; from what I have observed, the people would have been only too glad to see us amongst them. These valleys would be vastly improved by arboriculture along their numerous water-courses, which might be opened up to the hill-sides instead of running underground as at present, and road- making presents no greater difficulties than simply levelling the ground at most places. 4. The accompanying register of temperature will give an idea of the climate of Mustoong and Khelat during the hot season; the cold in winter there I believe is very severe. The nomadic portion of the population avoids it by descending into Cutchee, again migrating to the hilly plateaux with their flocks and herds when the heat becomes oppressive in the plains, to graze on the hill-sides which are covered with grass after the melting of the snow in March and April. [Statement.
131 SIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. HOSPITAL H. M.'s 3RD REGIMENT SIND HORSE. Meteorological Register kept in the above Hospital of Self-registering Thermometers.132 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. 5. The climate, on the whole, did not agree with the majority of the men, who are natives of the plains of Hindoostan; they raised an outcry against, and blamed the water for their different complaints, and said they preferred the muddy water of the plains. Some attributed attacks of dyspepsia accompanied with tympanitis from which they suffered to it, and they were recommended to use boiled drinking water, and after a short time they improved. The Beloochees, who are a hardy race, seem to thrive on the water remarkably well, and, as far as its physical characters are concerned, it is clear, sparkling, cool and pleasant to the taste. I could not analyse it for want of instruments and re-agents, but so far as the production of soap lather would indicate, it seemed to me to be only slightly hard. What natives really mean when they state the water does not agree with them, is that the climate does not suit them. Several complained of lassitude, oppressed breathing, amounting to dyspnSIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 133 Jemedar of Belooch guides who escorted the kafilas as far as Quetta had died of the disease there and from May to October cholera continued to prevail in the outlying villages between Mustoong and Khelat. Towards the end of September cholera appeared in the town of Khelat, a 1pace redolent with excremental nuisances, and where sanitation is studiously ignored; the mortality caused by it there is unknown, but 4 or 5 deaths occurred in the " Miri," and one of His Highness the Khan's sons was carried off by the disease. The last case of cholera occurred among the troops in September, the patient being a syce, who recovered, but sank from exhaustion, consequent on the attack at Mastoong in October. On our return march I can only attribute our immunity from cholera at Mustoong and Khelat, where it raged around us for months to our living in tents our attention to camp sanitary arrangements and the scrupulous care always exercised in protecting the source of our water-supply from contamination in addition to this the men were warned and as far as possible prohibited from going into the infected villages but anything like quarantine or a cordon sanitaire was impossible and out of the question. 10. On the 12th August we marched from Guranee stream to Koing two miles from Khelat and remained at this place till October 22nd when we began our return march to the plains by Moongoocher Mustoong and the Bolan Pass the Battery and Rifles proceeding by the Moola Pass and rejoining us at Mittree on 29th November. 11. Mittree where we are at present encamped is about 20 miles east of the mouth of the Bolan Pass on the right bank of the Nari river which rises in the Murree hills and traverses the plains of Cutchee in a south-westerly direction. The surrounding country is bare and flat and only cultivated in such places as the surface water from the hills can be intercepted the ground sloping gently towards the banks of the Nari which in some parts are thickly lined with tamarisk bushes. So far as our present knowledge of the propagation of cholera goes I am now satisfied that it was by means of the water of this river that the troops were infected with that disease in April last. Origin of the cholera epidemic. 12. Cholera was raging at Seebee, in Afghanistan territory where the Nari debouchee on the plains before the troops left Jacobabad as we heard that a number of people were carried off by an epidemic there. The disease travelled through the different villages on the river and we most probably con- tracted it at Kunda by means of the drinking water on the 6th April134 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Sick carriage. 16. The marching on the present occasion has proved our sick carriage to be a failure, and shown its utter inefficiency and inadequacy to the purpose for which it is kept up. The bearers are not "Kahars" but an inferior class of coolies deficient in physical stamina and untrained for their work; hence it need not be wondered at that they completely broke down. After some correspondence on the subject I was permitted to put them through a course of dooly practice at Mustoong and Khelat; but this would have been unnecessary if the bearers had been always under the exclusive control and supervision of the medical officer who is responsible for the conveyance of the sick, and would make a point of getting the men trained and keeping them efficient. A better and more economical arrangement than the present one, in my opinion, would be to have fewer but properly-trained bearers attached to each regiment of the Frontier Force, with light stretchers with hoods, instead of the present heavy cumbersome doolies, and a certain proportion of kujavas similar in construction to that used by the Russians during the Khivan Expedition. 17. I should say that for troops marching through a desert like that of Cutchee and over stony ground like the Bolan Pass, camel kujavas of some description are indispensably necessary for sick carriage, and I submit that the matter should be considered by the proper authorities. REMARKS OF DEPUTY SURGEON-GENERAL F. G. JOYNT, M.D. Visited Mittree February 19th 1877. The regiment is housed in grass huts, the sanitary condition and ventilation of which are duly attended to. The water-supply appears to be abundant and of fair quality. The sick are accommodated in tents. There were 4 fatal cases of pneumonia, which would seem to be due in a great measure to the great vicissitudes of climate which have been experienced. H. M.'s No. 2 Mountain Battery. KHELAT.SIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 135 without stockings and without greasing his feet. Indeed, I cannot conceive why the native soldier should not be accustomed to do without shoes in the plains, and to use sandals only when marching in the hills or over rough ground instead of the unsatisfactory boots with which he is generally provided; if accustomed to serve without shoes, nature would furnish a hard and horny substitute on the soles of his feet. Effects of climate. 3. For general remarks regarding the prevalence of diarrh136 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. parts near the town were stagnant and stinking. It was here on the 9th that the first case of cholera occurred in the person of Captain Scott's bheestie. In the course of the night a sepoy of the 30th N. I. also died of the disease as the troops were marching out of camp for Hajee Kesher. On our arrival at Hajee Kesher, on the 10th, it was found that several of the men were sick with cholera, and Surgeon MacRury, in conjunction with Captain Humfrey, took the necessary steps for their isolation. A tent was pitched well in rear of the camp, and this was rapidly filled with patients. We decided as to the plan of treatment to be adopted, and this we endeavoured to carry out as effectively as circumstances admitted of throughout the outbreak. 4. By the evening of the 10th a large number of admissions had taken place, and the question had to be decided whether the troops should march or not; the only objection to marching being the difficulty of transport of the sick, whilst for marching there were the following weighty considerations:SIND DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 137 information that cholera had existed some time previously at Kassim ke Joke near Mukkum Beyla, and Major Sandeman was informed that one of the syces belonging to the Khan's troops had died of the disease the day we arrived at Bagh. It was also stated that at Seebee, Hajee Kesher, and other places the disease had been very fatal some weeks before. Inquiry is made with great difficulty in this part of the world, and this is all the information bearing on the-subject we have been able to obtain. 7. With regard to the water-supply, the troops were compelled to drink whatever was available, and it is more than probable, when the prevalence of the disease in the district is re- collected, that the water was contaminated with cholera discharges. The water at Rojhan was obtained from wells; at Kunda it was abundant, but at the same time it had traversed a large tract of country in its passage to that place, and this tract is known to have been infected. The water at Mukkun Beyla and Bagh was limited in quantity and stationary, and were the fact established of the virus being imbibed by means of drinking water, and if the period of incubation were known, it would not be difficult to settle definitely the place at which the troops became infected, as water could be obtained at the halting places only. If troops are to march through Cutch we should strongly recommend that a line of wells should be dug between Rojhan and Dadur, as the water-supply is scanty, uncertain, and unsatisfactory. Character and type of disease. 8. The earlier cases proved rapidly fatal, and were of a severe character, the patients being much distressed by spasms and cramps; the latter cases suffered but little from these complications, but, on the other hand, they afforded several instances of suppression of urine followed by ur138 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. The physical geography of the district would indicate the occasional, if not the frequent, occurrence of thunderstorms, and the site suggests malarious fever of a severe type on the subsidence of inundations. On these points, as also on the thermal range, rain-fall, and prevailing winds, sufficient information is not availableSTATEMENT.
140 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. STATEMENT showing the SICKNESS and MORTALITY among the NATIVE N.B. -The regiments are placed as Regiment. Station. Movement during the year. Average daily sick. Average daily strength present during the year. Remained on 1st January 1876. Admitted during the year. Total treated. Discharged cured. Discharged otherwise. Died in hospital. Died out of hospital. Remaining. Average daily sick per cent. to average strength. Ratio per cent. of admissions to average strength. RATIO PER CENT. OF DEATH. Invali- ded. In Hospital. Outof Hospital. To treated. To average strength. To treated. To average strength. For discharge the service. For change of climate. PRESIDENCY DIVISION, ADEN Detachment, 4th Regiment N. I. Bombay None. 5.6 136.0 6 100 106 87 13 2 1 4 4.1 73.5 1.9 1.5 0.9 0.8 11 1 20th Regiment N. I. Do. None. 42.7 594.5 27 722 749 625 83 13 1 28 7.1 121.2 1.7 2.2 0.1 0.2 48 31 21st do. Do. None. 12.5 568.5 16 283 299 257 29 3 7 10 2.1 49.7 1.0 0.5 2.7 1.2 21 22 Wing 7th do. Tanna None. 4.2 276.0 12 171 183 159 16 2 1 6 1.5 61.9 1.1 0.7 0.5 0.4 5 2 17th Regirnent N. I. Surat None. 35.0 631.6 18 1,194 1,212 1,159 24 15 5 14 5.6 189.0 1.2 2.4 0.4 0.8 30 24 Detachment, 20th Regiment N.I. Janjira None. 0.1 17.0 ... 6 6 6 ... ... ... ... 5.8 35.2 ... ... ... ... ... ... Do 21st do. Bushire None. 0.7 16.0 ... 18 18 17 ... ... ... 1 4.3 112.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... Do. Bassadore None. 2.7 12.0 ... 198 198 196 1 ... ... 1 22.5 1600.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... Do.. On board the steam ship " Dal- housie." None. 0.2 8.0 1 10 11 10 1 ... ... ... 2.5 12.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... Do. Do. " Magdala." None. ... 8.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Do. Do. "Abyssinia." None. ... 8.0 ... 2 2 1 1 ... ... ... ... 25.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... Do. Do. "Hugh Rose." Joined its Head Quarters on 30th November. 0.2 9.1 ... 3 3 3 ... ... ... ... 2.2 32.9 ... ... ... ... ... ... Do. Do. "Quangtung." None. ... 8.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Details 21st Regiment N.I. Bombay None. 1.9 28.0 7 16 23 11 4 5 ... 3 6.8 5.7 21.7 17.8 ... ... 2 ... Total 105.8 2,320.7 87 2,723 2,810 2,531 172 40 15 67 4.5 117.3 1.4 1.6 0.5 0.6 117 80 6th Regiment N. I. Aden None. 14.3 642.6 4 425 429 406 12 4 .. 7 2.2 66.1 0.9 0.6 ... ... 20 10 4th and 5th Company Sup- pers and Miners None. 2.2 104.2 2 48 50 46 2 ... ... 2 2.0 46.0 ... ... ... ... 8 1 Aden None. 6.1 89.5 2 158 160 156 ... 1 ... 3 6.8 176.5 0.6 0.1 ... ... 2 2 Aden Troop Khor Muksar None. 0.3 50.0 1 9 10 7 3 ... ... ... 6.0 18.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... Detachment, 6th Regiment N. I. Perim Total 22.9 886.3 9 640 649 615 17 5 ... 12 2.5 72.2 0.7 0.5 ... ... 30 13 Total Presidency, Aden and Bombay Marine 128.7 3,207.0 96 3,363 3,459 3,146 189 45 15 79 3.9 104.8 1.3 1.4 0.4 0.4 147 93 POONA 1st Regiment N. L. C. Poona None. 10.4 291.0 7 282 289 276 6 3 1 4 3.5 96.9 1.0 1.0 0.3 ... 13 5 5th Regiment N. I. Do. None. 22.1 589.0 13 1,106 1,119 1,089 17 ... ... 13 3.7 187.7 ... ... ... ... 54 11 8th do. Do. None. 28.1 684.0 26 1,311 1,337 1,307 18 2 ... 10 4.1 191.6 0.2 0.2 ... ... 58 17 26th do. Do. None. 30.2 598.0 34 793 827 735 61 5 ... 26 5.1 132.5 0.6 0.8 ... ... 10 21 Sappers and Miners Kirkee None. 7.3 360.3 11 169 180 152 11 3 ... 14 2.0 46.9 1.6 0.8 ... ... 8 2 Detachment, Poona Horse Dhulia None. 3.1 102.0 ... 41 41 37 1 1 ... 2 3.0 40.1 2.4 0.9 ... ... ... 1 4th Regiment N.I.... Satara None. 6.7 322.6 5 363 368 348 15 2 ... 3 2.1 112.5 0.5 0.6 ... ... 7 15 19th do. Sholápur None. 10.7 631.5 12 326 338 308 21 3 ... 6 1.7 51.6 0.9 0.5 ... ... 4 10 15th do. Ahmednagar None. 13.6 584.0 23 396 419 386 17 4 ... 12 2.3 67.8 0.9 0.7 ... ... 6 9 2nd Grenadier Regiment N.I. Belgaum None. 16.7 630.0 8 402 410 360 26 5 ... 19 2.7 63.8 1.2 0.8 ... ... 31 8 14th do. Do. None. 17.4 569.1 23 466 489 436 34 5 4 14 3.0 81.8 1.0 0.9 0.8 0.7 30 18 Head Quarter, 13th Regiment N.I. Málegaon None. 7.7 348.3 4 309 313 304 2 2 ... 5 2.2 88.5 0.6 0.6 ... ... 14 2 Poona Horse Sirur None. 10.1 314.5 13 247 260 215 32 1 ... 12 3.2 78.5 0.4 0.3 ... ... 18 20 3rd Regiment N. I. Kolhápur. Arrived in February from Ahmedabad. 16.0 547.0 23 544 567 535 17 2 ... 13 2.9 99.4 0.4 0.4 ... ... 10 11 Detachment 3rd Regiment N.I. Kaládgi None. 1.2 89.8 ... 63 63 56 6 ... ... 1 1.3 70.5 ... ... ... ... ... 6 12th do. do. Dharwar None. 13.6 642.8 15 303 318 301 3 4 .. 10 2.1 47.1 1.2 0.6 ... ... 15 ... Detachment 4th Regiment N.I. Asirgarh None. 5.5 144.7 1 128 129 122 4 ... ... 3 3.8 88.4 ... ... ... ... 9 ... Total 220.4 7,448.6 218 7,249 7,467 6,967 291 42 5 167 2.9 97.3 0.5 0.5 0.1 0.1 287 156
STATEMENT SHOWING THE SICKNESS AND MORTALITY DURING THE YEAR 1876. 141 TROOPS serving in the BOMBAY PRESIDENCY during the Year 1876. they stood on the 1st July 1876. Hindus. Mahomedans. Strength present on 31st December 1876. Regiment. Average number of consecutive nights in bed. Number of Recruits joined during the year CASTES. Remarks. Christians. Hindus. Mahome- dans. Others. Europeans. Eurasians. Natives. Strength. Died per cent. to strength in and out of hospital and on leave. Strength. Died per cent. to strength in and out of hospital and on leave. Average daily strength. Died in hospital. Died out of hospital. Average daily strength. Died in hospital. Died out of hospital. Average daily strength. Died in hospital. Died out of hospital. Average daily strength. Died in hospital. Died out of hospital. Average daily strength. Died in hospital. Died out of hospital. Average daily strength. Died in hospital. Died out of hospital. AND BOMBAY MARINE. 121 2.4 20 ... 142 Detachment 4th Regiment N.I. 4.8/17 ... 1.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 117.0 2 1 18.0 ... ... 1.0 ... ... 607 2.3 78 2.5 596 Do. 20th do. 3.46/89 69 5.0 ... ... ... ... ... 11.1 ... ... 508.4 12 ... 75.0 1 1 ... ... ... 422 1.4 159 2.4 583 Do. 21st do. 5 1/3 41 6.0 ... ... ... ... ... 1.0 ... ... 412.0 1 5 153.5 2 2 2.0 ... ... 253 0.7 19 5.2 277 Wing 7th Regiment N. I. 4¼ 10 2.0 ... ... ... ... ... 2.0 ... ... 252.0 1 1 19.0 1 ... 3.0 ... ... 595 3.1 32 3.1 639 Do. 17th Regiment N.I. 4 36 5.6 ... ... 0.4 ... ... 8.3 ... ... 587.3 14 5 30.3 1 ... 5.3 ... ... 15 ... 2 ... 17 Detachment 20th Regiment N.I. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13.3 ... ... 3.7 ... ... ... ... ... 13 ... 2 ... 16 Do. 21st do. 0.3/7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8.0 ... ... 3.0 ... ... 5.0 ... ... 9 ... 3 ... 12 Do. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10.0 ... ... 2.0 ... ... ... ... ... 6 ... 2 ... 8 Do. Every 2nd night. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6.5 ... ... 1.5 ... ... ... ... ... 6 ... 2 ... 8 Do. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6.0 ... ... 2.0 ... ... ... ... ... 6 ... 2 ... 8 Do. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6.0 ... ... 2.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Do. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8.0 ... ... 1.1 ... ... ... ... ... 6 ... 2 ... 8 Do. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6.0 ... ... 2.0 ... ... ... ... ... 60 8.3 5 ... 66 Details 21st Regiment N. I. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.6 ... ... 24.0 5 ... 3.3 ... ... 0.1 ... ... 2,019 2.3 328 2.4 2,380 ... 156 19.6 ... ... 0.4 ... ... 23.0 ... ... 1,964.5 35 12 316.4 5 3 16.4 ... ... 541 0.7 77 ... 633 6th Regiment N. I. 5½ 7 6.2 ... ... ... ... ... 38.0 ... ... 526.3 4 ... 74.3 ... ... 4.0 ... ... 81 ... 15 ... 96 4th & 5th Co. Sappers & Miners 6.7 ... 1.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 86.6 ... ... 17.6 ... ... ... ... ... 27 ... 64 1.5 91 Aden Troop 5 1/3 7 1.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 26.4 ... ... 63.1 1 ... ... ... ... 40 ... 8 ... 50 Detachment 6th Regiment N.I. 4.0 ... 1.0 ... ... ... ... ... 0.5 ... ... 43.1 ... ... 5.6 ... ... 0.8 ... ... 689 0.5 164 0.6 870 ... 14 9.2 ... ... ... ... ... 38.5 ... ... 682.4 4 ... 160.6 1 ... 4.8 ... ... 2,708 1.8 492 1.8 3,250 ... 170 28.8 ... ... 0.4 ... ... 61.5 ... ... 2,646.9 39 12 477.0 6 3 21.2 ... ... DIVISION 185 1.1 162 1.9 294 1st Regiment N. L. C. 4 3/3 14 6.0 ... ... ... ... ... 7.0 ... ... 185.0 1 1 99.0 2 ... ... ... ... 530 ... 98 ... 647 5th Regiment N. I. 3 3/5 60 6.0 ... ... ... ... ... 7.0 ... ... 484.0 ... ... 87.0 ... ... 11.0 ... ... 496 0.4 76 ... 643 8th do. 3.0 41 5.0 ... ... ... ... ... 13.0 ... ... 535.0 2 ... 76.0 ... ... 60.0 ... ... 559 0.8 77 ... 650 26th do. 3 9/41 42 5.0 ... ... ... ... ... 10.3 ... ... 511.5 5 ... 73.0 ... ... 3.2 ... ... 320 0.9 59 ... 383 Sappers and Miners 3.0 23 7.0 ... ... ... ... ... 1.0 ... ... 302.8 3 ... 54.2 ... ... 2.3 ... ... 24 4.1 86 ... 110 Detachment Poona Horse 13.6 ... 1.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 27.0 1 ... 75.0 ... ... ... ... ... 223 0.4 35 ... 387 4th Regiment N. I. 4½ 28 4.5 ... ... ... ... ... 10.8 ... ... 161.5 1 ... 24.4 ... ... 125.9 1 ... 508 0.5 78 ... 636 19th do. 4 1/6 7/9 21 5.0 ... ... ... ... ... 3.8 ... ... 503.6 3 ... 78.6 ... ... 45.5 ... ... 495 0.8 64 ... 577 15th Regiment N.I. 4 1/3 16 6.0 ... ... ... ... ... 12.0 ... ... 502.0 4 ... 64.0 ... ... 6.0 ... 569 0.8 79 ... 681 2nd Grenadier Regiment N. I. 5 ¾ 43 7.3 ... ... ... ... ... 12.0 ... ... 532.5 5 ... 66.5 ... ... 19.0 ... ... 430 1.4 61 32 615 14th do. 54½ 79 6.2 ... ... 2.2 ... ... 58.4 ... ... 399.9 5 2 60.4 ... 2 48.2 ... ... 207 0.4 48 ... 340 Head Quarters 13th Regiment N. I. 3 2/3 25 5.1 ... ... 1.0 ... ... 4.8 ... ... 214.4 1 ... 44.0 ... ... 84.1 1 ... 55 ... 266 0.4 321 Poona Horse 9.0 34 5.7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 56.3 ... ... 258.2 1 ... ... ... ... 337 0.5 95 ... 465 3rd Regiment N. I. 7.0 56 6.0 ... ... ... ... ... 2.0 ... ... 409.0 2 ... 102.0 ... ... 34.0 ... ... 149 .. 25 ... 180 Detachment 3rd Regiment N. I. 1.2 ... 0.1 ... ... ... ... ... 1.0 ... ... 72.6 ... ... 15.0 ... ... 2.2 ... ... 450 0.8 87 ... 576 12th Regiment N. I. 9¾ 11 6.5 ... ... 1.0 ... ... 14.0 ... ... 501.4 4 ... 101.5 ... ... 24.9 ... ... 87 ... 17 ... 140 Detachment 4th Regiment N.I. 5.1 ... 0.9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 91.6 ... ... 17.4 ... ... 35.7 ... ... 5,624 0.7 1,353 0.3 7,645 ... 493 83.3 ... ... 4.2 ... ... 157.1 ... ... 5,490.1 37 3 1,295.2 3 2 502.0 2 ... B 196142 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. STATEMENT showing the SICKNESS and MORTALITY among the NATIVE Regiment. Station. Movement during the year. Average daily sick. Average daily strength present during the year. Remained on 1st January 1876. Admitted during the year. Total treated. Discharged cured. Discharged otherwise. Died in hospital. Died out of hospital. Remaining. Average daily sick per cent. to average strength. Ratio per cent. of admission to average strength. RATIO PER CENT. OF DEATH. Invalid- ed. In Hospital. out of Hospital. To treated. To average strength Treated. To average strength. For discharge the service. For change of climate. NORTHERN 1st Grenadier Regiment N. I. Ahmedabad None. 28.8 660. 18 828 846 743 75 11 2 17 4.3 125.4 1.5 1.6 0.2 0.3 62 16 Wing 13th do. Do. None. 12.5 291.2 4 434 438 407 22 3 ... 6 4.2 148.0 0.6 1.0 ... ... 30 13 Squadron 2nd Regiment N. L. C. Rájkot None. 3.9 145.0 3 98 101 91 6 1 ... 3 2.6 67.5 0.9 0.7 ... ... 5 1 1st Company Native Artil- lery. Do. None. 3.0 120. ... 84 84 78 2 1 ... 3 2.5 70.0 1.2 0.8 ... ... 3 1 7th Regiment N. I. Do. None. 12.5 280. 9 375 384 300 65 1 ... 18 4.4 133.9 0.2 0.3 ... ... 24 6 28th do. Do. None. 20.0 528.7 20 563 583 482 75 13 ... 1 3.7 106.4 2.2 2.4 ... ... 35 29 11th do. Bhuj None. 19.2 678.2 14 485 499 452 19 2 2 2 2.8 71.5 0.4 0.2 0.4 0.3 14 2 2nd Regiment N. L. C. Deesa None. 7.4 315.4 7 246 253 239 9 1 .. 4 2.3 77.9 0.3 0.3 .. .. 13 2 18th do. N. I. Do. None. 16.2 627.0 23 508 531 515 7 3 3 6 2.5 81.1 0.5 0.7 .. .. 46 7 23rd do. do. Mhow None. 31.6 524.2 33 739 772 699 61 4 .. 8 6.0 140.9 0.5 0.7 .. .. 46 13 25th do. do. Do. An average strength of 128 men were at Mahid- pur from October to December. 31.0 522.6 10 774 784 747 19 1 3 17 5.9 148.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 5.0 33 18 3rd Regiment N. L. C. Neemuch March to Delhi in Novem- ber on account of Im- perial Assemblage 10.2 333.8 9 412 421 415 2 1 .. 3 3.0 123.4 0.2 0.3 .. .. 12 1 24th do. Do. Do. 18.6 651.6 25 787 812 762 23 7 2 20 2.8 120.7 0.8 1.0 0.2 0.3 24 7 Squadron 3rd Regiment N. L. C. Nusseerabad Squadron left for Delhi in November on account of Imperial Assemblage. 5.2 106.4 4 177 181 172 4 1 .. 4 4.8 166.3 0.5 0.9 .. .. 8 3 16th Regiment N. I. Do. None. 39.2 653.1 12 1,309 1,321 1,081 153 4 3 83 6.0 200.4 0.3 0.6 0.2 0.4 35 12 Squadron 1st Regiment N. L. C. Baroda None. 6.6 144.8 9 205 214 207 7 .. 1 .. 4.5 141.5 .. .. 0.4 0.6 6 7 9th Regiment N. I. Do. None. 11.9 662.0 11 452 463 433 20 2 3 8 1.8 68.2 0.4 0.3 0.6 0.4 36 14 22nd do. Do. None. 22.1 647.0 22 634 656 597 33 6 .. 20 3.4 97.9 0.8 0.9 .. .. 20 20 Detachment 1st Regiment. N. I. Sadra None. 0.5 33.6 .. 33 33 32 1 .. .. .. 1.4 98.2 .. .. .. .. .. .. Detachment 13th do. Do. None. 0.3 16.0 .. 16 16 15 .. .. .. 1 1.9 100.0 .. .. .. .. .. .. 10th Regiment N.I. Mahidpur Marched to Neemuch in October. 33.2 378.0 22 1,074 1,096 1,012 51 3 .. 30 8.7 281.5 0.2 0.7 .. .. 21 8 Wing, 10th do. Augar Left on 24th October to join its Head Quarters at Neemuch. 14.9 243.0 14 360 374 318 18 2 .. 36 6.1 148.1 0.5 0.8 .. .. 9 7 Detachment 28th Regiment N. I. Dwárka None. 3.3 83.9 ... 114 114 106 6 .. .. 2 3.9 135.8 .. .. .. .. .. 6 Detachment ment 7th do. Barda Chowky Joined its Head Quarters at Rájkot in October. 7.4 67.2 1 261 262 253 8 1 .. .. 11.0 388.3 0.4 1.4 .. .. .. 3 Detachments 23rd and 25th Regiments N. I. Indore None. 6.0 224.6 3 209 212 199 8 .. .. 5 2.6 93.0 .. .. .. .. .. 4 Total 365.5 8,937.3 273 11,177 11,450 10,355 694 68 19 333 4.1 125.1 0.5 0.7 0.1 0.2 482 200 SIND 29th Regiment N. I. Kurrachee None. 18.0 627.2 19 597 616 580 6 5 3 25 2.8 95.1 0.8 0.7 0.4 0.4 24 6 27th do. Hyderabad None. 38.0 655.0 32 900 932 848 16 7 .. 61 5.8 137.4 0.7 1.0 .. .. 18 8 30th do. Jacobabad 200 men were detached on escort duty to Khelat from April to December. 34.8 577.9 30 1,438 1,468 1,347 24 42 .. 55 6.0 248.8 2.8 7.2 .. .. 22 15 1st Sind Horse Do. None. 14.3 325.2 14 687 701 664 12 5 1 20 4.3 211.2 0.7 1.5 0.1 0.3 6 12 2nd do. Do. None. 11.8 340. 22 399 421 387 18 2 3 14 3.4 117.3 0.4 0.5 0.7 0.8 23 16 3rd do. Do. Head Quarters marched to Khelat in April on ac- count of escort duty. 17.7 369.7 12 809 821 772 8 21 3 20 4.5 218.8 2.5 5.6 0.3 0.8 4 8 2nd Company Native Artil- lery. Do. A party of about 60 men were detached on escort duty to Khelat from April to December. 7.6 95.4 .. 299 299 272 1 10 .. 16 7.9 313.4 3.3 1.0 .. .. .. 1 Total 142.2 2,990.4 129 5,129 5,258 4,870 85 92 10 211 4.7 171.5 1.7 3.1 0.1 0.3 97 66 Grand Total 856.8 22,583.3 716 26,918 27,634 25,338 1259 247 49 790 3.7 119.2 0.8 1.0 0.1 0.2 1013 515
STATEMENT SHOWING THE SICKNESS AND MORTALITY DURING THE YEAR 1876. 143 TROOPS serving in the BOMBAY PRESIDENCY during the Year 1876144 A SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Summary of the Statistics for the Year 1876 and 6 previous years. Years. Average Daily Strength. Admissions into Hospitals. Ratio per Cent. of Admissions to Average Strength. Mean of all. Average Daily Sick per Cent. to Average Strength. Mean of all. Deaths in Hospital. Ratio of Deaths in Hospital per cent. to Average Strength. Ratio of Deaths in Hospital per cent. to Admis- sions. Deaths out of Hospital and on Leave. Total Deaths out of the Average Strength in the year. Ratio per Cent. of Total Deaths to the Average Strength. Ratio per Cent. to Strength of Hindus who died in and out of Hospital and on Leave. Ratio per Cent. to Strength of Mahomedans who died in and out of Hospital and on Leave. Ratio per Cent. to Strength in- valided for discharge of the Service. Ratio per Cent. to Strength in- valided for change of Climate. 1876 22,583.3 26,918 119.2 3.79 247 1.09 0.90 49 296 1.31 1.14 1.57 4.27 2.17 1875 22,819 25,475 111.63 3.38 213 0.93 0.83 66 279 1.22 1.30 1.18 4.27 1.83 1874 22,750 26,601 116.92 3.67 176 0.77 0.66 72 248 1.09 0.99 1.12 4.60 1.73 1873 22,967 29,035 126.86 3.82 165 0.71 0.56 81 246 1.07 ... ... 4.35 2.11 1872 22,903 36,209 158.09 4.54 226 0.98 0.62 95 321 1.40 3.98 2.13 1871 22,959 29,733 129.50 4.31 236 1.03 0.79 97 333 1.45 3.12 2.10 1870 22,715 28,380 139.08 4.33 191 0.84 0.68 95 286 1.26 3.71 2.33
145 APPENDIX I. ANNUAL GENERAL RETURN exhibiting the Sick of H. M.'s Native Troops in the Bombay Presidency for the Year1876,compared with1875,arranged according to authorized Classification and Nomenclature. Regiment. Station. Average Strength. Average Daily Sick. 1876. Station. Average Strength. Average Daily Sick. 1875. CLASS OF DISEASES. CLASSES OF DISEASES. GENERAL DISEASES. LOCAL DISEASES. Old Age and Debility, 904 and 905. Poisons, 906 to 991. INJURIES. Total. SURGICAL OPERA TIONS. GENERAL DISEASES. LOCAL DISEASES. Old Ave and Debility, 904 and 905 Poisons, 906 to 991. INJURIES. Total. SURGICAL OPERA TIONS. Sub-Division A. Sub-Division B. Diseases of the Nervous System, 59 to 104. Insanity, 105 to 110. Diseases of the Eye, 110 to 185. Diseases of the Heart, 219 to 244, and 250 to 258. Diseases of the Lungs, 290 to 337. Diseases of the Sto mach and Intestines, 149 to 500. Diseases of the Liver, 501 to 520. Diseases of the Spleen, 524 to 530. GonorrhAPPENDIX II. 146 APPENDIX II. RETURN showing the Admissions and Deaths, &c., amongst the Native Troops of the Bombay Presidency at the several Stations for the Year 1876 compared with 1875. 1876. 1875. Division. Regiment. Station. Average Strength. Average Daily Sick. Admis- sions. Deaths in Hospital. Regiment. Station. Average Strength. Average Daily Sick. Admis- sions. Deaths in Hospital. Presidency Division, Aden and Bombay Marine. Detachment 4th Regt. N. I. Bombay 136.0 5.6 100 2 Detachment 4th Regt. N. I. Bombay 141.5 6.3 133 2 20th Regiment N. I. Do. 594.5 42.7 722 13 20th Regiment N. I. Do. 621.7 29.3 624 9 21st do. Do. 568.5 12.5 283 3 21st do. Do. 586.0 17.4 371 5 Right Wing 7th Regt. N. I. Tanna 276.0 4.2 171 2 Right Wing 7th Regt. N. I. Tanna 301.0 8.2 267 5 17th Regiment N. I. Surat 631.6 35.0 1,194 15 26th Regiment N. I. Surat 614.0 34.4 1,240 11 Detachment 20th Regt. N.I. Janjira 17.0 0.1 6 ... Detachment 20th Regt.N. I. Janjira 17.0 1.4 8 ... Do. 21st do. Bushire 16.0 0.7 18 ... Do. 21st do. Bushire 16.0 0.4 37 1 Do. do. Bassadore 12.0 2.7 198 ... Do. do. Bassadore 12.0 2.0 155 ... Do. do. On board the Steamer "Dal- housie" 8.0 0.2 10 ... On board the Steamer "Dal- housie" 8.0 0.3 14 ... Do. do. On board the "Magdala" 8.0 ... ... ... Do. do. On board the "Magdala" 8.0 ... ... ... Do. do. On board the "Abyssinia" 8.0 ... 2 ... Do. do. On board the "Abyssinia" 8.0 ... ... ... Do. do. On board the "Hugh Rose" 9.1 0.2 3 ... Do. do. On board the "Hugh Rose". 10.0 0.2 14 ... Do. do On board the "Quangtung." 8.0 ... ... ... Do. do. On board the "Quangtung" 8.0 0.3 9 ... Details attached to 21st Regiment N. I. Bombay 28.0 1.9 16 5 Details attached to 21st Regiment N. I. Bombay 35.0 2.5 32 1 6th Regiment N. I. Aden 642.6 14.3 425 4 2nd Gr. Regiment N. I. Aden 592.0 13.5 363 1 4th and 5th Co. Sappers and Miners Do. 104.2 2.2 48 ... 5th Co. Sappers and Miners. Do. 97.0 1.5 46 ... Aden Troop Khor Mucksa. 89.5 6.1 158 1 Aden Troop Khor Mucksa, Detachment 6th Regt. N. I. Perim 50.0 0.3 9 ... Detachment 2nd Gr. Regi- ment N. I. Aden 90.7 5.5 188 ... Perim 45.8 1.1 21 ... 2nd Co. Native Artillery Aden 66.8 1.1 29 1 Detachment 21st Regt. N. I. Bagdad 10.0 ... ... ... Total 3,207.0 128.7 3,363 45 Total 3,288.5 125.4 3,551 36 B 196147 APPENDIX II. 1876. 1875. Division. Regiment. Station. Average Strength. Average Daily Sick. Admis- sions. Deaths in Hospital. Regiment. Stations. Average Strength. Average Daily Sick. Admis- sions. Deaths in Hospital Poona Division. 1st Regiment N. L. C. Poona 291.0 10.4 282 3 1st Regiment N. L. C. Poona 301.6 8.9 310 1 5th do. N. I. Do. 589.0 22.1 1,106 ... 8th do. N. I. Do. 690.0 28.1 1,381 2 8th do. Do. 684.0 28.1 1,311 2 17th do. Do. 658.5 22.8 791 3 26th do. Do. 598.0 30.2 793 5 1st Gr. Regiment N. I. Do. 629.5 24.6 779 3 Sappers and Miners Kirkee 360.3 7.3 169 3 Sappers and Miners Kirkee 488.5 9.2 281 4 Detachment Poona Horse. Dhulia 102.0 3.1 41 1 Detachment Poona Horse Dhulia 91.5 1.9 31 1 4th Regiment N. I. Satara 322.6 6.7 363 2 4th Regiment N. I. Satara 352.5 5.6 308 1 19th do. Sholápur 631.5 10.7 326 3 19th do. Sholápur 668.0 14.0 625 2 15th do. Ahmednagar 584.0 13.6 396 4 13th do. Ahmednagar 674.0 14.7 543 2 2nd Gr. Regiment N. I. Belgaum 630.0 16.7 402 5 5th do. Belgaum 634.0 14.4 407 4 14th do. Do. 569.1 17.4 466 5 6th do. Do. 610.5 11.1 356 4 Hd.-qrs. 13th Regt. N. I. Málegaon 348.3 7.7 309 2 15th do. Málegaon 608.0 14.4 517 2 Poona Horse Sirur 314.5 10.1 247 1 Poona Horse Sirur 308.3 10.6 292 3 3rd Regiment N. I. Kolhápur 547.0 16.0 544 2 14th Regiment. N. I. Kolhápur 524.0 20.2 419 4 Detachment 3rd Regt. N. I. Kaládgi 89.8 1.2 63 ... Detachment 14th Regt, N. I. Kaládgi 85.0 1.4 53 1 12th Regiment N. I. Dharwar 642.8 13.6 303 4 12th Regiment N. I. Dharwar 685.0 18.3 363 4 Detachment 4th Regt. N. I. Asirgarh 144.7 5.5 128 ... Detachment 4th Regt. N. I. Asirghar 137.0 4.0 151 ... Total 7,448.6 220.4 7,249 42 Total 8,144.9 224.2 7,607 40 Division. 1st Gr. Regiment N. I. Ahmedabad 660.0 28.8 828 11 3rd Regiment N. L. I. Ahmedabad 700.5 32.4 1,226 15 Wing 13th Regt. N. I. Do. 291.2 12.5 434 3 Squadron 2nd Regt. N. L. C. Rájkot 145.0 3.9 98 1 Squadron 2nd Regt. N. L. C. Rájkot 146.0 3.9 119 1 1st Co. Native Artillery Do. 120.0 3.0 84 1 1st Co. Native Artillery Do. 124.0 2.6 105 1 7th Regiment N. I. Do. 280.0 12.5 375 1 7th Regiment N. I. Do. 247.0 6.8 284 4 28th do. Do. 528.7 20.0 563 13 28th do. Do. 551.2 15.9 550 9 11th do. Bhuj 678.2 19.2 485 2 11th do. Bhuj 671.0 161 314 4 2nd do. N. L. C. Deesa 315.4 7.4 246 1 2nd do. N. L. C. Deesa 288.9 9.4 243 1 18th do. N. I. Do. 627.0 16.2 508 3 18th do. N. I. Do. 583.0 21.2 732 ... 23rd do. Mhow 524.2 31.6 739 4 16th do. Mhow 547.7 24.7 749 5 25th do. Do. 522.6 31.0 774 1 25th do. Do. 517.0 22.5 744 1 3rd Regiment N. L. C. Neemuch 333.8 10.2 412 1 3rd Regiment N. L. C. Neemuch 316.0 12.3 361 1 24th Regiment N. I. Do. 651.6 18.6 787 7 24th Regiment N. I. Do. 622.0 23.2 1,015 11 Squadron 3rd Regt. N. L. C. Nusseerabad 106.4 5.2 177 1 Squadron 3rd Regt. N. L. C. Nusseerabad 122.6 3.7 152 ... 16th Regiment N. I. Do. 653.1 39.2 1,309 4 23rd Regiment N. I. Do. 629.0 17.9 665 1
APPENDIX II. 148 Northern Squadron 1st Regt. N. L. C. Baroda 144.8 6.6 205 ... Squadron 1st Regt. N. L. C. Baroda 158.1 6.6 233 ... 9th Regiment N. I. Do. 662.0 11.9 452 2 9th Regiment N. I. Do. 648.3 15.6 481 11 22nd do. Do. 647.6 22.1 634 6 22nd do. Do. 662.2 26.8 977 9 Detach. 1st Regiment N. I. Sadra 33.0 0.5 33 ... Detach. 18th Regiment N. I. Sadra 41.8 0.4 39 ... Detach. 13th do. Do. 16.0 0.3 16 ... 10th Regiment N. I. Mehidpur 361.0 24.3 858 25 10th Regiment N. I. Mehidpur 378.0 33.2 1,074 3 Detach. 10th do. Angar 223.3 15.4 392 ... Wing 10th Regiment N. I. Augar 243.0 14.9 360 2 Detach. 7th do. Dwárka 80.7 2.8 115 ... Detach. 28th do. Dwárka 83.9 3.3 114 ... Detach. 28th do. Barda Choky 87.9 7.7 283 5 Detach. 7th do. Barda Choky 67.2 7.4 261 1 Detach. 16th and 25th Regi- ments N. I. Indore 217.9 6.0 275 1 Detach. 23rd and 25th Regi- ment N. I. Indore 224.6 6.0 209 ... Total 8,937.3 365.5 11,177 68 Total 8,547.1 318.2 10,714 105 Sind Distict. 29th Regiment N. I. Kurrachee 627.2 18.0 597 5 29th Regiment N. I. Kurrachee 627.8 20.8 538 4 27th do. Hyderabad 655.0 38.0 900 7 27th do. Hyderabad 679.0 27.8 629 2 30th do. Jacobabad 577.9 34.8 1,438 42 30th do. Jacobabad 583.2 25.9 829 13 1st Sind Horse Do. 325.2 14.3 687 5 1st Sind Horse Do. 304.5 10.1 570 6 2nd do. Do. 340.0 11.8 399 2 2nd do. Do. 287.0 9.6 334 3 3rd do. Do. 369.7 17.7 809 21 3rd do. Do. 356.0 101 703 4 2nd Co. Native Artillery Do. 95.4 7.6 299 10 Total 2,990.4 142.2 5,129 92 Total 2,837.5 104.9 3,603 32 Grand Total 22,583.3 856.8 26,918 247 Grand Total 22,819.0 772.7 25,475 213
149 APPENDIX III. APPENDIX III. COMPARATIVE STATEMENT showing the Health of the Native Troops in the Four Divisions of the Bombay Presidency. 1876. 1875. Average Strength. Admissions. Deaths. Average Daily Sick. Ratio per Cent. of Admissions to Average Strength. Ratio of Deaths per Cent. Average Daily Sick per Cent. to Average Strength Average Strength. Admis- sions. Deaths. Average Daily Sick. Ratio per Cent. of Admissions to Average Strength. Ratio of Deaths per Cent. Average Daily Sick per Cent. to Average Strength. In Hospital. In Hospital. To Ad- missions. To Strength. To Ad- missions. To Strength Presidency Division. Bombay circle. 2,320.7 2,723 40 105.8 117.3 1.4 1.6 4.5 2,396.2 2,904 34 102.7 125.4 1.2 1.4 4.3 Aden 886.3 640 5 22.9 72.2 0.7 0.5 2.5 892.3 647 2 22.7 72.5 0.3 0.2 2.5 Poona Division 7,448.6 7,249 42 220.4 97.3 0.5 0.5 2.9 8,145.9 7,607 40 224.2 90.3 0.5 0.4 2.7 Northern Division 8,937.3 11,177 68 365.5 125.1 0.6 0.7 4.1 8,547.1 10,714 105 318.2 125.3 0.9 1.2 3.7 Sind Division 2,990.4 5,129 92 142.2 171.5 1.7 3.1 4.7 2,837.5 3,603 32 104.9 126.9 0.8 1.1 3.6 Total 22,583.3 26,918 247 856.8 119.2 0.9 1.0 3.7 22,819.0 25,475 213 772.7 111.6 0.8 0.9 3.3 BOMBAY: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS.
