1323 IP/13/AF.3 I.P. MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY, FOR THE YEAR 1870. EXTRACTED FROM THE ANNUAL RETURNS, FROM THE REPORTS OF REGIMENTAL MEDICAL OFFICERS, AND FROM THE INSPECTION REPORTS OF DEPUTY INSPECTORS GENERAL OF HOSPITALS. [ALL STATISTICAL INFORMATION IS GIVEN IN THE TABLES AT THE END.] COMPLIED IN THE OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL OF HOSPITAL, INDIAN MEDICAL DEPARTMENT (BOMBAY.) BY SURGEON T. E. P. MARTIN, ACTING SECRETARY TO INSPECTOR GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL DEPARTMENT. Bombay: PRINTED AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1871.
SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY, FOR THE YEAR 1870. EXTRACTED FROM THE ANNUAL RETURNS, FROM THE REPORTS OF REGIMENTAL MEDICAL OFFICERS, AND FROM THE INSPECTION REPORTS OF DEPUTY INSPECTORS GENERAL OF HOSPITALS. [ALL STATISTICAL INFORMATION IS GIVEN IN THE TABLES AT THE END.] COMPILED IN THE OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL OF HOSPITALS, INDIAN MEDICAL DEPARTMENT (BOMBAY.) BY SURGEON T. E. P. MARTIN, ACTING SECRETARY TO INSPECTOR GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL DEPARTMENT. Bombay: PRINTED AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1871
INDEX. The Regiments are placed as they stood in the Army List on the 1st of July 1870. PRESIDENCY DIVISION OF THE ARMY. PAGE PAGE 21st Regiment Native Infantry, Bombay. 1 22nd Regiment Native Infantry, Bombay 3 Detachment 2nd Grenadier Regiment Native Infantry, Bombay 3 Wing of 10th Regiment Native Infantry, Tanna 4 Details attached to the 21st Regiment Native Infantry, Bombay 3 13th Regiment Native Infantry, Surat 5 POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 3rd Regiment Native Light Cavalry, Poona 6 16th Regiment Native Infantry, Ahmed- nuggur 36 9th Regiment Native Infantry, Poona 7 4th Regiment Native Infantry (Rifles), Sholapore 36 23rd Regiment Native Infantry, Poona 11 24th Regiment Native Infantry, Poona 12 2nd Regiment Native Infantry, Sattara 37 1st Company Native Artillery, Malli- gaum 16 Detachment 2nd Regiment Native Infan- try, Asseerghur 38 10th Regiment Native Infantry, Malli- gaum 16 1st Grenadier Regiment Native Infantry Belgaum. 38 Detachment Poona Horse, Dhoolia 23 5th Regiment Native Infantry, Belgaum 43 25th Regiment Native Infantry, Dhoolia. 23 7th Regiment Native Infantry, Dharwar 43 Sappers and Miners, Kirkee 25 17th Regiment Native Infantry, Kolapore 46 Poona Horse, Seroor 27 NORTHERN AND MHOW DIVISIONS OF THE ARMY. 6th Regiment Native Infantry, Ahmeda- bad 50 3rd Regiment Native Infantry, Mhow 64 14th Regiment Native Infantry, Mhow 64 8th Regiment Native Infantry, Ahmeda- bad 50 2nd Regiment Native Light Calvalry, Nee- much 67 18th Regiment Native Infantry, Rajcote. 51 28th Regiment Native Infantry, Neemuch 68 1st Regiment Native Light Cavalry, Deesa 52 11th Regiment Native Infantry, Nusseera- bad 72 20th Regiment Native Infantry, Deesa 57 19th Regiment Native Infantry, Bhooj 60 15th Regiment Native Infantry, Mehidpore 75 26th Regiment Native Infantry, Baroda. 63 Wing 15th Regiment Native Infantry, Au- gur 79 Detachment 25th Regiment Native In- fantry, Burda Chowkey 64 SIND DISTRICT. 29th Regiment Native Infantry, Kur- rachee 82 1st Sind Horse, Jacobabad 84 2nd Sind Horse, Jacobabad 86 27th Regiment Native Infantry, Hydra- bad 83 3rd Sind Horse, Jacobabad 90 30th Regiment Native Infantry, Jacobabad. 90
iv INDEX. ADEN DIVISION. PAGE PAGE 2nd Company Native Artillery 94 3rd Company Sappers and Miners 96 12th Regiment Native Infantry 94 Aden Troop 96 STATISTICAL TABLES. Statement showing the Sickness and Mortality among the Native Troops serving in the Bombay Presidency during the year 98 APPENDIX. Return showing the Health of the Native Troops in the Poona Division for 1870 compared with 1869 106
No. 2061 OF 1871. FROM THE INSPECTOR GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL DEPARTMENT, TO THE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, MILITARY DEPARTMENT. Bombay, 25th May 1871. SIR,ii 5. At the various stations in the Presidency Division, there has been a gene- ral improvement in the health of the troops under all the principal classes of disease. At Tanna where the "Regimental lines" are unsuitable and objectionable, the admissions from "fever" and bowel-complaints in 1870 were 163 and 52, as against 245 and 75 in 1869, the strength of the wing being about the same in both years. There has been but one case of cholera (occurring in the 13th N. I. at Surat) in the whole Division. 6. In the Poona Division and Southern, Mahratta Circle there has been a decided improvement in the health of the troops this year, as compared with 1869, under all heads of the return given in the Appendix. The strength was about the same in both years. There were three cases of cholera in 1870, and 25 cases in 1869; there were also fewer admissions from fever and bowel-complaints. 7. In the Northern and Mhow Divisions the troops in some of the stations were very unhealthy in 1869, suffering principally from fever and scurvy. There has been considerable improvement during 1870, especially in the 11th Regiment N.I.. at Nusseerabad, and the 19th Regiment N. I. at Bhooj, both Regiments having left these stations at the end of 1870 for Sattara and Bombay respectively. The "average daily sick" in the 11th Regiment has been reduced from 60.3 in 1869 to 40.5 in 1870, and the number of deaths from 24 in 1369 to 12 in 1870. The state of health of the 8th Regiment N. I. at Ahmedabad is unsatisfac- tory, and contrasts unfavourably with that of the 6th Regiment N. I. at the same station. Average daily sick... 28.1 ... 6th Regiment N. I., Do.... 48.3 ... 8th do., the last being the highest number of daily sick in the native army for the year. The next in the list being the 20th Regiment N. I. at Deesa, which has an average daily sick of 43.9. 8. In the Sind District the 29th Regiment N. I. at Kurrachee has suffered much less from malarious fever than in 1869, when there were 810 admissions from it, those of 1870 being only 226. The admissions under other heads were about the same in both years. The frontier station at Jacobabad has a medical history this year, which is unlike that of the rest of the native army. Instead of showing an improvement over 1869, there are indications of a condition of general health which is inferior to that of the year before. In the three Regiments of Sind Horse, the admissions and daily sick are greater this year than in 1869; the deaths also are more numerous. In the 30th Regiment N. I., the number of deaths during the year was 32, whilst in 1869 there were 14 fatal cases. The increased mortality has been explained as being the result of a low form of pneumonia, brought on probably by the severity of the cold season at Jacobabad, which would predispose the men in an unusual degree to chest complaints. The
iii men moreover are said to be careless as to warm clothing; such a mortality, how- ever, would seem to point to the general physique of the men being below the proper standardA SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY, FOR THE YEAR 1870. [The Regiments are placed as they stood in the Army List on the 1st July 1870.] PRESIDENCY DIVISION OF THE ARMY. Average strength present during the year, Infantry... 2,446 Average daily sick per cent. to the average strength... 3.06 Ratio of mortality per cent. to the average strength... 0.74 21st Regiment Aatibe Infantry, Bombay. In Medical charge of Surgeon-Major J. GILBERT, Strength 633. During the past year the average strength of the Regiment has been six hundred and thirty-three. Three hundred and ninety-six cases have been admitted. Twelve remained on the 1st of January 1870, making the total treated four hundred and eight. Of these three hundred and eighty-nine were discharged, five died, and fourteen were in hospital on the 31st December 1870. Twenty-five men have been sent away on sick certificate, and twenty-one have been invalided. The percentage of treated to strength has been 64.4, of deaths to strength 0.8, of deaths to treated 1.2. The daily average of sick has been fifteen. 2. The prevailing diseases have been ague, chronic rheumatism, conjunctivitis, diarrh2 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. 8. Twenty-eight cases of contusions have been admitted, but none of any interest. 9. Six admissions for scurvy; two of these died when away on sick leave, the rest re- covered. 10. One case of small-pox of a mild form was admitted and discharged cured; and four cases of chicken-pox were treated. 11. Vaccination has been carefully carried on during the year; one hundred and twenty- eight children have been vaccinated, all successfully except two. 12. No cholera has appeared during the year in the Regiment. 13. Five deaths have occurred, one from ague, a very delicate weakly man, long subject to the disease came into hospital greatly exhausted and died on the third day. One from remittent fever, had been suffering for some days in the Lines before reporting himself sick, he was then exceedingly debilitated, and died on the third day. One from dysentery brought in the last stage of exhaustion and died the following day. One of idiopathic tetanus; had been subject to frequent attacks of fever, which had greatly impaired. his health, complain- ed of stiffness of the muscles of the face and jaws for some days in the lines before he was brought to hospital, he died on the seventh day. One from pneumonia, a very weak man, whose constitution had been worn out from frequent attacks of low fever, gradually sank, and died on the twentieth day. 14. The health of the Regiment during the past year has been very good. In 1869 the admissions were five hundred and one, and in this year, three hundred and ninety-six. How- ever, there has been an increase in the death rate, in 1869 only two fatal cases occurred, in this (1870) five. But this, I think, may be attributed to the debilitated and exhausted state of some of the men, in whom the disease proved fatal, before they came under treatment. 15. No change has been made in the Marine Lines during the year. One pendall was burnt down, bat has since been rebuilt. In the hospital two separate wards are much re- quired, one for treatment of cases such as small-pox, &c., requiring to be isolated, and one for females, for such cases as cannot be advantageously treated in the lines. Wattle and daub partitions are required in four of the servants' houses; they are at present occupied by two or three families eachNORTHERN AND MHOW DIVISIONS OF THE ARMY. 63 able, the flour was not only of inferior quality, bat was always much mixed with dust and small particles of siliceous matter; so that a pound of flour so called, purchased from the bazaar, did not contain a pound of nourishing food. Few among the sepoys purchased more than enough to barely satisfy their appetites; in fact, I believe, the quantity purchased daily by them is less regulated by their actual requirements, than by custom and price, so that it will be readily understood, that living as the men of the 19th Regiment have been living for 3 or 4 years in a debilitating climate on food inferior in quality, and in many cases insufficient in quantity, a deficiency in stamina must be the result. Green vegetables too, were hardly to be obtained in Bhooj, so that when scurvy once made its appearance in a patient, it was not easily got rid of. The march from Bhooj to Ahmedabad was made in every way as easy for the men as possible. They started always so as to be at the fresh camp a little after sunrise, and a halt always took place for one day after every third march. The men were permitted to wear native shoes or walk barefooted if they pleased, in consequence of which there were but few applications at hospital for treatment of sore feet. The constant change of place seemed to have a beneficial effect; the nights too, were unusually warm for December, and it was not till the Regiment had arrived within four or five marches of Ahmedabad, that they became at all cold64 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. The new Native Infantry hospital is in good order, and affords ample accommodation for the sick; but quarters for the medical subordinates are urgently required. The condition of the Native Infantry huts is good with the exception of the roofs, which are reported to be very leaky; the sanitary condition of lines satisfactory. The water supplied to the Native Infantry troops from wells is of bad quality, causing diarrh65 NORTHERN AND MHOW DIVISIONS OF THE ARMY. During the rains, however, the houses are very damp, as the black soil on which they are built retains the moisture. The wells from which the men draw their drinking water are to the north of the lines on the slope between them and the latrines. Though the water has been pronounced by the Chemical Analyser to Government "suspicious on the ground of sewage contamination," no cases of disease fairly attributed to the use of bad drinking water have occurred among the men or their families. The hospital is situated to the east of the lines, and is in the same bomb-proof building as the hospital of the 3rd Regiment N. I; the ventilation is by no means perfect, there being no sufficient outlet for the heated air66 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. by the injection, was readmitted for fever four days after his discharge from hospital, and after two paroxysms was really cured by half dram doses of liquor arsenicalis. The above cases seem to show that quinine hypodermically injected is not more efficacious than when given in the usual way, and moreover that when the subcutaneous treatment is applied to men suffering from well-marked malarial cachexy it is apt to cause sloughing, without producing any compensating good effect. The sloughs are generally about the size of a two anna piece, and the ulcers resulting from them are, owing to the debilitated constitutions of the patients, weak, indolent, and slow of healing. This Regiment suffered more from ague than the 3rd N. I. did, though both Regiments may be said to live in the same lines and be subject to almost the same hygenic conditions. It is worth while to inquire what were the reasons for the disparity in the number of admis- sions for this disease. In the first place the 3rd had fewer parades during the rains, when the number of admis- sions in the 14th was greatest. I do not mean to insinuate that the comparatively numerous parades had an actually injurious effect on the health of the men, but that they increased the number of admissions . For this reason, a man who is not on any duty disliking the confinement of hospital, may have fever daily for 3 or 4 hours, and never apply for admission into hospital, while a man after his attack of fever may find himself too weak and languid to perform his duty, and is consequently constrained to come on the sick list. Secondly, many of the men in the 14th have not even yet, I fear, shaken off the effects of their residence in that very malarious station, Mehidpore. The 3rd came from Poona and were all strong, healthy men, the weakly ones having been weeded out by the hardships of the Abyssinian campaign. A strongly-built Affreedi recruit was admitted in November suffering from great enlarge- ment and induration of the spleen. The anNORTHERN AND MHOW DIVISIONS OF THE ARMY. 67 The treatment of the primary disease was purely local, and a modified mercurial course was generally prescribed for the secondary manifestations. Owing to the large quantity of mercurials requisite for treatment by fumigation, I have thought proper to abandon the use of the mercurial vapour bath, though I consider it by far the best method of exhibiting the drug, and should unhesitatingly again resort to it for the treatment of an obstinate case. Gonorrh68 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. During the first nine months of the year vaccination has been successfully effected, but since the beginning of October, the lymph seems to have been inert, as not a successful case has occurred in the Regiment. At present there are 20 children to be vaccinated, but on our arrival at Deesa they will have immediate attention. No Officer of the Regiment obtained sick leave in India. Lieutenant Gabb proceeded to England on medical certificate, suffering from ague and dysentery, on the 20th of January. The Regiment remained at Neemuch from the end of 1857 up till the 29th December 1870, and during that time suffered occasionally from epidemics, more especially during 1869. During the year there has been no epidemic. During the period from the 20th of October to the date of the departure of the Regiment to Deesa, the men have been remarkably healthy. The following is the rainfall during the last three years:NORTHERN AND MHOW DIVISIONS OF THE ARMY. 69 The country immediately surrounding this station is considerably higher than the site occupied by the station itself, and affords very favourable sites for encamping troops during epidemics. To the south of camp is a ridge some four miles in length on which are many spots very well adapted for this purpose; as they are high, perfectly exposed, but little culti- vated, with a gentle slope which would cause perfect drainage and water at no great distance; these are situated not more than 3½ miles from camp, and are easily reached in any weather. Beyond these again in the direction of Jeerum and Giwall, are many places possessing every necessary qualification for good camping grounds. To the north and north-east of camp, about four miles along the Jawud and Nusseerabad roads, are several other sites, as likewise at about a similar distance along the Oodeypore road; but with regard to these latter, the objection of their being situated in the direction of the old cholera camp of the 45th Regiment might be urged, though I feel certain that after the lapse of so many years, they are perfectly safe from any fear of infection. I may here mention that I have myself pointed out all these sites to the Assist- ant Quartermaster General of this Division, and he perfectly approved of them all. There is one great want which is very much felt in this place, and that is, a sanitarium within easy reach of the station. This I consider is perfectly attainable, for at a distance of 12 or 13 miles to the N. E. of camp, is a range of hills some 300 or 400 feet above the surround- ing country, which I am perfectly convinced might be used for this purpose. No great elevation is necessary, for during the hot weather months the troops are more healthy than at any other period, but it is after the rains, from September till December, that the want of such a place is so much felt. The only thing really necessary is to raise the men above the reach of the malaria from the plains, and I consider these hills perfectly sufficient for that purpose. I have several times visited them at that season, and found the climate pleasant and bracing, water is abundant, more especially at Malana, which I consider to be the spot most suited for such a purpose, as being more easily reached, the road being fair for carts as far as the foot of the hills. I think the returns of sick from this place not only of Europeans but also of natives, must show what a boon a place of this sort would be to all during the months above allued to, and I firmly believe that many a good servant is lost to Government in these parts, simply from the want of some place near at hand to which they could be sent for change. The climate of Rajpootana is, I consider, very trying, not only to Europeans, but also to natives of other parts of Hindoostan, who after a residence of several years in these parts, have their constitutions very seriously affected by it. It is not the extreme heat or cold, to both of which we are exposed, but the very rapid changes from the one to the other which are so prejudicial to health. In no other part of India, I believe, are these changes so rapid. The sun during all seasons of the year is most powerful, more especially during the few months immediately following the rains, at which time, it is more trying on account of the amount of moisture contained in the atmosphere. The rainy season, all things considered, is not so unhealthy as might be expected. The fall varies from 25 inches to 35 inches, or even in some years is as high as 40 inches; during the past year it has only amounted to 27 inches. The manner of the fall varies considerably in different seasons; at times the whole fall will conic down in five or six heavy storms, as much as five or six inches falling in the course of the 24 hours, whilst in other seasons the fall is gradual and distributed pretty evenly over the three months which the rains generally last, commencing in July, and lasting with occasionally breaks of a fortnight till September, or even as late as October. During this season the climate is pleasant though at times hot and steamy, more especially during the breaks in time rains; but steady south-west winds prevent the heat being so much felt as it otherwise would be. The water-supply of camp is at present rather precarious, being for the most part dependent on wells, which may or may hot be pro- perly filled during the rains. Some few of these derive their supply from springs, but by far the greater number are entirely dependent for their supply on the subsoil drainage, and this supply has been rendered much less by the abolishment of a tank which used formerly to exist 18 s
70 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. about 1½ mile to the west of camp; the abolition of which indeed, often causes many of the wells to run dry during the hot season. This tank was done away with on the plea of sanitary im- provement, but I think the returns most fully prove that, since this measure was adopted, the health of the troops has very considerably deteriorated; epidemics have occurred quite as frequently as formerly, and intermittent fever has been much more prevalent. Besides these wells, the only water-supply of camp is the two nullahs running on either side, which are used by the natives to a considerable extent, not only for purposes of ablution, but also for cooking and drinking. On this account, I am of opinion that every care should be taken to prevent their contamination by sewage, &c. Unfortunately this is very difficult to effect, owing to the formation of the ground on which the cantonment is situated, which forces all the natural drainage to take the direction of these nullahs. The overlying soil is very shallow and the substratum is of hard sandstone rock, which directs the whole of the subsoil drainage towards these nullahs, carrying with it of course all the impurities which in so large a cantonment must be numerous. This fact alone is a very serious obstacle to the introduction of the trench system of latrines, as the water would very speedily become contaminated from the use of them. I am of opinion that the water is now to a great extent contaminated by the pursuance of the plan of utilising the ordure in the Government gardens, both of which are situated in the immediate vicinity of those nullahs. The latrine system as at present in vogue for the 28th Regiment and bazaar is far from good; the smell from the la- trines being at times very offensive, more especially in those belonging to the bazaar. I am convinced that, excepting the trench system which is not practicable in all situations, no tho- roughly good system of latrines for natives has been discovered. For the successful adoption of the trench system of latrines, there are two conditions which I should consider indispen- sable. First, that the spot selected should be level and have no lateral drainage, more especially towards wells, nullahs, or rivers, the water of which is used for drinking purposes, &c. Secondly, that the soil should be light and loamy, so as to act rapidly and efficaciously on the ordure. In this station neither of these two requirements can be found combined in any situation; on this account I consider the introduction of this system of latrines impossible. I must now go on to speak of matters concerning more especially this Regiment. First, the lines occupied by the 28th are well situated on ground which slopes gradually down to the nullah, distant about half a mile, the intervening space being smooth maidan in- tersected by several small nullahs. They are clean and kept perfectly free from all rank vege- tation, but when so much has been said in their favour, all has been said which well can be. They contain the most wretched accommodation for the men; the rooms are extremely small, being only 6 feet by 8, and utterly without ventilation except by way of a door. To these two facts, I attribute in a great measure the bad health of the men of the Regiment in this place. The rooms are too small to allow the use of a charpoy, consequently the men have to sleep on the ground, a fact very prejudicial to health, more especially during the latter months of the year, and accounts in a great measure for the large number of admissions from fever. The latrines, distant some 500 yards from the lines, are on the the old principle in which lime and charcoal are used as disinfectants. The hospital for the greater part of the year was situated in the Lawrence Bungalow, together with the staff and cavalry hospital. The build- ing was altogether inadequate to the wants of the three hospitals, a large number of the sick being obliged to be placed in tents; but it was not till November that any other arrangements could be made. At that time two of the old barracks lately vacated by the detachment 1/8 Re- giment were handed over to the Regiment for hospital use. These buildings are airy, clean, and situated close to the lines, and very well adapted to the purpose. During the past year, the number of admissions into hospital have not been quite so numerous as during the previous one, being 1,022 in 1870 against 1,088 in 1869; but still I cannot say that the health of the Regiment has in any way improved, as the different diseases assumed a much more severe form, and the men have recovered but slowly from their effects. The men are at present in a weakly
71 NORTHERN AND MHOW DIVISIONS OF THE ARMY. state, and their constitutions have been considerably impaired by long residence in this part of the country. The chief cause of this lies in the fact that vegetables are procured with great difficulty from the month of March till July or August. This greatly predisposes the men to scurvy, or if it does not actually take the form of that disease, most other diseases are more or less tinged with a scorbutic taint. During the latter part of 1869 and the commencement of 1870, many of the men were affected to a greater or less degree; most of these cases were but slight, and the men were able to perform their duties, remaining the whole time under treatment. It required constant watching and there were frequent inspections of the whole Regiment to keep the disease under. But by dint of care, it was at last almost totally eradi- cated, though it will require time and a complete change of climate thoroughly, to remove all the ill effects it has worked on the constitutions of the men. By the accompanying return it will be seen how large the number of admissions from intermittent fever has been. The number is not quite so large as last year, but the cases have been more obstinate and consequently the daily average number of sick has been higher. This is in a measure due to the weakly state of the recruits of the Regiment, numbering 89, many of whom have been admitted into hospital six or seven times in three months. They are for the most part men enlisted from the Concan, Deccan, and Southern Mahratta Country, and it may be that the sudden change to a climate so widely different from their own, has so seriously affected them. Great care has been taken since their arrival that they should not be over-worked. I must now pass on to speak of the other cases among which I think the 10 admissions from remittent fever most worthy of remark. The cases all occurred in a body of recruits who were marched up here at the end of March or the commencement of April. The Lance Naique in charge of the party, contrary to all orders, marched them during the heat of the day instead of by night, consequently one man was brought into camp with strong fever and violent delirium, and nine other admissions quickly followed, among whom was the Non-Commissioned Officer in charge. Two of these cases rapidly proved fatal, and a third while under the effects of delirium made his escape from the hospital, and in spite of every endeavour to trace him, was never seen or even heard of again. The remainder of the cases after long and tedious illness, in which the severe head symptoms were the chief complications, made a slow recovery, but up to the present time they have not entirely shaken off the effects of their illness. There have been two cases of great interest during the past year. One of them, a sepoy, who was admitted into hospital complaining of pain in his foot which nothing relieved, and which he attributed to an injury received while on service in Persia. After a short time mortification set in and spread rapidly; but for a long time he refused to have any operation performed, until it had spread so far that the limb had to be amputated in the middle third of the thigh. During and after the operation there was no bleeding, and on examination of the limb it was found, that the femoral artery was entirely occluded, and the collateral circulation had not been established. The man recovered steadily but not rapidly, and is now able to get about by means of crutches perfectly well. The second case was in the person of a bugler who had suffered for some time from a swelling in the side of the neck; this at last began to ulcerate and increase rapidly, and took the form of colloid cancer. The tumour was deeply seated, embracing both the external and internal carotid arteries, so that removal of it was rendered almost impossible. The man became gradually more and more cachetic, and it required the constant exhibition of stimu- lants to keep him alive; till one day there was an enormous gush of blood from the tumour, and he was dead. The internal carotid had been eaten through, just at the point where the stylo-glossus and stylo-pharyngeal muscles cross the vessel.
72 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OP THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Of rheumatism the cases have been but mild, but few of them being attended with any complications, though nearly all of them have had a scorbutic origin, and have slowly yielded to treatment. There have been no decided cases of ophthalmia during the entire year, though there have been several cases of inflammation of the conjunctiva; but all of them have been but slight and have lasted but a short time. The inflammation rapidly subsided after the application of a small blister on the temple, and seldom spreading to the second eye. Cases of diarrhNORTHERN AND MHOW DIVISIONS OF THE ARMY. 73 wholesome; but there is an utter absence, so far as the men are concerned, of good drinking water. The soil of the station is impregnated with various salts to such an extent, that it is nearly impossible to cultivate flowers or vegetables; these salts contaminate all the water within reach of the men. Assistant Surgeon May, Analyst of potable waters to Government, in his report made in 1868, characterised some of the wells as "so bad that in most stations the water would not even be used for bathing;"in addition to this there is great difficulty in pro- curing fresh vegetables. At the south end of cantonments where are the lines of the Native Infantry, the soil is in great part composed of decaying rock, a fertile source of malaria. The variation of temperature is very great, from 110º in the shade during the hot weather, to 30º in cold weather before sunrise. All these causes combined make the place a very unhealthy one for men from the Concan and Deccan74 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. five cases and three deaths; one European Officer, Captain Newton, the Quartermaster of the Regiment, died of the disease in eight hours; he had previously been much weakened by diarrhNORTHERN AND MHOW DIVISIONS OF THE ARMY. 75 same period last year; the cases mainly trivial; the deaths which occurred really resulted from previous suffering. There is no reason to doubt that, located in good stations, and in cli- mates congenial to them, the health of the men will this year improve to its normal state among Native Regiments. Head Quarters Wing of H. M.'s 15th Regiment N. I. Mehidpore.76 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. In the report for the month of April it was remarked, that cases of intermittent fever were becoming numerous, and from that time, with the exception of a slight decrease towards the end of May and during the early part of June, admissions into hospital steadily increased in numbers until the end of November. Of 45 recruits who joined the Regiment from the Concan and Deccan between the 1st April and 11th June, there were 102 admissions into hospital from fever alone. The total admissions from all causes during the year was 845, being an increase of 137 on that of 1869. Of these 704 were from fever, the greater number of them being cases of ague, and from repeatedly recurring attacks of this disease, the general health of the wing has been much im- paired. Eight cases of simple remittent fever occurred during the year. From diarrhNORTHERN AND MHOW DIVISIONS OF THE ARMY. 77 The maximum temperature observed in any one of these cases was 105.6; the average temperature during the exacerbation (taken at 4 P.M.) being 103.7, and during the remission (taken at 6 A.M.) 100.8, showing a daily variation of nearly three degrees. The temperature was taken in every case under the tongue, with Dr. Atkins' self-regis- tering thermometers. In the remarks which accompany these instruments, the average tem- perature of the body in the tropics is stated to be nearly one degree higher than it is in tem- perate regions; but with the two I have in use, I have not found the temperature in health to be above his normal standard, viz., 98.4. Rheumatism .78 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. The flooring is of brick; there are six small circular ventilators in the roof, for these it has been recommended to substitute two or three larger ones in the ridge. A ground plan of the hospital is given below; it has been recommended also that suitable buildings should be erected in the hospital compound for the 1st and 2nd class hospital servants; at present there are none for them, and they have consequently to live in the lines. Dry earth is used in the hospital latrine. Ground plan of Hospital. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75007208.tif] The lines are situated about 150 yards from the river, Officers' compounds intervening. They consist of eight lines of huts running north and south, and cover a space of ground 760 feet in length by 440 in breadth, the intervals between the lines being 21 yards across. The rows of huts are well ventilated, and are kept in good repair, but being built without plinth in a low situation and on porous soil, some of them become very damp during and after the rains; to this cause much sickness is doubtless due. The ground between and around the rows of huts has been raised by laying down gravel, so as to keep them as dry as possible, but nothing but the building of new lines will entirely remedy this evil. Latrines. NORTHERN AND MHOW DIVISIONS OF THE ARMY. 79 Wing of A. M.'s 15th Regiment A. I. Augur (Central India).80 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Remarks by the Deputy Inspector General, Indian medical Department, Northern and mhow Divisions. The Annual Returns for 1870 having all been forwarded to the Inspector General in January last, and no Memos. of them retained in this office, I am unable to do more than fur- nish a bare statement of the movements which have taken place among the native troops in the Northern and Mhow Divisions. Two troops of 1st Regiment Light Cavalry proceeded from Deesa viâ Ahmedabad to Poona on 24th October 1870, and the head quarters followed on 26th January last. Two troops of same Regiment which were at Rajcote marched there likewise viâ Limree and Baroda on 24th December. These were replaced by the head quarters and 4 troops of the 2nd Bombay Light Cavalry from Neemuch, leaving that station for Deesa on 29th December, and arriving there on 24th January following. Two troops of this Regiment likewise left Neemuch on 8th October and reached Rajcote on 5th December. The 3rd Bombay Light Cavalry arrived at Neemuch from Poona on 27th December, and one squadron of the Regiment proceeded to Nusseerabad, where it arrived on 23rd Janu- ary last. In the matter of Infantry reliefs, the following were effected:NORTHERN AND MHOW DIVISIONS OF THE ARMY. 81 whole, the men were below par, and not in the best condition to resist the united influences of bad water and malaria, which render a station like Nusseerabad not the most desirable for a Regiment lately fever-stricken. The diseases which have prevailed the most have been fevers of malarious origin, and affections of the respiratory and digestive organs. The hospital accommodation has been sufficient; one instance was met with, however, in which it was quite the reverse. This was in the hospital at Mehidpore which contained the sick of the head quarters 15th Regiment N. I., Mehidpore being from sanitary causes a very unhealthy station. The hospital is much too small; it consists of one ward only, having a superficial area of 1,238 feet and of cubic feet 19,189; this apportioned to 18 patients, gives 68 superficial and 1,066 cubic feet to each. During the rains the accommodation is far too small; the sanitary condition of the lines of this Regiment (15th N. I.) is decidedly bad. They are situated on a "dead levelSIND DISTRICT. Average strength present during the year 2,974 Average daily sick per cent. to the average strength 5.96 Ratio of mortality per cent. to the average strength 2.32 h. m.'s 29th or 2nd Belooch Regiment n. i. In Medical charge of Surgeon E. MORTON, Strength 677. 677. I am happy to be able to report favourably on the general health of the Regiment (strength as per margin) during the year 1870, as compared with the preceding year which was so abnormally unhealthy throughout the Province of Sind. The admissions for the year under review were 589 against 1,200 (or less than one-half of the admissions in 1869), which with the 43 remaining at the close of the latter year, make a total of 629 under treatment from the 1st January to 31st December 1870. Of the above total, 589 were discharged, cured, or experienced relief from treatment; 2 died, and 38 remained at the end of the year. The rainfall which in 1869 was so excessive and to which was due the deadly form of paludal fever (commonly known as "Low Sind fever," which swept off so large a number of the inhabitants of Upper and Lower Sind), approached nearer to the normal standard in 1870. Subjoined is the comparative table:SIND DISTRICT OF THE ARMY. 83 of the Regimental lines, may be attributed the marked improvement in the general health. In July 1869 a rainfall of 13 inches 54 cents rendered the pendalls, sanitarily speaking, uninhabitable, or in other words, foci for the generation of malarial poison, a condition which rendered their evacuation for repair and reconstruction temporarily necessary in the month of November, when more than one-third of the Regiment was prostrated from paroxysmal fever. The floors were dug up and removed to the depth of 6 inches, the walls were carefully scraped, lime-washed and colour-washed. Due attention was paid to lateral ventilation, which had been extremely defective, and roof ventilators of improved construction were substituted for the imperfect ventilators then in use. The following were the prevailing diseases throughout the year, and the admissions are noted comparatively with the prevalence of the same diseases in 1869, as below:84 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. exposure to dust-storms and solar glare. Diseases of the integumentary system furnish a large number of the causes of admissions. A good many ulcers are due primarily to shoe-bites and remain for a long time without healing; none of the cases headed violent deaths or diseases were of sufficient gravity to call for special remarkSIND DISTRICT OF THE ARMY. 85 Admissions from pneumonia 12, fatal cases 5. First case in April I did not see; second, a man of twenty years' service, whose constitution was completely shattered; third, fourth, and fifth cases proved rapidly fatal86 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. mornings, frequently brings on bad attacks of fever, pneumonia and rheumatism, and must always have the effect of making Jacobabad a most unhealthy station, and one which no sanitary precaution could improve. The trees in the station, which are such a boon in the hot weather, would die were the Indus water cut off. The roads, owing to the sandy and dusty state of the soil, are obliged to be covered with a coarse sort of grass, which probably produces malaria as it decays. The quarters of the men, as far as you can see, are clean, but most likely more confined than necessary, and wanting thorough ventilation. The ordinary diet of the men is as follows: Flour, rice, dhall, vegetable, meat, milk, curd, and ghee; and here I may remark that on several occasions lately, men came under my observation who were very insufficiently nourished and wanting in strength and muscular vigour, in fact in a weak state from want of sufficient or proper food. They complain that, their pay being so small, they were unable to procure enough food for themselves and their families. Free trade being allowed in Jacobabad, the banias charge the men whatever they like; this is a subject which ought to be inquired into, as most likely it seriously affects the health of every married man in the Regiment, who is not owner of the horse he rides. As to local diseases, pneumonia, or rather the type of the disease you find here, is most likely uncommon. Its chief feature being the rapidity with which its runs through the several stages of the disease and its fatality. The health of the European Officers for the past year has been very unsatisfactory; 5 have left the station on sick leave. It may be worthy of remark, that long service here has a peculiar effect on the brain, causing loss of memory or extreme nervous prostration. These symptoms are common enough to remark on them. G. M.'s 2nd Regiment Sind Horse. Jacobabad.SIND DISTRICT OF THE ARMY. 87 2nd Sind Horse Hospital in the month of November, also in several cases in the Civil Hospital. In the month of December I gave it to 22 patients in the 2nd Sind Horse Hospital. Of the 34 cases, 33 recovered, generally after taking it from one to three days, or in much the same time as it takes when quinine is given. Besides the above cases and those in the Civil Hospital, I have given the hyposulphite of soda most successfully in several other cases. Among these the First Hospital Assistants of the 1st and 2nd Sind Horse, both of them used to suffer constantly from ague. They had tried quinine, arsenic, &c., but still they suffered a good deal; the fever never left them for many days together. The Hospital Assistant of the 2nd Sind Horse was free from fever for a fortnight after taking only three doses of the hyposulphite of soda, the Hospital Assistant of the 1st Sind Horse had no return for a month. A servant of mine has not taken anything else but the soda hyposulphite for his ague, and recovered under its use easily. In the use of this medicine, I proceeded very cautiously, wishing to give it a fair trial, rather undervaluing the results than otherwise. Some of the first cases I gave it in, were those of men who, like the Hospital Assistant, used to get very frequent attacks, and were off and on for a long time in hospital; they all benefited by it. One of these men has got such thorough confidence in its usefulness, that he has come to me more than once for "three doses of the medicine" which he says will put him all right again, and he does not wish to be on the sick list. Professor Polli believes that relapses after taking sulphites, are of much less frequent occurrence than after the use of quinine. My experience is not extended enough to confirm or disprove that statement, though the cases of my Hospital Assistant and one or two sowars would seem to be favourable to the Professor's views. Even though my cases up to this time amount to only between 50 and 60 (including those treated elsewhere), yet I think I do not make an extravagant statement when I say that the "sulphites" (hyposulphite of soda was the representative of the class), do stop the recurrence of attacks of malarious fever as well as quinine. Dr. Polli recommends sulphite of magnesia as having more curative power, and the hyposulphite of soda as having more prophylactic virtue. I could not get any of the first mentioned medicine from Mr.Kemp of Bombay, so was content to get and try the latter only, it having answered well as a curative agent, perhaps it is best to employ it as combining both qualities. Professor Polli says that the "sulphites" act not on the materies morbi, but they fortify the blood against the action of the poison. Hyposul- phite of soda is useful also in dyspepsia, more particularly when acidity is present, and against sarcinæ ventriculi. It is also a laxative, and useful in congestion of the chylopoetic viscera, thus combining qualities which make it one of the most useful medicinal agents we can have in malarious fevers and their complications. It is also an easily made and a very cheap sub- stance; it is however contra-indicated in cases of ague complicated with diarrh88 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. form, Eleven such cases were admitted, of which five died; most of them came when the disease had advanced too far, the constitutions of the generality of the men being very as- thenic and the disease of adynamic type; very little can be done for themSIND DISTRICT OF THE ARMY. 89 disabled a civilian from doing his duty, nor even an infantry soldier, being in parts which dis- abled the sowars from riding. Other cases I am sorry to say were originally caused or increased in size from neglect or intention so as to get off work. Having noticed the most important of the diseases from which the Regiment suffered during the year, I proceed to notice, as I did last year, about such matters as came under the eye of the Medical Officer, and will begin likewise with90 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. H. M.'s 3rd Regiment Sind Horse. In Medical charge of Assistant Surgeon E. COLSON, Strength 306. I took over charge of the 3rd Regiment Sind Horse, previously vacated. by Assistant Surgeon Lawrance, from Assistant Surgeon Banks on August 5th 1870. Previous to my arrival five deaths had occurred; three resulting from pneumonia, two from intermittent fever. Whilst the Regiment was under my charge, three deaths happened; one from pneumonia, two from fever. The pneumonia case was an old man, the hospital orderly, who was quite unable to make head against the disease. The two cases of fever terminating fatally, were both brought into hospital from out-post duty in a state of collapse from which they never recoveredSIND DISTRICT OF THE ARMY. 91 hospital from Surgeon R. Byramjee on the 9th April; 9 deaths had already occurred. Two companies of the Regiment accompanied the 1st Sind Horse out marching at the commencement of November, and were in medical charge of the Assistant Surgeon 1st Sind Horse. They were a month away, and from reports received, I found more than half the number of men constantly on the sick list, and the occurrence of 2 deaths from pneumonia. The total number of deaths during the year amount to 32; this large mortality I can only account for to be due to the total want of stamina in the men, occasioned by long residence, in this very unhealthy station. Of the prevailing diseases fever ranks first, every human being, European or native, that came under my notice suffered from occasional attacks of it. This being my first year in Jacobabad, I cannot compare the severity and type of fever to those of the past. Ague of the quotidian and tertian varieties are very common; I have had some very obstinate cases under treatment, both of the remittent and intermittent forms. In the months of October and November several were brought to hospital in a semi-unconscious state, and they turned out to be very serious cases. The disease prevails to a slight extent all the year round, but most cases occur during what is called the fever season, viz., from August to end of November; this corresponds to the time when nullahs and masses of water about the place begin to dry up. In the intermittent form of fever, the stages noticed by authors, and which are well exemplified in the fevers of these parts of India, are not at all marked; the hot stage is the only one always present92 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. for this low form of pneumonia except assisting nature; blisters fail completely, warmth to chest soothes the patients, good nourishment and stimulants are administered, together with medicines when malaria is suspected to exist in the system. During the year two cases of sunstroke occurred among the men, and about 4 among the followers of the Regiment, they all resulted from direct exposure to the sun and were of the worst form, viz., the cardiac; all the cases baffled treatment. DiarrhSIND DISTRICT OF THE ARMY. 93 At Jacobabad there has been a decrease in the admissions in the Cavalry Regiments, and a slight increase in the 30th Regiment N. I. The lines of all the Regiments are in good order and there is no overcrowding. The camp is intersected by canals which doubtless contribute towards the cause of fever, and the trees are, if anything too numerous, and obstruct the breeze a good deal; but they are of great use in the heat of the day, and enable the men to move about in the shade without suffering from the sun, which compensates in a great measure for any obstruction they may cause to the breeze. In the hot months there is almost a perfect stillness of the atmosphere, and Europeans are obliged to use punkahs night and day. Cholera I am glad to say has not prevailed in Sind during the past year. In the previous year, although it raged amongst the civil population at Hydrabad, Kotree and Kurrachee, there was not a single case amongst the native troops; this I attributed at the time, to the great care that was taken to prevent all communication. With the exception of Kurrachee, the supply of water is abundant and good, and this year I have heard no complaints made regarding the quality of the food obtainable at the different stations. The Belooch Regiment are meat-eaters, which I consider to be a great advantage, as I have no doubt a moderate amount of animal food contributes to health, and enables a man to undergo, when requisite, a greater amount of exposure and fatigue than one subsisting entirely on a vegetable diet. A Lock Hospital has been established at Kurrachee, but a sufficient time has not elapsed to enable me to report on the usefulness of the institution. I consider that a similar institution should be established at Hydrabad, where venereal disease is at all times unusually prevalent. I venture to think that it would benefit the community at large, and be the means of curing many of the unfortunate women who, once diseased, go on from bad to worse, losing their health, and dying of the worst forms of secondary syphilis. Annual Return of Sick of Native Troops for 1870:ADEN DIVISION. Average strength present during the year 913 Average daily sick per cent. to the average strength 4.93 Ratio of mortality per cent. to the average strength 0.55 h. m.'s 2nd Company Native Artillery. In Medical charge of Surgeon R. W. JAMES, Strength 86. The men of the Company during the past 10 months have been remarkably healthy. The admissions from ague and scurvy were less by one-half, whilst there were no cases of enthetic disease. The daily average number of sick was under 3. The treated to strength was 8.6; no deaths occurred. I gave over medical charge of the Company in November. Report by Assistant Surgeon T. Barnwell while in charge of the above Company. The sick of No. 2 Company Native Artillery, previous to the 9th November 1870, were treated at Camp Aden under the charge of Dr. James, Civil Surgeon (vide annexed Report); this was owing to the want of hospital accommodation at Steamer Point, where the battery is stationed. During the month of November the number of admissions were 8:PLAN OF THE PENINSULA OR CAPE OF ADEN SCALE 200 YARDS TO AN INCH. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75007265.tif]
ADEN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 95 The average strength during the year was 638; there were 846 admissions into hospital, and in all 6 deaths. From the fact of there having been 952 admissions in the previous year, it would appear that the health of the Regiment had improved during that under review; but if the admissions for guinea-worm, amounting to 183, are deducted, which may fairly be done, as the men brought the complaint with them from Dharwar, and there was not a single case taken into hospital during 1870, those for other diseases increased by 75. The percentage of treated to strength was 130.3; of deaths to strength was 0.9; the average number of daily sick was 32, and there were 37 men invalided. Ague .96 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. The left wing embarked at Aden on the 12th of December in the sailing ship Queen of Australia, and reached Vingorla on the evening of the 13th of January of this year. During the latter part of the voyage, the men suffered much from scurvy, and many not actually on the sick list had to be given antiscorbutics daily; of course the non-cooking suffered, but they were not the only men, for the Punjaubees, who never before showed a trace of the disease, were attacked, showing that men who have resided at Aden for any time, even though they may not stint themselves in any way, have the seeds of the disease in them ready to burst forth when a favourable time comes. The right wing was forty-two days at sea in the sailing ship Calcutta, and the men suffered much more than those of the left wing, as was shown by their thin and delicate appearance, and the fact that the smallest abrasion of the skin from a boot was followed by unhealthy ulcers. For part of the time on board, they were on a reduced allowance of water, which of course was a great privation and not calculated to improve their health. The Regiment was looking thin and weak before it left Aden, and unquestionably the want of nourishing food for such a length of time at sea has done much towards making men previously scorbutic, worse. The only thing now to be hoped for is, that comfortable quarters, good air, and plenty of fresh vegetables will quickly set them up. H. M.'s 3rd Company Sappers and Miners. In Medical charge of Surgeon W. JAMES, Strength 104. I have great satisfaction in recording the healthy state of the Company throughout the year. The daily average number of sick was only 3.3 per cent., whilst the treated to strength was 84; no deaths occurred. The prevailing diseases were ague and contusions; the total number admitted with the former was only one more than in 1869, and from contusion about one-half less; the falling off in the admissions from contusion is attributable to the men not being so constantly employed in blasting operations. Scurvy was only met with in three cases; this is a disease that is yearly decreasing, the facilities for procuring vegetables being greater, and the kinds procurable being more varied than they were a few years back. I gave over charge of the Company to Assistant Surgeon Alleyne in the month of November. Report by Surgeon Horace Day. Having only been a few days in charge of No. 3 Company of the Sappers and Miners, I have but little to add to the report of Surgeon James, Staff Surgeon. The men appear to be pretty healthy considering the time they have been in Aden; but although there is no pro- nounced scurvy amongst them, many of them are in an anADEN DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 97 Report by the Superintendent Indian Medical Department, Aden. The few native troops at Aden have been more than ordinarily healthy. Their usual number was diminished by the relief of the 12th Regiment N. I. by the 5th N. I. at the close of the year. After 2 years' service at Aden the 12th Regiment N. I. returned to India, in perhaps better physique than on arrival, when a large number of the men suffered greatly from dracunculus, originating at Dharwar. By reason of the saline nature of the water from the Aden wells, guinea-worm cannot exist. H. M.'s 5th Regiment N. I. has recently arrived, and is a fine healthy corps with a large proportion of young soldiers. The Company of Native Artillery has been very healthy, having only one death during the year. The Company of Sappers and Miners has also been in excellent health; there has been no death during the year. The diseases have been of the ordinary Indian type; the cases of intermittent fever in my opinion are not endemic, but traceable to India for their origin. The "febriculæ," it is true, do occur at Aden, but they arise from sudden transitions of climate and temperature and from exposure, especially from indiscriminate sleeping in the open air during the terrible nights when dews, almost as intense as in the Mediterranean, suddenly fall, checking the excretion from the body surface. The military native followers attached to the several departments are badly housed, and hospital accommodation for them is also inferior. Vegetable diet being difficult to obtain in sufficient quantity and of good quality, scurvy and skin diseases are prevalent. Fever also and dysentery are more common amongst these followers than among the better-cared-for sepoys. 25 s
98 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Statement showing the SICKNESS and MORTALITY among the NATIVE N.B.STATEMENT SHOWING THE SICKNESS AND MORTALITY DURING THE YEAR 1870. 99 TROOPS serving in the BOMBAY PRESIDENCY during the year 1870. they stood on the 1st July 1870. RATIO OF DEATHS PER CENT. INVALIDED. HINDOOS. MUSSULMAN. Strength of Regiment on 31st December 1870. Regiment. Average number of conse- cutive nights in bed. REMARKS. To Treated To Average Strength. For Discharge the Service. For Change of Climate. Strength. Died per cent. to Strength, in and out of Hospital and on leave. Strength. Died per cent. to Strength, in and out of Hospital and on leave. OF THE ARMY. 1.2 0.8 25 25 456 2.4 107 2.0 544 21st Regt. N. I. 4½ 5.7 3.5 4 2 105 1.5 25 0.0 130 Details do. 0 1.5 0.8 27 0 528 1.5 75 0.0 598 22nd Regt. N. I. 7 0.0 0.0 5 3 173 0.0 23 0.0 196 Detachment 2nd Grenadier Regt. N. I. 4½ 0.2 0.3 18 9 241 1.2 30 0.0 271 Right Wing 10th Regiment N. I. 3½ 0.6 0.8 20 10 547 0.7 90 1.1 652 13th Regt. N. I. 5 DIVISION. 0.0 0.0 19 1 251 0.0 177 0.0 450 3rd Regt. Native Light Cavalry. 4 0.3 0.3 31 11 626 0.6 70 0.1 705 9th Regiment N. I. 3 0.6 0.8 27 13 503 0.6 124 1.6 661 23rd do. 3 0.4 0.6 33 11 466 1.5 107 0.9 573 24th do. 6¼ 0.0 0.0 40 0 117 0.8 24 0.0 141 1st Company Na- tive Artillery. 4 1.0 1.7 12 2 289 2.4 57 0.0 351 Head Quarters 10th Regt. N. I. 4½ 0.4 0.5 26 39 576 1.0 109 0.0 553 25th Regt. N. I. 3 0.0 0.0 0 3 20 0.0 130 0.0 151 Detachment Poona Horse. 2 0.0 0.0 11 2 408 0.0 49 0.0 457 Sappers & Miners. 4 1.0 0.7 14 8 23 0.0 167 2.3 190 Poona Horse. 3 0.5 0.0 0 8 616 0.5 85 0.0 730 16th Regt. N. I. 4½
100 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Statement showing the SICKNESS and MORTALITY among the NATIVE REGIMENT. Station. Movements in the year. Average Strength for the year. Number of Admissions. Number of Deaths in Hospital. Average Daily Sick per cent. to average Strength. Ratio per cent. of Admis- sions to average Strength. POONA 4th Regiment N. I. Sholapoor Proceeded from Shola- poor to Baroda in October 1870. 663 644 1 1.8 97.1 2nd Grenadier Regiment N. I. Sattara Proceeded from Sattara to Poona in November 1870. 279 495 1 4.6 177.4 Detachment 2nd Grena- dier Regiment N. I. Asseerghur None. 143 200 0 3.6 139.9 1st Grenadier Regiment N. I. Belgaum Do. 680 647 3 3.1 95.2 5th Regiment N. I. Do. Marched to Aden in November 1870. 647 348 3 1.9 53.8 7th do. Dharwar None. 527 475 3 4.5 90.1 Detachment 7th Regiment, N. I. Kulladghee.. The Detachment joined the Head Quarters at Dharwarin May 1870 and was replaced by another Detachment. 67 37 1 1.5 55.2 17th Regiment N. I. Kolapoor None. 701 313 6 1.6 44.3 NORTHERN 6th Regiment N. I. Ahmedabad None. 562 809 6 4.9 143.9 8th do. Do. Do. 601 1,174 1 7.9 195.3 1st Squadron 1st Regt. Native Light Cavalry. Rajcote Marched to Poona in December 1870. 105 157 1 1.7 149.5 18th Regiment N. I. Do. None. 619 766 7 1.9 123.7 1st Regiment Native Light Cavalry. Deesa Do. 298 581 1 5.5 194.9 20th Regiment N. I. Do. Marched to Bhooj in November 1870. 630 971 2 6.9 154.1 19th do. Bhooj Marched to Bombay in November 1870. 605 907 4 3.3 149.9 20th do. Baroda Marched to Nusserabad in October 1870. 638 1,223 7 5.0 191.7 Detachment 25th Regi- ment N. I. Burda Chowkey Marched to Dhoolia in December 1870. 84 276 0 10.5 328.5
STATEMENT SHOWING THE SICKNESS AND MORTALITY DURING THE YEAR 1870. 101 TROOPS serving in the B0MBAY PRESIDENCY during the year 1870102 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Statement showing the SICKNESS and MORTALITY among the NATIVE REGIMENT. Station. Movements in the year. Average Strength for the year. Number of Admissions. Number of Deaths in Hospital. Average Daily Sick per cent. to average Strength. Ratio per cent. of Admis- sions to average Strength. NORTHERN Detachment 25th Regi- ment N. I. Dwarka Marched to Dhoolia in November 1870. 90 125 0 .3.6 138.8 Do. 6th and 8th Regi- ments N. I. Sadra None. 50 56 0 1.0 112.4 3rd Regiment N. I. Mhow Do. 570 538 5 2.4 94.4 14th do. Do. Do. 501 575 2 4.2 114.5 2nd do. Native Light Cavalry. Neemuch Marched to Deesa in December 1870. 413 354 1 2.9 85.7 28th Regiment N. I. Do. None. 589 1,005 5 5.8 170.8 11th do. Nusseerabad Marched to Sattara in December 1870. 633 1,079 12 6.5 170.5 Detachment 14th Regi- ment N. I. Indore Do. to Mhow in December 1870. 213 107 0 1.2 50.2 Head Quarters 15th Re- giment N. I. Mehidpore None. 345 845 3 7.2 244.9 Left Wing 15th Regiment. N. I. Augur Do. 263 335 0 7.2 127.3 SIND 29th Regiment N. I. Kurrachee None. 638 585 2 5.3 91.8 27th do. Hydrabad Do. 657 501 6 1.9 76.2 1st Sind Horse Jacobabad Do. 381 1,087 11 7.6 285.3 2nd do. Do Do. 365 695 10 8.9 190.4 3rd do. Do Do. 306 905 8 10.9 295.7 30th Regiment N. I. Do. Do. 588 1,241 32 6.3 211.0 ADEN 2nd Company Native Artillery. Aden None. 85 55 0 3.7 63.5 12th Regiment N. I. Do. Marched to Bombay at the end of December 1870. 638 846 5 5.0 132.6 3rd Company Sappers and Miners. Do. None. 104 83 0 3.1 79.8 Aden Troop Do Do. 85 263 0 6.3 309.4
103 STATEMENT SHOWING THE SICKNESS AND MORTALITY DURING THE YEAR 1870. TROOPS serving in the BOMBAY PRESIDENCY during the year 1870104 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Summary of the Statistics Average daily Strength. Admissions into Hospital. Ratio per cent. of Admissions to average Strength; mean of all. Average daily Sick per cent. to average Strength; mean of all. Deaths in Hospital. Ratio of Deaths in Hospital per cent. to average Strength. Ratio of Deaths in Hospital per cent. to Admissions. 22,715 28,380 139.08 4.33 191 0.84 0.68 BOMBAY, The 25th May 1871.
SUMMARY OF STATISTICS FOR THE YEAR 1870. 105 for the year 1870. Deaths out of Hospital and on leave. Total Deaths out of the average in the year. Ratio per cent. of total Deaths to the average Strength. Ratio per cent. to Strength of Hindoos who died in and out of Hospital, and on leave. Ratio per cent. to Strength of Mussul men who died in and out of Hospital, and on leave. Ratio per cent. to Strength invalided for Discharge the Service. Ratio per cent. to Strength invalided for Change of Climate. 95 286 1.26 0.32 0.94 3.71 2 33 T. E. P. MARTIN, Surgeon, Acting Secretary to Inspector General, Indian Medical Department .
BOMBAY: PRINTED AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS BYCULLA. 106 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMAY. Appendix. Return showing the HEALTH of the NATIVE TROOPS in the POONA DIVISION for 1870 compared with 1869. 1870. 1869. CORPS. Stations. Average Strength. Average Daily sick. ADMISSIONS. DEATHS. Stations. Average Strength. Average Daily sick. ADMISSIONS. DEATHS. Fever. Bowel Com- plaint. Cholera. Other Causes. Total. Fever. Bowel Com- plaint. cholera. Other causes. Total. Fever. Bowel Com- plaint. Cholera. Other causes. Total. Fever. Bowel Com- plaint. Cholera. Other causes. Total. 3rd Regiment Native Light Cavalry. Poona 433 20.3 191 48 ... 345 584 ... ... ... ... ... Poona. 418 16.8 204 38 ... 318 560 ... ... ... ... ... 9th Regiment N. I. Ditto 664 18.4 360 40 ... 213 613 ... ... ... 2 2 Ditto 675 26.8 374 57 ... 283 714 1 ... ... ... 1 23rd ditto Ditto 627 22.7 500 62 1 272 835 ... 2 1 2 5 Ditto 635 23.2 586 37 ... 276 899 2 ... ... 2 4 24th ditto Ditto 653 14.0 240 60 ... 198 498 1 ... ... 3 4 Ditto 739 22.0 248 66 ... 159 473 ... 2 ... 3 5 1st Company Native Artillery Malligaum 123 8.4 97 5 ... 56 158 ... ... ... ... ... Malligaum 128 4.8 77 9 ... 72 158 ... ... ... 2 2 Head Quarters 10th Regiment N. I. Ditto 335 14.9 373 22 1 191 587 1 1 1 3 6 Ditto 312 14.5 234 40 1 213 488 ... ... ... ... ... 25th Regiment N. I. Dhoolia 457 28.2 286 17 1 186 490 ... ... ... 2 2 Dhoolia 423 23.4 173 26 5 256 460 1 ... 4 ... 5 Detachment Poona Horse Ditto 151 3.6 70 1 ... 31 102 ... ... ... ... ... Ditto 150 2.3 58 4 ... 19 81 1 ... ... ... 1 Sappers and Miners Kirkee 466 13.0 168 33 ... 186 387 ... ... ... ... ... Kirkee 433 15.0 340 24 1 177 542 ... ... ... ... ... Poona Horse Seroor 285 5.5 67 10 ... 121 198 ... ... ... 2 2 Seroor 294 8.6 194 2 ... 138 356 ... ... ... 1 1 16th Regiment N. I. Ahmednuggur 711 13.2 212 44 ... 304 560 2 ... ... 1 3 Ahmednuggur. 724 18.5 293 85 ... 412 790 1 1 ... 1 3 4th ditto. Sholapoor 663 12.0 433 36 ... 175 644 ... ... ... 1 1 Sholapoor 677 18.5 496 48 ... 223 767 ... ... ... 4 4 2nd Grenadier Regiment N. I.. Sattara 279 13.9 192 44 ... 259 495 ... ... ... 1 1 Sattara 285 14.0 249 33 1 248 531 ... ... 1 1 2 Detachment ditto Asseerghur 143 5.1 116 17 ... 67 200 ... ... ... ... ... Asseerghur 114 3.5 82 15 ... 48 145 ... ... ... ... ... 1st Grenadier ditto Belgaurn 680 21.4 327 42 ... 278 647 1 1 ... 1 3 Belgaum 722 32.1 593 63 ... 364 1,020 3 1 ... 5 9 5th Regiment N. I. Ditto 647 12.5 90 38 ... 220 348 1 ... ... 2 3 Ditto 637 14.0 114 34 ... 232 380 ... ... ... 3 3 7th. ditto Dharwar 527 24.1 110 36 ... 329 475 ... ... ... 3 3 Dharwar 540 19.4 172 60 11 334 577 1 ... 7 2 10 Detachment ditto Kulladghee 67 1.2 8 3 ... 26 37 1 ... ... ... 1 Kulladghee 61 21.6 19 11 3 16 49 ... ... 1 ... 1 17th Regiment N. I. Kolapoor 701 11.0 53 44 ... 216 313 ... 1 ... 5 6 Kolapoor 706 12.0 57 20 3 206 286 ... 1 1 ... 2
PRESIDENCY DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 3 and Mochees, all of them meat-eating. There is generally a higher. rate of sickness in this Regiment, but this may be accounted for, probably by their almost constant residence in Bombay, whilst the stay of other Sepoy corps is only temporary." Detachment H. M.'s2nd Grenadier Regiment N. I. In Medical charge of Surgeon-Major J. GILBERT, Strength 202. The health of the Detachment has been very good during the past year. The admissions have been 123, treated 128, percentage of treated to strength 63.3, whereas last year it was 86.1. There have been no deaths. Details attached to the 21st Regiment N. I. In Medical charge of Surgeon-Major J.GILBERT. The details for the year have averaged 57. Of these 85 have been treated. Two deaths have occurred; one from debility, the other from dysentery. Daily average sick two, treated to strength 61.4; death to strength 3.5; deaths to treated 5.7. Nothing of any particular interest has occurred during the year. H.M.s 22nd Regiment N. I., Bombay. In Medical charge of Assistant Surgeon A. R. COWELL, Strength 622. The average strength of the Regiment during the year was 622, average daily sick 15.6. Proportion of sick to strength per cent 2.5. Percentage of treated to strength 52.2. Per- centage of deaths to strength 0.8. Percentage of deaths to treated 1.5. Proportion of ad- missions to strength per cent 49.2. The total number treated during the year was 325. The above number, when compared with those of the last year, show a decrease, as follows:4 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. In accordance with Circular No. 2829, of 27th September 1870, I have tried tow instead of lint, and am of opinion it will never answer as a substitute for it. The health of the Regiment has been good during the year, with the exception of the last eight days, when there were 18 cases of ague, and 6 of dysentery, on the road between Khundwa and Simrole. Movement .PRESIDENCY DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 5 huts and is separated from its adjoining one by a street 32.5 feet wide. The following are the dimensions of each hut6 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. There is a good road leading to them. There is a small Cantonment bazar. The building used as a Hospital is an upper storied bungalow, situated at the end of the Camp: It will accommodate about 36 patients. The ventilation is good. The latrines and other buildings are in good sanitary condition. Just behind the Hospital and outside the Camp limits is a small village. The climate of Surat being so near the sea (about 8 miles), the Camp is exposed to the south-west monsoon, and the prevailing winds are from the south and south-west, with occa- sional oppressive lulls. In November, December, January, and February the prevailing winds are from the north and north-east. The rainfall averages about 38 inches. The diet of the sepoys in health consists principally of rice, dall, vegetables, wheat and jowaree. The Hindoos eat also fish and meat. There are no local diseases peculiar to Surat. POONA DIVISION. Average strength present during the year 8,612 Average daily sick per cent. to the average strength 3.06 Rates of mortality per cent. to the average strength 0.49 H. M.'s 3rd Regiment Poona.POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 7 H. M.'s 9th Regiment N.I. Poona.8 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. support; these wives are carefully veiled and excluded from the outside world as much as possible; the higher classes are the more secluded. The Mahomedan Tribes are as follows:POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 9 The Mahrattas are idolaters, they are like the Mahomedans, polygamists, but they permit free intercourse with their wives amongst their friends, and do not seclude their females in any way. Their widows remarry at any period. They generally marry in the first instance in infancy, they are said to be particular in their observance of their custom of bathing every day (?) The "other castes" which form the remainder of the Regiment consist of Purwarees, Mangs, Dairs, and Domas, all of these of the lowest caste. They all eat anything, however obtained. The Mangs, Dairs, and Domas go so far as to eat carrion, or even the flesh of swine or other animal that they know has died from disease. Their shadow falling over the food of a Brahmin renders it unclean and unfit to be eaten; yet these men are the hardiest soldiers in the Regiment, and from their easy adaptability to all the circumstances of a camp life and active service, they make excellent soldiers. They are comparatively free from caste or religious prejudice, and readily put their hands to work which would be refused by men of high caste. They marry at all ages and do not seclude their wives or children. All the above different castes work together on duty with a good will and bon amie which is very satisfactory. There are of all castes together 664 (to 700) and they are located in com- fortable huts disposed of in rows which are called lines, one row or line to each company perpendicular to the line of front, thus:10 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. a more perfect ventilation of the hut through the crevices as is very evident by the smoke from the interior, passing through the roof in large quantities. The carbon and pyroligneous distillations of the smoke have also a very good deodorant effect on the sanitation of the hut. The shutters of the windows are of jungle wood fitted in and latticed with split bamboos. Each line or row contains 84 huts, altogether 672 huts, each hut being separate and private from the others. In the single men's line they consist of one hut, but in the married quarters, the verandah is walled in which forms a second room or dormitory. The Native Officers' huts are divided into two rooms by a partition wall, and one of these is sometimes sub-divided for the convenience of a small family. The lines are situated to the north-east of the cantonment on a rocky plateau which slopes gently to a natural water course or "nulla," on the margin of which three wells are sunk; and these form the water supply of the Regiment and properly belong to these lines. But there are two adjacent public wells about four hundred yards distant further to the north which are made use of by the Regiment, thus making five wells, which give togetherPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 11 ventilators being placed on the roof of the hospital and also a stone floor. At present the floor is of mud and used to be cow-dunged periodically to the detriment of the recovery of the patients; the smell and damp feeling which pervaded the hospital was so offensive, that I ordered the filthy practice of cow-dunging to be discontinued; and with a most marked favor- able result to the patients and other inmates of the hospital and its adjacent buildings12 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. The general health of the Regiment during the past year may be said to have been good, and has certainly improved as compared with the previous year, if the admissions into hospital is any criterion, being 64 less. The prevailing diseases have been fever and diarrhPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 13 diseases of the alimentary canal. One man attempted to commit suicide by cutting his throat, who was subsequently admitted into the Lunatic Asylum, Colaba. On the 1st of February 1870, 15 remained in hospital and 41 were admitted during the month; these were almost entirely fevers, bowel-complaints and boils. On the 1st of March 16 remained under treatment, and 48 were admitted during the month, these were chiefly fevers and contusions of the feet; two cases of diarrh14 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Leaving Poona in wings on the 15th and 16th of October, the Regiment reached Ah- medabad by train on the evenings of the 16th and 17th, halting a couple days there; the march to Deesa commenced and lasted to or until the 29th October, when the camp at Deesa was reached. During the march from Ahmedabad, two halts took place at intervals of three days each. The marches were short and performed in the early mornings, but on account of the exceedingly bad state of the roads, they were very fatiguing and protracted. The roads in the district through which the Regiment passed, are mere sandy tracks bounded in places by cactus hedges. From the traffic of generations these tracts have become very difficult marching ground. The loose sand of many inches of surface depth filled the boots, causing abrasions and great fatigue. No large bodies of troops had passed over these roads for five years, and the ordinary camping grounds as a rule were in an indifferent sanitary condition. The water was in abundant quantity and fair quality seemingly; in some places it was impregnated, with a salt, probably nitrate of potash, and was indifferently useful for cooking purposes, but no bad effects arose from it. During the month the health of the Regiment was good, a considerable number of men suffered from shoe-bites, but this was at once alleviated by caus- ing them to march without shoes or boots. The temperature varied greatly at different parts of the day and of the march, at first the heat at Ahmedabad was very oppressive, changing little by day or night, and the men suffered considerably, but it gave rise to no active disease; as the march progressed the temperature continued very high by day, but fell comparatively low at night and in the early morning. A considerable number of men fell out at this time while marching, suffering from colic and a small number suffering from diarrhPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 15 ing Board at Poona in November. The diseases which more commonly required that the men suffering from them should have change of scene and climate, were fevers and bowel- complaints. The causes of the permanent invaliding of the thirty-four men, were the following, given in the order of their frequency, viz.:16 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. The present Medical Officer having only been in charge a few months, has not been able to procure sufficient information regarding the different stations in which the Regiment has been during the past year, to warrant him in entering into any details regarding the topogra- phy of the districts or the usual diseases of the inhabitants. A few descriptive notes on Deesa may be mentioned here. In a large flat sandy plain which extends for many miles on all sides, unbroken by any thing except the chain of mountains of which Mount Aboo is one, lies Deesa. This is divided into two small districts near Deesa in one of which is the town of Deesa, in the other the Camp, the sudder bazaar and several villages near. The latter dis- trict contains a native population of upwards of 8,000, not including the troops. Between the town of Deesa and the Camp there is an interval of a few miles. On the west of the Camp, are the Artillery, Native Infantry, sudder bazaar and Cavalry, extending from north to south. On the east the European Infantry, and between these are the residences of the Officers of the Native Troops and station staff. The Camp is very much cut up by "nullahs," which discharge water during the rains into a river running to the west of the Camp. H. M.'s 1st Company Native Artillery. Malligaum.POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 17 at Tanna, which has been relieved annually. The Company of Artillery was here only for about a half-year, and at the end of June the men who had not been invalided or discharged the service, were transferred to the 2nd Company Native Artillery with Guzerat Mountain Train at Rajcote, on the abolition of the Khandeish Mountain Train. Since arrival here the troops have continued healthy, and though epidemic cholera was present in the province of Khandeish in 1868 and 1869, the disease passed lightly over the station when the neighbouring districts were suffering from its ravages. Indeed, the health of the troops contrasts very favorably with the condition of those stationed here from 1850 to 1860, for which there are tables at hand for comparison; and which show that cholera was present in cantonment in seven years, and eruptive fever annually daring that period. The station is about 1,300 feet above the level of the sea, and is about 32 miles to the south of the civil station of Dhoolia and 24 miles from Munmar on the Great Indian Penin- sula Railway, with which it is connected by a good bridged road. The cantonment has a somewhat bare look from the scarcity of large trees, which are rare, excepting in the Officers' compounds; but trees have been planted in the lines and along the principal roads in camp, in view to eventually attracting a greater and more equable rainfall in this arid climate. Notwithstanding, however, every care, there has been great loss in many of those recently planted from insufficient moisture, and about 150 young trees besides a number of large full- grown ones in Officers' compounds, are reported to have died in a single season. The can- tonment is stationed in an open level plain, dry and free from jungle in its vicinity, with good natural drainage, the slope being towards the river Moosum, so that the heaviest fall of rain either passes into the ground or drains off to the river in a few hours. The river Moosum, which is a branch of the Girna, passes behind the regimental hos- tal and sudder bazaar, and is a fairly sized stream in the rains, after which it dries up, and in the cold and hot season its bed is nearly dry, with pools of water at intervals. The water supply at these seasons is chiefly obtained from wells from 36 to 49 feet in depth, which are surrounded with solid masonry slope and drain. In the year 1868, apprehension was felt as to state of the wells in the following hot season from the failure of the monsoon. The public wells had to be deepened, and two of Norton's tube wells were sunk near the river, as several of the wells in the higher part of camp had completely dried up, and numbers of trees there also suffered from want of moisture, the springs having been affected from the scanty rainfall. This met the difficulty and a favorable monsoon in 1869 restored the supply to the wells in the lower part of camp, which have since yielded their usual quantity. The quality of the water is generally good and contains a considerable quantity of lime, the exact propor- tion of which had not hitherto been determined by chemical analysis. Lately a specimen of well and river water was forwarded to the Chemical Analyser to Government in accordance with Circular No. 1869 of the 14th June 1869; and he has reported more unfavorably on the quality of the water than was anticipated, and has stated that "both samples appear to be contaminated with organic matter probably of a very deleterious character." The quantity of solid matter in both samples is greater than was apprehended, and if judged of by the composition and quantity of the London Companies as given by Dr. Letheby in June last presents an unfavorable comparison; but it is, however, within the proportion fixed by the Brussels' Sanitary Congress for potable water, and the amount of organic matter is larger than desirable, indicating that stricter river conservancy is required. The contamination in regimental wells of vegetable debris may probably be to a certain extent from leaves of trees blown into the wells in high winds. If so, this will be liable to occur until the wells are duly protected and covered over, excepting an aperture for a drawing bucket. The wells were cleaned out a year and a half ago, and the ground in the vicinity has been pro- tected from substances likely to affect the water, and the wells have been kept for drinking purposes only, the men having to proceed to the river for bathing, which is prohibited on the masonry slope. 5 s
18 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. The station is regarded by the natives as a healthy one, and a number of invalids of the Bombay Army select it for permanent residence when pensioned. The longevity of some of these men is perhaps noteworthy. One is living here who is 82 years of age, and has been in receipt of Government pension for 36 years, and others somewhat younger have been pensioned from 24 to 32 years. The climate may be characterised as a dry and warm one during the greater part of the year, with short cold weather and comparatively light rains. It is considered to be as superior to Dhoolia in point of healthiness as Nassick to this station. In 1869 the mean maximum temperature was 86, the mean minimum 73, the extreme maximum in the shade in May was 104, the extreme minimum in the shade was 52. In 1870 the mean maximum was 87, the mean minimum 72, the extreme maximum 56. The average temperature and rainfall in these two years will be seen in the subjoined table. 1869. 1870. Mean mini- mum. Mean maxi- mum Extreme mini- mum Extreme maxi- mum RAIN. Mean mini- mum Mean maxi- mum Extreme mini- mum Extreme maxi- mum RAIN. Inches. Cents. Inches. cents. January. 64 82 59 88 ... ... 63 80 57 86 ... ... February 67 85 58 92 ... ... 65 86 58 90 ... ... March 74 89 64 95 ... ... 72 90 65 97 ... ... April 79 98 75 104 ... ... 79 98 74 104 ... ... May 82 99 73 104 ... 45 79 99 75 104 ... 16 June 78 91 74 102 6 49 78 87 75 101 7 81 July 78 87 76 95 2 41 77 83 75 91 3 28 August 78 86 74 93 8 91 77 83 74 86 2 67 September 76 83 74 92 6 43 76 86 73 95 3 44 October 70 84 65 90 3 80 75 86 68 95 3 02 November 66 80 58 88 1 16 69 85 61 91 ... 18 December 4 78 52 86 2 22 63 80 56 86 ... ... Total ... ... ... ... 31 47 ... ... ... ... 20 56 Mean 73 86 ... ... ... ... 72 87 ... ... ... ... The rains are variable but generally light; in the season of 1868 they completely failed, only, 10 inches and 72 cents were gauged; in 1869 31 inches and 47 cents; and in 1870 20 inches and 56 cents were registered. The rainfall in 1870 was 10.91 cents less than the preceding year, and the temperature in the first three months was rather below, and of the last four months, above that of the last four months in the corresponding months of the previous year. Hot dry winds prevail in March, April, and May, when the place has a parched and burnt-up look, and dust storms arise occasionally. The mornings, however, are upon the whole generally comparatively cool, and the nights rarely such as sleep cannot be obtained from the heat. Previous to the rains, and in September and October, there is more or less marked electrical disturbance with cloudy close oppressive weather.
POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 19 The district is included in the great trappean area of the Deccan. The surrounding country is an open plain, level or gently undulating in places. The soil is brown loam, sandy, calcareous, containing kunkur, thin and poor, resting on trap or amygdaloid rock, which at times appears on the surface, and renders such portions more or less unfit for cultivation. The soil of the low ground, however, especially along the "Moosum" is deeper, more argillaceous, and better in quality. The minerals are quartz, agate, jasper, colespar, feldspar, zeolites, &c. The vegetable products in irrigated land are wheat, grain, pease, pepper, sugarcane, Indian corn, tamatoes, cucumbers, plantains, guavas, and rice in small quantity. In unirrigated land bajree, Lilly, ooreed, moong, mut, jowaree, tobacco, turmeric, tooree and cotton, the cultivation of which has been largely increasing since 1864, and according to Mr. Wilkin- son's recent report the area of cotton cultivation amounts this year in Khandeish to upwards of 616,000 acres, showing an increase of 75.258 acres over last year. In the talooka of Malli- gaum, Nandgaum in the Nassick Collectorate, 8,038 acres have been used for cotton, or 3,172 in excess of last year. The more common trees are the neem, peepul, babool, banian and mango. The fruits met with in the cold season are pomegranates, guavas, custard apples, plantains; and in the hot season melons and mangoes. In the bazaar, oranges and limes are to be had occasionally from Aurungabad, and potatoes, which are grown at Nassick, are usually obtainable throughout the year. In order to encourage the neighbouring villages to bring in their supplies of grain and country produce, a market is held weekly near the lines, and a pendal has been erected there with corrugated iron roof for the accommodation of the sellers of country vegetables and fruits. The diet of the men here seems to be better than that which was common at Poona in 1864. It is stated that single men use 1½ lbs. of wheat or bajree flour, and 8 ozs. of rice and dhall, and 1 lb. of milk in the evening with their flour cakes; and when dhall and rice are not used, lbs. 2 of flour with lbs. ½ of mutton twice or thrice a week according to their means. The following scale is submitted as an approximation merely, but will perhaps be sufficient to show the ordinary description of food used by the different classes in the Regiment:20 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Cholera having made its appearance in the town the troops were not allowed to visit it except on duty, and arrangements were made for the early treatment of any cases of diarrhPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 21 stances. At Poona wheaten flour, dhall and meat were said to be rarely used by the families on account of the high prices there prevailing. The men, however, generally fully appreciate the necessity of suitable diet to maintain their condition for work, and when labouring on road-making and opening the passes in Abyssinia, bartered part of their rice for goats with the Shohoes, and that timely addition no doubt to a certain extent enabled them to withstand the subsequent privation for weeks, when they had little more to depend on than 1 lb. of flour as daily subsistence, as ghee, dhall, rice, and mutton ceased to be available. It is amongst Hindoostan men only that parsimonious habits occasionally interfere with due outlay for food sufficient to preserve health. One glaring instance of this was met with in a Hindoostanee, who went long fasting and stinted himself of his daily food; this was brought to the Commanding Officer's notice, who ordered that he should be provided sufficient food, so as to prevent recurrence of debility and inefficiency. The present lines were constructed by the 3rd Regiment N. I. in 1864, to afford accom- modation for the head quarters of a Native Infantry regiment. They are built of sun-dried bricks and tiled, and consist of 8 separate houses for Native Officers, 8 barracks for married men, 8 barracks for unmarried men, of 160 and 192 huts respectively:22 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. In 1869 permanent latrines for the troops were erected, and have been a great improve- ment on the former primitive system that had heretofore prevailed, of allowing the troops as well as the inhabitants of the sudder baazar to resort to a field on the opposite bank of the river, which must have led to fouling of the ground in the vicinity of the lines, as women and children could hardly cross the river in the rains for the purpose of nature. A tank cart, however, is still very much required for working of the latrines to remove the excreta of upwards of 800 individuals beyond camp limits. The small establishment of regimental sweepers is quite inadequate for the purpose, and in the event of sickness there would be serious inconvenience in carrying out the work. Only one tank cart is allowed to a native infantry regiment, and as one had been in use with the Wing at Tanna, the one at regimental head quarters was checked by the Control Department. Representation has been made by the regimental authorities of the great necessity of having a cart allowed to ensure efficient conservancy arrangements, but the matter has not yet been settled finally. In the course of the present year a proposal was made to substitute trench latrines for the present permanent ones; but on careful examination the Board of Health found that the ground was too rocky with too little soil on the surface, that the drainage slope was towards the river in the vicinity of which the lines are situated, that the lines were hemmed in with buildings, and that there was no open ground available excepting on the windward side of camp on the parade ground, and accordingly reported that this station was unsuited for the institution of such experiment as regards the troops. The sudder bazaar is situated to the south of the lines and consists of a wide street from north to south, and small streets or lanes at right angles. The population has averaged 5,105 persons from 1861 to 1870, and is now 4,850. The mortality amongst the inhabitants has averaged 120 yearly, or 2.3 per cent. during the last ten years, and the deaths from cholera from 1861 to 1868 have averaged 30 annually or 0.5 per cent. The conservancy of the bazaar has been duly attended to, and an endeavour was made to accustom the inhabitants to the use of latrines. A small latrine was accordingly built to accommodate fifteen females, but the arrangement was not popular with the more respectable inhabitants, who preferred to follow their old custom and to resort to a field on the opposite bank of the river, which, how- ever, is not easily accessible for women and children during the rains. Their views, however, in this respect might in time be got over were there not financial difficulties to overcome, before latrines could be erected for public use. The place has been free from epidemic disease for upwards of two years, when cholera appeared in the end of November with the advent of pilgrims from Punderpore. The disease had previously broken out in the town of Malligaum on the 16th November simultaneously with the arrival of the pilgrims, and subsided sometime after the depar- ture of about 250 of them. There was no sickness present in the town before their arrival, and though disease was afterwards found to have occurred amongst them at Egutpoora, they were said to be then free from the malady, and to have no direct intercourse with those who were first attacked. In the town there were 18 cases and 12 deaths, and in the sudder baazar 24 cases and 11 deaths, and in the troops one fatal case. The first attacked were "Momins" upon whom it fell most severely, for out of 13 attacked 11 died. The greater mortality of this class has been explained by their predisposition to epidemic disease at the time, by their long strict abstinence from food during the day, as it was "Rumzan," their fast month. The opinion held by native officials that the disease was confined to Momins was not supported by the sudder bazaar return, where it attacked Hindoos in greater proportion, and more especially selected women and children; as out of 24 cases 15 were Hindoos, 8 Mussulman, and 1 Christian, of whom 8 were women and 14 children. The season previously had been a healthy one, and the cold weather was then setting in, though it was more or less cloudy and warm for the period of the year. As soon as it was known that cholera had
SURVEY PLAN OF CIVIL TOWN OF DHOOLIA AND ITS ENVIRONS. Scale 660 Feet to an Inch. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75006684.tif]
POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 23 shown itself in the town the usual sanitary precautions were adopted to limit its extension. From scurvy there were only two admissions, but the diathesis was met with in several cases of fever and rheumatism as previously mentioned. The next in point of importance were diseases of the respiratory system, of which there were 5 from phthisis, 1 pneumonia, 1 pleuritis, 1 bronchitis, and 3 catarrh; but this does not fully show the number in whom the phthisical diathesis was more or less developed as it was present in two of the invalids, and in a case that died on furlough24 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Company at Myjee Fair, from the 12th January to the 20th of March, had only an average strength of 5 European Officers and 457 Native Commissioned and Non-Commissioned Officers and privates at head quarters. The ordinary diet of the healthy sepoys during the year was as far as can be ascertained usually as follows:POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 25 found chiefly amongst the men who had suffered severely in Abyssinia from it. The ague was of a low type, chronic and very intractable to treatment and the change of air was the only remedy that seemed to have any effect. The number of admissions from it do not bear any proportion to the number of men attacked, as some men were in hospital four or five times during the year with ague. Shoe-bites admitted under the heading contusion contributed the next highest number, 49, and were owing chiefly to new and badly fitting boots. Conjunctivitis comes next in point of number and contributed 22 cases, which occurred chiefly in August, September, and October, and was owing, I believe, to the myriads of small sand flies that existed during these months. Chronic rheumatism contributed 18, and was attributed to previous service in the climate of Abyssinia. Syphilis, both primary and second- ary, contributed 13 cases, but three of these were contracted at Myjee Fair. One case of cholera occurred in December amongst the men of the detachment that ar- rived from Kattywar, and was attributed to the men having marched through Malligaum, a station from which cholera was reported. The men were not allowed into Camp until seven days had elapsed since their departure from Malligaum, and they were considered safe; yet this case occurred two days after they had entered. The man was seen early and treated from the first with ten grains of calomel and a stimulating mixture of an aromatic nature, and he made good recovery. Two deaths occurred in hospital during the year; one in January from double pneumonia and ague, in a man of a broken-down constitution, and one in June from tetanus. The case of tetanus was treated with hydrate of chloral, and seemed to be getting on well, until he died suddenly in the fifth day. The remaining admissions were for ordinary diseases showing nothing worthy notice. Twenty-six men were invalided and pensioned, being permanently unfit for further active service, and of these the greater part were rendered useless by chronic rheumatism contracted in Abyssinia. Thirty men were granted sick leave to their native countries, for periods averaging from four to six months and all of them were sufferers from ague of a most chronic type, which would not yield to treatment as long as they were kept at Dhoolia, with the exception of one man who had bronchitis. Of the five deaths which occurred out of hospital, one was by suicide; two were men who had been sent on sick leave, one a man on furlough, and one in the Company at Myjee Fair in 1870. H. M.'s Corps of Sappers and Miners. Kirkee.26 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. success; but the failure is only due to the breaking of the instruments we were using, and the inability of the Medical Store Department on each occasion to supply another one with- out considerable delay. The hypodermic syringes, though beautiful instruments, are almost necessarily of delicate structure, and have not been handled by the subordinates with all the caution and care that was required, but which I trust experience will now have taught them, and thus two instruments have been broken in my hospital. Their great liability to be broken is very much increased by a fault in their manufacture, which, if remedied, would render the chances of fracture very much less. This defect lies in the cement used for fixing on the upper silver cap, which instead of being so strong as to be untouched by the solutions used, is so easily acted on by the acid of a quinine solution, that after two or three days it becomes loosened, and the slightest force subsequently applied in trying to fasten the cap on again breaks the graduated tube. I have used it altogether in 49 cases, with the following results: Four out of the 49 turned out to be remittent fever, so the treatment was changed. Out of the remaining 45, in only two instances it is recorded that there was "no effect," in the rest the result was "no return of fever;" of these, however, eight were cases of febricula, which may have recovered without any treatment at all, so I would exclude them from the list. There then remain 37 cases of true intermittent fever, of which 20 were accompanied with ague, 8 were of tertian type and 9 quotidian, without ague. The number of times hypodermic injection was per- formed was as follows:POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 27 I trust I am justified in saying that as far as the experiment has been tried it has been very successful. I hope the Medical Stores will be enabled to supply another instrument soon, and so enable me to resume the practice, and I would venture to submit for the consideration of the Inspector General, whether an extended trial of the plan should not be made and reports sent in after six or twelve months. Of course I am aware that the cost of the instruments must be considered as a drawback to the cheapness of the plan, but with a better model or a stronger kind of instrument, and greater care in handling it, even this I think would be counterbalanced. With regard to the use of chloride of ammonium in hepatic disorders, as directed to be tried in Circular No. 2096 of 29th July 1870, I am unable to report much as I have only had one opportunity of trying it in my hospital, and in that case the result was good. Out of hospital I have administered it to a young child of four years of age for jaundice, with a very marked and rapidly beneficial effect. I have great satisfaction in recording that not a single case of cholera has occurred amongst either men or followers, in fact the station has been entirely free from that scourge during the whole year; the one solitary case that happened was that of an old woman who was passing through the bazaar, and who no doubt brought the disease with her from some village. In summing up the chief points of the foregoing Report, I would draw particular atten- tion to the improvements absolutely necessary in my opinion; and to other changes which, though not so vital, are still of much importance. In. the former class would be new lines for the men properly constructed on a better site. Quarters for the apothecary. A wall or fence round the hospitals. Huts for the 2nd class hospital servants. Among the improvements desirable, but not perhaps absolutely necessary, are:28 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. at other times rugged ridges of larger hills break the continuity of this part of the Deccan table land. In the vicinity of the Bheema, the country is fertile and produces varieties of luxuriant crops, when the season is propitious. The soil is a deep black loam throughout the greater extent of the Bheema valley. Along the ridges and higher lands the soil is un- productive, and the ground so studded with boulders that it hardly admits of cultivation. In such places, a stunted herbage is only to be found during the rains; the country is badly wooded and thus it presents a somewhat sterile appearance, except in the vicinity of the villages where clumps of trees (mango and tamarind chiefly), and cultivated patches of ground change its aspect. On the higher lands water can with difficulty be obtained at great expense for cultiva- tion, and in seasons of great drought, large tracts of productive soil are uncultivated, and on this account villages have been almost depopulated, the inhabitants emigrating to more favored localities. The agricultural produce consists of cereals in common use as articles of food in the Deccan, including rice, which is cultivated only to a slight extent in the district, dry elevated lands not suiting its cultivation. Leguminous plants are cultivated extensively for food and oil, and gum and fodder; cucurbitaceæ are in great demand in this bazaar, as native vegetables; mangoes are largely grown in the vicinityPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 29 of the cantonment. The hills beyond the river present the same undulating appearance, running west to east, they form the front boundary of the basin in which the cantonment of Seroor is situated. Geological formation.30 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. street 28 yards wide runs on either side, a drain communicating with the private compound at the back of the lines, which I have recommended to be paved, as it carries off water which must be impregnated with organic impurities. These streets and intervals between the lines provide very sufficient ventilation. Each line contains 42 houses for the accommodation of families, the house contains two rooms, in one of which the family lives, in the other their cooking and daily ablutions are per- formed. The large room measures 18 feet by 13 feet, the smaller room is 13 feet by 6 feet, whilst a front verandah about two yards wide runs along the whole line. The verandah and rooms are raised 2 feet above the ground, the roof is tiling and is in general weather- proof. I have found the houses wet and damp after rain, but this may have been as much owing to the severity of the storm as to imperfect repairs. The houses have a substantial tenable appearance and afford good and sufficient accommodation to the sowars and families. A house is assigned to each married man, but to two men if they are unmarried. The furniture is very simplePOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 31 main streets, but in the off-streets and lanes a few unsafe dilapidated buildings can be seen. Courtyards are perhaps too common, unless they are kept strictly clean, which in the village they are not; they accumulate and conceal filth, and in the event of any epidemic would be the very foci of infection and contagion. Cows too should be housed in sheds apart from human dwellings; at present they can be viewed in verandahs of houses and in other places in much too close proximity to their human inmates. There is a tan-yard near the village, from which most offensive effluvia proceed; to pass in the neighbourhood of it is at times almost impossible owing to the disgusting smell; under such circumstances, it must be a nuisance at least to those living in the vicinity, and as such it should be removed to a distance from human dwellings. The changes of season have been more distinctly marked in this; than in preceding years. The rains have been more abundant, 27 inches 70 cents, perhaps a little above the average; but in Seroor the amount of rain registered falls so far short of the rainfall of Poona and Ahmednuggur for the year, that it is difficult to understand how the rainfall in Seroor could be much in excess during the past year. By comparing the rainfall of Seroor with Poona and Ahmednuggur rains of former years, I find Seroor is least, although rising to a much greater height above the sea than either. In the case of Poona a reason for this difference would be found in its greater proximity to the sea coast and range of high hills; but in the case of Ahmednuggur no such reason can be assigned. It may be that the higher part of the hill-range encircling Seroor attracts much more of the rain cloud, than would the depressed basin in which the cantonment is situated; the absence too of trees and vegetation here would also have an effect, in this as in other parts of the country. The rains continued from June to October; the number of rainy days is fewer than in the year preceding, which modified the climate in the rains. October and November were hot and very oppressive, in December it became much colder; this difference in temperature is chiefly confined to the night and early morning. The past December is the only indication of a cold season which has been experienced in this part of the Deccan for many years. In the early part of the year the hot winds began and continued until June, when the rains began; this caused a very pro- tracted hot season, December and January being in the preceding distinctly hot and oppres- sive although hot winds had not set in thus early. The temperature of December 1870 is less by 13º in the morning in the hospital verandah than was the temperature of 1869 in the same month, the thermometer being placed in each instance under similar conditions. In the hospital, however, at 4 P.M, the temperature is only two degrees less in December 1870 than at the same of 1869; for the whole year the thermometer shows a lower temperature for 1870 than for 1869. The climate of Seroor is pleasant and healthy, we have the benefit of the S. W. and N. E. monsoons which blow steadily; there are at times intervals of oppressive calm, during and after the S. W. monsoon. During the S. W. monsoon there is often a lull from 6 to 9 P.M., after this again a steady breeze sets in which continues throughout the night, so that in the hot season a hot night is seldom experienced; but in October and November for days even an oppressive lull continues, and the atmosphere is oppressive and stagnant. At the same time the autumn sun is hot and unmodified by cloud and unsubdued by vegeta- tion (green), so that the direct and reflected ray of the sun make its influence greater, and thus the autumn is perhaps justly considered the most oppressive season in the Deccan. The hot and rainy seasons are the most healthy periods of the year in this part of the Deccan, and during the past year, I have not traced a single case of any severity which could be fairly attributed to the influence of the climate of Seroor. Slight ailments as diarrh32 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. tive of its tonic invigorating influence. The greater degree of cold at present experienced is trying to natives who have not the means of counteracting by warm clothes the effects of cold, and thus enabling the system to adapt itself to extremes of temperatures; colds and pulmonary affections and fevers are apt to be thus caused. Amongst the sowars, at present a few suffer from the slighter effects of cold, coryza, and cough; and amongst the camp followers, syces, &c., such affections I find are not only much more common, but they are more severe. Again amongst the villagers there are even greater numbers suffering directly from cold. Amongst the more severe forms of pulmonary disease, it usually happens, that in the beginning of cold weather or other sudden change of temperature, the first indication of the disease presents itself, patients suffering from phthisis pulmonalis give out that the cold season called forth, or gave expression to the disease which had been for sometime previously lying dormant. In the cold season too, fevers are more common, the attack is reinduced in such cases by cold, although it cannot be excited "de novo" by such means. Fevers in Seroor are much more common in the cold season (beginning in October and terminating in March) then they are in the hot and rainy season combined. This is so exactly the opposite of what is usually experi- enced in Indian cantonments that it should be noticed. This immunity from malaria and fever intermittent is solely due to the excellent site which the cantonment occupies, the nature of the ground or soil, and the efficient natural drainage which the site secures for it. Other diseases too of malarious origin are uncommonPOONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 33 post duty in the more unhealthy districts of Khandeish, where intermittent fever is endemic after the rains. If suffering only from uncomplicated intermittent fever, they rapidly recover their health on rejoining head quarters; where however more serious visceral complications coexist, the same happy results do not follow. The climate of Seroor for 8 months of the year is extremely dry, it is therefore least adapted as a residence for men suffering from organic visceral disease. The camp followers are as a rule healthy, the children suffer from colds, coryza, bronchitis and diarrh34 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. I have ascertained the daily diet in common use in the Regiment, which I subjoin, giving the quantity and cost of materials used:POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 35 the former is 59 and of the latter 8; these attacks of fever have been simple and uncompli- cated, yielding to simple antiperiodic and tonic remedies. Admitted for rheumatism, 3 patients with chronic disease. Secondary syphilis, 1 admission. Scurvy, 2 admissions, severe, in one instance resulting from Sind fever, in the other in- stance preceded by mental anxiety and worry, but no fever; disease of eye36 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. SANITARY REPORT BY THE MEDICAL OFFICER TN CHARGE. Scorbutus existed only to a slight extent. I treated 2 cases of this disease, both of which proved rather obstinate, but yielded eventually to treatment; in the one case the scorbutus seemed the effect of frequent attacks of Sind fever and debility, but in the other case no such cause existed; the patient, a Native Officer, had not been for several years absent from Seroor or duty, and seemed besides a healthy man of sound constitution; in the latter instance the patient assigned the attack of scorbutus to distress of mind, anxiety, worry and annoyance. Amongst others I found a scorbutic taint to exist, which tended to complicate the simplest ailments; this was generally observed amongst the men who had served in Upper Sind in 1868. I recommended kokum as an article of diet with the greatest advantage, it was used almost universally in the Regiment during hot and cold season when other fresh vegetables are scarce in the bazaar. In Seroor in the hot and cold season succulent cruciferæ are always scarce, as well as other vegetables, and even native vegetables are at times extremely scarce. I have there- fore recommended a Regimental garden to be introduced which should render the Regiment, independent of the contingencies of the season and the irregularities of the bazaar supply. This recommendation could be easily carried out, as garden ground with abundant water-supply can be found at hand. Guinea-worm cannot be said to be on the increase or endemic in Seroor, although a greater number of admissions is shown during the present year. The same man may be often admitted for the same disease, so that the number of admissions cannot show with any exactness the prevalence of any disease. In such cases it would be more accurate to add a name descriptive or illustrative as " readmission." Guinea-worm is seldom single, but is generally multiple: as an instance of the number of these parasites which may infest the indivi- dual, I mention that I have removed 7 guinea-worms from the same man during the past season. In a village distant about 10 miles from Seroor guinea-worm is so prevalent, that it is said about 60 per cent. of the inhabitants suffer from it. In this instance there is only one well in the village which all must use, in other neighbouring villages too, guinea-worm is common, so that the disease might readily be imported into Seroor. The water for the most part used here is chiefly obtained from the river which at no season of the year is stagnant, and cannot be impregnated with guinea-worm or their ova, and the older residents are seldom affected with it. G. M.'s 16th Regiment N. I. Ahmednuggur.POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 37 The health of the battalion has improved since last report. The average strength exclusive of 7 European Officers numbered 663 men. There were 644 admissions registered during the year with a daily sick average of 12.0; the percentage of treated to strength was 98.7; of treated, and deaths to strength was 0.3. Of the deaths recorded, one was suicidal (cut-throat), the other and only casualty in hospital. was the result of acute bronchitis; these returns contrast not unfavorably with those of the previous year. Ague was the most prevalent disease under treatment. With a view to economise the supply of quinine in consequence of the increase of fever cases shortly after the Regiment reached Baroda, beberiæ sulphas, liquid arsenicalis, chiretta and acid, &c., were substituted, but with unsatisfactory results. The native soldier has great faith in the antiperiodic virtues of quinine, and is, I have reason to know, dissatisfied in attacks of ague, with the exhibition of any other drug. Stimulants (spirituous) in fever cases complicated with bronchitis were freely given and always with good effect; in the use of the hydrate of chloral as au anodyne and hypnotic in rheumatism, acute and chronic, bronchitis, asthma, &c., we possess an agent superior in many respects to opium itself. Vaccination is carried on with success; 39 operations were performed with satisfactory results, the number of unprotected is only 3; no cases of small-pox have occurred in the Regiment. Eleven recruits joined during the year and sixteen men were invalided; fifteen sepoys proceeded on sick certificate to their own country, one of these a case of true leprosy was, on his return from leave, discharged with gratuity; a sepoy with chronic rheumatism after being in hospital 182 days, was similarly discharged. Head Quarters and one Wing of H.M.'s 2nd Grenadier Regiment A. I. Sattara.38 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. availed myself largely of the suggestion of the Officer Commanding, that those men whose homes were in the Concan should be sent there on short leave; of the benefits of this course I am satisfied. Only one death took place in the hospital, and that was due to chronic suppurative nephritis occurring in a man who had been operated on. eighteen months previously for lithotomy, and made a good recovery. He was a highly nervous, timid man, and only reported himself ill a very few days before his death, dreading the notion of any examination being made; it is surprising how with such advanced disease he could continue doing his duty for so long. There was a total absence of small-pox and cholera and anything which can be called epidemic disease, until the month of October, when just at the conclusion of an exceptionably heavy monsoon season, the ground being saturated both in and round the lines, a species of infantile bronchitis prevailed largely among the children, and from which three children suc- cumbed. In October and November, there was a great increase of admissions from malarial fevers, which went on until the date of leaving Sattara, the 15th of November, when the sick list was so unusually heavy, that I deemed it necessary to apply for one hospital tent, in excess of the amount laid down for a Wing of a Regiment, anticipating the probability that sickness would rather increase than diminish. The result, however, of moving the troops had an immediate beneficial effect; cases which had resisted large doses of quinine, the paroxysms of fevers daily recurring, ceased to have them almost on the first day of the march commencing. Convalesence became rapid, the admissions from this cause (fever) became very few, and on the arrival of the Regiment at Poona I had a comparatively clear sick list; no case of any serious importance. As usual on the march, every day many of the men reported themselves at the hospital in the evening suffering from that most easily preventable of all ailmentsPLAN OF THE CANTONMENT AND FORT. AT BELGAUM. Scale 3 Inches to a Mile. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 74982121.tif]
POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 39 ing, which acted injuriously on many of the men who were debilitated by previous attacks of fever, causing their frequent resort to hospital. A very large number of cases of contusion, abrasions, and other local injuries was unavoidably caused in the course of the various kinds of labour entailed in building, and swelled the sick list to a large extent. This hypothesis is borne out by comparison of the daily average number of sick from January to May, and that from June to December (after line building had ceased), the former being 36.6 the latter 14.9. In mention- ing the exposure of the men to malaria, I allude to the practice of sending out parties to the jungle for the purpose of wood-cutting which entailed a residence in unhealthy localities such as the Beedee district. To avoid as far as possible the injurious effects arising from this unavoidable measure, the precaution was taken during the past year of changing the working parties more frequently, and of removing them at night to some distance from the jungle, and a dose of quinine was administered to each man in the morning before he proceeded to work. By these means I believe the amount of sickness was diminished, both as to the number of cases and the type of fever resulting from the exposure, the cases of fever being much milder and less complicated with pneumonia than during the previous year. 334 cases of intermit- tent fever have been under treatment during 1870, none of which terminated fatally, though in some cases the cause of frequent readmissions into hospital owing to repeated attacks of the disease. Four cases of small-pox occurred during the year, the disease having broken out in April amongst the Regimental followers; precautions were taken to segregate those attacked by this disease, which was therefore confined to the above limited number, of these 3 had been previously vaccinated. Vaccination has been practised throughout the year and the supply of lymph has been of good quality; a great number of the Regimental followers, having been found unprotected, were vaccinated, and precautions taken for the inspection and vaccination of all persons per- mitted to reside within the Regimental lines. Three deaths have occurred in hospital during the year, one from remittent fever, one from dysentery, and one from phthisis, making the proportion of deaths to average strength 0.4, and the percentage of deaths to the number of treated 0.4. A private belonging to the 5th Regiment N. I. died in the Grenadier hospital from laryngitis; this man was left behind when his Regiment marched from Belgaum en route for Aden in November last, being too ill to accompany his corps, and died within a few hours after his admission. The hospital (as before remarked) affords very insufficient accommodation for the re- quirements of the Regiment, being only adapted for the reception of 16 men. During the past year it has been found necessary to pitch tents in the hospital compound for the reception and treatment of those patients for whom there was no room in the ward. There is also an entire absence of quarters for hospital assistants and medical pupils; the former are there- fore obliged to occupy two of the cookrooms provided for the use of patients, the latter live in a small building erected for the purpose of a store room. A ward for the contagious diseases is greatly wanted, and has been before recommended by the Sanitary Commissioner, but has not yet been erected. The hospital establishment is complete and the medical subordinates are attentive to their duties. I have pleasure in testifying to the zeal and intelligence of 2nd Class Hospital Assistant Bhowanee Sing, attached to the Regiment, 3rd Class Hospital Assistant Gunesh Succaram has also given me entire satisfaction. Topography of the Station. The military station at Belgaum is situated in the Southern Maratha Country in latitude 15° 22" N. and longitude 74° 42" E., at an elevation of from 2,100 to 2,260 feet above the sea, from which it is distant about 50 miles in a direct line eastward, and 15 miles from the west of the Western Ghauts. It has communication with Vingorla (on the sea coast) by two made
40 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. roads, the old one viâ the Ram Ghaut, and the other (recently completed) viâ the Parpoolee Ghaut; it also communicates by made roads with the stations of Kolapore to the north, Kulladghee to the east, and Dharwar to the south. The cantonment of Belgaum is built upon a slope extending more or less irregularly in a direction from N. W. to S. E., and adjoins the native town which bounds it to the eastward, by which the camp is divided from the fort, the latter being situated at a distance of rather more than a mile due east. The most elevated portion of the cantonment which on the N. W. aspect of camp is occupied by the barracks of the artillery and European infantry, the ex- treme southern and eastern aspect adjoining the limits of camp in that direction is occupied by the native infantry lines; and the large space comprised between these two is covered by the bungalows and compounds designed for the accommodation of the European Officers be- longing to the different corps and departments, together with a large Protestant church recently completed. The sudder bazaar is situated east of the cantonment, and to the north of the former are the pensioners' lines, comprising a number of small houses with their respective enclosures extending on each side of the main thoroughfare leading from the camp to the town of Belgaum. These houses (as their designation indicates) are occupied by pensioned soldiers and Non- Commissioned Officers with their families, and by Government employés attached to the various offices and departments; the building made use of as a lock hospital is located in this part of the cantonment. The population of the sudder bazaar and the pensioners' lines amounts to between 5,000 and 6,000 persons. The fort of Belgaum is situated about a mile due east of the cantonment, from which it is divided by the native town; it is of an irregular figure approaching a circle, enclosed by walls varying in height from 35 to 60 feet, having two entrances, one on the north, the other on the west side, the whole being surrounded by a ditch of variable depth containing more or less water at all seasons of the year. The fort contains the arsenal, barracks, and hospital of the European garrison, battery, commissariat stores, Protestant church, library, quarters for the European subordinates at- tached to the Ordnance Department and Engineering staff; also a number of bungalows with their compounds occupied by European Officers. The interior of the fort is well wooded and the soil favourable for garden cultivation; it drains into the surrounding ditch, but the drainage is defective towards the S. E. where water accumulates largely during the monsoon, and must be productive of malaria in the process of drying. The soil of the cantonment is entirely composed of the debris of laterite, which forms a covering to the underlying trap rock, and varies much in thickness, being many feet in depth in some localities, whilst in others it admits of the rock itself cropping out from the surface. Laterite forms a valuable material for building purposes, and most of the houses are constructed of it. This formation is observable throughout the cantonment, the roads presenting its characteristic red colour, while from its friable nature, dust prevails to a very considerable and unpleasant extent during the dry months. From the porous nature of the soil and the sub- stratum of laterite, water is rapidly absorbed and drained off, and in the course of a very short time after a heavy fall of rain, the surface of the ground becomes perfectly dry, and thus all accumulation of stagnant water is prevented. The cantonment is well wooded, with the ex- ception of the new artillery lines in course of erection, most of the compounds being well stocked with trees of umbrageous growth; there are also three topes of considerable size, one on the north side, and the others on the S. E., which add much to the beauty of camp and afford an agreeable shade, they also serve, in some measure, to intercept the dry east winds which prevail during the cold season.
POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 41 The prevailing winds are east, veering occasionally to north from November to February, west, with tendency to south from March to October; the latter, which blow more or less constantly during the greater part of the year, render the climate of Belgaum highly enjoyable, more especially in the months of March, April, and May, during which time the sea breeze sets in as early as 3 P.M., thus curtailing the many hours of heat which obtain in most Indian stations at that season, and affording cool and refreshing nights. Warm clothing is not only bearable, but is absolutely necessary to health and comfort during the evenings at this hot season of the year. The water supply is good and abundant, and is derived almost entirely from wells, of which there are many in various parts of the cantonment; the largest and best well for drinking water is in the vicinity of the Protestant church, the water from which, however, yields a trace of nitrates, indicating the presence of organic impurity, though to a very small extent. From the natural formation of the ground on which the cantonment of Belgaum is situated, presenting a very considerable slope from N. W. to S. E., the natural drainage is good; this is supplemented by surface drains which have been cut upon each side of the main roads.By these means the superfluous water is effectually carried off and lodgment is prevented. The whole of the cantonment is thoroughly flushed during the monsoon months, the drainage being carried off by two "nullas" which unite on the S. E. boundary of camp and are lost in the irrigated land in that direction. The mean yearly rainfall (completed from observations extending over 10 years from 1858 to 1867), is 52 inches, the greatest fall occurring in July; showers of rain fall more or less during every month of the year in ordinary seasons. The climate of Belgaum varies considerably during the year; from the latter part of No- vember until February it is dry and cold, owing to the strong east winds which prevail at that season; from the latter part of February until the end of May or beginning of June, the temperature is much increased during the day, but the heat is greatly moderated by the sea breeze which sets in about that time, rendering the evenings and nights delightfully cool and refreshing, on which account this season is generally considered the most agreeable of the whole year. The S. W. monsoon commences in June and continues until November, during which time rain falls heavily and the clouds gather so thickly that the sun is occasionally ob- scured for a fortnight or more at one time. The atmosphere at this season is so charged with moisture, that all such perishable articles as imbibe moisture readily are quickly destroyed, unless great precautions are taken; and all articles composed of leather, such as bindings of books, boots, shoes, &c., covered with a thick layer of mildew if left unattended to, even for a few hours; fires are constantly required to maintain clothes, bedding, &c., in a dry and whole- some condition. The temperature reaches its minimum (57°) in January, and attains its maximum (97°) in April. The greatest quantity of rain falls in July, the average for that month being 17 inches. In point of salubrity Belgaum contrasts favorably with most stations on this side of India. The prevailing diseases are malarious fever, bowel-complaints and hepatic affections. For many years past, epidemic diseases have been almost unknown, and although Belgaum is contiguous to three districts (Chickodee, Gokak, and Sumpgaum) in which cholera prevails to a considerable extent every year, it has hitherto enjoyed almost entire immunity from any epidemic of that disease. I believe the healthiness of Belgaum may be attributed in a great measure to its equable climate, the nature of the soil, and the influence of the sea breeze, which blows so regularly during the greater part of the year. Attached to this report is a sketch map of Belgaum, which will give some idea of the relative situation of the localities I have described. 11 s
42 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Report on the new Lines of H. M.'s 1st Drenadier Regiment A. I. By Assistant Surgeon B. KEELAN. The newly-built lines are spread over the widest available area on a gently sloping ground, measuring 890 feet by 790 feet, arranged in rows of pendalls extending transversely across the incline, and intersected by two large streets which cross each other at right angles in the centre of the lines. The gable ends of the pendalls face east and west (thus avoiding the deleterious east wind so very prevalent in this station) and their broadsides north and south. In no case does one building obstruct air or light from another, the streets between every row being so very wide, and, in consequence of the heavy monsoon here which lasts till Novem- ber, all the gable ends facing the west are built of laterite, and not of brick mud dried in the sun like the other walls, thereby, on account of keeping out the damp during this season, increasing the comfort of the men. The floor of each house is raised about 2½ feet from the level of the ground outside (and in some instances even 4 feet), and the surface drainage is so skilfully contrived that water cannot accumulate anywhere near the entrance. The floors are kept very clean and swept out daily, but as they are entirely made of earth, notwithstanding their elevated position, it is difficult to keep them perfectly free from the damp during the monsoon. I think it would be a good plan to have them all flagged like the floor of the hospital, or paved with small stones; but I fear the latter would be difficult to obtain in this station. 'Flag floors might be made for very little outlay, and, as they are the best material for keeping out the damp, no doubt the introduction of such a system in Belgaum would be a source of comfort, and possibly of increased health of the men. The monsoon here averages about 51 or 52 inches of rainfall extending from about the 7th of June until November, besides which there are heavy showers occasionally during the other months of the year. Owing to the situation of the station of Belgaum, placed as it is near the crest of the Ghats, the air becomes unusually damp during the period of the rainsNORTH. WEST. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75007043.tif] EAST. SOUTH. A PLAN SHOWING THE ARRANGEMENT OF THE NEW LINES.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75007046.tif] PLAN OF SEPOYS' AND NON-COMMISSIONED OFFICERS' QUARTERS. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75007046.tif] PLAN OF NATIVE COMMISSIONED OFFICERS' QUARTERS.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75007055.tif] COPIED BY R. ROJARIO B. E. S. PREES. A VIEW OF THE NEW LINES.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75007079.tif] R. ROZARIO. R. K. E. PRESS. SHOWING A PORTION OF THE OLD LINES WITH THE NEW LINES APEARING BEHIND THEM.
POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 43 Conservancy.44 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. One from extensive suppuration, the result of guinea-worm, giving a percentage of deaths to strength 0.76 and deaths to treated 0.80. There were 14 men invalided and three recommended for discharge from inability to per- form their military duties. The prevailing diseases were guinea-worm, admissions 115, and intermittent fever, ad- missions 110. The military lines are built on the S. E. slope of a hill on the top of which stands the quarter guard; they consist of 577 huts built of "kutcha" bricks and mud, of an average length of 8 feet to 10 and about 9 to 10 feet in height, with tile roofing which does not keep out the rain. During last rains a portion of the walls and roofs of these huts tumbled down, three came down completely and had to be entirely rebuilt. The quarter guard is built of "pucka" bricks and is in good condition; the present lines are unsuitable and are not liked by the sepoys. The hospital accommodation is very good; the building itself is kept in good repair. It is well ventilated; the floor is made of mud, periodically cow-dunged. There is no dead-house and the want of one is much felt. The Hospital Assistant's quarters are in a very tumble-down state; I expect to see the house come down every day, it is quite unfitted for habitation. The other hospital servants have no quarters attached to the hospital; they are at present occupying a detached building near the hospital, formerly built for European troops. On the arrival of a detachment of this Regiment from Kulladghee next month, they will most likely have to vacate, as there is no room in the lines for the extra detachment. The main water-supply of the Regiment is derived from a large tank, contiguous to the native town; the quality of the water is by no means good. It has been found to contain 4.8 grains of organic matter per gallon, and is very much discoloured, being of a muddy red colour, caused by the rains bringing with it the red soil from the surrounding heights. During last year guinea-worm having been very prevalent not only in the Regiment, but also in the native town, and finding that the water of the tank was so impure, it was suggested to the Collector to construct a filter in the tank as an experiment; this was not finished till near the end of the year, so that it yet remains to be seen whether it will answer or not. Guinea-worm has given the largest number of admissions into hospital during the past year; the ratio of admissions from this disease to the total strength of the Regiment was 21.8. The disease first appeared in the Regiment during the month of March, and the following table of the number of admissions each month up to the present time is given, clearly showing that the disease was more prevalent before than either during or after the rains. Admissions from guinea-worm, during March 11, April 28, May 20, June 26, July 7, August 7, September 6, October 4, November 2, December, 4. A great number of these cases were admitted with the worm broken during extraction by native barbers, much inflammation with extensive suppuration resulting. One case proved fatal from the extensive suppuration and drain on the system; two cases resulted in the contraction of the knee and ankle joints respect- ively, dependent on consolidation and contraction of the ligamentous and tendinous structures in and around joints. The most common situation in which I have found the guinea-worm was about the ankle and knee joints, one only in the abdominal wall, and one in the scrotum. When the head of the worm protruded it was gently drawn out and rolled upon a small piece of cotton, a probe was than dipped in a solution of carbolic acid (one part) and oil (four parts) and passed well up and around the worm for some distance, at the same time slight and cautious traction was made, and this was repeated day by day, until the extraction was com-
POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 45 plete. Under this treatment, I had only one case in which I removed the worm, measuring 2¾ feet, at a sitting of an hour-and a half; in the other cases I generally drew out about 4 to 5 inches every day. I found this plan of treatment to succeed very well, scarcely one case was followed by suppuration. In some cases where I found the worm as a firm catgut-like swelling beneath the skin, I cut down upon it with a lancet and passed a probe underneath and either directly extracted it, or rolled it around a bit of stick or cotton and afterwards dressed the wound with carbolic acid lotions. Vaccination has been successfully carried on with good lymph from arm to arm, which is kept up in the Regiment. The Superintendent of Vaccination for the Southern Mahratta Circle sent with his senior assistant a cow previously vaccinated to the hospital, where he vaccinated in my presence some children from it. I am sorry to say the result was unsuc- cessful. Topography .46 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. 11.9 grains of organic water per gallon. The jail well water is exceedingly good and plea- sant to drink; the tank water on an average contains about 4.8 grains of organic matter per gallon. It is very much discoloured by the red soil which is brought down by the rain, and which always remains suspended in the water unless it is filtered. During the last hot weather (1.870) guinea-worm was very prevalent in the native town, and as it was supposed to have been caused by the impurity of the tank water, which had become very scarce, the Collector had a filter constructed in a small tank as an experiment. This was not finished till far on in the rains, so that it remains to be seen whether it will do any good or not in the hot weather. The water is made to pass through four feet of fine sand, charcoal and gravel, into a well of masonry. The result is so far satisfactory, although the filtered water is not perfectly trans- parent. The water before entering the filter is very red and dirty, and never seems to clear by being allowed to stand; after passing through the filter it is very much clearer. As a proof that the natives appreciate the filtered water, it may be stated that the well into which it passes is crowded from morning to night with water drawers, and the people of the town are anxious to have filters placed in all the tanks. The country around Dharwar may perhaps be best described by describing the view from the Collector's kutcherry. Looking towards the west, two roads are seen, the one leading in a south-westerly direction to Hullial, and the other going nearly due west to Timghaut and thence to the Goa territory. The country between these roads is undulating and in some parts hilly, and is partly cultivated with rice, jowaree and other crops, and partly covered with bushes and low jungles; there is also a considerable extent of good grazing, ground. In the distance west the jungles near the borders of Canara are just visible. To the north and east an extensive plain stretches as far as the eye can see, sloping gently on the north towards the Malpurba river and on the east towards the Toongbudra. Abrupt hills rise up in the plains at intervals, giving variety to the landscape. Among these may be mentioned the hills of Nowlgoond and Nurgoond on the north-east and the Dumbul range on the east. The whole of this vast plain, except close to the hills, is a rich black soil, and is cultivated with jowaree, cotton, bajree, wheat, oil plants, &c. On the south the country is undulating, and in some parts even hilly and very beautiful; the soil is mostly laterite or red soil. The stones found in the Dharwar districts are principally iron stones, slate, quartz and a little free stone. Good building stone is scarce. Immediately under the black soil large quantities of kunker are found, both in beds and nodules, which when burned and slaked make very good building lime. The detachment at Kulladghee, Strength 67. Health good. H. M.'s 17th Regiment A. E. Kolapore.47 POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. ing nausea and vomiting, that the patients could hardly be induced to take them, while they did not seem nearly so advantageous as the same quantity when retained on the stomach. Six men died during the year. The Regimental lines are built on rocky ground elevated in the centre and sloping downwards in all directions. The situation is dry, with the exception of a small portion on the northern and eastern direction, where the adjacent ground being black soil it is rather damp during and some time after rain. The lines consist of eight double rows of huts running from S. E. to N. W., separated by streets of about 50 feet in width, the street between the right and left wing being 150 feet wide. Each row of huts is divided into four sections, the Sube- dars' houses being at the S. E. end and the Jemadars' at the opposite extremity. The privates' huts vary in length from 16 48 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. Sassoon Hospital, where a ward was set apart for their reception. In this way about 20 patients were brought under treatment from the railway station, while, as far as reported to me, only eight other cases occurred in the town, and still fewer in the cantonment. Much credit is due both to the police and the Hospital Assistants, who so vigilantly and zealously performed the duties assigned to them. Much discussion and correspondence has been going on during the last few months regarding the expediency of abolishing the present system of carting away all ordure to a consi- derable distance from cantonment, and substituting for it a plan said to be very effective in Bengal, viz., to dig trenches about 6 or 8 inches deep, close up to the men's houses and after a certain time have grain of some kind sown upon them. When called upon for my opinion on the subject, I did not think it necessary to go deeply into it, but confined myself to saying that as regarded the Poona cantonment, it was impossible to find any place in the neighbourhood of the 9th and 24th Lines where there was sufficient soil to allow of the experiment being tried, except on the race course or the border of a nullah, where it had been proposed to commence the experiment, but where, as I pointed out, contamination of the water in the nullah from which the regimental wells are mainly supplied would inevitably be the result. Neither of these places appeared to me to be at all suitable, and the objections being admitted the scheme was abandoned. As regards the neighbourhood of the 23rd Lines, however, the circumstances were some- what different, inasmuch as there are no sources of water-supply in the neighbourhood likely to be injured. I admitted therefore that the experiment might perhaps be tried during the hot months without much risk, but expressed the opinion that in the rains or in case of any unexpected down-pour of rain, the nuisance caused thereby would be intolerable. The experiment was commenced and has been continued, but the result has been such that I deemed it my duty, first, to urge a reconsideration of the subject, and more lately to point out the advisability of putting a stop to the system at once. My reasons for thus advising the military authorities were, first, that during a recent heavy fall of rain the filth was washed out of the trenches and was floating about over the surface of the ground, while the men, women, and children did not know where to go to relieve nature, and thus a fair sample of the probable result of what would occur during the monsoon was afforded. My other reason was, that on personally examining the trench first made (on the 26th November last), three months after it had been closed, I found the ordure as little decomposed, and if possible more offensive than it had been when first deposited. I reasoned to myself that if, as it appeared, at least three months more would be requisite to allow of decomposition taking place in the trenches first filled in, it was hopeless to expect that those now being used, and still more those hereafter to be made, would have their contents rendered innocuous before the monsoon, when we might of course expect the disgusting result described above to be of frequent repetition; I therefore urged the immediate stoppage of the system. My opinion of the arrangement, judging from what I have seen, is decidedly adverse to its being introduced into any cantonment on the Bombay side, and with the exception of that of Baroda, I am well acquainted with every one of them. While on this subject I may as well mention another case where it appears to me that economy has been carried somewhat too far in conservancy arrangments. As the regulations now stand, one tank cart only is allowed to each regiment. Unfortunately a tank cart cannot like a quire of paper be divided into two equal portions, when the regiment happens to be divided into wings. Though this is self-evident no departure from the rule is granted. The case in point is that of the 10th Regiment N. I., one wing was sent to Tanna, the bead quar-
POONA DIVISION OF THE ARMY. 49 ters, and other wing remaining at Malligaum. It so happened that the latrines for the former were finished first, and the solitary tank cart was indented for and obtained. But when the the latrines at Malligaum were completed and a tank cart indented for, it was refused, on the plea that the one cart sanctioned by regulation had already been supplied to the Regiment. They were allowed two or three extra sweepers, and told to make the best arrangement they could. The result was that the sweepers could not carry the pans far, they deposited their contents on the nearest spot beyond camp limits, viz., on the opposite or left bank of the river. Had they been disposed to remove it further, they could not have done so, as the ground up to the very edge of the bank is private property. This river supplies water to the town, the cantonment, bazaar, and the chief well of the lines; the latter being the highest up the stream, On inspecting the spot where the filth was deposited, I found it still higher up than the well. It was moreover at the lowest portion of the bank, almost on a level with the water, so much so that the slightest rise in the stream must cause its free admixture with the water, while the liquid state of the deposits must have been constantly furnishing contamination. I next examined the contents of the well and made inquiries respecting the alleged quality of the water; I found it clear and sparkling, and people seemed to approve of it as being good. This appeared strange considering its vicinity to such an accumulation of filth, and fortunately before leaving Malligaum, I had the opportunity of seeing the result of an analysis of some of it, which had a little time before been sent by Dr. Murray to the Chemical Analyser to Govern- ment. From this it appeared, as might have been expected, that the amount of nitrite and nitrate was 1.47 per gallon. As water containing only 0.41 was pronounced by the Health Officer of London as "very dirty and vile" and unfit to drinkNORTHERN AND MHOW DIVISIONS. Average strength present during the year 7,774 Average daily sick per cent. to the average strength 5.00 Ratio of mortality per cent. to the average strength 0.73 H. M.'s 6th Regiment N. I. Ahmedabad.NORTHERN AND MHOW DIVISIONS OF THE ARMY. 51 There were seven cases of remittent fever. During 1869 there were 10 cases of cholera, but in 1870 there was not a single case. Small-pox and other epidemic diseases were also absent. The detachment at Sadra52 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. A man returning from furlough was attacked with diarrh53 NORTHERN AND MHOW DIVISIONS OF THE ARMY. in exceptional cases that the fever resisted the continued treatment by diaphoretics, sulphuric acid and quinine, rest and warm clothing. There is probably no such thing as a specific remedy for any disease; all known remedies are more or less useful when administered rightly; mercury as an antifebrifuge is exiled from the English Materia Modica, but it still lingers as such among the German physicians. In those cases where the course of the disease is com- plicated with maniacal, and tetanic convulsions, and occasionally with jaundice, its value will be superior to quinine. Delirium departs sooner and convalescence comes more rapidly when mercury is used in preference to quinine. During the past year the hypodermic method has been used with marked success in more than 20 cases of fever; in half of these cases Fowler's solution was used undiluted, with the very best results. One was a case of congestive remittent fever; the patient was delirious and it was found impossible to get him to swallow. Ten minims of solution arsenicalis were injected, the injection being repeated every 4 hours until recovery set; at the end of the third day the patient was bettor. In the remaining cases, a solution of quinine of various degrees of strength was used with good results. In the concealed forms of intermittent fever, arsenic is the most efficacious remedy. In the treatment of chronic malarial dyscrasia combinations of iron, quinine, and strychnia have been useful. As usual in a Cavalry Regiment, there were a considerable number of slight surgical cases, but none of them of sufficient interest to call for special description. Diseases of the Eye .54 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. The site of the Deesa cantonment is on a flat sandy tract (traversed by the river Bunas), and presents during the dry season a uniform, arid, and scorched appearance; the soil con- sists entirely of light, fine sand. The only sign of vegetation in the hot season is to be found in a number of sickly-looking neem trees in the compounds of Officers' bungalows. The road- sides have been recently planted with young trees. The roads, though badly kept, are in pretty good order during the dry weather, but quite unfit for use during the rains; the only other feature worth notice is the existence of a good natural fall for surface drainage, through the middle of the cantonment and terminating in the river. Remembering this fact, and remembering also that considerable tracts of the cantonment are flooded during the rains, it would seem that there is a great deal of good yet to be done by improving the existing natural drainage. In all other respects the cantonment is clean and salubrious. The neighbourhood surrounding Deesa is for the most part free from jungle and partly cultivated. Twenty years ago the jungle on the north side of Deesa reached to within three miles of camp limits; it has now receded, so that there is nothing that can be called jungle within fourteen or fifteen miles of camp limits. This, most likely, has had more to do with the de- crease of fever as shown by statistics in Deesa, than even the many improvements in sanitary arrangements. Fever, small-pox, and guinea-worm seem to be the most prevailing complaints in the country about, particularly fever, which in the months of August, September, October, and November, prevails to a very great extent every where, but most especially in the villages situated in the jungle, where every native seems to be affected with it more or lessNORTHERN AND MHOW DIVISIONS OF THE ARMY. 55 2ndly. 56 SKETCH OP THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. REMARKS ON THE FATIGUE DRESS. 1. Jacket and trowsers .57 NORTHERN AND MHOW DIVISIONS OF THE ARMY. see the men of the 3rd Bombay Cavalry (who wear similar boots but not so long or heavy), toiling up the steep mountain passes where they were forced to walk and lead their horses in hand. 3. Trowsers and breeches. 6. Cloak. These need no remark being, of good material and as well fitting as circumstances and bad tailors will allow. Gymnasium .58 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. The Regiment is composed as follows:NORTHERN AND MHOW DIVISIONS OF THE ARMY. 59 Food. 60 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY, hospital were, on my recommendation, excused from running drill for a period of 8 days; but did not find it necessary to report any man as permanently unfit for it. The Regiment performed the march from Deesa to Bhooj, a distance of 200 miles, with the greatest ease, presenting no unusual amount of sickness. The whole distance was performed by seventeen marches with 4 halts, the marches varied in length from 7½ to 16 miles, and the men were always marched off the ground in the early morning, at such time as enabled them to arrive at the new camping-ground at or a little before sunrise. Recreation. NORTHERN AND MHOW DIVISIONS OF THE ARMY. 61 Dr. Wakefield's observations recorded in the "monthly remarks" show that the effects of the epidemic of the previous year still continued as evidenced by the weak state prevailing generally among those who had been attacked, and by the marked tendency to relapse. The number of cases during the latter part of the year rather increased, in proportion to what had been admitted in the first eight months; but I do not conclude from this, that the health of the Regiment was worse than it had been in the first half of the year. The men treated in the months of September, October, November, and December, suffered in race instances anything that could be called an acute attack. The worst symptoms about them were their want of tone and strength, and the prevalence of scurvy; two conditions which acted and reacted on one another, causing the frequent relapses noted above; so that a large amount of stimulant and nourishment formed in many cases a chief item in the treatment. During November and December, more in the former than in the latter, congestion of the lung or bronchitis occurred in about 10 or 12 per cent. of those stiffening from intermittent fever, but yielded to treatment or subsided as soon as the fever was stopped. Two cases only of remittent fever have occurred during the year, one in February and one in October. The latter would have been sent to the Invaliding Committee in Bombay, had he been well enough to be moved; he was left in Bhooj when the Regiment quitted that station for Ahmedabad. One case of mumps occurred in the month of September, it was a mild case requiring no treatment beyond fomentation and gentle purgatives and diaphoretics. Under the head of chronic rheumatism 22 were admitted, 21 of whom came also under the head of readmissions; almost all of these were men of 13 years' service and upwards, with weak constitutions; 8 of them were invalided by the General Invaliding Committee. Ten cases of primary syphilis have occurred during the year; 8 of these were admitted be- tween the months of January and June; one in November, and one in December during the march; the disease, however, was contracted in Bhooj. The two last suffered from the in- fecting form of chancre and became the subjects of constitutional syphilis; for this disease there have been 7 admissions, and 5 of these have been readmitted at various times; they were treated with mercury in the form of the bichloride, iodide of potass, iodide of iron, and nitric acid. Two of these patients were cachectic and suffering also from scurvy62 SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY. 5th of September. From this date slow but regular improvement continued, and by the middle of October the patient was able to walk a few yards with the aid of a stick; on the 20th November he was sent on sick leave to Concan. The iodide of potass was given in gradually increasing doses, till 17 grs. three times a day was reached, and this dose was continued for about a week. Fifteen cases are mentioned in the return under the head of conjunctivitis, most of these were very simple and cured entirely by local treatment. Three of them should have been described under the head of rheumatic ophthalmia; they were not severe and yielded readily to combined constitutional and local treatment. One case of keratitis is mentioned as having occurred in May, cured apparently as there does not seem to have been any relapse. A case of cataract was sent to Bombay for operation. Three cases of heart disease have been admitted; two under the head of disease of the valves, the other under that of hypertrophy. Of the former, one has been invalided, the other has gone on sick certificate; the third after being a few days in hospital was discharged and is doing duty. 31 cases of bronchitis have been treated in hospital; most of these have been cases of chronic bronchitis; 13 readmissions for this disease. Pneumonia .SKETCH OF THE MEDICAL HISTORY OF THE NATIVE ARMY OF BOMBAY, FOR THE YEAR 1870. EXTRACTED FROM THE ANNUAL RETURNS, FROM THE REPORTS OF REGIMENTAL MEDICAL OFFICERS, AND FROM THE INSPECTION REPORTS OF DEPUTY INSPECTORS GENERAL OF HOSPITALS. [ALL STATISTICAL INFORMATION IS GIVEN IN THE TABLES AT THE END.] COMPILED IN THE OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL OF HOSPITALS, INDIAN MEDICAL DEPARTMENT (BOMBAY.) BY SURGEON T. E. P. MARTIN, ACTING SECRETARY TO INSPECTOR GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL DEPARTMENT. Bombay: PRINTED AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 1871.
