IP/QB.10 (NEW SERIES.) No. 3. SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. SOME OBSERVATIONS ON THE POISON OF RUSSELL'S VIPER. (DABOIA RUSSELLII). BY G. LAMB, M.D., CAPTAIN, I.M.S., AND WM. HANNA, ESQ., M.B., ETC. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75023503.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING INDIA. 1903. Price As. 5 or 6d.
X No. 3. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. SOME OBSERVATIONS ON THE POISON OF RUSSELL'S VIPER. (DABOIA RUSSELLII). BY G. LAMB, M.D., CAPTAIN, I.M.S., AND WM. HANNA, ESQ., M.B., ETC. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75023515.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1903.
Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. E. A. ARNOLD, 37, Bedford Street, Strand, Lon- don, W.C. CONSTABLE & CO., 2, Whitehall Gardens, London, S. W. SAMPSON Low, MARSTON & Co., St. Dunstan's House, Fetter Lane, London, E.C. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W.C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TROBNER & CO., Charing Cross Road, London, W.C. B. A: QUARITCH, 15, Piccadilly, London, W. WILLIAMS and NORGATE. Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & CO., Cambridge. ON THE CONTINENT. R. FRIEDLANDER & SOHN, II, Carlstrasse, Berlin, N.W. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, Hague, Holland. IN INDIA. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & CO., LD., Bombay. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & Co., Bombay. A. J. COMBRIDGE & Co., Bombay. MRS. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, BOMBAY. HIGGINBOTHAM & CO., Madras. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & CO., Madras. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH AND SONS, Mufid-I-Ant Press, Lahore. SUPERINTENDENT, AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, Rangoon.
SOME OBSERVATIONS ON THE POISON OF RUSSELL'S VIPER. (Daboia Russellii.) MUCH light has of late years been thrown on the physiological action of the venoms of most of the poisonous snakes. Thus Weir Mitchell 1 in America, has carefully investigated the nature and action of the venom of the American rattle-snake (Crotalus); Martin 2of Melbourne has made similar researches on the poisons of the Australian black snake (Pseudechis) and tiger- snake (Hoplocephalus curtus); and Wall3 and Cunningham 4, in India, have pub- lished observations on the physiological actions of the venoms of the cobra (Naja tripudians) and of Russell's viper (Daboia Russellii). In addition to this, Kanthack 5 , Stephens 6and Myers7 have done valuable work, principally on the hæmolytic action "in vitro" of those venoms. Finally, Calmette and Fraser9 have investigated the question of artificial immunity against those poisons, and both have been able to obtain a serum which has a specific action, at least against the venom of the cobra. While all the older observers, such as Brunton and Fayrer 10, seem to have regarded the physiological action of cobra venom as essentially identical with that of the poison of vipers, such as Daboia, the result of the investigations mentioned above has been to show beyond a doubt that this is not the case, and that cobra poison exercises its poisonous effect in quite a different manner from the venom of true vipers. However, in a recent publication11 issued from Lille it is stated that Calmette has shown that snake venoms differ from one another only in the degree of their toxicity, and that they are all of the same nature. It is stated, further, that an animal immunised with the most toxic venom, i.e., cobra poison, furnishes a serum which is protective against, and anti-toxic to, the venom of all species of snakes. We shall return to the con- sideration of these statements later. It would appear from a perusal of the literature of the subject that, while the descriptions of the symptoms which the different venoms produce in man, and when artificially inoculated into animals, coincide fairly well, there is a great divergence of opinion amongst different observers regarding the physiological cause of these symptoms. Thus, while almost all writers, who have specially A
2 studied the physiological action of cobra venom, consider that it owes its lethal property principally, if not entirely, to its action on the central nervous system,. that it is, in fact, a primary neurotropic poison, Cunningham 12 contends that cobra venom acts primarily as a blood poison, and that its action on the nervous system is quite secondary to the changes which it produces on the blood. It is not, however, our intention in the present paper to enter into this discussion. Again, there is much difference of opinion as regards the exact physiological cause of death resulting from the injection of viperine poison. Thus, Martin 13 states, as a result of his researches with the poisons of Pseudechis and Hoplocephalus curtus, that he believes that all rapid deaths from viperine poison are due to extensive intravascular clotting. These snakes, however, classed morphologically amongst the colubrine snakes, resemble more the vipers as regards the nature and action of their poison. This opinion is upheld by the researches of Weir Mitchell14with the poison of Crotalus. Cunningham 15, on the other hand, as a result of his experiments with the poison of a true viper, viz., Daboia Russellii, puts forwards the opinion that, when this venom causes rapid death, it does so entirely by a direct action on the central nervous system. He looks upon its primary action as being that of a strong nervous irritant. It may be noted in passing that the symptoms preceding rapid death, as described by Martin in the case of the Australian snakes, are practically identical with the symptoms which Cunningham noticed in similar cases of daboia venom intoxica- tion. In view of the fact that Martin's hypothesis is based on experiments made with the venom of snakes which are not true vipers and the poison of which, he admits, is probably related in its physiological action to both the poison of the cobra and the poison of the viper, and in view of Calmette's statements mentioned above, it would appear necessary that further research should be made with the venom of a true viper with the object of controlling those obser- vations and statements. It was, then, with this object in view that the experi- ments which we have now to present were begun. At a later date a consider- able extension of the originally intended scope of the research had to be made. Unfortunately an interruption occurred in the work through the departure of one of us from India. The present publication, therefore, may be looked upon' as a preliminary note only, which it is hoped will soon be further extended. With this object experiments are now in progress in this laboratory. The material which was used in all our experiments was pure, dry and fresh daboia venom. This was collected during a period of some months from, on an average, six full sized living snakes. The poison was obtained by firmly compress- ing the glands, care being taken to keep the fangs over a watch-glass by means
3 of a piece of string passed behind them. After collection the venom was rapidly desiccated over lime. When the poison had been thoroughly dried, it was added to the general stock, which was preserved in an air-tight tube protected from light. Before the venom was weighed a considerable quantity of it was reduced to an impalpable powder, and again dried over sulphuric acid. In this way it was found possible to obtain a poison of a uniform strength for all experiments made at different times, thereby ensuring observations which could be compared with each other. Rapid death4 Post-mortem examination.5 Post-mortem examination.6 This series of experiments can be conveniently tabulated as follows:7 was directly injected into the blood stream. We shall then be in a position to critically sift the data of all the experiments at one and the same time. In the second and third series of experiments, which bear on the question under discussion and in which the venom was injected directly into the blood stream, monkeys and rabbits, respectively, were the animals used. The dried venom was dissolved in sterile normal salt solution, the strength of the solution being, unless otherwise stated, 0.1 per cent. The post-mortem examinations were made immediately after death. SERIES 11.8 Further, they seem to show that the intravascular clotting, which, as we shall see from our later experiments, is present in all cases of rapid death following the intravenous injection of daboia venom, can be easily overlooked. They also show that the fluid blood collected either before or after death remains uncoagu- lated. It is obvious, therefore, that without a very complete and thorough post- mortem examination undertaken immediately after death the cause of the symp- toms and of the fatal result might be passed over. Monkey 49 This series of experiments is tabulated as follows:10 Rabbit 211 Rabbit 712 This, then, completes the observations which bear on the question at present under consideration, namely, the cause of the symptoms and of death following rapidly on either the subcutaneous or intravascular injection of daboia venom. Later on we shall present some experiments made with a view to ascertain the cause of the symptoms and of death in the chronic cases of this intoxication. Let us now consider the conclusions to which the data contained in the three series of experiments collated above seem to point. It would appear, from our observations, that when death rapidly follows an injection of daboia poison, made either subcutaneously or directly into the blood stream, more or less extensive intravascular clotting is always found on careful post-mortem examination performed immediately after death. Further, it would appear, that, even when a dose which just fails to cause death from intra- vascular thrombosis is given intravenously, the animal presents none at all or only very slight symptoms. In the case of subcutaneous injection, however, as we shall see later, a dose which fails to cause rapid death by intravascular clot- ting may, in some cases, produce serious symptoms of chronic intoxication and death. A study of our experiments will show, also, that the larger the quantity injected, whether given subcutaneously or directly into the blood stream, the more rapidly do symptoms come on, the more quickly does death follow and the more extensive and solid is the clotting found on post-mortem examination. Such, then, being the facts of the case the question evidently resolves itself into the consideration as to whether intravascular thrombosis, which we have seen is found in all cases, can be brought forward as an adequate explanation of the symptoms observed and of the rapidly fatal result which follows. Now, the objective symptoms which follow thrombosis or embolism of the pulmonary arteries or their main branches are well known in man and are similar to those which we have described above.16 Whether these symptoms are ultimately refer- able to asphyxia or to cerebral anæmia is a question which is under dispute, but which does not concern us at present. In our opinion, therefore, there can be no doubt that the extensive intravascular clotting, especially the thrombosis of the pulmonary arteries, is the cause of the symptoms and of the rapidly fatal result which follows in these acute cases of daboia intoxication. Now, the symptoms which we have noted in all our experiments, viz., restlessness and difficulty in preserving equilibrium, gasping and laboured respiration, followed by violent general convulsions, are the symptoms which were observed by Cunningham 17 in his experiments. As we have mentioned before, this observer holds the opinion that these symptoms are entirely due to a direct irritant action of the venom on the central nervous system, and that the cause of death is also this action of the poison on the nerve centres. The reasons for his belief are put forward in the publication already referred to. A study of this
13 paper will show, however, that this opinion is based solely on the observer's interpretation of the symptoms preceding death, and that the post-mortem exami- nations were quite inadequate in number and detail. In the one or two instances in which he records having made a post-mortem examination, he found the blood of the heart in a fluid condition, and he further noted that it remained unclotted. We have ourselves noted this same phenomenon occurring in conjunction with an extensive thrombosis of the portal vein and the pulmonary vessels (vide monkeys 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6). It is evident, then, that Cunningham either did not observe, or attached no importance to, the more or less extensive intravascular clotting which we have described and which, in our opinion, has a most important bearing on the question at issue. In view of these facts and considerations it appears to us, therefore, that Cunningham's hypothesis, that the symptoms and death in these cases are due to a direct irritant action of the venom on the central nervous system, is not substantiated and will have to be discarded. We have seen above that one milligramme of daboia venom when injected directly into the blood stream of a monkey causes almost instantaneous death. If, then, the cause of death is, as Cunningham holds, due to a direct action of the venom on the nerve centres, especially on the centres of the medulla, the rapidity of the onset of the phenomena observed being due to the poison being at once carried by the blood stream to these centres, we should expect a similar result following the introduction directly on to the medulla of a larger amount of venom than one milligramme. Such an experiment was made as follows:14 for some time after the injection or, even after grave symptoms, recovery ultimately takes place. These observations were made principally on monkeys, although a few rabbits, fowls, pigeons and rats were also used. It was found, however, that the symptoms could be better seen and studied in the monkey than in any of those animals. The following observations, therefore, apply, for the most part, to cases of chronic intoxication in the monkey. The symptoms which are observed in chronic cases of daboia poisoning may be divided into local and general. At the site of inoculation a few hours after the injection a more or less extensive subcutaneous hæmorrhage developed. Around this, especially at the dependent part, a considerable 15 We have seen above that at the post-mortem examination of animals in which death has rapidly followed on the injection of daboia venom, although intravascular clotting is a prominent feature, the fluid blood collected from the heart remained uncoagulated, and that in some instances most of the blood was in this condition, the clots being small and difficult to find (e.g., monkeys 1, 2 and 3). From a consideration of this fact, and of the symptoms and post-mortem lesions noted above as occurring in cases of chronic daboia intoxication, it seemed to us not unlikely that these symptoms might be accompanied by, or even might be dependent on, a considerable deficiency in the coagulation of the blood. With a view of further investigating this hypothesis the following experiments were made:16 Monkey 1017 Blood coagulation time, 3¼ minutes. From this time the animal rapidly recovered. For the next few days the blood coagulation time was about 4 minutes. With a view of ascertaining how soon after the inoculation of the venom this diminution of blood coagulability appeared, the following experiments were made:18 Blood coagulation time, 3¼ minutes. The observations detailed above may, for convenience, be tabulated as fol- lows:19 and severe, the blood .coagulability was markedly deficient and remained deficient for some time (monkeys 9 and 10), and especially was this the case in the latter animal, which had to be killed on account of the severity of the symptoms. It would appear, however, from a consideration of these two cases, in conjunction with the case of monkey 14, that in order that these symptoms may become fully developed and so severe as to lead to an anticipation of a fatal result, the blood coagulability must not only be greatly deficient but must remain markedly deficient for some time after the injection. Thus, in monkey 14 the blood a few hours after the injection remained unclotted " in vitro," and the animal was apparently moribund; but next day this deficiency of blood coagulability had passed off, and the urgent symptoms had disappeared. This condition was also seen in the case of monkey 12 although in a much less, degree. On the other hand, it would appear that in those instances in which there is no great deficiency of the blood coagulability, the symptoms are neither well marked nor urgent and recovery is rapid (monkey 11). A study of these facts, therefore, justifies the conclusion that the patholo- gical symptoms in chronic cases of daboia intoxication depend for the most part on the deficiency of the blood coagulability, and that the greater this deficiency the more urgent and pronounced are the symptoms, especially the hæmorrhages and 20 At 3.9 P.M., 1 milligramme of daboia venom in 1 c.c. sterile normal salt solution was slowly injected into the cephalic vein. A minute after this injection the animal stopped breathing and was ap- parently dead. Respiration, however, soon started again. It was at first gasp- ing and then of regular rhythm. 3.11 P.M.21 Effect of heat on daboia venom. It is well known that heat affects all snake venoms in two ways:22 bath at 60° C. After thorough desiccation over lime, the basin with the residue was again weighed. The following were the results obtained:23 We thus recovered from 97 milligrammes of dried venom, 24.2 milligrammes of coagulated proteid and 77.8 milligrammes of incoagulable residue, a total of 102.0 milligrammes, i.e., a gain of 5 milligrammes. Making the same assumptions as in the previous experiment, we arrive at the following percentage estimate:24 (2) If water was taken up by the coagulable proteids only Coagulable proteid 23.3% Incoagulable residue 76.7 %, It would appear from these experiments that cobra venom contains practi- cally the same amount of proteids coagulable by heat as daboia poison contains. As regards cobra venom, our estimation is widely different from the estimations made by Weir Mitchell and Reichert and quoted by Martin in Clifford Allbutt's " System of Medicine."20 In the table published in that work cobra venom is stated to contain only 1.75% of proteid coagulable by heat. As regards daboia poison we can find no record of any estimation of the amount of coagulable proteids which it contains. This amount, however, is much the same as the quantity of coagulable proteid contained in Crotalus venom21 (24.6 per cent.). Effect of heat on the toxic power of daboia venom. It is well known that viperine poisons in general are very sensitive to heat when in solution. We shall see that daboia venom is no exception to this rule. The effect of heat, however, apparently depends on the degree of concentration of the solution heated. Further, the comparison which we shall make between the effect of heat on daboia venom and on cobra venom distinctly points to the conclusion that the former venom contains no albumose which acts on the central nervous system and which is the principal toxic constituent of cobra poison. We have seen that rapid death following either the subcutaneous or the intravascular injection of daboia venom is due to an extensive thrombosis; we have also detailed experiments which go to show that in the chronic cases of daboia intoxication the principal pathological condition is a deficiency of the blood coagulability. We have, therefore, now to consider what the effect of heat is25 was obtained in the following manner. A one per cent. solution of daboia venom was heated at 73º to 75º C. for half an hour. It was then filtered to remove the coagulated proteids. The clear filtrate was evaporated over a water bath at 60º.C. The drying was completed over lime. The dried residue was then collected, powdered and thoroughly desiccated over sulphuric acid. For our experiments a solution of 0.2 per cent. strength of this powder was made in sterile normal saline solution. Rabbits were the animals used, and all in- jections were made into the marginal vein of the ear. The weights of venom refer to the dried residue. Rabbit 926 These observations are tabulated as follows:27 The material used in the above experiments was obtained in exactly the same manner as that employed in the previous series, with the exception that in this instance the solution heated was 10 times weaker than that used in the first series of experiments (Table V). The two following series of experiments (3 and 4) were made with a view to ascertain whether heating daboia venom in solutions of the same strength as used in the two series just detailed, affected in a similar manner the power which, as we have seen, the unheated venom possesses of producing a marked deficiency in the blood coagulability. In both these series the solutions of venom of 1 per cent. and 0.1 per cent. strength, respectively, were heated in a water bath at 73º to 75º C. for half an hour. They were then centrifugalised, until the coagulated proteids had completely settled at the bottom of the tubes. The perfectly clear supernatant fluid was then decanted off and used for the experiments. Monkeys were, as in the similar series of experiments with unheated venom, the animals employed. All obser- vations on the blood coagulability were made with Wright's coagulometer tubes. (3) Effect of heating a solution of 1 per cent. strength as regards deficiency of blood coagulability. Monkey1728 Blood coagulation time, 3¾ minutes. Monkey 19.29 3 minutes, received subcutaneously in pectoral region 6 milligrammes of heated venom, equivalent to 4.2 milligrammes of dried incoagulable material. 4-45 P.M.30 Further, if the poison, heated in the same manner as was done for the last series of experiments, is injected intravenously, no deficiency of the blood coagulability follows. The account of a single experiment, among many which we performed, will serve to illustrate this point. Rabbit 1731 the material was obtained by heating a 0.1 per cent. solution, the filtrate which had to be evaporated measured more than 90 c. c. Although in the latter case it was divided between two platinum basins, the time occupied in the evaporation process, which was done at 60° C., was very much longer than in the former instance, namely 5 times longer. We have here a possible explanation of the difference in the toxic power of the two residues left after evaporation, namely, that the prolonged exposure of the weaker filtrate to a temperature of 6o° C. had the effect of destroying the toxicity of the venom, which toxicity, although weakened, had not been completely destroyed by the initial heating at 75° C. for half an hour. The two experiments, detailed below, distinctly show that the destruction of the power of causing intravascular clotting took place before the evaporation process was begun. A solution of daboia venom of 0.1 per cent. strength was heated for half an hour at 73° to 75° C. It was then carefully filtered. The filtrate was at once in- jected intravenously into two rabbits. Rabbit 18.32 venom has to produce a deficiency in the blood coagulability, on the other hand, a closer study of the experiments detailed in series 3 (Table VII) leaves a doubt in our minds as to whether or not a like result follows the heating of a 1 per cent. solution. Thus, we have seen that monkeys 17 and 18 suffered from a considerable 33 quantity of coagulated proteid was obtained by heat from a 1 per cent. solution than from a 0.1 per cent. solution. Further, we have seen that the incoagulable residue got from the 1 per cent. solution still retains the power of producing intravascular clotting, while the similar residue got from the 0.1 per cent. solution has completely lost this power. We can, therefore, only conclude that the constituent of daboia venom which acts on the blood coagulability, what- ever it may be, is not a proteid which is coagulated at 73° C., although this temperature applied for half an hour can, when the solution is a dilute one, viz., 0.1 per cent., completely destroy this toxic element. Does daboia venom contain any toxic element similar to that of cobra venom ? We have seen above that one of the principal physiological actions of daboia venom is its action on the blood, especially on the blood coagulability. We may now, therefore, pass on to consider some experiments which were made with a view of directly ascertaining if this venom contained any of the element to which cobra poison owes its toxic power on the central nervous system. It has been shown by Calmette 23 and other observers that cobra venom when heated for half an hour at 73° C. still retains its toxic power, and that the lethal dose of this heated venom is only slightly less than the lethal dose of the original unheated venom. Now, experiments with daboia venom heated in the same way (vide Table VI) show that 12 milligrammes per kilo. of such a heated venom injected intravenously produce no symptoms in rabbits. When we consider that 0.35 milligramme per kilo. of heated cobra poison,24 a quantity 34 times less than this amount of heated daboia venom, is sufficient to kill a rabbit, this observation alone would almost entitle us to conclude that daboia venom contained no toxic albumose similar to that present in cobra poison, which acts on the central nervous system. With a view to definitely settle this question, two parallel series of experi - ments were made with cobra and daboia venoms. A 0.1 per cent. solution of each venom in distilled water was prepared. These solutions were then heated in a water bath for half an hour at 73° C. A copious coagulum was obtained in each case. This was carefully filtered off. The filtrates were then evaporated to dryness over a water bath at 60° C. The residue in each case was collected and thoroughly dried over lime. A 0.1 per cent. solution was made, which, when necessary, was diluted tenfold. All injec- tions were made subcutaneously in the inner side of the thighs of rats which were carefully selected of about the same weight, i.e., 120 grammes. The weights of the venom refer to the residue left after evaporation of the filtrate. E
34 The results were as follow:35 intravascular clotting. It will be sufficient to detail a single experiment, among many made by us, which would seem to point towards this conclusion. Rabbit 2036 therefore not expect to find such an antitoxin in the serum obtained from these horses. The following experiments were made with a view of directly testing this hypothesis. It is to be regretted that these observations were not more extensive, the reason for this being that the stock of fresh serum available became exhausted. Rabbits were the animals employed for our observations. We have seen above (Table III) that 0.1 milligramme per kilo. of dried venom injected intra- venously into a rabbit is the minimum dose, which will cause rapid death from intravascular thrombosis. In the first four experiments now to be recorded, the test dose we employed was ten times this amount, i e., 1 milligramme per kilo. In a single experiment the test dose used was only two lethal doses, i e., 0.2 milligramme per kilo. The dried venom was dissolved in normal saline solution, the strength of the solution being 0.2 per cent. The test dose was then mixed "in vitro" with varying amounts of serum. The mixture was allowed to stand at laboratory temperature (about 25° C.) for half an hour. All injections were made into the marginal vein of the ear. The serum was comparatively fresh serum, as it bore the date 17th September 1900, and our experiments were made on the 27th January 1901. It was obtained directly from M. Calmette, whom we take this opportunity to thank for his courtesy in placing it at our disposal. The results are tabulated as follows:37 milligramme, taking 0.075 milligramme as a maximum non-lethal dose for a rabbit of 1 kilo. weight (Table III). This result is noteworthy when we compare it with the result obtained with the same serum in the case of pure cobra venom. For we have shown in a recent publication,30 that 1 c.c. 0 this same sample of serum was able to neutralise 0.73 milligramme of cobra venom, while these observations show that 1c.c. could not neutralise even 0.031 milligramme of daboia venom. Our observations extend and confirm the single observation made by Stephens,31 who showed that Calmette's serum had little effect in delaying death in guinea pigs when only a single lethal dose of daboia venom was used as a test dose. It would appear, therefore, justifiable to conclude, considering that daboia venom contains none of the principal toxic albumose of cobra poison, that this serum prepared by Calmette is of no therapeutic value in cases of bites from Russell's viper. Martin and Cherry,32 working with the poison of Hoplocephalus curtus, showed that 1.5 c.c. of Calmette's serum was able to neutralise a test dose consisting of 8 lethal doses for a rabbit, which Semple and one of us 33 calculated was equivalent to showing that 1 c.c. was able to neutralise something be- tween 0.12 and 0.18 milligrammes of this poison. In these experiments, how- ever, the venom against which the serum was tested had been previously heated, so as to remove the coagulable proteids. This heating, aslwe have seen, must have at least greatly diminished, if it had not destroyed, the viperine element of the poison. This result, therefore, when compared with our observ- ations noted above, would point to the fact, that the poison of the Hoplocephalus curtus is, as stated by Martin, not a pure viperine poison, but a mixture of colubrine and viperine elements. We may sum up the conclusions, which the observations detailed in this paper would appear to justify, as follow :38 hand, cobra venom contains no substance which can cause intravascular thrombosis. 4. Calmette's serum has no power to neutralise the toxin of daboia venom.. References. 1. Smithsonian Contributions to Knowledge; Vols. XII and XXVI. 2. Proc. Roy. Soc., N.-S.-W., 1892, 1893 and 1895. 3. " Indian Snake-poisons: their nature and effect." W. H. Allen and Co., London, 1883. 4. Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army of India: Part IX, 1895, and Part XI, 1898. 5. Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army of India: Part XI, 1898. 6. Journal of Pathology and Bacteriology. Vol. V, p. 279. Loc. Cit., Vol. VI, p. 273. 7. Journal of Pathology and Bacteriology. Vol. V, p. 279: Loc. Cit., Vol. VI, p. 414. 8. Ann. de l'Inst. Pasteur, 1893,1894, 1897. Calmette, " Le venin des Serpents", 1895. 9. Brit. Med. Journal, 1895, p. 1310, and 1896, p. 957. 10. Proc. Roy. Soc., Vols. XXI, XXII and XXIII. 11. " Notice sur le sérum antivenimeux et sur le traitment des morsures de serpents," Lille, 1901. 12. Loc. Cit. 13. Clifford Allbutt's " System of Medicine," Vol. II, p. 809. 14. Loc. Cit. 15. Loc. Cit. 16. Clifford Allbutt's " System of Medicine," Vol. VI, p. 261. 17. Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army of India: Part IX, 1895. 18. Brit. Med. Journal, July 29th, 1893, February 3rd, 1894. Lancet, August 1st, 1898. 19. Brit. Med. Journal, July 14th, 1894: Lancet, January 1st, 1896: January 3oth, 1897: september 19th, 1896. 20. Clifford Allbutt's " System of Medicine", Vol. II, p. 809. 21. Clifford Allbutt's " System of Medicine", Vol. II, p. 809. 22. Cifford Allbutt's " System of Medicine", Vol. II, p. 809. 33. Loc. Cit. 24. Brit. Med. Journal, April 1st, 1899, p. 781. 25. Loc. Cit.
39 26. Loc. Cit. 27. Loc. Cit. 28. "Notice sur le sérum antivenimeux et sur le traitment des morsures de serpents," Lille, 1901. 29. Lancet, June 15th, 1901. 30. Loc. Cit. 31. Journal of Pathology and Bacteriology, Vol. VI, p. 273. 32. Brit. Med. Journal, 1898, p. 1120. 33. Brit. Med. Journal, 1899, p. 781.
No. 3. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. SOME OBSERVATIONS ON THE POISON OF RUSSELL'S VIPER. (DABOIA. RUSSELLII) BY G. LAMB, M.D., CAPTAIN, I.M.S., AND WM. HANNA, ESQ., M.B., ETC. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75023753.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1903. Price As. 5 or 6d.
