IP/QB. 10 m. 91. b. (NEW SERIES) No. 12 SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ON THE MORPHOLOGY, TERATOLOGY AND DICLINISM OF THE FLOWERS OF CANNABIS. BY MAJOR D. PRAIN, M.B., I.M.S. (Indian Medical Service.) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026721.tif] CALCUTTA : OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1904. Price Annas 0-14-0 or 1s. 4d.
No. 12. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ON THE MORPHOLOGY TERATOLOGY, AND DICLINISM OF THE FLOWERS OF CANNABIS. BY MAJOR D. PRAIN, M.B., I.M.S. (Indian Medical Service.) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026733.tif] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026733.tif] CALCUTTA : OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1904.
Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. E. A. ARNOLD, 37, Bedford Street, Strand, Lon- don, W.C. CONSTABLE & CO., 2, Whitehall Gardens, London, S.W. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & CO., Charing Cross Road, London, W.C. BERNARD QUARITCH, 15, Piccadilly, London, W. C. WILLIAMS and NORGATE, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & CO., Cambridge. ON THE CONTINENT. R. FRIEDLANDER & SOHN, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin, N.W. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. IN INDIA. THACKER, SPINK & CO., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & CO., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. S. K. LAHIRI & CO., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., LD., Bombay. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & CO., Bombay. A. J. COMBRIDGE & CO., Bombay. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAM & CO., Madras. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & CO., Madras. G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH AND SONS, Mufid-i-Am Press, Lahore. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazair Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission Press, Rangoon.
ON THE MORPHOLOGY, TERATOLOGY AND DICLINISM OF THE FLOWERS OF CANNABIS. SECTION I.2 understood. A brief sketch is therefore here given of the usual configuration and disposition of parts; this is followed by a resumé of the abnormal conditions hitherto observed or reported; the facts having been stated, their bearing on the problems under discussion is then considered: the nature of the ovary and origin of the ovule are dealt with first; the character and manifestation of the diclinism are then examined. Since 1893, when the writer was deputed by Government to enquire into the cultivation and use of Gánjá in Bengal, the subject of Cannabis has interested him, and has occupied his attention at intervals. It is difficult to say in what direction the interest is greatest; whether it centres in the form of the plant that held, from the earliest times, in the estimation of the northern peoples outside the pale of the Egyptian, Assyrian and Mediterranean civilisations, the place that, as a fibre-plant, flax held among the races which these civilisations influenced; or whether it resides in the form of the plant which produces the potent narcotic that, though unknown to the Arabs till they conquered Persia, has since then spread to most lands and races influenced by the Arab faith. In either case the study of Canna- bis offers a series of problems of agricultural, commercial, chemical and physiological interest, and leads into many historical, ethnological and linguistic bye-paths. The obscurity of its original habitat; the strange effects and peculiar character of its narcotic resin; the mystery that surrounds the problem of its sexuality; the dubiety that exists as regards its floral structure, all conspire to sustain the interest that has been taken by so many writers in the subject of Cannabis. In the section dealing with the normal structure of the flowers of Cannabis, subordinate passages have been added which attempt to trace the gradual evolution of our existing knowledge. This has more than a direct interest; it illustrates how features that, if not obvious, are nevertheless readily apparent when looked for, may long escape the notice of the closest observers; it emphasises the value of direct observation as compared with the uncritical adoption of the observations of previous workers; it inspires a hope that one's own imperfect observations may yet prove stepping stones to those who follow. A considerable number of the teratological facts here recorded were noted in 1893 while the writer was engaged in the enquiry into Gánjá already alluded to. At the request of friends the drawings were exhibited and remarked on before the Linnean Society of London on November 15th, 18941; the invitation to publish a paper was declined because the deductions that seemed to follow from the conditions observed, which are those contained in this paper, did not then appear altogether conclusive; and because it was hoped that in the already quoted work by Briosi and Tognini, the appearance of which was at the time expected, the same ground might be covered. That valuable treatise, however, deals only incidentally with teratological considerations and does not systematically employ them in the discussion of the particular problems which it leaves unsolved. The writer has hoped, since Briosi and Tog- nini's Intorno all' anatomia della Canapa appeared, that some European botanist with more leisure than is at his disposal, would deal exhaustively with the teratology of hemp. He has himself, during the interval, revisited the area to which the cultivation of Cannabis is in Bengal restricted, and has grown plants experimentally in the Royal Botanic Garden at Shibpur. In this way he has been able to test and confirm the majority of his orginal observations of 1893 and in certain directions to supplement them. Now, finding that no one has been led to take up the subject independently, he offers here the information at his disposal. 1 Proceedings of the Linnean Society of London: April 1896, p. 3.
3 SECTION II.4 taken by a third panicle usually smaller than the lateral ones, often reduced to a simple cyme or a single flower; in Indian plants the writer has only once or twice met with a single flower, in most cases the axil is altogether empty (PLATE 1, fig. 1). Moreover, it is, in India, very usual to find that the lowest pairs of stipular panicles, that is to say, the pairs of panicles which should occur at the bases of the floral branches lowest down on the stem, are either entirely absent or are replaced by pairs of solitary female flowers (PLATE 1, fig. 2). Though simulating a panicle, the male inflorescence is not in reality a spiral of racemes but a spiral succession of cyme-systems in which the axis is defined and gives out two branches, the lower smaller than the higher, which latter repeats the process (PLATE 1, fig. 3). The presence of a female flower, instead of a panicle of cymes, in the axil of a stipule at the base of a stem-branch in a male plant was first noticed by Autenrieth1 though the flower referred to by him happened not to be a normal female but a pseudo-hermaphrodite one, and the fact that it replaced a whole panicle, not merely a single flower, does not seem to have impressed him. In India the phenomenon is of very common occurrence; as a rule the leaves and branches low down on the stem are opposite or sub-opposite and, as a rule, too, the lowest branches are decidedly extra-axillary, a character in which the solitary female flowers which are basal to the lowest male floral branches follow them, though these indicate their relationship to the stipules as definitely as the upraised branches do their relationship to the leaves; these female flowers are very often abortive and are sometimes only represented by a partially developed enveloping bract. A remarkable but well-known feature of hemp-cultivation, as practised in Bengal, is the care and success with which all male plants are eliminated, long before they flower. The object is to prevent undue fertilization of the female plants, which yield the Gánjá resin that it is the cultivator's object to obtain. The process of weeding out the males, which is con- ducted by a special expert5 at first appear; of the three accounts that by the Italian authors accords best with the natur a conditions as seen in India. In any case it is certain, (1) that we have to deal with a contin- uous succession of definitions of the axis; (2) that of the two lateral branches associated with each such definition only one continues the process; also (3) that, except at the com- mencement and at the close, the definition and the concomitant branching do not occur in the same plane or at the same node. It is this last circumstance that is the confusing factor, and that has been the cause of whatever dubiety has existed. Female Inflorescence.6 5-nerved; it is not impossible that in this there was a subjective tendency to consider it the equivalent of the 5 free sepals of the male flower; the disposition of the main-nerves, however, is against the view and, taken by itself, proves either too much or too little ; there are at least 11 nerves to be made out altogether, but if merely the strong nerves are considered there are only three, whereof the two lateral are distinctly stronger than the cen- tral one7 itself so that the micropyle comes just beneath the style-bases and close up to the hilum. (PLATE 2, figs. 11, 12; 17-21). The embryo, curved in agreement with the shape of the ovule, assumes a pseudo-incumbent position; the radicle, pointing to the micropyle, occupies the anterior (external) portion of the chamber; the cotyledons, forming the bulk of the ovule, occupy the posterior (internal) part. It may therefore be termed obcampylotropous. To the earlier writers, who recognised the involving bract as the perianth, the true perianth was unknown; even some who had formed a true conception of the nature of the involv- ing bract were unacquainted with the perianth, which is not shown in the figures given by Hayne1 or Autenrieth,2 or in the already quoted figures by Nees and Reichenbach. The first discovery of the perianth appears to have been made by Payer3 though it is evident that it was independently detected about the same time by B. Clarke.4 Since then it has always appeared in figures and been mentioned in descriptions of Cannabis. Schnitzlein5 says that in certain cases it is not to be detected; Bentham and Hooker6 do the same. The writer must, however, say that it is always to be found, if looked for, in a normal flower; the only instances in which he has failed to detect it have been in the cases of solitary female flowers, towards the apices of normal female spikelets, where the involving bract was also absent; and at the apices of abnormal female spikelets in which the sexes were mixed. According to Payer3 the development of the perianth follows that of the involving bract and precedes that of the ovary; he also has it that the perianth consists of two leaflets which soon became connate; a posterior which appears before the other which is anterior7 and next the involving bract. B. Clarke4 also makes it out to be higher behind than in front and Schnitzlein5 not only makes it higher behind but deeply cleft in front.8 The development of the perianth, however, according to Briosi and Tognini,9 begins after the development of the ovary has commenced; and, if there be at first a more rapid develop- ment behind than in front, it is certain that in Indian plants the margin is ultimately almost perfectly horizontal. B. Clarke10 speaks of the perianth as adherent to the ovary except as an abnormality and Masters11 has consequently included those cases where it is free among his instances of solution of the calyx. What, however, really happens is that, as a rule, the perianth is closely applied to the ripe fruit and fits so tightly as to form practically an outer coat; it is so described by Briosi and Tognini12 but is, as they explain, applied to, not organically united with the nutlet. But this is not always the case; sometimes the perianth slips 1 Arzneigewächse : Berlin, 1822; vii t. 7. 2 De discrimine sexuali, t. 1, t. 2. 3 Organogénie : Paris, 1857; p. 275, t. 68. 4 Ann. & Mag. Nat. Hist. Ser. 3, i. (1858) t. 6, f. 8. 5 Iconographia : Bonn, 1870; ii, t. 95. 6 Genera Plantarum; London, 1880; iii.357. 7 These positions are, according to his view, opposite the position of the two parts of the ovary; in the carpeilary whorl, according to Payer, the anterior appears before the posterior. 8 This would make the perianth theoretically equivalent to one axial appendage opposite to the involv- ing bract. The condition described by Schnitzlein is that characteristic of the closely allied Humulus, but the writer has never found it confirmed in Indian Cannabis flowers. 9 Intorno all' anatomia della Canapa, i. 50. 10 Ann. & Mag. Nat. Hist. Ser. 3, i. (1858), p. 102. 11 Vegetable Teratology, 81, 82. 12 Intorno all' anatomia della Canapa, i. 66, tt. 10, 11.
8 down as the fruit develops and is to be observed as a shrivelled collarette at its base; at other times, though this is very unusual, it remains wider than the nutlet and does not slip down. This last condition probably corresponds to the instance alluded to as abnormal by B. Clarke and Masters. But, in the case of the flower, the perianth is normally perfectly free from the ovary. There are normally no traces visible of fibro-vascular bundles in the perianth. In certain abnormal conditions, however, alluded to by B. Clarke,1 and in others to be described be- low, a fibro-vascular system is developed. Stamens may occur in abnormal female flowers but they then always either replace, or are collateral with, a carpel; so far they have not been found as a complete or even a partial whorl outside the pistil, though Briosi and Tognini record instances in which they have observed, within the perianth, outgrowths between it and the pistil that in the text they hesitatingly, and in the explanation of their figures they more definitely suggest may be staminodes. They record, however, the occurrence of similar outgrowths outside the perianth and between it and the involving bract.2 This fact leads to a suspicion that, whatever those extra-perigonal excrescences may be, they can hardly be accepted as rudi- mentary stamens, and to a further suspicion that the intra-perigonal excrescences are really of the same character as the extra-perigonal ones. If the subsequent evidence from teratologi- cal phenomena be accepted, the situation of these intra-perigonal protuberances should be the best proof of their non-staminal character. Even if they had only occurred intra-perigonally, the theory that they represent the casual development of a partial disk is rather more tenable than the theory that they represent stamens. Hayne figures the stigmas as clavate, but this condition is not met with normally. Auten- rieth figures the styles as they normally appear, so does Nees; Reichenbach copies both Hayne and Nees. The styles fall off after fertilisation. The orientation of the styles is shown in PLATE 2, fig. 6. The two are in the same plane; this plane, which ought perhaps organically to be at right angles to the plane of the stipule, the involving bract, and the ovule (PLATE 3, figs. 1-7), is, owing to the intimate union of the ovule with the middle line of the posterior (internal) ovarian wall, distorted so that the ovule comes to be in the same plane with the two styles, and deflected so that the planes of the two flowers intersect in the floral axis or thereabouts. As development proceeds, further deflection takes place and the final position appears to be in the same plane as the involving bract, between the free margins of which the posterior style at length protrudes and the posterior aspect of the fruit ultimately projects (PLATE 2, fig. 14). But whatever position the plane in which the styles lie may assume, that plane is the same as the plane occupied by the body of the ovule and its radicle, and whether the planes of the two flowers intersect in the floral axis, or be coincident and tangential to the leafy axis, or even, finally become radial to the leafy axis, the body of the ovule is towards the posterior (inner) aspect and just under the posterior (larger) style. Schnitzlein,3 however, shows the plane of the styles at right angles to the plane of the ovule, making the former coincident with the plane of the stipule and the involving bract. Besides this deviation from actual conditions, Schnitz- lein further shows the radicle as occupying the inner, the cotyledons the outer part of the ovarian chamber. This interpretation, which is quite unreal, has been copied by Cesati, Passerini and Gibelli.4 1 Ann. & Mag. Nat. Hist. Ser. 3, i. 1885, p. 102; New Arrangem. Phan. Pl., Introd. p. 4. 2 Intorno all' anatomia della Canapa, i. 53; tt. 5, 16. 3 Iconographia ii., t. 95. 4 Compendio : Milan, 1874; p. 229, t. 33, fig. 1.
9 The ovule commences as a papilla on the top of the axis, not however at the organic apex but immediately behind this (PLATE 3, figs. 8-12). The apex of the posterior wall of the ovarian chamber, becoming intimately associated with the ovule, carries it upwards as it grows till at length the ovule reaches the top of the ovary, where it already is before the ovarian chamber is closed (PLATE 3, figs. 13.16). According to Payer1 the formation of the ovular coverings, the primine and secundine, is coincident with its passage upwards, but according to Briosi and Tognini2 the ovule has already assumed the pendulous position before either the primine or the secundine are developed (PLATE 3, fig. 17). The upward progress of, the ovule being due to intercalary growth there is no obvious trace of a funicle adnate to the ovary, though there is a thickening which corresponds to the path of its progression along the middle line of the inner (posterior) carpellary wall. This thickening was first, though not quite accurately, shown by B. Clarke,3 was again shown by Berg and Schmidt,4 and more accurately still by Schnitzlein, who is copied by Cesati, Passerini and Gibelli (PLATE 2, fig. 16). The shape of the ovule is fairly accurately shown by Autenrieth; according to Nees, Mirbel was the first author to describe it, owing to its uncinate shape, as campylotropous. Payer speaks of it as anatropous, as does Baillon5 with reference to its development; fur- ther on in the same work, however, with reference to its shape, Baillon terms it campylotro- pous. But it is hardly correct to speak of the development as anatropous, seeing that the change of direction of the hilum is not due to any growth of the funicle inverting the seed, but is owing to the place of its insertion being carried bodily upwards by the growth of the carpellary wall; there is therefore some reason for the contention of Duchartre6 and others that it is orthotropous; the uncinate shape, however, precludes the use of this term. But though the shape be uncinate it is not quite correct to speak of it as a campylotropous ovule, since in this case the micropyle does not alter its original direction by being carried down towards the hilum; it is the hilum that changes its original direction by being carried up towards the micropyle; hence the proposed use of the term obcampylotropous. The embryo-sac is horse-shoe-shaped and is at first of fairly uniform diameter, but subse- quently it becomes altered by the expansion of the cotyledons in the direction of the hilum. The conditions have been well shown by Gasparrini7; by Schnitzlein,8 who is copied by Cesati9; and by Briosi and Tognini.10 Schleiden, however, as his manuscript drawings show (PLATE 3, figs. 21-23; taken by permission from the British (Natural History) Museum Schleiden collection), had anticipated these authors. The embryo-sac is at first partially filled with endosperm, which surrounds the embryo; this, however, does not ultimately form albu- men but is completely absorbed during the development of the embryo. This endosperm was first detected by Gasparrini7; its progress and fate have been explained by Briosi and Tognini.10 According to Payer the development of the various parts of the female flower is acro- petal; this, however, according to Briosi and Tognini11 is not the case: the organic apex 1 Organgénie, p. 275, t. 60 (1857). 2 Intorno all' anatomia della Canapa, r. t. 6, fig. 10. 3 Ann. & Mag. Nat. Hist. Ser. 2. xi. 1853 pl. 15, fig. 24. 4 Offizinellen Gewächse, f. 19 b. 5 Hist. des Plantes, vi. p. 160 (anatropous); p. 215 (campylotropus), 6 Elementes de Botanique, Paris, 1867. 7 Ricerche sulla embriogenia della Canape, tt. 1-3. 8 Iconographie, ii. t. 95. 9 Compendio, t. 33. 10 Intorno all' anatomia della Canapa, i. t. 14. 11 Intorno all' anatomia della Canapa, i. p. 50. C
10 of the axis of a flower-bud is at first quite indistinguishable from the organic apex of a leaf- bud. Soon, however, the apex in a flower-bud gives rise to the ovule; this (PLATE 3, fig. 8) is followed shortly by the development of the involving bract (PLATE 3, fig. 9); then by the appearance of the ovarian parietes (PLATE 3, fig. 10); last of all by the appearance of the perianth (PLATE 3, figs. 11-14) between the involving bract and the ovary. The Fruit.11 external to the embryo-sac; it forms a thin layer round the outer aspect of the coty- ledons and a somewhat thicker covering to the radicle; between the radicle and the anterior cotyledon it forms a fairly thick pad indented from above by the fold to which the upper surface of the testa is there reduced. Round the body of the seed the testa s tightly applied to the albumen ; round the radicle on the other hand it is looser and extends in two wing-like folds outwards and backwards from the edges of the radicle so as almost to touch by their free margins the body of the seed (PLATE 2, fig. 19). The testa is firm and crustaceous owing to compression of the subepidernal cells of the outer covering of the ovule. The features characteristic of the albumen and embryo are readily studied with a hand- lens magnifying 6-8 diameters, and are, moreover, quite recognisable even without making a section of the seed, if the seed examined has been carefully removed from the shell without injury to the testa (this with a little trouble is easily effected), and then boiled. With ordinary care in using the needles the testa may first be removed from the seed ; then, a slit having been made in the covering of albumen along its convexity, the embryo can be pressed downwards and inwards clear of the albumen which, except for the rent through which the embryo has been extruded, remains entire, retains its natural shape, and is capable of examination. The relationship of the radicle to the anterior cotyledon is best seen when a vertical section of the seed (PLATE 2, fig. 18) is examined; it is, however, also well seen when a hori- zontal section above the middle is studied. The first author to speak of the radicle as incum- bent is Baillon1; the expression is not applicable because, so far from being incumbent on this cotyledon, the radicle is separated from it by an invagination of testa and a thickish pad of albumen. The use of this inappropriate term which has, however, been adopted both by Bentham and Hooker2 and by Engler,3 should be given up. The darker colour of the testa over the radicle, its paler colour elsewhere, is perhaps due to the greater distention of this covering over the body of the seed, where the cotyledons are so largely developed, than over the less developed radicle. To the same cause is per- haps due the winged character of the testa at the sides of the radicle; the explanation may, however, be that the stimulus to growth resulting from the pressure of the cotyledons over the greater part of the periphery extends also to that portion of the testa overlying the radicle, so that more testa is produced than the radicle and the albumen which surrounds it are capable of filling. This arrangement appears to have been overlooked by most writers; possibly it is not so marked in seeds of European Hemp: it is very characteristic of Indian Hemp seeds. The orange-brown chalazal patch is of considerable interest as being the ultimate form assumed by the expanded discoid apex of the funiculus to which the body of the ovule is attached and from which the coats of the ovule arise. Its margin is therefore the point of origin both of the green covering of the embryo (the testa) and of the white covering (the albumen). It is described by Berg,4 though here as in so many other matters Schlei- den appears from his manuscript drawings to have been the first to observe the condition. As regards the albumen we find on studying a vertical section of the seed (PLATE 2, 1 Histoire des Plantes, vi. 216. 2 Genera Plantarum, iii. 357. 3 Natürlichen Pflanzenfamilien ; Leipzig; 1894: iii 1. 97. 4 Anatomisches Atlas : Berlin 1865; p. 86. C 2
12 fig. 18) that it lies as a thick pad in the sinus between the radicle and the smaller cotyledon, indented in its turn by the vertical invagination to which the upper surface of the testa is practically reduced. But such a section further shows that the peripheral pressure exerted by the growing cotyledons has not, as in many campylotropous seeds, been sufficient to obliterate completely the cushion of albumen on which they impinge; a sheet of albumen, much attenuated it is true but still readily discernible, separates the larger cotyledon from the overlying testa. In a longitudinal section of the seed we further observe that the plumule does not extend upwards beyond the middle, while the invagination of the testa does not pass below that level. Consequently in a horizontal section below the middle we find that the albumen has a figure-of-eight shape, the smaller loop embracing the radicle, the larger enclosing the cotyledons with the plumule between them, while a single layer of testa surrounds the whole (PLATE 2, fig. 20). In a horizontal section above the middle we find, on the other hand, that the albumen is in two rings separated by the invaginated testa which is now figure-of-eight shaped; the cotyledons within the larger ring of albumen have now no plumule between them (PLATE 2, fig. 21). The presence of albumen was first pointed out by Bentham and Hooker.1 Most of the early authors have, however, seen and figured it though, not knowing what it was, they have not figured it very exactly and in many instances, with the actual tissue before them, have followed Agardh2 in denying its existence. The latest author of outstanding authority to do this was Baillon3; the only authors, prior to Bentham and Hooker, who have attempted to explain the tissue, which no one can well fail to see, were Le Maout and Decaisne,4 who supposed it to be an albuminoid thickening of the endopleura. While Bentham and Hooker are the first to recognise its existence, the account they give of it is not quite exact for they describe it as unilateral, and plentiful round the radicle. It is plentiful round the radicle and it is most abundant on the upper side between the radicle and the cotyledons, but it is not strictly unilateral; it forms a complete covering to the embryo. Their not quite accurate expression has, however, been adopted both by Engler5 and by the writer6; this error should be avoided by future authors. An almost accurate description of the conditions present was given by Harz7 who, however, recognises as the remains of the body of the nucleus only 3 or 4 layers of small cells underneath the testa, and describes the bulk of the albumen as endosperm. These layers of cells seen by Harz, who has been followed in regard to the statement and the deduction from it, by Macchiati,8 are supposed by Briosi and Tognini to be possibly the tegmen of the seed. Judging from the figures they may be tegmen, or they may be only the outer much compressed layers of the albumen. Whether the tissue that Harz and Macchiati take to be perisperm is part of the covering of the seed or part of the remains of the body of the ovule, there is no doubt that these botanists err in describing the bulk of the albumen as endosperm. Had this been the case the albumen would not necessarily have ended at the margin of the chalazal disk; it would probably not have persisted along the convexity of the larger cotyledon and it would possibly have filled more completely the available testa round the radicle. In any case, whether it ended at the margin of the chalaza or not, it would not have been organically 1 Genera Plantarum iii. p. 357. 2 Theoria Systematis Plantarum: Lund, 1858; p. 256. 3 Hist. des Plantes, vi, p. 215. 4 Traité de Botanique; Paris, 1868: p. 508. 5 Natürlichen Plansenfamilien, iii. 1. 97 6 Bengal Plants; Calcutta, 1903: ii. 960. 7 Landwirthschaftliche Samenkunde, ii. p. 890. 8 Sulla sessualita, etc., della Canapa: Modena, 1889: p. 13.
13 continuous with the tissue of the chalazal patch. This, coupled with the fact that the endosperm is entirely used up in the development of the embryo, proves that all the albu- men present in the seed must be derived from the body of the ovule and must therefore be perisperm and perisperm only. The manifest inequality of the two cotyledons is more visible when the embryo is removed from its envelope of albumen (PLATE 2, fig. 21); the larger posterior cotyledon is regularly plano-convex, the smaller anterior one is subtruncate at the apex and slightly grooved vertically along its convex surface. The differences between the two cotyledons are doubtless the result of accommodation, under pressure of growth, to the confined space they occupy. Fibro-vascular bundles pass up the centre of the radicle and diverge fanwise in the cotyledons; within each, as a rule, fifteen delicate stands can be made out, three of the fifteen being slightly stronger than the others (PLATE 2, figs. 19, 20). SECTION III.14 and in double cherries. Here we find in some cases two leafy carpels that, by reason of complete union of their opposed margins, give rise to a closed cavity no longer, however, as in the normal female flower, sessile, but very distinctly stipitate (PLATE 4, figs. 4-16). Attached to the margin of the posterior leaf of the pair we find an ovule remarkably like that which occurs in the flowers already described as irritated by disease. The midrib of the leaf to which the ovule is attached is distinctly thicker throughout than that of the opposite one (PLATE 4, fig. 7). In other cases, still with closed cavities, we find that the ovule does not reach the apex of the leaf to which it belongs (PLATE 4, figs. 9, 10) or is quite free from it except for a slight union of funicle and midrib at the base (PLATE 4, fig. 11). In still other cases we find the ovule and its funicle replaced by an axial leafy shoot (PLATE 4, fig. 12). In these cases it was observed that the shorter the funicle the stouter it had become, and that beyond the point of attachment a normal midrib innerved the posterior leaf. Among the flowers with closed carpellary cavities occur others where the cavities remain open and the carpellary leaves, larger than in the preceding cases, gape at the mouth and include at the base of the tube a symmetrically placed terminal leaf-bud (PLATE 4, figs. 13-15). In yet other instances the gaping sac is replaced by two free leaflets, supported on an extension of the axis beyond the involving bract and perianth, which further projects between them as a leafy branch (PLATE 4, fig. 16). Associated with all these abnormal conditions we find considerable modifica- tion of the perianth. This is no longer a thin, hyaline, membranous cup; it becomes herbaceous and develops a distinct fibro-vascular system of 5 rather stout straight nerves with, between these, 5 more slender nerves that branch anas- tomotically. The margin of the perianth becomes hirsute and is minutely 10- denticulate (PLATE 4, fig. 8). The predominance of the primary branches of the main nerve of the involving bract over its mesial continuation is more marked in these abnormal flowers than in normal ones (PLATE 4, fig. 6). Moreover, the greater the deviation of the ovule from its normal posi- tion the longer is the stipe on which the modified ovary is borne. It is to be remarked further that, while the conditions shown in PLATE 4, figs. 7, 9, 10 and 11 are very common, they are representative and not exhaustive; all shades of intermediate states prevail. On the other hand, the condition shown in PLATE 4, fig. 12, is very rare and has only been met with on three or four occasions. But while in the case of carpellary leaves forming closed cavities leafy shoots replacing modified ovules have actually been met with, the converse has not been the case; no ovules, but only leafy shoots, have so far been met with in cases where the carpellary leaves formed an open sac or were free. The interesting conditions manifested in this sport, the bearing of which on doubtful questions will be discussed further on, do not appear to have been recorded, so far, in European hemp plants. The sport was not at all uncommon in the Bengal hemp fields in 1893. The vascular condition of the perianth associated with this sport does not accord with
15 an abnormality mentioned by B. Clarke,1 where, in a monstrous flower with 3 stigmas, the perianth had three faintly marked but distinct green ribs. Functional Abnormalities: Khásiá Hemp.16 green colour, this differentiation cannot be certainly effected sufficiently early to admit of their being replaced by transplanting other individuals from the seed-beds. This being the case, and because, if they are of no use they nevertheless do not induce excessive formation of seed in the normal plants, they are left standing. With the male plants, which they term the female,1 it is very different. As already explained, the greatest care is taken to detect and eradicate these before they flower at all, and a daily search is subsequently made for anything in the shape of a mon17 whole branch or a part of a branch in a male plant may bear female flowers; a branch or part of a branch in a female plant may bear male flowers. Male plants with female flowers: Sheória Hemp.18 flowering of male plants the more they approximate to female Cannabis plants in ap- pearance. The first writer to speak of mon19 seen by the writer; a much less complete state of the same phenomenon where, through- out a plant of female type, only the basal flowers were normal females and all the female flowers on all the intervening axillary spikelets were replaced by stamens, has only been met with twice. This last is the closest approximation to Holuby's interesting instance that has been noted in Indian hemp fields. Abnormal Flowers.20 In male flowers in India the writer has met with no abnormalities, but in Europe very interesting examples have been recorded and figured by Autenrieth1 and Gasparrini.2 The former has not clearly described the condition met with but his figures1 are sufficiently instructive. He shows in one figure what looks like a normal male flower with a whorl of sepals, followed by a whorl of stamens, within which lies a cluster of female flowers. But the companion figure of the same instance, in which the perianth remains in situ, but from which the stamens have been removed, shows several female flowers, not in a cluster but in a spiral towards the upper part of a central axis, in the axils of bracteoles corresponding to involving bracts (PLATE 5, fig. 15). The condition appears to be, in fact, the exact converse of a condition that is repeatedly met with in the inflorescence of a female plant of Mória type. The instances observed by Gasparrini, though very different from that of Autenrieth, are not less interesting. He found21 A rare abnormality, of which only two instances have so far been observed by the writer, is for the male influence to be so strong, or the female so weak, as to stop short at the formation, within the involving bract, of a normal female perianth, not, however, sessile but at the end of a short prolongation of the sub-bracteal pedicel; inside the perianth are two stamens of which the anterior has a filament and is perfect, the posterior a monstrous non-polliniferous sessile anther with a broad connective, so incompletely developed that each of its cells remains 2-chambered (PLATE 5, figs. 11-13). Autenrieth considered the instances in which he found a prolongation of the axis with spirally disposed ovaries, inside a whorl of sepals and stamens, to be examples of hermaphro- ditism. The conclusion at first sight is not unnatural. But further reflection shows that it must be erroneous since the ovaries he figures are really separate and complete female flowers, and whether the sepals and stamens below be considered to constitute a male flower or not, there is no question that the central axis represents precisely the converse of such an inflorescence as one meets with in female plants of Mória type. This being the case the question that arises is whether, in the whorl of sepals and stamens, con- stituting what we are accustomed to consider a male Cannabis flower, we do not have an instance of a compressed inflorescence rather than a true flower; something, in fact, com- parable with the inflorescence of an Euphorbia. The instance recorded by Gasparrini, where the conditions usual in Mória inflores- cences, instead of being reversed, are almost exactly repeated, strongly bears out this suggestion; here, however, from the other point of view, the claim that we have to deal with a hermaphrodite flower is stronger and, but for Autenrieth's instructive example, the question might have remained an open one. Besides these, however, another claim has been made for the occurrence of herma- phrodite flowers in Cannabis, the writer making it being Masters,1 the greatest living authority on teratology. It is, however, as Penzig2 remarks, unfortunate that no detail has been published of the precise conditions present in Masters' specimens, and it is not certain whether he had before him flowers approximating to the Mória type, flowers approximating to the Sheória type, or something quite unlike either and really hermaphrodite. Some of the conditions noted by the writer as occurring in abnormal female flowers of plants of the Sheória type have already been recorded by Autenrieth,3 notably that in which the flower is replaced by a solitary style; and one of the most interesting of Autenrieth's figures (tab. ii, fig. 21) represents what is very like an exact parallel of the condition shown at the apex of a Mória inflorescence (PLATE 5, fig. 3; fig. 16). Unfortunately Autenrieth does not appear to have been aware of the existence of the true perianth, as it is not shown in this or in any of the other figures that he gives of female hemp flowers. None of the writer's examples of Sheória flowers quite accord with this of Autenrieth's, the nearest approximation being that shown in PLATE 5, figs. 9, 10. In one or two of the cases where the fruit had developed a ripe seed, the shrivelled remains of an attached anther, on the side of the nut next the radicle, showed that there had been a staminody of the pistil. In these cases sclerenchymatic hardening of the pericarp did not take place along the anterior (ex- ternal) face opposite the radicle, this part of the wall of the nut remaining soft and flexible. 1 Vegetable Teratology, p. 197. 2 Pflansenteratologie, ii.: Genua, 1894. 3 De discrimine sexuali, p. 7, t. ii. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026799.tif]
22 Autenrieth and Gasparrini both figure very interesting examples of stamens with the connective prolonged upward as a style and stigma, or of a carpel reduced to the connective of an anther (PLATE 5, figs. 18-20). The writer has not met with this phenomenon in India. Staminody of the pistil, such as is here described, is a well-known phenomenon. It is recorded by Masters1; parallel conditions to those described here have been noted by Baillon as occurring in Ricinus, and have been pointed out to the writer by Professor Trail as occurring in the white-flowered form of Passiflora coerulea. Except, however, for Autenrieth's instance, which has been overlooked or misunderstood by subsequent writers, the condition has not before been recorded in Cannabis. Summary of Teratological Phenomena.23 SECTION IV.24 of less differentiated tissue. Apart, however, from this, Clarke's theory fails to explain why there are two styles, and particularly why the posterior one, where by his interpreta tion there is no carpel at all, should be longer and stronger than the anterior, which belong to the only carpel that he admits. Clarke's careful attempt, from organographic considera tions alone, to interpret the structure of the ovary and the origin of the ovule, cannot therefore be accepted as successfully explaining all the conditions. The next important attempt to explain the structure of the ovary in Cannabis we owe to Payer.1 This author states that the ovary commences as two carpels, at first distinct, but afterwards united at the base and forming two styles. At the base of each carpel there is a depression; of these, the posterior soon becomes entirely obliterated while the anterior becomes enlarged and forms the solitary loculus of the ovary. The ovule he claims as internal and axial. When the ovule appears, the loculus is not very deep and the ovule does not quite fill the cavity; it is thereafter carried up by intercalary growth to the apex of the loculus, the primine and the secundine being developed during its transit. Compar- ing the Cannabineæ with the Tremandreæ, Payer says that as regards the ovary they differ only in this, that whereas in the Tremandreæ there are two carpels, both lateral to the axis, and each forming a loculus, in the Cannabireæ only one of the carpels, the anterior, is lateral to the axis and forms a loculus; the posterior remains as a rudimentary structure at the apex of the axis and does not form a loculus. This must mean, if it means anything, either that the axis continues to grow upward carrying on its apex the ovule and, just behind the ovule, the internal style; or, if the apex of the axis remains stationary, that the anterior carpellary loculus progressively deepens so that its base gradually leaves the two styles and the solitary ovule behind. In either case the posterior aspect of the ovarian wall25 the developed anterior one, and the thicker rib on the posterior carpellary wall is not much better explained by supposing it to be axial than it is by supposing it to be placen- tal. On the whole therefore Payer's attempt to explain, on organogenic grounds, the structure of the ovary and the nature of the ovule is not more satisfactory than Clarke's organographic one. Doell1 appears to be the next writer to express a definite opinion on the subject. He advances the theory, already put forward by B. Clarke, that in Cannabineæ we have normally a solitary carpel in the ovary. He explains the second style, which B. Clarke does not deal with at all, as an excrescence on the ventral suture of the carpel. But though this view was at one time endorsed by Celakowsky,2 it has only to be stated in order to realise its insufficiency; Clarke's reticence on the point is by comparison almost commendable. Schnitzlein,3 whose drawings have been referred to already, makes a quite different attempt to explain the two styles by showing them at right angles to the axis of the cavity formed by the single carpel, which is coincident with the long axis of the embryo. If this had accorded with organographic facts it might have accounted for the existence of the two styles as belonging to one carpel, though it would still have failed to explain why one of the styles should be larger than its neighbour. The carpel, according to Schnitzlein, is internal not external. But the whole drawing is out of accord with actual fact; the styles and the long axis of the embryo are in the same, not in intersecting planes; moreover, Schnitzlein has shown the radicle where the cotyledons ought to be, and vice versá. Celakowsky soon abandoned the view of B. Clarke as modified by Doell, and adopted that of Payer, for in his magistral works on this subject4 his views as regards the struc- ture of the ovary are mainly those of Payer repeated in another form, and are, as he himself practically admits, based on the results obtained by Payer in the classic Organo- génie. 'The apex of the floral axis is clothed with foliar tissue belonging primarily to two separate carpels, of which the inner is practically abortive, being pushed to one side by the outer which develops more strongly, and ultimately is represented by the portion of the ovarian wall overlying the chalaza and by the posterior internal style.' Thus put, all the objections to the original theory stand unanswered; in particular the view here expressed is irreconcilable with the fact that the posterior style, which should belong to an abortive carpel, is nevertheless the stronger of the two. Celakowsky's view regarding the ovule, though at first sight diametrically opposed to Payer's, since Payer holds that the origin of the ovule is axial while Celakowsky insists that it is of foliar origin, is nevertheless merely Payer's view modified to accord with Celakows- ky's thoughtful hypothesis. 'The growing point of the floral axis is displaced by the greater development of the anterior carpel to the lateral posterior position it actually occupies. This growing point, however, includes nothing belonging to the axis; it is of foliar nature; the stele has no true apex, at any rate no bare apex; this subtends, is blended with, and is lost in the substance of the apical tissue.' Whatever may be the case in other plants there is nothing in the structure of Cannabis that affords the slightest 1 Flora des Grosshersogthums Baden ; Carlsruhe, 1857-62. 2 Ueber die morphologische Bedeutung der Samenknospen (Flora 1874, p. 274). 3 Iconographia, ii, p. 95 (1870). 4 Ueber Placenten and Hemmungsbildungen der Carpellen. Prag. 1875: Vergleichende Darstellung der Placenten in den Fruchtknoten der Phanerogamen. Prag. 1876.
26 foundation for the theory propounded by Celakowsky, and adopted by Schaeffer1 and others as to the origin of the ovule from a hypothetical tissue of foliar nature which intervenes between the ovule and the apex of the axis. To the writer the whole hypothesis appears unnecessary; in Cannabis it is certainly baseless. So far, therefore, neither the organographic considerations of B. Clarke, the organo- genic researches of Payer, nor the subjective conceptions of Celakowsky have satisfactorily explained the nature of the ovary and the origin of the ovule of Cannabis. To Briosi and Tognini2 we are indebted for a careful attempt to attack the problem from the histo- logical side. To attain their object they studied a series of progressive horizontal sections of the base of a female flower from the level of its insertion upwards. In the very short pedicel are to be found four vascular traces, of which one is anterior, one is posterior, and two are lateral (PLATE 3, figs. 1, 2). Of these the anterior27 is not joined by the secondary trace28 facts detailed by Payer and augmented and emended by Briosi and Tognini. It also, the writer believes, is in strict accordance with the histological details given by these authors. The two carpels are innerved by the two opposite lateral traces in the pedicel (PLATE 3, figs. 1-7, 29 pseudo-spicate system of female flowers30 structure of the female flower has now to be developed; the only point to be noted before we proceed to do so is that, since the sepals of the male flower correspond to the involving bracts of the female spikelet, no contrast is permissible between male perianth and female perianth, the latter being an organ quite unrepresented in the male flowers. Channels of Diclinism.31 Nature of the Diclinism.32 The Results.Explanation of the Plates. PLATE I. CANNABIS SATIVA Linn. Prain: Cannabis. PLATE I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026841.tif] D. Prain delt. CANNABIS SATIVA Linn. PLATE II. CANNABIS SATIVA Linn. Prain: Cannabis. PLATE II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026853.tif] D.Prain. delt. CANNABIS SATIVA Linn. PLATE III. ORGANOGENY OF CANNABIS Prain: Cannabis. PLATE III. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026865.tif] E Briosi et Tognini, et Schleiden. ORGANOGENY OF CANNABIS PLATE IV. PHYLLODY OF GYNPrain: Cannabis. PLATE IV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026877.tif] D. Prain delt. PHYLLODY OF GYNOECIUM IN CANNABIS. K. D. Chandra lith.
PLATE V. KHÁSIÁ, MÓRIA AND SHEÓRIA CANNABIS. Fig. 1.Prain; Cannabis. PLATE V. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026889.tif] D. Prain delt. KHÁSIÁ, MORIA AND SHEORIA CANNABIS. K. P. Dass lith.
No. 12 (NEW SERIES) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ON THE MORPHOLOGY, TERATOLOGY AND DICLINISM OF THE FLOWERS OF CANNABIS. BY MAJOR D. PRAIN, M.B., I.M.S. (Indian Medical Service.) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026904.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1904. Price Annas 0-14-0 or 1s. 4d.
