IP/QB.10 No: 2. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. MALARIA IN INDIA BY CAPTAIN S. P. JAMES, M.B. (LOND.), I.M.S. (On Special Duty with the Royal Society's Commission on Malaria). ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75022345.tif] CALCUTTA : OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA, 1902. Price Rs. 1-8 or 2s. 3d.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75022351.tif]
x No. 2. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. MALARIA IN INDIA BY CAPTAIN S. P. JAMES, M.B. (LOND.), I.M.S. (On Special Duty with the Royal Society's Commission on Malaria). ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75022357.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1902.
Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. E. A. ARNOLD, 37, Bedford Street, Strand, Lon- don, W.C. CONSTABLE & Co., 2, Whitehall Gardens, London, S.W. SAMPSON Low, MARSTON & CO., St. Dunstan's House, Fetter Lane, London, E.C. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W.C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & CO., Charing Cross Road, London, W.C. B. A. QUARITCH, 15, Piccadilly, London, W. WILLIAMS and NORGATE, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & CO., Cambridge. ON THE CONTINENT. R. FRIEDLÄNDER & SOHN, II, Carlstrasse, Berlin, N.W. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. KARL W. HIERESMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague. IN INDIA. THACKER, SPINK & CO., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & CO., Calcutta. THACKER & CO., LD., Bombay. D. B. TARAPORE VALA, SONS & CO., Bom- bay. A. J. COMBRIDGE & CO., Bombay. MRS. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, BOMBAY. HIGGINBOTHAM & CO., Madras. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & Co., Madras. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH AND SONS, Mufid-I-Am Press, Lahore. SUPERINTENDENT, AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, Rangoon.
CONTENTS. PART I. PAGE Methods of Investigation . . . . . . . . . 1 PART II. CHAPTER I. Observations on anopheles mosquitoes and their larvæ . . . 27 " II. On the malarial infection of native children in India . . . 59 " III. Observations on the causes which influence the prevalence of malaria in different parts of India . . . . . . . 73 " IV. The relation between enlarged spleens and malarial infection . 85 " V. Note on the malarial parasites and fevers of India . . . 95 " VI. Observations on birds . . . . . . . . 99
NOTE. THE work recorded in this report includes the greater part of that done conjointly by Dr. J. W. W. Stephens, Mr. S. R. Christophers, M.B., and myself, during the time I was associated with them in India, as well as some of the work I have done since their departure. It may happen that, as I have not yet seen their reports, my conclusions may, in some cases, differ from those of Drs. Stephens and Christophers. It should be noted, therefore, that only my own opinions are expressed in this report. S. P. JAMES, Captain, I. M. S.
MALARIA IN INDIA. PART I. METHODS OF INVESTIGATION. I PROPOSE first to describe, under the following headings, some methods we have employed in our investigations :2 does it produce an extensive and evenly spread film of blood, but the ease and rapidity with which a large number of specimens can be taken by this method renders it the only practicable one for taking specimens of blood from village children. During such operations the crowd and dust are usually so great that an attempt to take specimens on cover-glasses or by any other method could only end in failure. A straight surgical needle, the eye of which has been previously removed with a pair of forceps, should be used for this method of taking films. We thus have a needle with a good point and a straight shaft. The finger is pricked and a clean glass slide is lowered on to the drop of blood that exudes, so that it touches the drop about half an inch from one end of the slide. Care should be taken to allow the slide only to just touch the drop of blood3 films are fixed by immersion from ten minutes to half an hour in absolute alcohol. For this and for staining purposes the glass stain-pots shown in Fig. 3 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75022381.tif] Fig. 3. will be found very useful. A large number of slides can be fixed in one of these pots at the same time; but before placing each slide in the alcohol, a number by which it will be known should be written upon it with Indian ink or a "glass pencil." For staining blood films we have usually employed either alcoholic hæma- tin or Romanowsky's stain, and other stains than these are seldom necessary. The alcoholic hæmatin stain possesses the advantages of being very easily worked, of being permanent, and of showing up the pigment in malaria parasites better than Romanowsky's stain. With a little practice, however, very beautiful results can be obtained by Romanowsky's method, and as, in a slide stained by this method, it is almost impossible to overlook even the smallest ring forms, it is to be recommended even for routine work. The alcoholic hæmatin stain is made as follows :*4 This solution should be allowed to stand, in a corked bottle in a hot sun for one or two days (or in an incubator for a week), until the blue has acquired a red tinge when looked at through the bottle held up to the light. Stock solution, B :5 and the blood platelets are correctly stained, for the parasites will be found to show up quite plainly in the bluish corpuscles. A useful property of Romanowsky's stain is its power of causing the red cells which have been invaded by simple Tertian parasites to become stippled with red dots, thus making cells containing these parasites very easily recog- nisable. This stippling, which is probably the result of degeneration in the corpuscle, does not, of course, occur in every corpuscle that is invaded by a simple Tertian parasite, but in every correctly stained slide of simple Tertian parasites, there will be a large proportion of stippled cells, and on the whole, it is a very characteristic sign. A pseudo-stippling sometimes occurs in blood corpuscles invaded with malignant Tertian parasites, but this pseudo-stippling is readily distinguished from the characteristic appearance presented by corpuscles invaded with the simple Tertian parasite. After a slide has been examined the oil should be removed with a few drops of xylol: the slide can then be wrapped in paper and kept indefinitely. It is somewhat difficult to prepare good specimens of flagella bodies, and it is usually preferable to observe them in the fresh state. In cases, however, where flagella bodies are fairly numerous, I have found the following method give good results. A moist chamber is first made by cutting a round hole the size of a large cover slip in a thick piece of blotting-paper, and applying this over the cell of a hollow ground glass slide. The blotting-paper is well moistened with water. The finger should be pricked and a large drop of blood squeezed out. During this operation it is well to breathe continuously on the drop of blood as it exudes, and while it is resting on the finger. The drop of blood is then transferred to the middle of a clean glass slide and inverted over the moist chamber cell: the blood should not be spread out on the slide but should remain as a hanging drop. A number of similar hanging drops of blood are prepared and placed in moist chambers. At varying periods of time after their preparation,6 Fresh specimens should be examined with the oil-immersion lens and with carefully arranged light: if too much light passes through the specimens the parasites are difficult to see. To those who are unfamiliar with malaria parasites the examination of fresh specimens of blood is full of pitfalls. Anything which seems to have the appearance of a parasite, but which is not actually inside a red blood corpuscle, and especially such things as "free pigment," "free spores" (unless the latter are actually seen breaking away from a segmenting parasite), should be disregarded. In cases where there is any doubt and especially in cases where only unpigmented forms appear to be present, it is better to take films and stain them by Romanowsky's method. In stained films, unless scrupulous attention has been paid to the cleanliness of the patient's finger, we should be on the watch for skin parasites, which often present a superficial resemblance to malaria parasites. It is unnecessary, however, to enumerate all the things that may be mistaken for malaria parasites, and experience has shown that no advantage is gained by doing so:* it is sufficient to say that the malaria parasite is so definite an organ- ism that anything about which, after careful examination, it is possible to have the least doubt is almost certainly not a parasite. The detection of pigmented leucocytes.7 than the large mononuclear cells are, in the absence of parasites, of less diag- nostic value. The differential count of leucocytes.8 the large mononuclears in malarial films, are distinguished from these by the presence of a deeply notched nucleus and by the presence of scanty granula- tions in the protoplasm. In suspected cases of malaria, slides for making differential counts should be taken, if possible, during an apyretic interval, as it is at such times that the difference in the proportions of the different varieties of leucocytes is most marked. When all possible care to place each variety of leucocyte met with under its proper heading in the count has been taken, a result which gives the number of large mononuclear elements as over 15 per cent. of all the leucocytes may be regarded as a proof of recent malarial infection. II.9 The mosquitoes to be dissected are killed with chloroform and the species of each carefully identified. They are then placed in a normal saline solution in watch glasses10 above method may be easily stained. The excess of salt solution is removed with blotting-paper and the cover-glass slipped off the slide in the same manner as is done when making a cover slip preparation of blood. The slide and cover-slip are then dried in the air, fixed by immersion in absolute alcohol for half an hour, and stained by Romanowsky's method like an ordinary blood film. Examination with the oil-immersion lens will show the sporozoites singly and in groups as sickle-shaped bodies, pointed towards the ends, and with one or more brilliant red chromatin dots at or near the centre of each. It would be of little or no advantage to enumerate the appearances and structures that may be mistaken for sporozoites. The best way to avoid error is to ensure that no other structures except the glands are included under the cover-glass. If in doubt, the specimen may be fixed and stained as above described. In making dissections of a large number of mosquitoes caught in a village, several other parasites besides sporozoites will almost certainly be found. The most interesting of these are the bodies which for want of a better name we have called the "sausage bodies." They are small oval or crescent-shaped bodies, which are occasionally found in great numbers in the tissues of the head surrounding the salivary glands, but not as a rule in the glands them- selves. When stained with Romanowsky's stain they present a red capsule, blue body substance, and two round chromatin patches in the centre surrounded by a clear area. Their nature is unknown. To dissect out the stomach to demonstrate sygotes.11 posterior third of the stomach (nearest the origin of the malpighian tubes) although in some cases they are more uniformly spread over the whole stomach. The number of zygotes present varies greatly; sometimes only ten or fifteen can be counted, at other times as many as four or five hundred, so that the whole surface of the organ is studded with them. Very young zygotes can only be made sure of by examining the whole of the specimen with the oil-immersion lens: they can then be recognised by the presence of grains of malarial pigment the appearance of which is very characteristic. These grains of pigment may be arranged in little groups or in a line across the zygote. There are so many cells in and around the stomach and malpighian tubes that bear a superficial resemblance to zygotes that their detection presents more difficulty to those who are unfamiliar with their appearance than does the detection of sporozoites. In this case,12 (Giles) and A. Rossii (Giles), states that neither of these species carry the malignant Tertian (crescent) variety of the malaria parasite. Positive results have, however, been obtained by us with both those species of anopheles for simple Tertian, malignant Tertian and Quartan parasites. We have also shown that zygotes and sporozoites will readily develop in six other species of Indian anopheles with which we have experimented (viz., A. Culicifacies, A. Fluviatilis, A. Stephensii, A. Theobaldi, A. Turkhudi, A. Barbirostris), so that we may infer that almost certainly all the species of Indian anopheles are capable of harbouring the malaria parasite under experi- mental conditions, and negative results in feeding experiments with anopheles are more likely to be due to failure in carrying out the details of the experiment than to the fact that any species of anopheles is hostile to the parasite. The most important thing is, as we have said, to obtain a suitable case for the anopheles to feed upon. By this is meant a case in which a large number of gametes are ripe for flagellation at the time of the experiment. It is practically useless to carry out a feeding experiment on a case in which, by the examination of fresh specimens of blood, a fair number of flagellating bodies have not been seen shortly before the experiment. Having procured a good case on which to carry out the experiment, the best method of feeding the mosquitoes and keeping them alive can be easily devised after a few trials. We have found that anopheles do not, however, live so well in the mosquito netting boxes that are usually recommended for feeding experiments as they do in glass bottles, but if the latter are used a rough piece of cardboard or stiff paper must be placed in the bottles for the anopheles to rest comfortably upon. This detail, which is due to the ingenuity of Dr. Christophers, is very important. The following is the plan we have found most successful :13 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75022414.tif] Fig.5.14 the development of zygotes, so that it is not absolutely necessary to place any males in the bottles with the females, although in order to imitate natural condi- tions more closely it is possibly of advantage to do so. Either mosquitoes bred from larvæ, or those caught in a village may be used; the advantage of employing the latter is that they will usually feed more readily on the first night. For infecting a healthy person, all that is necessary is to allow the anopheles: which have previously fed on the case of malaria to bite the healthy man in the same manner as they did the malaria case. It is of course useless to attempt to infect a healthy person with malaria unless sporozoites have been detected in the glands of some of the anopheles of the same batch as those which are being used in the infecting experiment, and experiments which simply consist in feeding a number of anopheles for some days on a case of malaria, and then on a healthy man, without simultaneous dissection of the mosquitoes, are of little if any value; and when negative results are obtained, such experiments are liable to throw discredit on the fact that malaria is conveyed only by mosquitoes. III.15 patient from the knowledge of whether his case is one of simple Tertian, of Quar- tan, or of malignant Tertian fever far outweighs any remote danger there may be in withholding quinine for a few days until the diagnosis can be accurately made. I say "for a few days" advisedly, because in a first attack of malaria it sometimes happens that during the first or even during the second day of fever, parasites may be absent from the peripheral circulation. During the first day or two also the temperature may be continuous and give us no clue as to the nature of the fever. If we give quinine during this time we do so empirically and without the least knowledge of the nature of the case, and in doing so we do away at once with almost all chance of afterwards finding out (should the fever not yield to quinine) whether the case is one of malaria or not. In very severe cases of malaria, as, for instance, where patients are brought into hospital in a semicomatose condition, parasites can usually be found by a few minutes examination, and we are then in a position to treat the case with appropriate vigour. This question of the routine administration of quinine during the first few days in nearly all cases of fever has an important bearing on the question of the differentiation of Indian fevers. Unless we can absolutely exclude malaria by repeated examinations of the blood before quinine has been taken, it is impos- sible to say definitely that a case of fever is not malaria. It is quite possible that idefinite cases of fever which cannot be classed as enteric fever, Malta fever, relapsing fever, or malarial f ever occur in India, but if in such cases quinine has been given early in the disease it is impossible to definitely exclude malaria, because a malarial fever may continue in spite of the administration of quinine in ordinary doses, and in spite of the absence of parasites from the peripheral circulation. If, however, in such a case we have refrained from giving quinine, we are able, by repeated examinations of the blood, to definitely exclude malaria and can therefore, with confidence, search for some other cause of the fever. It appears, therefore, that until the plan of not beginning quinine treatment until an accurate diagnosis of every case of fever has been made, is adopted systematically for a year or so in one of the large hospitals of India, our knowledge of the non-malarial fevers will remain no further advanced than it has been for many years past. This, together with a close study of individual cases of malaria, is the kind of work which can be best carried out in hospitals and jails. The large class of cases which are characterised by the presence of greatly enlarged spleens and much anæmia, accompanied frequently by long continued irregular fever, are also very common in Indian hospitals and offer excellent material for study, but although it is generally considered that these cases are
16 hardly, if at all, amenable to quinine, it is quite exceptional to find in any hospital a case of this nature which is not being treated more or less vigorously with this drug, so that to prove definitely the connection between such cases and malaria becomes a difficult matter. IV.17 examined in order to ascertain the percentage of children with enlarged spleens. In the examination of the films the variety of parasite met with in each slide should be noted, in order that the proportion of each variety present in the village and district may be ascertained. The number of "large infections" should also be noted, as if there are a good number of heavy infections there will be more likelihood of finding infected anopheles. Having ascertained the endemic index, the next thing is to search for adult anopheles in the houses, out-houses and stables, and to find out by dissection18 Having determined the percentage of infected anopheles, we can turn to the simpler but very important questions of19 The following were the results of our malarial survey of this place. I.20 IV.21 parasites of malaria. In order to do this it is necessary to be able to identify each species correctly, and it is also of great advantage to be able to identify the larva of each species without the necessity of breeding out each batch of larvæ that have been caught. The following are the chief points to be aimed at in a study of anopheles :22 This cork, carrying the mosquito to be examined, is placed on the microscope- stage and can be moved about on the stage at will. The angle at which the pin is fixed in the cork should be such that the part of the mosquito which is being examined is always as nearly as possible parallel to the microscope stage. It is best to begin with an examination of the palpi and to work back- wards, noting every marking and character that presents itself, and the position of the disc carrying the mosquito will of course have to be frequently altered by removing the pin from the cork and readjusting it at a different angle. The palpi, the wings, and the legs are the structures to which chief attention should be directed, and diagrammatic drawings should be made showing clearly every marking on these structures. In addition, it is important to note the characters of the scales on the head, thorax, and abdomen. In order to ascertain the arrangement of the transverse veins of the wings, and the detailed shape of the wing scales (an important point to note), one or more wings must be mounted separately on a slide and covered by a cover slip. The wing can then be examined if necessary under a higher power of the microscope. The tips of the male legs, especially the fore legs, and the male genitalia should be mounted on slides in xylol balsam. The characters of the fore ungues in the male and the male genitalia are of use in identification. In order to obtain eggs for examination, a few female anopheles that have been caught in a village should be transferred to a glass jar similar to those already described for use in feeding experiments. The jar should be inverted over a small tin of water on which a piece of paper is floating for the mosquitoes to rest upon. If this is done in the early evening, by the next morning one or two of the anopheles will almost certainly have laid their eggs. Some of the eggs will almost always be found to have been deposited on the pieces of damp paper floating on the water in the tin, so that all that one has to do is to remove the paper carrying the eggs23 or injure it in any way, so that at end of the examination the larva can be returned to the bottle and allowed to develop, in order that by an examination of the adult insect we may test the correctness of our observations on the larva. After some practice it is of course possible to make out all the structures in the intervals of rest which follow each effort to wriggle off the slide, without the ne- cessity of applying a cover-glass, but as the resting intervals are usually very brief, it is best at first to examine the larvæ imprisoned by the method just described. Permanent specimens of larvæ may be obtained either (1) by mounting them simply in a solution of formalin in hollow ground glass slides24 The median hairs arise close together near the middle line and project forward in front of the head. They are not difficult to see with a ½ or ¼ inch objective. A very important difference between the larvæ of different species depends upon the fact that the characters of these external and median frontal hairs differ in different species. Thus in some species both the external and median hairs are simple and entirely unbranched (see figure 7, Larva of A. Rossii), in other species both pairs of hairs are slightly branched (e.g., A. Superpictus, Grassi), in others the median hairs are slightly branched or frayed, while the external are very much branched ("like a small tree," Grassi, e.g. A. Fuliginosus), and again the median may be simple or slightly branched and the external undergo dicho- tomous branching so that it forms a very prominent and distinct "cocade" (A. Nigerrimus, A. Barbirostris). Further details regarding these hairs are given under the descriptions of the different anopheles of India. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75022450.tif] Fig.7.25 (2) The "palmate hairs." (Figure 7, C.) If the dorsal surface of the abdomen of the larva be examined at about the third or fourth segment, a pair of prominent small conical or fan-shaped hairs will be seen. The hairs are arranged in pairs26 is formed by dots of pigment only, and is therefore liable to considerable varia- tion, yet in some species the head pattern is sufficiently constant to be of assistance in the identification of larvæ. The inverted triangular area enclosing four dots of pigment on the dorsal surface of the head of the larva of A. Rossii, for example, is fairly characteristic, as is also the complete absence of any pattern on the head of A. Stephensii larvæ. The usual markings on the heads of these and other larvæ are given in the diagrams. The above are the chief characteristics by which we have differentiated the larvæ of the Indian species of anopheles. Further work would doubtless show that other structures might be used for the same purpose, such for example as the spines on the maxillæ or the varying length of the caudal papillæ. It would also be interesting to discover the characters which distinguish the male and female larvæ from each other if in this stage of the mosquito's existence any marked difference exists.
27 PART II. I.28 A. Funestus, A. Minimus, A. Rhodesiensis, and the Italian species A. Superpictus (Grassi). We thus have at least nine closely allied species of this one group which, although considered by entomologists to be quite distinct, are nevertheless very difficult to identify and to separate from each other. The points relied upon by Mr. Theobald* for separating all the above mosquitoes from each other as distinct species are as follow :29 the cross veins and the darker scaled wings, from Rhodesiensis by the orna- mented wing fringe and the cross veins, and from Superpictus by its darker hue and ornamented fringe." Before, however, it would be possible to place such reliance as this on the value of this character as a means of distinguishing species, it must be shown that the relative position of the cross veins to each other in any species is always constant. If it can be shown that in any species the relative position of the cross veins is not constant, then of course its value as a distinguishing character is very much lessened. In order, therefore, to test this point I examined a number of specimens of two well known species of anopheles, viz., A. Culicifacies and A. Rossii, to ascertain whether any marked variations occur in the relative positions of the cross veins. The results of my examinations are given in the diagrams below (Fig. 8), and it will be seen that in the same batch of both these species very marked variations are found, so that, in my opinion, this character does not appear to be sufficiently constant to enable it to be used for the separation of species. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75022502.tif] Fig. 8.30 (3) The other characters upon which Mr. Theobald relies, depend upon differences in the males. If, however, two species which can be separated from each other only by the characters of the males, occur in the same locality, we shall be unable to say to which species any female specimens we may catch belong, and if only one of the two species happens to be carrying malaria at the time, we shall be unable to say which species is to blame. None of the above methods of separating closely allied species therefore can be considered entirely satisfactory, and for the most part they are liable to lead us into the error of considering as a new species any particular specimen which varies slightly from the type of an already known species. A good deal of our time has been spent on the question of the distinctions between the different Indian species of anopheles, and it appears probable that our work on the differences between the eggs and larvæ of different species of anopheles, will point the way to a definite and final system of classification; for it will, I think, be admitted by all, that if a definite difference between the eggs or larvæ of any two species of anopheles can be shown to exist these species must be certainly distinct31 larv32 One specimen which I received from Sukchar, which might possibly deserve to be considered a new species, has two equal broad white bands and one narrow one on the palpi, but in the absence of more specimens and of its larvæ it is, for the present, best placed as a variety only. The adults can be distinguished from the other members of this group by a careful comparison of the wing markings (see figures). Characters of larva.33 This species resembles the preceding one very closely in the adult stage, but the differences of the larvæ at once separates them as distinct species. The markings of the palpi are the same as those of A. Fluviatilis and the legs are unbanded. The wing markings are shown in the figure, and it will be seen that they differ in certain points from those of A. Fluviatilis, thus A. Jeyporiensis has three black scaled areas on the sixth longitudinal vein and seven pale patches on the wing fringe (including the apical one), whereas A. Fluviatilis has only two dark spots on the sixth longitudinal vein and only six white patches on the wing fringe. Characters of the larva.34 be described as unbanded, although the apices of some of the segments may occasionally show small white markings. The wing markings are shown in the diagram. It should be noted that the third longitudinal vein is black scaled throughout its length, and that, includ- ing the white apical spot, there are only three white patches on the wing fringe. Characters of the larva (Fig. 14).35 culex with the body parallel to the wall and the back hunched (the proboscis, head and body not being in one line). For this reason it is easily mistaken for a culex. We have proved this species to be the malaria carrier in Mian Mir and in Ennur (Madras). Experimentally also we have shown that the parasites of the three varieties of malarial fever can readily develop in this species. 4. A. Immaculata, sp. n. This is a small mosquito resembling in general characters the other mem- bers of this group, except that its wings are entirely unspotted. It is apparently a rare species, for we only obtained one specimen from Ennur. Several speci- mens, however, have since been obtained by Mr. Aitken from the Goa Province. The legs are unbanded but are darker coloured towards the tarsi. We have not yet obtained the larva of this species, but I think it is rightly placed in this group, on the grounds of its general appearance and unbanded legs. GROUP II. 1. A. Barbirostris (Van der Wulp). 2. A. Sinensis and its allied species A. Nigerrimus (Giles). 3. A. Gigas (Giles). Group characteristics.36 thick black densely-scaled palpi which are unbanded will serve to distinguish this species from any other of the Indian anopheles. Characters of the larva.37 This mosquito may be considered as a type of several species of anopheles which are regarded by Mr. Theobald as distinct, viz. :38 The larvæ are characterised by the fact that although the external frontal hairs are very distinctly branched (except A. Lindesayii), they are not developed into the actual cocades which characterise the larvæ of Group II. They are, in fact, intermediate between the larvæ of Group II and Group IV in which the frontal hairs are simple and unbranched. In habits the members of this group are intermediate between the typically "wild" mosquitoes of Group II, and the typically "domestic" mosquitoes of Group IV. They are all occasionally found in houses in small numbers, and excep- tionally A. Fuliginosus may be found in stables and out-houses in large numbers. The breeding places of A. Fuliginosus and A. Jamesii are similar to those of Group II, except that they appear to prefer shallower, clearer water with more sunlight. I. A. Fuliginosus (Giles). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75022529.tif] Fig. 17.39 The markings on the wings, palpi, and hind legs of this mosquito are shown in the figure (Fig. 17). In the fore legs there are apical white bands to the femora, tibiæ and tarsi except the fourth tarsus, the joint between this and the fifth tarsus being black. At the joints of the other legs, there are apical white bands. Near the apex of the femur of each middle leg is a large white patch placed on one side and not forming a complete ring round the femur. This white patch is a useful character in identification. Characters of the larva (Fig. 18).40 2. A. Jamesii (Theobald) and its allied species. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75022535.tif] Fig. 19.41 been found in the Berars (Ellichpur) and in other parts of India, and the original specimen from which Mr. Theobald's description was taken was sent from Quilon (Southern India). 2a. A. Jamesii, allied species I.* Under this name I refer to a very distinct species which I found at Nagpur (Central Provinces). It is possibly the same species which Colonel Giles describes under the name A. Maculipalpis, an African species. It differs from the mosquito above described as A. Jamesii in the following particulars :42 Habitat and observations.43 branched or frayed. There are palmate hairs on the abdominal segments and a rudimentary pair on the thorax. The shape of each leaflet is characteristic and the terminal filaments are very short and blunt. The head pattern is shown in the figure. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75022544.tif] Fig. 21.44 Habitat and observations.45 The wing markings are shown in the figure. The large T-shaped middle spot on the costa is characteristic, but this and the other wing spots vary considerably. Characters of the larva (Fig. 7, page 24).46 Glen-Liston, I.M.S. (Indian Medical Gazette, November 1901), so that the name A. Metaboles must be regarded as a synonym. The palpi are marked with two broad and one narrow band, and with a few white speckles between the bands. The legs are marked with white bands at the tarsal joints as in A. Rossii, but they are in addition brilliantly speckled with white spots. The wing mark- ings are shown in the figure, but as in A. Rossii, they vary considerably. Characters of the larva (Fig. 24).47 3. A. Maculata (Theobald). 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75022556.tif] 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75022556.tif] 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75022556.tif] Fig.25.48 It was also present at Kurseong (5,000 feet). At Sam Sing in the Duars it was breeding in clear pools on the rice fields. In Lahore (Punjab) I found it breeding in a pool near one of the irrigation canals in March, and some of the larvæ hatched out in that month. During the hot weather of April and May it disappeared. It occurs also in the Jeypur State (hill districts). In the Duars we were not able to catch a sufficient number to ascertain whether it was a carrier of malaria. None of the specimens we dissected were infected. This species also occurs in Hong Kong. GROUP V. Species which cannot be classed with the above groups:49 and there is a white interruption of the wing fringe opposite each longitudinal vein. The abdomen is densely scaled with black and white scales which form lateral tufts on the hinder border of each segment. The eggs are of the same type as those of A. Rossii. The larvæ have the external pair of frontal hairs branched. The palmate hairs are present from the second to the seventh abdominal segments and the terminal filaments of the leaflets are long. Habitat and observations.50 two pairs of unbranched frontal hairs a third pair of simple hairs projects over the mouth parts behind and between these. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75022565.tif] Fig. 28.51 has been drawn up with the help of Captain Glen-Liston, I.M.S. Its main features are based on the palp markings which, although they may occasionally vary slightly, are sufficiently constant to afford a basis of classification for the purposes of identification. TABLE OF THE INDIAN SPECIES OF ANOPHELES. A.52 The breeding places of anopheles larvæ. It is now well known that anopheles larvæ may occasionally be found in almost any collection of water of whatever nature it may be. This fact has an important application when any practical measures at extermination of larvæ are attempted, in that it leads us not to overlook even the most unlikely places in our search for larvæ; for unless we search systematically every collection of water, temporary or permanent, we may easily allow an important breeding place to remain, when we think all possible breeding places have been done away with. Under favourable conditions, however53 and shrubs and containing a number of deep clear pools in which water plants and weed have grown. The adults of the three species, A. Rossii, A. Culicifacies, and A. Fuliginosus, were present in the houses of the bazaar, and we should have expected that the larvæ of all the species would have been found together in any and all of the breeding places. This, however, was not the case. In the irrigation channel no other larvæ than those of A. Culicifacies were ever found, in the shallow muddy pools no other larvæ than those of A. Rossii, and in the clear deep pools under the trees no other larvæ than those of A. Fuliginosus. It is evident, therefore, that each of these species had selected a particular kind of breeding place. In another part of Mian Mir an example of selection of breeding places by another species of anopheles was found. In this place several species of ano- pheles were present in the barracks of the native troops, and there were abun- dance of breeding places of different kinds near. The larvæ of only one species, however (viz., A. Stephensii), were found in the gumlahs of water kept in the lines in case of fire, and the larvæ of this species were never found in any of the other breeding places54 near Madras, where it was breeding in the borrow-pits by the side of the railway. It has also been found in rocky pools in the bed of a river. GROUP II.55 the disused wells in the courtyards of the Native and Eurasian houses. It is probable that since the introduction of a pipe-water-supply into Madras City the numbers of this species, at any rate, have largely increased, for its larvæ are only found in those wells which, since the introduction of the pipe-water-supply, have been unused. A. Maculata. The larvæ of this species may be found further from houses than those of A. Rossii, and whereas the larvæ of A. Rossii are usually found in muddy water, the larvæ. of A. Maculata prefer clear sandy or rocky pools. In the Duars its larvæ were found in clear pools on a rice field. In Hong-Kong (China) I found the larvæ of this mosquito in the small marshy pools on the granite soil of Kowloon. Sufficient observations have not been made with regard to the remaining species of anopheles to enable their favourite breeding places to be stated with certainty. Under unfavourable conditions the selection of suitable breeding places by the different species is not of course so apparent, and many instances might be given which show that if all the suitable breeding places near a village are dried up the anopheles will lay their eggs on any collection of water. The 56 likely to find anopheles larvæ in certain collections of water than in others, no, hard and fast rule, which might perhaps prevent us from searching a particular place, can be made. The enemies of larvæ and the effect of running water on larvæ. We have made a good many experiments which show that many small water animals and young fish feed voraciously on mosquito laræ, but I do not think so much importance attaches to this subject as is generally supposed. It is of course true that a number of small water animals, larvæ, and young fish eat mosquito larvæ, but it is equally true that under natural conditions anopheles larvæ may always be found in the same pools in which the most voracious fish or water animals are living, and experiments on this subject carried out under artificial conditions are apt to be misleading. A kind of young fish, for ex- ample, is very common in the irrigation watercourses at Mian Mir: if a few specimens of this fish are put into a basin of water with twenty or thirty ano- pheles larvæ, in an hour or two the fish will have devoured all the larvæ. Under natural conditions, however, the number of larvæ in the watercourses does not appear to be lessened by the presence of the fish, and I have watched a natural pool of water containing these fish and anopheles larvæ for some days without the number of larvæ having appreciably diminished. In other parts of India, too, it is not at all uncommon to find larvæ in pools containing fish and other water animals which will devour the larvæ readily if placed along with them in a bottle or basin. Another point to which I am not inclined to attach much importance is the effect of running water on larvæ. If it were possible in all the streams and canals of India to make the water run as swiftly at the sides as it does in the centre they would of course afford poor breeding grounds, but however swiftly a stream runs in the centre there are almost always many small bays and back- waters where the larvæ can live sheltered by weeds and grass, so that it is possible to find anopheles larvæ by dipping at the edges of almost every stream, however swiftly it may appear to be running. The effect of running water on larvæ is not to kill them, but simply to carry them on with it until they find some sheltered bay or backwater where they can develop unmolested. This is the case in the more swiftly running irrigation channels at Mian Mir. If a length between two bridges of one of these water channels be examined, a large number of very young larvæ which are evidently being carried onwards with the stream will be found. At the bridges, however, where the water is collected into a comparatively still pool before it passes under the narrow bridge, full grown larvæ and pupæ will invariably be found. The inference is that the young larvæ have been carried down by the stream to develop in the comparatively still waters. near the bridges.
57 The distance of flight of anopheles mosquitoes. At the present time practically all observers are agreed that anopheles do not fly to any great distance from their breeding places in search of food, and although it is of course possible to find anopheles larvæ in jungles several miles from any human habitation, the inference is that the adults of these larvæ feed either on the blood of animals or on vegetable juices. The importance of ascertaining the usual distance of flight of those species which habitually feed on the blood of man is very great, because unless this is known it is impossible to state the safe distance for a residence from a focus of infection. There are three groups of rain-formed pools in Mian Mir which afford a good opportunity for observation in connection with this important subject. One of these groups of pools is 450 yards away from any habitation, the second group is 750 yards away and the third is over three-quarters of a mile away. With each shower of rain these pools are filled and remain full for over a week as a rule. On every occasion I have found the first group of pools to contain many larvæ within a week of a shower of rain: on three out of four occasions the second group of pools has contained larvæ, and on no occasion have larvæ been found in the pools of the third group. This shows, I think, that mosquitoes will readily fly to a breeding place a quarter of a mile away, that they will less readily fly to a breeding place half a mile away, and that they will never (except perhaps under exceptional circumstances) fly over three-quarters of a mile. In these instances the larvæ found were those of A. Rossii. In an indirect way also the usual distance of flight of mosquitoes can be determined and the safe distance from a focus of infection ascertained. In Mian Mir, for example, there are two groups of syce lines, one of which is 150 yards and the other 500 yards from the same and only breeding place of the malaria-carrying species of anopheles. In the nearer syce lines numerous adult anopheles were caught, and in the further syce lines we were not able, at the time of our examination, to catch any adult anopheles. The endemic index of the nearer syce lines was 56 per cent., and that of the further lines only 20 per cent. This is sufficient to prove that the majority of the anopheles did not fly the 500 yards to the further syce lines. The following examples will show, however, that it is not unusual for ano- pheles to fly a quarter of a mile. In the village of Anjini in the Central Provinces three species of anopheles were abundant, the endemic index was 25 per cent., and the nearest breeding places were a quarter of a mile away. Three species were also present, though scanty, in the village of Takli, with the nearest breeding places the same distance away and an endemic index of 15 per cent. Above 1
58 a quarter of a mile, however, from a breeding place the amount of malaria rapidly diminishes, and over half a mile away safety from anopheles is practically assured, as the following examples show:- Names of places. Presence of adult anopheles. Distance of nearest breeding grounds. Endemic index. Lawa None found. Half mile. 5% Wadi None found. Half mile. 5% Chintarapelly None found. Over half mile. o% We may say, therefore, that the usual distance of flight of anopheles mos- quitoes rarely if ever exceeds half a mile, and that at this distance from a focus of infection we are practically safe from malaria.
59 II.60 The following table shows the percentage of infected children in the different places we have visited :61 infected. The percentage of infected children affords, in fact, a very true test of the endemicity of malaria in different places, and the figure representing this percentage may, therefore, be termed the "Malarial Endemicity Index," or shortly the "Endemic Index." It would of course be possible to arrive at a rough estimate of the amount of malaria and the liability to infection at different places by other methods than this, as, for example, by an examination of the statistics of admissions into hospitals for malarial fever, or by an estimation of the number of people with enlarged spleens, but by neither of these methods can we arrive at an accurate result, for neither of them will give us any information regarding the prevalence of malarial parasites at the time of our examination. It is obvious that a knowledge of the prevalence of parasites among the general population, and a knowledge of the number of infected anopheles mosquitoes are the only reliable data on which we can form an estimate of the amount of malaria and the danger of infection. The reasons for the great differences in the malarial endemicity of different places in India shown in the above table will be discussed later: at present it is necessary to refer to the significance of the infection of native children, and to the relative immunity of the adult native. The great importance of the infection of native children lies in the fact that they form undoubtedly the chief source from which anopheles mosquitoes become infected. This is a point of the greatest practical importance and one which cannot be too clearly recognised. That this must be so, is easily under- stood when we remember that practically all the cases of malarial fever occurring in native children are untreated, and go on for many months without it being recognised by anyone that the children are suffering from malarial fever, and have malaria parasites in their blood. A further proof is given in the fact that the highest proportion of infected anopheles is found in the places where we find the largest number of infected children; and in places where there are no infected children it is difficult or impossible to find infected anopheles. This is shown in the following table. TABLE II.62 It is apparent from the above table that the greatest liability to infection of any new comer exists in those places which contain the largest number of in- fected children, and in places, such as Calcutta, where there are no infected children, there is practically no danger of infection with malarial fever. We have seen that two other important points were brought out by Koch, and Stephens and Christophers, in Africa, in connection with the infection of native children, viz., (1) that a diminished infection of the children occurred with advancing age, and (2) that the adult negro in Africa was relatively immune to malarial infection. For certain malarious districts of India these same rules will apply, as the following table shows:63 throughout the whole year. In India it is easy to find almost every condition of prevalence, so that whereas in Africa a very large proportion of the natives have the opportunity of becoming relatively immune by repeated infections during childhood, in India only those natives who have lived all their lives in such places as the Duars enjoy an immunity. This, of course, includes but a very small proportion of the whole Indian community, and the fact that the average adult native of India enjoys no immunity is shown by the certainty with which he contracts malarial fever when exposed to infection. It probably requires ten or twelve years of constant infection and reinfection before an immunity is established, and it is possible also that, even then, the relative immunity only applies to the variety of parasite with which the indivi- dual has been infected. The nature of the infection in native children. The work done by Drs. Stephens and Christophers in Africa, on the infec- tion of native children,* led them to the conclusion that the infection in such cases was different from an ordinary attack of malaria in an adult, in that (1) they did not observe any rise of temperature in the children, nor any of the usual symptoms of malarial fever, and (2) although asexual forms of the parasites were not uncommonly seen, the chief characteristic of the infections appeared to them to consist in the presence of a large number of sexual forms having characters differing from those of the sexual forms usually found incases of malarial fever occurring among Europeans. They had no opportunity of fol- lowing out the cycle of the parasites in a case over a period of 24 or 48 hours. This subject has not been worked at in India by Drs. Stephens and Christophers, but as it has always appeared to me that malaria must be one of commonest causes of death among native children in India, I thought it would be of advantage to study the question somewhat more closely, especially with the object of ascertaining whether the health of the children is really much affected by the presence of malaria parasites or not.64 Christophers in Africa, is characteristic of the infection of native children, and if they are seen in the mornings (which is the usual time at which one goes out to take specimens of blood), it would certainly be difficult to say from their appearance that any of the children were suffering from malarial fever. In the evenings one or two of the children may be lying down, others, however, though evidently suffering from fever, may be still playing about with the other children of the village, and the parents are seldom aware that their children are not in good health. The following cases were first examined for a few days in February and again for a period of a week during March. INFECTION OF NATIVE CHILDREN. Case I. Name.65 24th February 1902.66 23rd February 1902.67 parasites, some of which were in the pre-segmenting stage, and a fair number of segmenting Quartan parasites were found. 11th March 1902.68 This was a case of a heavy infection with Quartan parasites, which went through their cycle with great regularity. The symptoms were more marked than in any of the other cases examined, but, except on his "fever days" he felt quite well and was accustomed to go out in the fishing boats with his father. The paroxysm began with a chill and slight shivering about three o'clock in the afternoon. By five o'clock the temperature had reached its height and the paroxysm ended with profuse perspiration between six and seven o'clock in the evening, after which he felt practically quite well for the next two days. Case V. Name.69 13th March 1902.70 Case VIII. Name.71 A consideration of the above cases will show, I think, that there is really no essential difference between child infections and those occurring in adults. The same febrile disturbance takes place about the time of segmentation of the para- sites, and the asexual forms go through their cycle with the same regularity as is usually observed in an untreated case of malarial fever in an adult. It is certain, too, that although the children appear fairly bright and well on a casual examination, the frequent attacks of fever and the continued infection with parasites for many months, undermine their health to a very great extent and result in the same after effects, viz., marked anæmia, enlarged spleen, and sometimes 73 III.74 The following table, therefore, shows the relation between the distance and extent of breeding grounds, the number of anopheles and the amount of malaria:75 easily explained by the varying distance and extent of breeding grounds, it is possible to find villages with a considerable amount of malaria and yet a variable number of anopheles, sometimes indeed with much malaria and no anopheles at all, nor any breeding grounds near at the time of examination. The cycle of events which has been gone through in such cases as this is as follows :76 In places such as the following where no adult anopheles are found n the houses, no breeding places are present and there are no signs of breeding places having existed at some time previously, we find no malaria to be present in the children. Place. Endemic index, per cent. Spleen rate, per cent. Anopheles in the houses. Breeding places at time of observation. Signs of breeding places at some time previously. Vizagapatam Busty 0 0 None found Nil Nil Chintarapelly 0 0 None found Nil Nil (2) The influence of the number of adult anopheles.77 On the contrary, however, we found that none of the 140 children examined by us had parasites in their blood, none of them had enlarged spleens, and not one of the 324 anopheles dissected was infected. At the end of September, which is considered to be the time at which fever is most prevalent in Calcutta, 42 children from the same districts were again examined with the same result, none of them showing parasites in their blood and none enlarged spleens. One must conclude, therefore, that in these districts, in spite of the enormous number of anopheles, there is practically no endemic malaria, and the danger of infection is almost nil. In the Duars, on the other hand, the number of anopheles was not nearly so large78 A. Rossii we had previously examined, infection with sporozoites to the extent of 6.25 per cent. was readily found in this new species. It was evident that this new species was the carrier of malaria in the Duars, and in none of the A. Rossii which we examined there did we find infection. Very few A. Rossii, however, were found in the Duars, and we were not able to obtain sufficient numbers to make the point certain that it was not also carrying malaria as well as A. Fluviatilis. From Calcutta to the Duars the places were under practically identical conditions79 present in fewer numbers, however, this was the species in which alone infection was found as the following table shows.80 numbers in houses to have very much effect on the amount of malaria. A. Barbirostris and A. Sinensis are certainly " wild " species very rarely found in houses. We have however shown that under experimental conditions the parasites of human malaria are capable of developing in A. Barbirostris. A. Pul- cherrimus is a rare species which cannot, I think, exercise any influence on the amount of malaria. A. Fuliginosus is very common in houses and stables in some districts. Under experimental conditions, we have shown that the parasite of human malaria can develop in this species, and though we have never found it infected in nature, it is possible that it may occasionally have some influence. A. Maculata, A. Stephensii, A Theobaldi, A. famesii, and A. Tur- khudi are all moderately frequent in some districts and may occasionally be responsible for some of the malaria, though we have never found any of these species infected in nature. The group of anopheles which is certainly more important than any other from the point of view of malaria in India is the group of small brown anopheles comprising A. Fluviatilis, A. Culicifacies and their allies. The members of this group are the only ones that we have found infected in nature in India, and from this fact and the fact that in places of high endemicity one or other of the members of this group are always found to be present, while in places where there is little or no malaria the members of this group are absent, it is almost certain that this is by far the most important group of anopheles in India, and that in nature its members are better malaria carriers than any other anopheles. II. The effect of the importation of non-immunised strangers into an immune district, and the effect of social status on endemicity. Koch has shown that the importation of a number of non-immunised individuals into an immune district may bring about an increase in the fever rate, and that after a time the fever rate again declines as the new-comers become immune. This might partly account for the high endemicity of the Duars where coolies are imported for the tea plantations; but the parents of the children examined by us in this district had for the most part lived many years on the plantations and all the children had been born there, so that but little, if any, influ- ence can be assigned to this cause. Moreover, no immigration occurs in many of the other areas of high endemicity which we examined, as, for example, at Mainaiguri in Bengal (endemic index, 25 per cent.) or at Ennur in Madras (endemic index, 54 per cent.). As regards the influence of social status, children of low social status frequently showed a high rate of malarial infection, but on the other hand there are many instances (e.g., Calcutta, and Vizagapatam village, endemic index, 0 per cent.), where people of very low social status showed little or no malaria, so that but little importance attaches to this factor.
81 III. The effect of Seasonal Variation. In many parts of India the seasonal variation in the amount of malaria is very marked. In the south of India, where the temperature is fairly uniform all the year round and abundant anopheles are always present, this seasonal variation is not so marked as in the north where the climatic conditions vary extremely. Good examples of the effect of this cause may be taken from Mian Mir in the Punjab. The malaria-carrying species of anopheles in Mian Mir breeds almost entirely in the irrigation watercourses, and the prevalence of this species (A. Culcifacies) throughout the year is influenced partly by the times at which the water in these watercourses is shut off and let in. The seasonal prevalence of this mosquito in Mian Mir is roughly as follows :82 detailed account of the seasonal prevalence of the mosquitoes and of malaria will be given in a later report.* The following are examples of the seasonal variation in the malaria at Mian Mir :83 V. There are doubtless other factors which influence malarial endemicity than those given above. The low endemicity of such places as Calcutta, Madras, and Salur is difficult to explain. The particular species of anopheles present may have some influence (as in Calcutta), although at Salur abundant A. Culicifacies, a good malaria carrier, were found and yet the endemicity was nil. This species is also present in small numbers in Madras. In some cases special local conditions doubtless affect the amount of malaria to a great extent. When all factors are considered, some regions, too, appear in themselves to be more or less malarious than others and some importance doubtless attaches to the "Regional Factor" (the expression used in this connection by Drs. Ste- phens and Christophers); thus, in the plains of Bengal we have a region of low endemicity, in the Duars and in the Jeypur hills regions of intense malarial endemicity, where Blackwater Fever is found, in the Punjab (Mian Mir) a region of high malarial endemicity, and in the Central Provinces a region of not very intense malarial endemicity with marked local variations. M2
85 IV.86 Presumably the rate begins to decrease after 20 or 25 years of age, but very slight immunity is established in the adult. (3) Regions of little or no malaria, such as the cities of Calcutta and Madras, and some of the places in the Central Provinces, and other parts of India. The liability to infection in these places is very slight. Even in children up to ten years of age very few cases may be found. With increasing age periods the percentage infected will be greater and the highest amount of malaria will be found in the adults. No immunity occurs in such places as these. II. The length of time which infection, as shown by the presence of parasites. in the peripheral circulation, lasts, when no reinfections occur. Some light is thrown on this point by the results of the monthly examina- tions of children in Mian Mir. TABLE TO SHOW THE GRADUAL DISAPPEARANCE OF PARASITES FROM THE PERIPHERAL CIRCULATION, IN THE ABSENCE OF REINFECTIONS. Mian Mir. Endemic index, October 1901, per cent. Endemic index, November 1901, per cent. Endemic index, December 1901, per cent. Endemic index, April 1902, per cent. Endemic index, June 1902, per cent. Artillery Bazaar 35 * 29 20 5 Infantry Bazaar 50 22 * 8·3 Hospital Followers 60 * * * Nil No new infections occurred from about the middle of November, and from that time until the end of June there had been a steady disappearance of para- sites from the peripheral circulation. The asexual parasite sdisappear first, crescents and other gamete forms are the last to go; they probably last long enough to start the new series of infected mosquitoes of the following year. We may say then that in the majority of cases of untreated malaria the parasites will, in the absence of reinfection, disappear from the peripheral circula- tion in seven or eight months. Turning now to the question of enlarged spleens, we know that practically in every case of malaria the spleen becomes more or less enlarged, although the enlargement is not always sufficient to enable it to be detected by palpation. It is impossible, I think, to agree with Drs. Stephens and Christophers 87 said " In the great majority of cases, it (the spleen) is not larger than in the cases of typhoid I have observed in Germany, often indeed smaller," but it is difficult to understand how a very high parasite rate could have existed in the children without a correspondingly high (or even higher) spleen rate. The sequence of events in India is, first, infection with parasites; secondly, enlarge- ment of the spleen; thirdly, disappearance of the parasites; and fourthly, gradua reduction in size of the spleen. In all probability the same sequence occurs in Africa. As soon as the parasites disappear the spleen begins to reduce in size, but this always takes longer than does the disappearance of parasites, and for this reason it is quite possible to have a high spleen rate in children, without a corre- sponding parasite infection, but not, I think, the reverse. The reduction in the spleen rate with a reduction in the parasite rate is shown in the following table:88 whatever of a comparatively recent malarial infection. Nor indeed would one expect to find parasites in such cases, for few, if any, of them had been for some time in places where they would be very liable to contract a new infection, and I have already mentioned that parasites are not likely to be found in the peripheral circulation, unless a new infection has been received within seven or eight months of the examination of the case. The enlarged spleens are but the after-effect of former malaria which may have disappeared several years before. No parasites were found on puncture of the spleen or post-mortem in the organs of several cases which died. The mere presence of an enlarged spleen has no influence in preventing the appearance of parasites in the peripheral circulation. If in any of these chronic cases a new infection with parasites occurs, the temperature chart at once assumes the ordinary malarial character of the particular species of parasite, and parasites are found in the peripheral circulation. This occurred in one of the Calcutta cases. A man who had an enormously enlarged spleen, and in whom no parasites had been found on repeated occasions, suddenly developed typical Quartan fever and Quartan parasites in abundance were found, which went through their cycle just as though there was no enlargement of the spleen at all. It is doubtless on account of the large number of these chronically enlarged spleen cases in adults, which are treated in the hospitals of Calcutta and Madras, that these places have acquired the reputation of being very malarious, although, as a matter of fact, they are very slightly so. For the same reason, if one regarded the percentage of adults with enlarged spleens as a true test of the prevalance of malaria and the danger of infection in a district, many of the places in the plains of Bengal, which are in reality no more malarious than Calcutta or Madras, would be considered very much so, whereas such places as the Duars, Mian Mir, etc., which are really very malarious, to say nothing of the West Coast of Africa, would be regarded as being almost free from malaria. In both Calcutta and Madras no enlarged spleens were found among the young children, but the cases in the hospitals show that it is a common disease among the adults. It is interesting, therefore, to enquire into the reason of this. I believe the reason is that in slightly malarious places a much larger number of cases of fever and enlarged spleen will be found among the adults than among the children; in fact the less liability to infection there is in a place the greater will be the proportion of infected adults to infected children. I have already pointed out that there are at least three types of malarial regions in India. The Duars or Mian Mir or Ennur may be taken as types of the first region (region of intense malaria). In these regions there is very great liability to infection, so much so that even the young babies of a few months' old are frequently infected with
89 malarial parasites, and any new-comer is usually down with fever in a few weeks. From repeated reinfection during childhood an immunity gradually becomes estab- lished, and by the time adult age is reached the immunity is more or less perfect. In Mian Mir, for example, we may take the average endemicity as between 50 per cent. and 60 per cent. The average spleen rate of the same children (i. e., those up to 10 years of age) is about 75 per cent. The spleen rate being higher than the parasite rate shows that, although in some of the children an immunity to parasites has become established, the spleens have not had time to regain their normal size. The spleens are of course much slower in reaching their normal size than the parasites are in disappearing, so that although the para- site rate may decrease rapidly with advancing age, the spleen rate may even show an increase up to a certain limit of age. Suppose, for example, it takes ten years of constant infection and reinfection to produce an immunity to new infec- tions. During these ten years the spleen has been enlarged. At the end of the ten years parasites disappear and reinfection has no effect. Then the spleen begins to decrease in size, but it may take another ten years or more before it regains its normal size. Up to the age of twenty, therefore, enlargement of the spleen will be present not only in all those children who have parasites in their blood, but also in older children in whom an immunity to parasitic infection has been estab- lished, but whose spleens have not yet regained their normal size. After twenty, however, we may say that the spleens of the majority will have become of normal size, and in the adults, therefore, we shall not expect to find many enlarged spleens. This, as a matter of fact, is what we do find, as the following figures show:90 These places, therefore, are, I think, exactly comparable to malarious parts of Africa, where it is stated that enlargement of the spleen is very rare among the adults. Secondly, we have the regions of less intense, malaria, such as Jalpaiguri and other places in Bengal. Here the liability to infection was not so great. The endemic index was only 15 per cent. and in none of the children under five years of age did we find infection. The endemic index increased instead of decreasing with advancing age, and if immunity occurred in the adult it must have been at a comparatively late age. As would be expected from these facts, the spleen rate in the children under ten years of age was low; it increased rapidly with advanc- ing age, and large spleens were very common among the adults. TABLE TO SHOW THAT IN LESS MALARIOUS PLACES AN INCREASE IN THE SPLEEN RATE OCCURS WITH ADVANCING AGE. Place. Age. Number examined. Percentage of enlarged spleen. Jalpaiguri 191 Thirdly, we have places like Calcutta and Madras where the liability to malaria is much less than in either of the two types of places given above. No infection was found in any of the children under ten years of age in Calcutta, and only 5 per cent. in Madras. No enlarged spleens were found among the children of either place. Especially in Madras, however, a certain number of cases of fever do occur, and the large number of cases of enlarged spleens treated in the hospitals shows that enlargement of this organ is common among the adults. I think the above facts are sufficient to account for the general prevalence of enlargement of the spleen among the adults in the greater part of India, for the greater part consists of districts where the endemic index is only moderately high, although the liability to infection is sufficient to cause, during a number of years, a sufficient number of attacks of malaria to bring about (in the absence of continued treatment) a chronically enlarged spleen by the time 2592 (2) Places in which the spleen rate in the children up to ten years of age is almost the same as the endemic index. Examples:93 adults. By the time adult age is reached, too, immunity has, in very malarious places, come into play and affected the spleen rate. The spleen rate of the adults in Mian Mir, for example, is only 8.1 per cent., while it is over 50 per cent. in the certainly much less malarious places of Lower Bengal.* If, however, we depended only on a comparison of the spleen rates of adults for our results, we should be forced to the conclusion that these places were more malarious than Mian Mir or than the Duars. The factor of age is, therefore, a very important one in connection with spleen rates. Another factor which has to be taken into account is the season of the year at which the spleen counts are made. I have already pointed out how the parasite rate and the spleen rate decrease throughout part of the year in Mian Mir, and that there is a time when the prevalence of malaria is practically nil, although there are still a large number of enlarged spleens among the children. If at this time we depended on the spleen rate alone we should be misled into thinking that there was still a good deal of malaria and a moderate liability to infection when in reality there was none. TABLE SHOWING THE PRESENCE OF A HIGH SPLEEN RATE IN CHILDREN WITHOUT .A CORRESPONDING PARASITE INFECTION. Mian Mir. Date. Endemic index, per cent. Spleen rate, per cent. Artillery Bazaar June 1902 5 33 Infantry Bazaar June 1902 8 26 Hospital Followers June 1902 0 50 Besides the factors of age, relative immunity, and season, a fourth factor viz., the variety of parasite, may affect the spleen counts. Assuming, however, that the object is to obtain a rough indication only of the prevalence of malaria in a place, the examination of the number of enlarged spleens among the children is certainly a quick and useful test, especially if the count is made during the "fever season." If, for example, in a village 90 per cent. of the young children have enlarged spleens, we could certainly infer that the place was very malarious, if only 20 per cent. to 30 per cent. have enlarged spleens we could infer that the place was only moderately malarious, and if only 5 per cent. to 8 per cent., that it was very slightly so. The following conclusions may, I think, be drawn:94 (2) A high spleen rate may exist in adults and in children without a corresponding parasite infection. These are either, (a) chronic cases in which the parasites of the last new infection have gra- dually died out, but which will be liable to again become infected when opportunity occurs, or (b) cases which from repeated infec- tions have become immune to new infections with parasites, but in which the spleen has not yet had time to diminish to its normal size. (3) The spleen rate in adults is no indication of the prevalence of malaria. In places which are very malarious it may be very low; in places which are only slightly malarious it may be very high (Calcutta, etc.). (4) Bearing in mind that the spleen is comparatively slow to enlarge and diminish in size, the spleen rate is entirely influenced by the para- site rate. In places where the parasite rate decreases at advan- cing age periods, the spleen rate also does so, although in some places an increase, up to a certain age, may occur owing to the time taken for individual spleens to diminish to their normal size. In places where the parasite rate goes on increasing with advancing age (i.e., less malarious places where no immunity is established), the spleen rate also does so, so that while there may be no en- larged spleens among the children, there may be many among the adults (Madras, etc.).
95 V.96 At Calcutta we saw simple Tertian and malignant Tertian infections in the Military Hospital at Alipore, and one case of Quartan and one of simple Tertian in the General Hospital. The majority of the cases treated in the hospitals at Calcutta are, however, cases of malarial cachexia, characterised by marked anæmia, greatly enlarged spleens with sometimes enlargement of the liver, and irregular slight fever ranging from 99°F. to 101°F. continuing for many weeks or months. The same class of case is very common in many parts of India, and the diseases known under the names of kala-azar and kala-dukh would appear to be aggravated cases of the same nature. As already men- tioned, no parasites were found by us in 80 of these cases examined in Calcutta, nor any other sign of recent malarial infection, and none of the cases appeared to be influenced by quinine. One case, sent as a typical case of kala-dukh, was examined by us in Jalpaiguri. No parasites or any signs of recent malarial infection were found. The man afterwards died of pneumonia. I have since examined slides sent from Assam of eleven cases of kala-azar without finding any parasites. One of the first things that strike one in investigating malaria in India is the almost complete absence of typical malaria charts among the cases of "ague" under treatment in the hospitals. If one went by the charts alone, one would be led to believe that typical cases of simple Tertian and Quartan fevers were almost unknown in India. As a matter of fact, many medical officers have informed me that, though they have been a number of years in charge of hospi- tals in India, they have never seen typical temperature charts of simple Tertian or Quartan fever among the patients, and it appears, I think, to be the general opinion that the "malignant" forms of parasite, producing more on less irregular fever of varying duration, are much more prevalent in India than the "benign" forms. In reality this is not the case, and I believe that the reason why typical cases of ordinary malaria, and typical temperature charts, are not more frequently seen, is that in the majority of hospitals quinine is administered very early in almost all cases of fever. In order to diagnose a case of malaria correctly (including, of course, the form of parasite), it is, as a general rule, necessary to withhold quinine for a few days. In the commencement of nearly all cases of malaria the fever is more or less irregular and often practically continuous for the first two or even three days, until the parasites have settled down to their regular cycle, and intermittency becomes a marked feature. During these first two or even three days, also, it may be quite possible that parasites will not be found in the peripheral circulation. In cases of fever, if no parasites are found after careful search, it is, I think, unwise to give quinine, because by doing so we not only alter the true course of the temperature chart, but also, do away with the chance of afterwards finding parasites. If the case is really one of malaria, to withhold quinine for a few days (in the absence of parasites.
97 from the peripheral circulation) will not endanger the case in any way, and if the case is not one of malaria, the administration of quinine, in doses suitable for a case of malaria, is certainly harmful. When quinine has not been given, if the case is one of malaria, the temperature chart quickly assumes its typical course, and even without an examination for parasites a correct diagnosis is usually assured. A detailed account of the cases we have examined and of the characteristics of the parasites must be left for a later report. I have notes of only two cases of "Comatose malaria" observed by us. One was a case in one of the hospitals at Calcutta which had been diagnosed as cerebro-spinal meningitis. Numerous ring forms of the malignant Tertian parasite were found on our first examination of this case. The second case occurred at Jalpaiguri. Almost every corpuscle in this case was infected with one or more malignant Tertian parasites, and all the large mononuclear leucocytes were crowded with pigment granules. This man died. Blackwater Fever is chiefly prevalent in India in the Duars, in some parts of Assam, and in the Jeypur State. According to Drs. Stephens and Chris- tophers, it is quite as prevalent in the Duars as in Africa. During our stay of only about a fortnight in the tea-planting districts of the Duars two cases were seen by Doctor Stephens, and a third case was reported to us on the day after our return to Jalpaiguri. A comparatively large number of the Europeans in the Duars had had the disease at some time or other, and the reports of a number of cases were received by Drs. Stephens and Chris- tophers. No cases were actually seen in the Jeypur State, but reports of several cases were received and the disease is evidently not uncommon there. Notes of isolated cases of Blackwater Fever having occurred in other parts of India were also received, and it is certainly more prevalent in India than has generally been assumed to be the case. From the examination of the cases seen in the Duars and the notes and slides of other cases, Drs. Stephens and Christophers have not, I believe, seen reason to alter the views expressed by them in Africa regarding the causa- tion of Blackwater Fever. Their views have indeed been strengthened by the Indian cases. Their opinions regarding its causation are as follows:98 attack. It is malarial in origin, although in itself it cannot be considered as an attack of malaria. (3) Quinine is, in the great majority of cases, the immediate cause of the Blackwater. Although it is not common to find malaria parasites in cases of Black- water Fever, Drs. Stephens and Christophers have been able to show (by the large mononuclear change, and by the presence of recent pigment) the existence of a malarial infection in all their cases. The administration of quinine alone would be sufficient in the majority of cases to account for the absence of para- sites from the peripheral circulation, and, in addition, it is well known that many ordinary cases of undoubted malaria occur, in which, for several days after the fever has commenced, and occasionally practically throughout the case, para- sites cannot be found in the peripheral circulation. In such cases the diagnosis can, as a rule, be accurately made by the finding of pigment in the large mononu- clear leucocytes, or by a differential count of the leucocytes, and the diagnosis will usually be afterwards confirmed by the finding of one or two parasites. In addition to proving the existence of a recent malarial infection in all their cases, Drs. Stephens and Christophers have been able to show that the onset of the Blackwater was, in all cases, preceded by one or more doses of quinine at an interval of from four to ten hours before the attack. After a careful study of the evidence and cases which they have published, one can scarcely fail to come to the conclusion, with them, that Blackwater Fever is essentially a malarial infection, in which quinine is the most common immediate determining cause of the attack of Blackwater. Blackwater Fever is therefore a preventible disease. The prophylaxis con- sists in the prevention of attacks of ordinary malaria. Complete protection from malaria may be ensured by any individual who is willing to take the trouble to pay scrupulous attention to the use of a good mosquito curtain at night, and to ade- quately protect himself from being bitten by mosquitoes during the evening hours. If these simple precautions are taken, it is quite unnecessary to use quinine as a prophylactic. No other precautions than the use of the mosquito net and the wearing of high boots or putties in the evenings have been used by any of us during our tours through some of the most malarious parts of India, and none of us have experienced a day's fever during this time. By the use of the same precautions also, and without taking any quinine, Dr. Stephens had previously passed two years in the most malarious parts of Africa without a single attack of malaria. If it were possible to induce the European planters, whose lives have to be spent in very malarious regions, to adopt the same simple precautions from the time of their first arrival in the districts, I have no doubt that Blackwater Fever would soon become unknown among them.
99 VI.100 wing or leg. By using a small-bulbed thermometer I found the taking of temperatures in the rectum (cloaca) of both sparrows and pigeons a very easy matter. Both culex and anopheles mosquitoes feed readily on sparrows and pigeons. All that is necessary is to confine a number of the mosquitoes in an oblong cage the sides of which are composed of mosquito netting. The head of the bird which is placed in the cage with the mosquitoes should be covered with a hood. This is quite sufficient to prevent the bird from flapping its wings and so driving the mosquitoes away. The voracity with which culex mosquitoes (C. Fatigans) will gorge themselves upon the blood of sparrows is extraordinary, and if too many mosquitoes are put in the cage with the same sparrow they will literally bleed it to death. Bred mosquitoes will not, as a rule, feed on the first night after being hatched out: on the second or third night, however, they will almost certainly do so. After many trials I came to the conclusion that the sparrows at Nagpur were not suitable birds on which to make observations regarding Proteosoma infection. In the first place, a large number died after being under observation one or two days. In the second, the temperature of a sparrow appeared to me to be affected by very slight causes. Even in sparrows not affected by any parasites I was unable to obtain anything in the nature of a regular chart. At intervals of half an hour or less the temperature would frequently vary as much as 1.5 or 2 degrees, and I can only conclude that the fright of being caught and held while the temperature was taken was sufficient to cause a rise or fall. Again, it was almost impossible to find a sparrow which was not infected with both forms of parasite, and a bird which, on one day would present nothing but Proteosoma parasites, would, a day or two afterwards, show large numbers of both forms. A very careful daily examination was necessary to exclude either form of parasite, and even then it was not possible to be quite certain that a scanty infection (which would, in a few days, become a very large one) with the second form of parasite had not been overlooked, owing to the large number of parasites that were usually present in each field. I shall not, therefore, reproduce here any of the charts of sparrows, as they do not present sufficiently marked characters to enable definite conclusions to be drawn from them. Taking the average of the results from a number of sparrows without parasites, I conclude, however, that the normal temperature taken in the rectum of a sparrow is between 106ºF. and 107.5ºF., and that the temperature in the evening is between 1º and 1.5º higher than that in the morning. It is not uncommon for the temperature of a normal sparrow to rise as high as 108.5ºF. or even 109º.
101 The chief feature of the charts of sparrows infected with Proteosoma parasites was their irregularity. The temperature in the evenings frequently reached 109°F. and in the mornings fell as low as 103°F. I was unable to make out that a definite rise of temperature corresponding to particular stages of the parasites occurred, and from none of my charts could a definite periodicity be made out. For the elucidation of the temperature of birds infected with Proteosoma, it would be necessary, I think, to study birds which are susceptible to this form of parasite only, and, if possible, larger and more robust birds than sparrows. In sparrows affected with Halteridium parasites only, the temperature charts did not present any special features from which it could be decided that they differed from normal charts. The temperature charts of the pigeons were much more regular and satis- factory than those of the sparrows. Charts I and II are those of normal pigeons. From these it will be seen that the normal temperature (taken in rectum) of a pigeon is between 107°F. and 108°F., and that there is a difference of about 1° between the morning and evening temperatures. Occasionally also the evening temperature rises as high as 109°F. without apparent cause. PIGEON CHART No. 1. No PARASITES. (RECTAL TEMPERATURES.) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75022718.tif] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75022718.tif]
102 PIGEON CHART No. II. No PARASITES. (RECTAL TEMPERATURES.) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75022721.tif] Chart III is that of a pigeon in which no parasites were found for the first fifteen days, on the 23rd January four Halteridium parasites were found in a slide, and after this date Halteridium parasites in increasing numbers were found at each examination. In spite of the new infection with parasites, however, no change in the tem- perature chart occurred, so that, taking this chart along with charts Nos. IV and V, which are those of pigeons with large infections of Halteridium parasites, we can, I think, infer, with some certainty, that no rise of temperature occurs in birds infected with Halteridium parasites.
103 PIGEON CHART No. III. (RECTAL TEMPERATURES.) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75022724.tif] PIGEON CHART No. IV. (HALTERIDIUM.) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75022724.tif]
104 PIGEON CHART No. V. (HALTERIDIUM.) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75022727.tif]
105 Feeding experiments. These may be summed up as follows:106 We can infer, with certainty, therefore, that the Halteridium parasite is not carried by Culex Fatigans, although this species is such a good carrier of Pro- teosoma. 4th experiment.(NEW SERIES.) No. 2. SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. MALARIA IN INDIA BY CAPTAIN S. P. JAMES, M.B. (LOND.), I.M.S. (On Special Duty with the Royal Society's Commission on Malaria). ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75022745.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA, 1902. Price Rs. 1-8 or 2s. 3d.
