IP/Q B 10 M 91 B No. 5 (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. SPECIFICITY OF ANTIVENOMOUS SERA, BY GEORGE LAMB, M.D., (GLASG.) CAPTAIN, (Indian Medical Service). ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75024053.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1903. Price As. 3 or 4d.
No. 5. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. SPECIFICITY OF ANTIVENOMOUS SERA, BY GEORGE LAMB, M.D. (GLASG.), CAPTAIN, (Indian Medical Service). ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75024065.tif] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75024065.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1903.
Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. E. A. ARNOLD, 37, Bedford Street, Strand, London, W.C. CONSTABLE & Co., 2, Whitehall Gardens, London, S.W. SAMPSON Low, MARSTON & CO., St. Dunstan's House, Fetter Lane, London, E.C. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W.C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & CO., Charing Cross Road, London; W.C. B. A. QUARITCH, 15, Piccadilly, London, W. WILLIAMS and NORGATE, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & CO., Cambridge. ON THE CONTINENT. R. FRIEDLÄNDER & SOHN, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin, N.W. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, Hague, Holland. IN INDIA. THACKER, SPINK & CO., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & CO., Calcutta. THACKER & CO., LD., Bombay. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & CO., Bombay. A. J. COMBRIDGE & Co., Bombay. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, BOMBAY. HIGGINBOTHAM & CO., Madras. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & CO., Madras. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH AND SONS, Mufid-i-Am Press, Lahore. SUPERINTENDENT, AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, Rangoon. S. K. LAHIRI & Co., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras.
SPECIFICITY OF ANTIVENOMOUS SERA. THE question of the specificity of antivenomous sera is a question of great importance and interest both from the practical and from the theoretical standpoint. Let us first consider the practical aspect of the question. It is at once evident that, should it be definitely proved that the serum of an animal immunised with the venom of one species of snake was not antitoxic to the poison of any species, except of that species the venom of which had been used for the purpose of immunisation, the difficulties of the therapeutics of cases of snake-bite would be enormously increased. Even if it were possible to prepare sera specifically antitoxic to the venoms of all the species of poison- ous snakes, a moment's consideration will show that the difficulties would not be overcome by supplying to the public a different serum for each variety of snake venom. Thus, in India alone there are four genera of terrestrial snakes, which can be said to be dangerous to man, viz., Naia, Bungarus, Vipera, and Echis. Further, of some of these genera there are several species. The genus Naia contains two Indian species, the genus Bungarus five species, and the genus Vipera two species. The genus Echis has only one species which occurs in India, viz., Echis carinata. Some of these species, however, are rare and there- fore do not threaten much danger to man. Nevertheless, at the lowest estima- tion we should have to supply six different antivenomous sera to meet the wants of India alone, viz., sera for the venoms of Naia tripudians (cobra), Naia bungarus (king cobra), Bungarus fasciatus (banded krait), Bungarus cæruleus (common krait), Daboia Russellii (chain viper), and Echis carinata (phoorsa). Further observations, however, might possibly show that the serum pre- pared with the venom of one species of snake was antitoxic for the venom of another species of the same genus. If such an hypothesis were found to be true, we should still have to prepare four antitoxic sera for the venoms of the four most poisonous genera of Indian snakes, granting always, of course, that the serum prepared with the venom of one genus was not efficacious against the poison of any other genus. Now, when a person, especially a native of India, is bitten by a snake, he is rarely able to tell the species of the snake which has inflicted the bite. And, further, to be of much practical utility an antivenomous serum must be injected before any symptoms of poisoning have set in. The medical man, therefore, who is called on to treat a case of snake-bite with antitoxin is not, as a rule, in a position to form an opinion, either from the history of the case or
2 from the symptoms, as to the nature of the venom which has been injected. He would have, then, either to use one of the antitoxic sera at haphazard, or to inject the whole of them at once. For obvious reasons it is certain that neither of these methods would recommend itself either to the patient or to the medical man as a sound and reliable therapeutical measure. The difficulty might be got over in one of two ways. It might be got over either by immunising animals against the venom of each species of snake separately and then mixing the various sera procured in this way, or by immunising, if this were possible, animals with a mixture made up of definite proportions of each venom: It is, however, premature to speculate further in this direction, before we have shown that it is necessary to overcome the difficulty, and before many preliminary experiments have been made. Nevertheless, the considerations put forward above show the great practical importance of the question under discussion. The theoretical aspect of the problem is of no less importance and interest than its practical aspect. Calmette 2 has all along held that all snake venoms are alike in physiological action, and that, in consequence, the serum which he sends out from Lille, prepared as it is chiefly with cobra venom, is active against the venoms of all species of snakes. These sweeping statements of Calmette have not stood the light of further and more recent research. They have now been shown to require considerable modification. In the first place, I have shown in a series 3 of papers that the venom of the cobra differs from that of the daboia in every detail of physiological action. In the second place, in Australia it was first shown by Martin 4 of Melbourne that Calmette's serum was unable to preserve animals against injections of the poison of the tiger snake (Hoplocephalus curtus). Subsequent experiments 5 in Sydney have de- monstrated a like fact as far as the poisons of other Australian snakes are con- cerned. In India, also, along with Dr. Hanna6 I have conclusively shown that, while Calmette's serum is active for cobra venom, it has no neutralising effect for the venom of Daboia Russellii. When we consider, as I have stated above, that the venom of the cobra has in every respect a different physiological action from the poison of the daboia, such a result was only to be expected. It is evident, therefore, that if it were definitely shown that antivenomous sera were specific, Calmette's assertions would be conclusively disproved. The question under discussion is further of theoretical interest in view of Martin's hypothesis,7 that all venoms contain two or more poisonous proteids, and that in the varying proportions of these in venoms from different species of snakes may be found the explanation of the different effects which follow the inoculation of the serveral poisons. It is unnecessary here to enter into the facts I have elsewhere 8 put forward which go to disprove this theory. It is sufficient to point out that, should it be shown that the serum of an animal immunised with the venom of one species of snake was quite inactive against the venoms
3 of other species, this hypothesis of Martin would receive its death blow. We shall return to this question later on. With this introduction we may now pass on to examine the data which bear on the question under consideration. In a recent paper9 on the serum therapy of snake bite Dr. Tidswell of Sydney has correctly pointed out that Calmette's serum, inasmuch as it is prepared with a mixture of snake venoms, in which mixture, however, cobra venom greatly preponderates, is not strictly adapted for the settlement of specificity, and that it was necessary for this purpose to possess a serum prepared with one single kind of venom and to test its efficacy against the same and other kinds of venom. In this same paper he gives some most interesting results which he obtained working with the serum of a horse immunised with the pure venom of the Australian tiger snake (Hoplocephalus curtus). He showed that 0.4. c.c. of this serum was sufficient to neutralise ten lethal doses, viz., 0.00059 grammes, for the rabbit of the particular venom used to immunise the horse. He further showed that this same serum failed completely to neutralise the poisons of the brown and black snakes and also that of the death adder. The outcome, in short, of Tidswell's observations " is such as to indicate that the serum is specific in its action, operative only against the venom by means of which it is prepared." The observations which I have now to put forward further extend my original observations, mentioned above, made with Calmette's serum and cobra and daboia venoms. They, also, further extend the observations made by Tidswell with the serum prepared with the poison of Hoplocephalus curtus. It is un- necessary here to reprint the details 10 of the experiments made with Calmette's serum and cobra and daboia poisons. It will be sufficient to recall the main facts demonstrated by these experiments, viz., that the serum sent out from the laboratory at Lille was able to neutralise, to a certain extent, the venom of the cobra, but was quite inactive against the venom of Daboia Russellii. The direction in which these observations were now extended was to test Calmette's serum with the venoms of two other species of Indian snakes, viz., Bungarus fasciatus and Echis carinata. Bungarus fasciatus is a snake belonging to the genus Bungarus, closely allied to the genus Naia, of which the cobra is a species. It is interesting in this connection to note that the genus Naia and the genus Bungarus belong to the same sub-family of Colubridae, viz., Elapinæ, in which sub-family, also, naturalists classify the bulk of the ophidian fauna of Australia. Further, all the members of the sub-family Elapinæ are poisonous. Echis carinata belongs to the genus Echis, a genus closely allied to the genus Vipera, of which genus Daboia Russellii is a species. The genus Echis and the genus Vipera belong to the same sub-family of Viperid, viz., Viperinæ. Let us first consider the experiments made with Calmette's serum and the venom of Bungarus fasciatus. As a preliminary measure it was necessary to
4 determine the minimum lethal dose of this poison when injected intravenously into rabbits. A reference to series No. I of the protocols will show that 0.7 milli- gramme per kilo. was the smallest amount which could be depended upon to cause the death of the animal. Two series of observations were then made with Calmette's serum and this venom. In the first series, vide protocols, series No. II A, four milligrammes per kilo., viz., about six lethal doses, were used as the test dose. This test dose was mixed in vitro with different quantities of serum. The mixture was allowed to stand at laboratory temperature (about 25°C.) for half an hour. It was then injected into the marginal vein of the rabbit's ear. A glance at the table appended will show that even 5 c. c. of serum were of no avail to save the life of the animal, the rabbit which received this amount of serum along with the test dose dying after practically the same interval of time as the control animal. In the second series of experiments made with Calmette's serum and the venom of Bungarus fasciatus, vide protocols, series No. II B, two milligrammes of venom per kilo., viz., about three lethal doses, were used as the test dose. With this exception the same technique was employed as in the previous series of experiments. It will be seen from the protocols that even with this small multiple of the lethal dose, 5 c. c. of serum were not able to preserve the life of the animal. The rabbits, however, which received 4 c. c. and 5 c. c. of serum lived some- what longer than the control animal. When we consider that the test dose in these cases was such a small multiple of the minimum lethal dose, this result does not appear to me to influence the conclusion to which we are led by these two series of observations, viz., that Calmette's serum has practically no neutra- lising power for the venom of Bungarus fasciatus. I have next to put on record the observations which were made to ascertain if the Lille serum could neutralise the venom of Echis carinata. In this case, also, it was necessary as a preliminary measure to determine the minimum lethal dose of this poison for a rabbit when injected intravenously. Injected in this way the venom of Echis carinata causes death in the same manner as the poison of Daboia Russellii, that is to say, by widespread intravascular thrombosis.11 The smallest quantity which could bring about this fatal thrombosis was found to be 0.05 milligramme per kilo. A reference to the protocols (series No. III) will show that one rabbit which received this amount died in two and a half minutes, and another rabbit, which received a like quantity, lived for eleven and a half minutes. Rabbits which received less than 0.05 milligramme per kilo. recovered. In order to give the serum every advantage the test dose of venom, which was used to test Calmette's serum, was only a single lethal dose, viz., 0.05 milligramme per kilo. Two experiments, vide protocols, series No. IV, were performed. In the first instance the test dose of venom and 4 c. c. of serum were mixed in vitro. This mixture, soon after its preparation, was injected
5 into the marginal vein of the ear of a rabbit. The rabbit died in two minutes. In the second experiment 5 c. c. of serum were injected into the marginal vein of one ear. A. few minutes afterwards the test dose of venom, viz., a single lethal dose, was injected into the marginal vein of the other ear. This animal likewise died in about two minutes. From these two observations we can at once conclude that Calmette's serum is quite inactive against the venom of Echis carinata. The outcome, then, of all these observations is to prove conclusively that, while the serum prepared by Calmette at Lille is of considerable value as a therapeutic measure in cases of cobra bite, if injected sufficiently early and in sufficient quantity, it is of no value whatever in the treatment of cases of bites from Daboia Russellii, Bungarus fasciatus, or Echis carinata. We may now pass on to consider the experiments which were made to test the serum got from a horse immunised with the venom of the Australian tiger snake, against the venoms of some of the Indian snakes. This serum was, as I have mentioned above, prepared by Dr. Tidswell of Sydney, to whom I am greatly indebted for his kindness in sending me a considerable quantity. I have also stated above that Tidswell found this serum to be strongly antitoxic to the venom with which it was prepared, but to be quite inactive towards the venoms of three other Australian snakes. The results, therefore, of the observations which I have now to record, made with this serum and the poisons of three Indian snakes, are of the greatest theoretical interest. The serum was first tested with the venom of the cobra. For these experiments rats were the animals employed. The test dose of venom used was ten lethal doses, viz., 0.7 milligramme.12 This test dose and different quantities of serum were mixed in vitro. The mixture was allowed to stand at laboratory temperature for half an hour. It was then injected subcutaneously into the inner side of the thigh. A reference to the protocols (series No. V) will show that the rat which received 4 c. c. of serum along with the test dose died after practically the same interval of time as one of the controls. The serum, therefore, had failed to neutralise any of the venom. Tidswell's hoplocephalus serum was next tested with the venom of Bungarus fasciatus. For this series of experiments rabbits were the animals employed. I have already stated that the minimum lethal dose of this poison for a rabbit is 0.7 milligramme per kilo. when injected intravenously. The test dose of venom now used was 4 milligrammes per kilo., viz., about 6 lethal doses. This test dose and different quantities of serum were mixed in vitro. The mixture was allowed to stand at laboratory temperature for half an hour. It was then injected into the marginal vein of the ear of a rabbit. It will be seen from the protocols (series No. VI) that the rabbit which received 5 c. c. of serum along with the test dose died in even a shorter time than the control which received no serum. We have, therefore, to conclude that the serum failed to neutralise even a modicum of the venom. Lastly, the serum prepared by Dr. Tidswell was tested with the venom of
6 Daboia Russellii. In the series of experiments Which were first undertaken with this end in view the test dose of venom used was 0.5 milligramme per kilo. of rabbit. It was found by experiment that this amount of the sample of venom employed did not cause intravascular clotting, but killed after about 18 hours from other causes. This test dose and different quantities of serum were mixed in vitro. The mixture was allowed to stand at laboratory temperature for half an hour. It was then injected into the marginal vein of the ear of the rabbit. A glance at the protocols (series No. VII A) will show that 4 c. c. of serum did not in the least delay the fatal result. A single experiment was made using a sample of daboia venom, of which 0.2 milligramme per kilo. killed a rabbit in a few minutes from intravascular thrombosis. Three times this amount, viz., 0.6 milligramme per kilo., was used as a test dose: 5 c. c. of serum were first injected into the marginal vein of one ear: five minutes afterwards the test dose of venom was injected into the margi- nal vein of the other ear. It will be seen from the protocols (series No. VII B) that even this large quantity of serum had no effect on the toxic action of the poison, the animal dying in one and a half minutes. This observation completes the experiments which were made with a serum prepared with the pure venom of a single snake, viz., Hoplocephalus curtus. It is perhaps to be regretted that this serum was not tested with the poisons of some of the other Indian snakes. Unfortunately, however, several of the phials had got broken in transit from Australia, and there remained only sufficient for the experiments which I have detailed above. A priori, however, it is almost certain that this serum would have had no neutralising power for other venoms. These results completely confirm and extend Tidswell's observations. This observer found that the serum prepared with the unmixed venom of the tiger snake was strongly antitoxic to that particular venom, but had no antitoxic effect for the poisons of three other Australian snakes, viz., the brown snake, the black snake, and the death adder. I have now further shown that this serum has no neutralising power for the venoms of three of our Indian snakes, viz., Naia tripudians (cobra), Bungarus fasciatus (banded krait), and Daboia Russellii (chain viper). Now, we have seen that the Australian snakes belong to the same sub-family, but to different genera, as the cobra and the banded krait. These results, therefore, taken along with the results collated above, got with Calmette's serum, show conclusively that the serum prepared with the venom of any one genus of poisonous snake is specific for the venom of that genus and is inactive for the poisons of other genera. It still remains to be shown, if a serum prepared with a single venom would be specific for the venom of that species, that is to say, inactive for the poisons of other species of the same genus. Thus, for example, it still remains to be shown whether a serum prepared with cobra venom is active or inactive for the venom of. the king cobra and whether a serum prepared with the venom of Bungarus fasciatus is active or inactive for the poisons of the other species of the genus Bungarus.
7 The bearing, however, which these results have on the problem of the therapeu- tics of cases of snake-bite, is very evident and need not further be discussed. The difficulties which I have pointed out at the beginning of this paper are actual and real difficulties. Much accurate, careful, and tedious work will be required to surmount them. I have already roughly indicated the directions in which this work must and probably will proceed. The theoretical importance of these results is also evident. These obser- vations certainly prove that Martin's hypothesis (quoted above), as regards the poisonous proteid constituents of snake venoms, is an incorrect hypothesis. This theory has in short now received its death blow. For it does not explain the different effects which follow the inoculation of the several poisons. It is evident that we shall now have to consider each variety of snake venom separately, and not draw any conclusions from observations made with one venom as to the action of the venom of even a closely allied species. In the present state of our knowledge we must regard the poisonous constituents of all snake venoms to be different from one another. Further research, however, may show that this extreme view can be somewhat modified. In a recent paper 13 on the precipitin of cobra venom I brought forward evidence which pointed to the fact that the proteid constituents of snake venoms are by no means identical. For it was there shown that the serum of a rabbit treated with the proteids of cobra venom caused a precipitum with cobra venom, and not with the poisons of several other species of snakes. I also showed in this publication that the precipitin prepared with cobra venom caused a preci- pitum with daboia venom, and that little or no difference was found between this reaction with cobra venom and that with daboia venom. The difference, in fact, was so slight that the conclusion arrived at, granted, as is generally granted, that this serum precipitin test for proteids is relatively specific, was that the pro- teids of cobra venom and of daboia venom are probably identical, or, at any rate have the same " haptophoric " group. Now, I have already stated that I have shown that in its physiological action cobra venom differs in every essential from daboia poison, a fact which is supported by the observation that a serum, viz., Calmette's serum, active for cobra venom, is quite inactive for daboia venom. When we consider, then, that the proteids of cobra venom and of daboia venom are probably alike, and that the poisonous constituents of these two poisons are quite different in their mode of action and are not rendered inactive by the same immune serum, we are almost led to conclude that the poisonous constituents of these two venoms, and therefore probably of all snake venoms, are not of a pro- teid nature. Such a conclusion is, I know, in direct opposition to the opinion of all workers on this subject, to whom, however, the considerations I have stated above were not until recently available. In spite of this generally accepted view, I venture to think that further research will be able to separate the proteid con- stituents from the poisonous elements of snake venoms. Such a research is at present in progress in this laboratory. B
8 Protocols. SERIES No. 1.9 The mixture was allowed to stand at laboratory temperature (about 25°C.) for half an hour. It was then injected into the marginal vein of the ear of the rabbit. The following were the results obtained :10 SERIES NO. III.11 B. In the second experiment 5 c. c. of serum were injected into the mar- ginal vein of one ear. Six minutes afterwards the test dose of venom was injected into the marginal vein of the other ear. The following was the result:12 SERIES No. VI.13 The following were the results obtained:14 Paper :' On the action of the venoms of the cobra (Naia tripudians) and of the daboia (Daboia Russellii) on the red blood corpuscles and on the blood plasma': in process of publication by the Government of India in Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India, New Series. 4. ' Inter-colonial Medical Journal of Australasia,' August 20th, 1897: Ibid: April 20th, 1898. 5. Tidswell: 'Preliminary Note on the serum-therapy of snake-bite.' Australasian Medical Gazette, April 21st, 1902, page 177. 6. ' Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Depart- ments of the Government of India ': 1902: New Series, No.1 ' Journal of Pathology and Bacteriology ': Edinburgh and London: 1902, Vol. VIII, page 1. 7. ' System of Medicine ': Clifford Allbutt: Vol. II, .page 809. 8. Loc. Cit. (Reference 3.): ' Lancet ': August 16th, 1902. 9. 'Australasian Medical Gazette ': April 21st, 1902, page 177. 10. Loc. Cit. 11. ' Journal of Pathology and Bacteriology ': Edinburgh and London: 1902, Vol. VIII, page 1. 12. The minimum lethal dose for rats of about 115 grammes weight of the sample of venom used for these experiments was found to be 0.07 milli- gramme. In a previous paper (vide reference 6), I stated that the minimum lethal dose for rats of this weight was 0.04 milligramme. A different sample of venom, however, had been used for these first observations. It is evident, therefore, that, as different samples of venom vary in toxicity, for each sample the minimum lethal dose should be determined for all experiments having in view the testing of an antitoxic serum. 13. 'Lancet': August 16th, 1902.
