IP/QB, 10 m..b No. 18. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. HÆMOGREGARINA GERBILLI. BY LIEUT. S. R. CHRISTOPHERS, M.B., I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA.SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027378.tif] CALCUTTA . OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1905. Price Annas 10 or 1s.
No. 18. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. HÆMOGREGARINA GERBILLI. BY LIEUT. S. R. CHRISTOPHERS, M.B., I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027390.tif] CALCUTTA. OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING INDIA. 1905.
Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. H. S. KING & CO., 65, Cornhill, and 9, Pall Mall, London. E. A. ARNOLD, 41 and 43, Maddox Street, Bond Street, London, W. CONSTABLE & CO., 16, James Street, Hay Market, London, W. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CO., Charing Cross Road, London, W.C. BERNARD QUARITCH, 15, Piccadilly, London, W. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 51, Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & CO., Cambridge. ON THE CONTINENT. R. FRIEDLANDER & SOHN, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin, N.W. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. IN INDIA. THACKER, SPINK & CO., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & CO., Calcutta. S. K. LAHIRI & CO., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & CO., Calcutta. HIGGINBOTHAM & CO., Madras. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & CO., Madras. G. A. NATESAN & CO., Madras. THACKER & CO., LD., Bombay. A. J. COMBRIDGE & CO., Bombay. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & CO., Bombay. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazair Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH AND SONS, Mufid-i-Am Press, Lahore. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission Press, Rangoon.
List of numbers of Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India (New Series) published previous to the present issue. No. 1. Standardisation of Calmette's anti-venomous serum with pure cobra venom: the deterioration of this serum through keeping in India, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 2. Malaria in India, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price Rs. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No. 3. Some observations on the poison of Russell's Viper (Daboia Russellii), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq. M.B. Price As. 5 or 6d. No. 4. On the action of the venoms of the Cobra and of the Daboia on the red blood cor- puscles and on the blood plasma, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 5. Specificity of Anti-venomous sera, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 6. First report on the anti-malarial operations in Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s, 2d. No. 7. Some observations on the poison of the Banded Krait (Bungarus Fasciatus), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 8. A preliminary report on a parasite found in patients suffering from enlargement of the spleen in India, by LieutenantS.R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price Rs. 1-3 or 2s. 3d. No. 9. Second report of the anti-malarial operations at Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 10. Specificity of anti-venomous sera (second communication), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 11. On a parasite found in persons suffering from enlargement of the spleen in India, Second Report, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price Rs. 2 or 3s. No. 12 On the Morphology, Teratology and Diclinism of the flowers of Cannabis, by Major D. Prain, I.M.S. Price As. 14 or 1s. 4d. No. 13 Oriental or Delhi sore, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 14. On a parasite found in the white corpuscles of the blood of dogs, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 15. On a parasite found in persons suffering from enlargement of the spleen in IndiaHÆMOGREGARINA GERBILLI. IT has hitherto been believed that parasites belonging to the group of hæmo- gregarines are confined to cold blooded vertebrates, for, unless the parasite recently found in the leucocytes of the blood of dogs1 is of this nature, no one has yet recorded the discovery of hæmogregarine parasites in either a bird or a mammal. There is also an undesirable gap in our knowledge of this interesting group of blood parasites, for we know little or nothing of the means by which they are transmitted from infected to healthy animals. I consider myself fortunate, therefore, in having recently found a characteristic hæmogregarine parasite in the blood of a mammal, a species of Indian field rat, kindly identi- fied by Professor Henderson of Madras as Gerbillus indicus, and in having added interest to the discovery by finding that the parasite develops in the body of a louse which infests this animal. I propose to give in this paper a description of the parasite in the rat and of its developmental stages in the louse, so far as the details have been worked out up to the present time. The Parasite in the Rat. The examination of a large number of rats, of the species named, caught near Madras, shewed that infection with the parasite is very common: only very few of the rats examined were quite free from infection although the number of parasites present in some animals was much greater than in others. Young and medium sized rats were more frequently infected than adults. The number of parasites present in an animal was very constant over a considerable period of time. In the systematic examination of a number of rats the following results were obtained:2 Rat 8 . Examined at intervals Parasites always very abundant. for 12 days. Fresh preparations.3 In fresh films made from the liver and spleen forms were sometimes seen apparently lying in cells, but such were probably superposed. No developmental forms could be detected in these preparations. Stained preparations.4 outline, one extremity being clear, whereas the other shews a blue reticulum (" tail "). In such parasites the chromatin mass shews a marked tendency to form strands passing transversely. Occasionally the appearance is such as to suggest fission in a longitudinal direction. This may be evidenced by a partial splitting of the chromatin into two lateral masses and by a division of the protoplasm (fig. 4). Forms were sometimes found in which the protoplasm was very clear and free from granulations, though other forms in the neighbourhood were stained in the usual manner. No very certain differentiation of two sexual forms could be made out. A very common appearance was that of two forms lying in opposition. Undoubtedly this was most often accidental but in many cases the two forms were so exactly similar as to suggest that they had resulted from a process of fission. In every instance noted, however, each parasite possessed a separate capsule. When films were made from a drop of blood which had been kept moist for some time, elongate vermicule forms were readily found. The chromatin mass, though elongated, was still situated nearer to the posterior extremity, and this portion of the parasite as heretofore contained most of the granules. A few fine granules were also usually present in the anterior portion of the parasite. Some of the free forms were very long and slender. (Fig. 8.) Prolonged search for evidence of phagocytic action was made in several animals but in no instance was a parasite seen included in any form of leucocyte. Examination of Viscera.5 Effect of infection upon rats.6 spur-like process. All segments have a few short spines. There is a terminal papilla bearing a few short spines. The eyes are absent.* The mouth is situated upon the inferior surface of a papilla. The papilla carries six short curved spines arranged in a circlet. A second circle of similar but larger spines surrounds the papilla at a short distance. At each of the posterior angles of the head, there is a large flat chitinous expansion, from which arises a single, very long, stout hair, and one or two small spines. The hair passes back as far as the abdomen. On the ventral surface of the head there are two medium sized spines arising near the base of the antenna. The thorax is small. It is separated from the abdomen by a constriction. The posterior angles of the chief dorsal plate are thickened and carry a number of stout spines. Internally to the spines, a long hair resembling that on the head, passes backwards as far as the first segments of the abdomen. Ventrally there is a narrow sternal plate, on either side of which the coxæ of the three pairs of legs arise. The legs consist of four large segments. The proximal joints of the legs (coxæ) are oval and of large size. They bear on their anterior surface, especially at their distal extremities, some small spines. The second joints are small. They carry small spines anteriorly. The third joints are large and globose. They are armed with spines on their anterior surfaces. The fourth joint is large and triangular. It is smallest in the first pair of legs, and very large and massive in the third pair. The apex of the triangle articulates with the third joint. The anterior angle of the base is con- tinued as a strong curved claw. The posterior angle forms a pad. Between the two is a hollow in which the shaft of the host's hair is held. The claw is jointed at its base. A second articulation is visible a short distance above this. The claws increase in size and massiveness from before backwards. That of the third legs is an extremely large mass of chitin shaped like a parrot's beak. The abdomen consists of nine visible segments. The differentiation of the ninth segment is more readily made out in the female than in the male. Each of the first six segments carries on its posterior border, both ventrally and dorsally, a fringe of hairs. The seventh segment carries only two hairs on the dorsal surface. Laterally the segments carry long stout hairs, as well as short powerful spines. In the adult, the first segment carries a single hair. The 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th and 8th, each two hairs, of which those of the 2nd and 6th segments are the longest. The eighth segment in the male, carries a short hair laterally. In the female it carries a number of stout spine-like hairs. The ninth segment has, in the female, a slit-like opening guarded by two chitinous plates. In the male, a * NOTE.7 horny papilla bears a circlet of short curved spines. On the dorsal surface of the papilla there is a large opening. In the male the penis forms a conspicuous object. It terminates in a horn-shaped process. The ova measure .48 m. m. in length. They are fixed to the hair about half way up the shaft. The attached end lies towards the base of the hair. The young escape from the egg as forms closely resembling the adult. The abdomen, however, is very small and the hairs projecting from it propor- tionately very long. In the immature forms the abdominal segments carry a fringe of only four hairs instead of many as in the adult. Structure. The alimentary canal.8 The pyloric ampulla* is a dilated portion of the mid-gut and is supplied with numerous circular muscles. Into it open four malpighian tubules. These enter two on each side, close together. Immediately beyond the malpighian tubules, a distinct dividing line between the mid-gut and the intestinal epithelum is seen. The intestine is straight and thin-walled. There is no differentiation into large and small intestine. It passes from the muscular pyloric mass, close beneath the abdominal terga, to the rectum. The cells lining the cavity are small. It has a layer of circular muscle fibres, and outside this a number of longitudinal fibres. The nuclei of the latter form conspicuous objects in the fresh tissues. The rectum consists of a distended globular portion, containing rectal papillæ, and a straight narrow portion leading directly to the anus at the apex of the ninth segment. The salivary glands.9 vescicles lie across the abdomen, and open together into a short straight tube surrounded with large muscle fibres. This tube in turn passes into the penis. The fat body.10 Development of the parasite in the body of the louse. In order that feeding experiments might shew unequivocal results, a young animal was selected in whose blood parasites were extremely abundant. As a cursory examination of the fur revealed no lice, a number were transferred from four older animals. They quickly disappeared among the hairs. On the fourth day ova were noticed on the fur about the head. Two lice, presumably belonging to those placed on the rat, were removed for dissection. One was dissected immediately after removal, the other was left overnight in a moist chamber. Dissection of the first louse shewed very numerous free vermicules in the mid-gut and intestine. A number were also scattered about the preparation, but may have been derived from the gut as this was ruptured. The vermicules exhibited active movements, mainly of lateral flexion. Very few encysted parasites were present. No forms were seen in the salivary glands or ovaries. A dry preparation was made from the mid-gut and its contents and stained with Romanowski's stain. Numerous large vermicule forms, in various attitudes, were seen among altered blood corpuscles. As many as a dozen vermicules were to be seen in single fields of the microscope. Compared with stained specimens of free vermicules from the peripheral blood of the rat, these forms appeared larger and finer. The chromatin masses, especially, were noted as extending through a greater portion of the parasite. The protoplasm of the vermicules was, in almost every case, free from granules and stained a clear blue. Some of the vermicules had assumed a characteristic crescentic form (Fig. 9.) Dissection of the second louse shewed many free vermicules collected in the pyloric ampulla (fig. 11). A motionless vermicule, which had become crescentic in shape, was detected in the body cavity in the neighbourhood of the rectum. In this dissection the alimentary canal was apparently free from injury. The vermicules in the gut shewed sluggish movements chiefly of lateral flexion. Only a single, still unchanged, encysted form was noted. On the seventh day the rat was killed and the lice collected. Many young lice, apparently just hatched, were observed. Dissection of several of these shewed many very active vermicules in the gut. In the dissection of the larger specimens, made on this day, certain very striking large cysts undoubtedly of parasitic origin, lying free in the body cavity of the louse were found. The most developed cysts were of large size, measuring as much as 350µ in diameter, and being readily seen under a low power lying in the abdomen of the infected louse (fig. 20). They were most often seen in the anterior portion of the abdomen, but were present also in other
11 parts. On pulling apart the abdominal segments, they readily became free upon the slide, and were easily visible to the naked eye, as minute white spheres. Under the microscope, the large cysts were seen to be filled with a number of small oval cysts. Each of these again contained six to eight crescentic bodies lying as a rule slightly obliquely in the long diameter of the cyst. On the rup- ture of the smaller cysts, the crescentic bodies were liberated, and were seen to be sausage-shaped bodies with blunt extremities, measuring 15µ in length and 4µ in thickness. A refractile area (nucleus) was situated nearer one extremity than the other. The protoplasm was granular, but in both extre- mities clear areas resembling vacuoles were conspicuous. No movement was observed in the bodies. On rupture, the wall of the small cysts became folded so as to form elongated spindles of very regular pattern. In the empty cyst a small granular mass (reliquat) was visible. (Figs. 15 and 16.) Younger stages of the large cysts were readily made out. All appeared quite free in the body cavity. The smallest cysts seen measured 10µ in diameter. They shewed a double contour, and a central clear refractile spot. Later stages are proportionately larger. In medium sized cysts a thick clear outer zone is present within the double contour of the cyst wall. The contents are granular, the granules sometimes being arranged in clusters. As maturation advances, the central granular portion becomes more opaque. At this stage the parasite has a characteristic aspect so that it can be detected, even without dissection, lying in the abdomen of the louse. The central granular mass is usually situated slightly excentrically, so that the clear zone is thicker at one side of the cyst than at the other. Before full maturation, the central mass becomes divided into oval bodies containing granular protoplasm arranged in a characteristic manner (fig. 17). Attempts to obtain satisfactorily stained specimens of the immature stages were not successful. (Figs. 12, 13 and 14.) In stained films made from the ruptured mature cysts, beautiful specimens of the liberated sausage-shaped bodies were seen, but the collapsed and unruptured cysts remained unstained. Considerably nearer one extremity than the other, so that it divides the protoplasm in two unequal halves, there is a large granular densely staining chromatin mass, and the body of the parasite at this point shews a marked constriction. The protoplasm is granular but contains in either extremity a conspicuous clear area. In all except two of eleven lice removed from the rat, cysts in some stage or other of development were found by dissection. In one louse three fully mature cysts, two medium sized cysts and three small cysts were found. In none of the lice was any unusual appearance observed in the salivary glands or ovaries. C 2
12 In addition to eleven lice which were dissected in the fresh condition, two were fixed in alcohol and reserved for the preparation of sections. Sections cu in paraffin were stained with hæmatein. In one instance the mid-gut was found fully distended with recently drawn blood, the corpuscles of which were scarcely altered in appearance. Numerous vermicule forms were seen. They were especially abundant near the walls of the gut. One or two examples only were seen of forms still encysted in corpuscles. The vermicules were usually stretched out, so that they gave a vivid impression that they were travelling through the mass of closely packed red cells. In the body cavity of the louse a large cyst was noted, lying between the wall of the mid-gut and the 5th and 6th abdominal terga. It contained numerous darkly stained bodies, showing a central clear area and a nucleus. These bodies appeared to be the immature stages of the contained cysts, prior to the formation of the sickles. In the second specimen, the mid-gut was empty. No vermicules were seen in the lumen. A single vermiculu was detected in the upper part of the intestine. The abdomen was distended with nearly mature ova. No unusual bodies were seen in these, nor in the salivary glands. No cysts could be detected in the sections. The appearances to be expected, being now familiar, further dissections were made, A rat which had been placed in a separate cage, on account of the presence of numerous parasites in the blood, was noticed to have a few lice and a considerable number of ova on the hairs about the head. Three lice were removed and dissected with the following result :13 Louse 3 One half grown cyst. " 4 Nil. " 5 Nil. " 6 Nil. " 7 Nil. A rat in whose blood I had never found more than an occasional parasite, was found to be harbouring a certain number of lice. Nine adult lice only were obtained. No cyst was found in any of these.* Behaviour of crescentic bodies when treated with intestinal juice.14 were also noticed. At first it was suspected that these were vermicules liberated from the red cells of the rat; but a cursory examination of the rat's blood shewed that, if present, parasites were scanty. It was also observed, that the active vermicules were present only in the neighbourhood of the ruptured cyst, and that they were distinctly larger than vermicules ordinarily seen in rat's blood. Soon nearly all the liberated forms were seen to be exhibiting move- ments. The movements were not progressive, but consisted of a wriggling motion somewhat like that of the larvæ of blow-flies. Forms here and there were then noticed to he rotating one or more blood corpuscles, apparently by means of an invisible projection from the tail. This movement was so curious and significant, that the hope of some development in plasma was raised. The preparation was placed in the incubator at 37° for an hour. The bodies had all become quiescent, except one, which was rotating upon its own axis at considerable speed. The preparation was again placed in the incubator for an hour. On examination, it was found that the form just noted had also become quiescent, but that it had changed somewhat in shape so as to become egg-shaped with rather truncated ends. The forms still included in the cysts were apparently unchanged. With a view to liberate more of these, the coverglass was compressed with a needle. By this means most of the cysts were ruptured, and the contained forms set free. Almost all the forms so liberated and many of those lying in partially ruptured cysts, at once began to exhibit the most active movements. It was then noted that the majority of the forms were going through the same extraordinary feat of rapidly rotating one or more red cells by means of their narrow extremity. The corpuscles, in many cases, were put in rotation whilst still separated by a distinct interval from the point of the parasite. Very often no movement of the parasite was seen, but in some cases the narrow extremity moved in a circular manner. As the process con- tinued, the corpuscles became aggregated in masses of ten or twenty, the whole mass being rotated in some cases. In others the body of the parasite itself rotated, using the blood cells as a fixed point. For an hour the field of the microscope was filled with forms revolving upon their axis or causing red cells to revolve. The preparation was again placed in the incubator and not examined until next morning. All forms were then motionless, but had in most cases taken on the egg-shaped form already noted. A certain number of bodies had retained their original sausage shape. From the position of some of these, it appeared probable that they were forms which had failed to exhibit the movement of rotation. A stained specimen, made from this preparation, shewed oval forms, having a light reticular protoplasm and a central lightly staining chromatin mass. The constriction previously noted was no longer present, and
15 the appearance of the bodies was much changed. The forms measured in the fresh state 9.5µ in length and 5.5µ in breadth. CONCLUSIONS. So far as I am aware a hæmogregarine parasite has not been observed previously in either a bird or a mammal. The only mammalian parasite, which may possibly come under this designation, is that recently described by Captain James 1 and Dr. Bentley 2. Except that this parasite appears to invade the polymorphonuclear leucocytes, there are some points of general resemblance between it and the parasite now under discussion. In the parasite of the field rat, the resemblance to a hæmogregarine, in every respect, is exact. The absence of pigment, the vermicule form, the curved "tail," the presence of a space in which the parasite lies, the occurrence of motile forms and their behaviour are all features characteristic of the group. The only appreciable difference between this form and typical members of the genus is due to the absence of a nucleus in the red cell of the host. I have provisionally named the parasite Hæmogregarina gerbilli.* The method of increase in the blood is not very clear. The only method of multiplication, of which any evidence was obtained, was longitudinal fission. Forms younger than the attenuated form of vermicule, if present, must be very rare. The absence of appearances shewing how the red cells are invaded and the early stages of invasion, is also very remarkable. The existence of multiplication forms in the intestinal epithelium is doubtful. As regards the forms seen in the louse. I have no doubt that they are extra-corporeal stages of Hæmogregarina gerbilli. This is of interest since although the transmission of many protozoa by biting insects has been demonstrated by experiment, the only instance, of which we have actual knowledge of the stages gone through in the carrier, is that relating to the developmental stages of certain parasites in the mosquito. The effect of intestinal secretion upon the sporozoits does not suggest ingestion by the mouth as a probable method of infection; but the extraordinary behaviour of the sporozoits in freshly drawn blood of the rat is, on the other hand, very significant. Further dissection of lice, kept for longer periods on infected rats may throw light on the method by which the sporozoits gain entrance to the blood. * M. Laveran has very kindly given me his opinion upon the nature of this parasite. He writes as follows:EXPLANATION OF PLATE. Figure 1.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027456.tif]
No.18. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. HÆMOGREGARINA GERBILLI. BY LIEUT. S. R. CHRISTOPHERS, M.B., I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONS WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA SIMLA [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027471.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1905. Price Annas 10 or 1s.
