IP/QB.10 advercalis No. 10. NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. SPECIFICITY OF ANTIVENOMOUS SERA. (SECOND COMMUNICATION.) BY CAPTAIN GEO. LAMB, M.D. (GLASG.) (Indian Medical Service.) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026377.tif] CALCUTTA : OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1904. Price As. 8 Or 9d.
3942667 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026383.tif]
No. 10. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. SPECIFICITY OF ANTIVENOMOUS SERA. (SECOND COMMUNICATION.) BY CAPTAIN GEO. LAMB, M.D. (GLASG.) (Indian Medical Service.) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026389.tif] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026389.tif] CALCUTTA : OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1904.
Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. E. A. ARNOLD, 37, Bedford Street, Strand, Lon- don, W.C. CONSTABLE & CO., 2, Whitehall Gardens, London, S.W. SAMPSON LOW, MARSTON & CO., St. Dunstan's House, Fetter Lane, London, E.C. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & CO., Charing Cross Road, London, W.C. BERNARD QUARITCH, 15, Piccadilly, London, W. C. WILLIAMS and NORGATE, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & CO., Cambridge. ON THE CONTINENT. R. FRIEDLANDER & SOHN, II, Carlstrasse, Berlin, N.W. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. IN INDIA. THACKER, SPINK & CO., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & CO., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & CO., Calcutta. S. K. LAHIRI & CO., Calcutta. THACKER & CO., LD., Bombay. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & CO., Bombay. A. J. COMBRIDGE & CO., Bombay. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAM & CO., Madras. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & CO., Madras. G. A. NATESAN & CO., Madras. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH AND SONS, Mufid-i-Am Press, Lahore. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazair Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission Press Rangoon.
SPECIFICITY OF ANTIVENOMOUS SERA (SECOND COMMUNICATION.) IN a previous paper1 entitled "Specificity of Antivenomous Sera" I drew attention to the great importance and interest of this question both from the practical and from the theoretical standpoint. Further, in this com- munication I brought forward evidence which pointed to an antivenomous serum being in all probability strictly specific, that is to say, that a serum prepared by injections of a single pure venom is able to neutralise that venom only and no other. This evidence, stated briefly, consisted of the following facts:2 blood cells as evidenced by hæmolysis, or the action which they have on the blood plasma which results in an increase or a diminution of its coagulability. Since the date of the first publication I have had the opportunity of greatly extending the observations summarised above in the various directions in which they fell short. These observations form the subject of the present communi- cation. Firstly.3 Thirdly.4 will show that 1 c.c. of this serum was able to neutralise at least 1.5 milligram- mes of pure unheated cobra venom. In a previous communication6 along with Dr. Hanna I put on record the estimation of the antitoxic value of fresh antivenomous serum sent out from Lille for pure unheated cobra venom. As a result of a large series of experiments it was determined that 1 c.c. of this serum was able to neutralise about 0.73 milligramme of poison. I have, therefore; been able to prepare a serum more than double the strength of that prepared by Calmette. Moreover, it may be anticipated that the antitoxic value of this serum will, after the further treatment of the horse with considerably larger doses of poison, become greatly enhanced. Such a result is no doubt due to the fact that a pure and unheated venom was used and not a mixed and heated poison. NAIA BUNGARUS (KING COBRA).5 from the symptoms seen in experiments with cobra venom. Rogers 8 has shown that death is due to respiratory paralysis of central origin as in the case of cobra venom intoxication. The minimum lethal dose for rabbits by intravenous injection was found to be 0.04 milligramme per kilo. The test dose now used to ascertain if either C. V. serum or H. C. V. serum had any antitoxic effect for this venom was ten lethal doses, namely, 0.4 milligramme per kilo. It will be seen from the protocols (Table IV) that the rabbit which received 4 c.c. of either serum along with the test dose of poison died as quickly as the control animal. It is, therefore, evident that neither C. V. serum nor H. C. V. serum has any neutralising effect for the general action in vivo of the venom of Bungarus c6 sufficient to neutralise ten lethal doses for the rabbit, namely, 0.59 milligramme. In the same paper he showed that Calmette's serum was quite inactive against the venom of Hoplocephalus curtus. I have forwarded to Dr. Tidswell a supply of the C. V. serum I have prepared, so that he may test it carefully against the poisons of the various species of the poisonous snakes of Australia. The stock of Hoplocephalus poison which I possess is so small that I am unable to undertake any experiments in this direction. As, however, Calmette's serum has no neutralising effect for this venom we may almost conclude from à priori reasons that the pure C. V. serum will also be inactive. ENHYDRINA VALAKADIEN (COMMON SEA SNAKE).7 Calmette's serum against the venom of Enhydrina valakadien are somewhat difficult to comprehend. Thus, in one publication,12 he states, that using only minimum and slightly supra-minimal lethal doses of the poison he found that the serum animals died in just about the same time as the controls. He, therefore, concluded that Calmette's serum is of no use against this poison. Again, in a lecture13 delivered a month later than this publication, he states, that in a series of experi- ments in which ten lethal doses were employed Calmette's antivenomous serum was found to have a certain neutralising effect for this poison, as it had also for the venom of the king cobra. It is difficult to reconcile these two statements, and as no details of the experiments performed are given in either instance it is impossible to sift them critically with a view to ascertain where the error lies. A single experiment was sufficient to show that H. C. V. serum has no antitoxic action for the venom of Enhydrina valakadien. In this experiment the animal which received 4 c.c. of serum along with the test dose, namely, ten lethal doses, died even more quickly than the control animal (vide Table VII of protocols). This experiment completes the observations made in vivo with the antiven- omous sera and those venoms of the colubridæ which were available. We may sum up the results as follows:8 Hoplocephalus curtus has any hindering effect on this action of the poison. A single experiment was now sufficient to show that C. V. serum had likewise no effect of an antitoxic nature against this clotting action of daboia venom in vivo, (vide protocols, Table VIII). In one of the communications mentioned above, I pointed out that, if a quan- tity of daboia venom not sufficient to cause rapid death by intravascular throm- bosis be injected, a negative phase of diminished blood coagulability sets in, and that, while the blood is in this condition, the injection of a large quantity of the same poison cannot so increase the coagulability as to cause thrombosis. In a paper16 recently read before the Royal Society, Rogers has pointed out that, if a preliminary non-lethal dose of venom be given, followed by a larger amount after the phase of diminished coagulability of the blood has set in, quite rapid death could be brought about, in spite of the fact that there was no intravascular throm- bosis produced. Further, this observer made a prolonged investigation of this phenomenon and arrived at the conclusion that the primary cause of death in these cases was a complete paralysis of the vaso-motor centre in the medulla. In the case of large animals, such as man, bitten by a daboia he considers that death in most cases will result from this action of the poison. It became, there- fore, of great interest to test C. V. serum and H. C. V. serum against this action of daboia venom. The method adopted was as follows: a small non-lethal dose of venom was given intravenously. Half an hour afterwards a mixture containing 4 c.c. of one or other serum and a quantity of poison just capable of causing fairly rapid death by vaso-motor paralysis was injected also intravenously. The constituents of this mixture had been standing in contact for half an hour previous to the injection. A reference to the protocols (Table IX) will show that the two animals which received the sera died in practically the same time as the control. It is evident, therefore, that neither of the sera had any neutralising effect for this action of daboia venom. ECHIS CARINATA (PHOORSA).9 0.1 milligramme per kilo. of weight. It will be seen from the protocols (Table X) that neither serum had any antitoxic effect as far as this action of the poison was concerned. In the second place, the sera were tested against the action of the venom on the vaso-motor centre in the same way as has been described in the case of daboia poison. A small preliminary non-lethal dose of poison was injected into the marginal vein of one ear. Half an hour afterwards the mixture of serum (4 c.c.) and venom (0.5 milligramme per kilo., an amount not exceeding 10 lethal doses) was injected into the marginal vein of the other ear. This mixture had been standing in vitro at laboratory temperature for half an hour. A reference to the protocols (Table XI) will at once show that neither serum had any effect in hindering this action. We can, therefore, conclude from these two series of observations that neither C. V. serum nor H. C. V. serum has any antitoxic effect for the general action in vivo of the venom of Echis carinata. TRIMERESURUS GRAMINEUS (GREEN PIT VIPER).10 milligramme per kilo. injected intravenously, namely, two lethal doses. In each instance 4 c.c. of serum were tested against this dose. It will be seen from the protocols (Table XIII) that the serum animals died in even a shorter time than the control rabbit. We must, therefore, conclude that both C. V. serum and H. C. V. serum are quite inactive against the general action in vivo of the venom of Crotalus adamanteus. These experiments complete the observations which were made with the two antivenomous sera and those venoms of the Viperidæ which were available, as far as the general actions of the poisons in vivo are concerned. We have seen that both sera were tested against four venoms of this description and were found in every instance to be quite inactive. It is unnecessary to comment further on these results. We may now pass on to the second part of our subject, that is, the considera- tion of some observations which were made with the object of determining if the antivenomous sera in question had any hindering effect on the hæmolytic action in vitro of any of the venoms mentioned above. It has been well known for many years that snake venoms possess a marked power of breaking up living cells in general and the red blood corpuscles in particular. This hæmolytic action can be demonstrated in most instances both in vivo and in vitro. Quite recently, however, the work of Flexner and Noguchi 17 in America and of Preston Keyes and Sachs 18 in Ehrlich's laboratory has thrown a flood of light on the intimate mechanism of this particular action of snake poisons. It is not my intention in the present communication to enter into any details as regards this mechanism. It is sufficient for our purpose to mention the fact that it has now been shown that venoms act only as amboceptors, and that they require, in order to bring the red cells to solution, a complement of some kind or other. This complement, as has been shown by Keyes and Sachs in the case of cobra poison, may be either a serum complement or lecithin, which is normally present in the red cells themselves and in serum. I have been able to confirm these observations with cobra poison and have also extended them with the other poisons mentioned above. I found that all these venoms act only as amboceptors requiring complement to bring about the hæmolysis, but that in the case of some of the venoms lecithin, either free or as a constituent of the red cells, cannot take the place of serum complement. These observations, however, will form the subject of another communication. For our present purpose it is sufficient to recognise the facts, that complement is necessary for the hæmolytic action of all venoms, and that lecithin cannot act as complement in the case of some poisons. Therefore, to make the experiments now to be recorded uniform throughout serum complement was used in all cases. The red cells of the dog, as being very susceptible to hæmolysis by all venoms, were chosen for the present observations. The blood was first gently
11 defibrinated: the red cells were then washed several times with salt solution (0.85 per cent.), being centrifugalised between each washing. A 5 per cent. suspension of the washed red cells was then made in sterile 0.85 per cent. salt solution. It was found that these manipulations completely removed all serum complement. As a preliminary measure, it was necessary to determine the minimum com- plete, or nearly complete, hæmolysing dose of each venom for 1 c.c. of the 5 per cent. red cell suspension, when a fixed amount of serum complement was added. The complement used was that of the dog, and the amount employed was 0.5 c.c. of a two-fold dilution of fresh serum. Each tube thus contained12 of serum, however, was required to effect this than in the case of cobra venom. Thus, it required 0.6 c.c. of serum to completely neutralise 0.025 milligramme of this poison, an amount of serum 30 times as much as was necessary for the same quantity of cobra venom. It is to be remembered also that in each instance only a minimum complete hæmolysing amount of venum was used. Finally it will be seen from this table, that C. V. serum had no hindering effect at all on the hæmolysing action of the remaining eight venoms, the tubes containing 1 c.c. of serum showing as complete hæmolysis as the controls. We may conclude from these observations that the specificity of C. V. serum as regards this particular action of snake venoms is well marked, but not quite absolute. The point of greatest interest and importance is that a serum prepared with cobra venom has absolutely no hindering effect on the hæmolysing action of the venom of the king cobra, a species, as I have mentioned, belonging to the same genus as the cobra. In the third place, H. C. V. serum was tested against the hæmolytic action of each poison in exactly the same manner as has been described above. It will be seen from the protocols (Table XV) that this serum was not so specific in its action as C. V. serum Thus, it will be noted that it neutralised the venom of Enhydrina valakadien rather better than it neutralised the poison with which it had been prepared. Also, it will be seen that it had a marked hindering effect on the action of cobra venom and on the action of the poison of Echis carinata. It had no hindering effect on the hæmolysing action of the other six poisons against which it was tested. The results of these two series of observations appear to me to be of the greatest importance. Thus, it is evident that the hæmolysing elements of venoms differ from one another as markedly as do the elements which act on the central nervous system. It cannot even be affirmed that this constituent of the poisons of two species of the same genus are alike. For we have seen that a serum prepared with cobra venom is very active against this poison but has no hinder- ing effect on the hæmolytic action of the poison of the king cobra. In other words, the hæmolysing amboceptors of these two venoms possess different haptophore groups. On the other hand, the red cell receptor of the venom of a colubrine snake may resemble that of the poison of a viperine species. For we have seen that the serum prepared with the venom of Hoplocephalus curtus is active to a certain extent for the poison of Echis carinata. We can, however, conclude that the constituent of any one snake venom which acts as an amboceptor for the red blood corpuscles differs, for the most part, from the similar constituent of any other venom in not possessing exactly the same haptophore groups. There are, as we have seen, exceptions to this rule, but no à priori resemblance can be taken for granted in venoms of species belonging to the same genus. We can now pass on to the third and concluding part of the present inves-
13 tigation, that is, to the consideration of some observations which were made with the view of ascertaining if either C. V. serum or H. C. V. serum had any hinder- ing effect on the actions of the different poisons on the blood coagulability in vitro. It will be convenient in this instance to consider these observations in two groups, namely, (1) the observations made with the venoms which prevent the clotting of citrate plasma which results on the addition of a soluble salt of lime, and (2) the observations made with the venoms which rapidly clot citrate plasma without the addition of any lime salt. In the first group of poisons are the venoms of the cobra and of the king cobra. In a previous communication 19 I showed that cobra poison had a marked action on the coagulability of the blood plasma, and that this action could be demonstrated in vitro with citrate plasma or oxalate plasma. If cobra venom be added in suitable quantity to citrate plasma, the coagulation which normally results from the addition of a suitable amount of a soluble salt of lime is completely inhibited. If the quantity of poison added be too small to completely prevent clotting, coagulation is delayed according to the amount of venom added. In this paper I showed that 1 milligramme of cobra venom was able to prevent completely the clotting of 2 c.c. of citrate plasma, which normally resulted from the addition of a soluble salt of lime. The poison of the king cobra has a similar action on the blood plasma as that of cobra venom, that is to say, it inhibits or diminishes coagulability. This action can also be demonstrated with citrate or oxalate plasma in vitro in the manner I have already described. I found after a series of experiments that 0.8 milligramme of king cobra venom was the smallest amount which could com- pletely inhibit the clotting of 2 c.c. of citrate plasma. The tube containing 0.6 milligramme of poison had a slight clot after standing twenty-four hours. C. V. serum was now tested against this action of these two venoms. The following was the method employed. The test dose of poison, namely, 1 milli- gramme in each case, and varying amounts of serum were mixed in small test tubes. The mixtures were allowed to stand at laboratory temperature for half an hour. To each tube there was then added 2 c.c. of citrate plasma. The preparations were left for two hours. Then there was run into each tube a quantity of calcium chloride solution which clotted the control without venom in about 25 minutes. The results were noted at intervals. A reference to the protocols (Table XVI) will show that C. V. serum was able to neutralise cobra venom, as far as this action was concerned, but had little or no effect on king cobra venom. Thus, the experiments show that 0.8 c.c. of serum completely, and 0.6 c.c. nearly, neutralised 1 milligramme of cobra poison, and that even 2 c.c. of serum were not able to neutralise the same amount of king cobra venom. It is true that the tubes containing amounts of serum more than 1.6 c.c. showed a trace of clot after 20 hours. There was evidently
14 in these tubes an attempt, if I might call it so, at neutralisation, but the venom was still able to act on the plasma in a most decided manner. We can, therefore, conclude that C. V. serum is, as far as this action is concerned, practically specific. I had not sufficient H. C. V. serum at my disposal to test it against this action of these two venoms on plasma coagulability. As, however, the primary action of the venom of Hoplocephalus curtus on the blood plasma is to bring about a marked increase of coagulability, it is probable that the serum pre- pared with this poison would be quite inactive against venoms, such as those of the cobra and the king cobra, the primary action of which is to cause a dimi- nution of blood coagulability. It has long been known that many snake poisons, especially the venoms of the Viperidæ, cause a marked primary increase of blood coagulability which often re- sults in an extensive intravascular thrombosis. In the communication above referred to, I showed that this action of these venoms on the blood plasma could be demon- strated in vitro. Thus, it was shown that daboia venom clotted citrate plasma without the addition of any salt of lime, and also that this poison markedly increased the coagulability of oxalate plasma, but did not of itself cause solid clotting. Since this publication I have investigated this phenomenon with the venoms of several other species, and have found that this action of daboia venom on citrate or oxalate plasma is slight in comparison with the similar action of four other poisons, namely, the venoms of Hoplocephalus curtus, of Echis carinata, of Trimeresurus gramineus and of Crotalus adamanteus. If a suitable amount of any of these four venoms be added to either citrate or oxalate plasma, clotting takes place almost instantaneously. Take, for example, the venom of Echis carinata, the most powerful of these four poisons in this respect. Using 2 c.c. of citrate horse plasma (1 per cent.) I found that 0.2 milligramme of venom caused a solid clot in less than one minute, 0.02 milligramme in about ten minutes, 0.002 milligramme in about one hour, and 0.0002 milligramme in at least 20 hours. If these results be compared with the similar observations I have already published with regard to daboia venom, it will be seen that the action of daboia venom on citrate plasma is very much less marked than that of the poison of Echis carinata. Thus, 3 milligrammes of daboia venom caused a solid clot in 2 c.c. of citrate plasma only after 3 hours, and 1 milligramme only after 20 hours. The other three poisons mentioned above are intermediate between the venoms of Echis carinata and Daboia Russellii in the following order of strength :15 poison was mixed with varying amounts of either serum. The mixtures were allowed to stand at laboratory temperature for half an hour. To each tube were then added 2 c.c. of citrate plasma (1 per cent.). The results were noted at intervals of one minute. The details of the experiments with C. V. serum are given in Table XVII of the protocols. From this table it will be seen that this serum had no hindering effect at all on this action of any of the four venoms. The details of the experi- ments with H. C. V. serum are given in Table XVIII of the protocols. A study of this table will make it evident that this serum had a well-marked antagonistic action for the corresponding venom, 0.06 c.c. of serum being able to prevent the clotting caused by 0.1 milligramme of poison. On the other hand, it will be seen that H. C. V. serum had no hindering effect at all on the actions of the other three venoms. We can, therefore, conclude that, as far as this action of snake poisons is concerned, an antivenomous serum appears to be specific. As, however, the serum prepared with Hoplocephalus curtus venom was not tested against the venoms of any of the other Australian colubrine snakes, which have a similar action on the blood plasma to that of the poison of Hoplocephalus curtus, it is impossible to say that the serum is strictly specific in this action. Protocols. The two antivenomous sera, which were used in the observations detailed below, were as follows. (1) The serum of a horse which had been subjected for a period of two years to repeated doses, gradually increasing in amount, of pure unheated cobra venom. This serum is designated C. V. serum. (2) The serum prepared by Dr. Tidswell of Sydney.20 This serum was the serum of a horse which had been subjected to repeated doses, gradually increasing in amount, of the pure unheated venom of Hoplocephalus curtus (Australian tiger snake). This serum is designated H. C. V. serum. In all the experiments to test the neutralising effect of the two antivenom- ous sera on the general actions in vivo of the several venoms rabbits were the animals employed. The test dose, a small multiple of the minimum lethal dose either by subcutaneous or by intravenous injection, was mixed in vitro with different amounts of one or other of the sera. The mixtures before injection were allowed to stand at laboratory temperature for at least half an hour. TABLE I.16 The following were the results. Animal. Weight. Cobra venom in milligrammes. C. V. serum. Result. Rabbit 1 . . 710 grammes . 2 0.4 c.c. . . Died in 1¾ hours. 17 It is evident from these experiments that 14 c.c. of serum failed to neutralise 218 TABLE V.19 It is evident that this serum has no neutralising power for the venom of Enhydrina valakadien. TABLE VIII.20 TABLE X.21 TABLE XII.22 then placed in the ice chest for 18 to 20 hours. The following were the results obtained. The letters at the top of each column are the initial letters of the genus and species of each snake (vide p. 2). The test dose of poison in each instance is indicated at the top of each column. C. V. serum. N. T. N. B. B. C. B. F. H C E. V. V. R. E. C. T. G. C. A. 0.025 mgr. 0.025 mgr. 0.025 mgr. 0.1 mgr 0.025 mgr. 0.1 mgr. 0.025 mgr. 0.1 m. 0.025 mgr. 0.025 mgr. 1 c.c. ... Nearly C H. No H. C. H. C. H. Nearly C. H. C. H. C. H. C. H. C. H. 0.8 " ... Ditto No H. C. H. C. H. Ditto C. H. C. H. C. H. C. H. 0.6 " ... Ditto No H. C. H. C. H. Ditto C. H. C. H. C. H. C. H. 0.4 " ... Ditto Trace C. H. C. H. Ditto C. H. C. H. C. H. C H. 0.2 " ... Ditto Marked C. H. C. H. Ditto C. H. C. H. C. H. C. H. 0.1 " No H. ... C. H. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0. 08 " No H. ... C. H. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.06 " No H. ... C.H. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.04 " No H. ... C. H. ... .. ... ... ... ... ... 0.02 " Mere trace. ... C.H ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0.01 " C H. ... C.H. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Nil (control) C. H. Nearly C.H. C. H. C. H. C. H. Nearly C.H. C. H. C. H. C H. C. H. C. H. = Complete hæmolysis. TABLE XV .23 TABLE XVI.24 The test dose of each poison, namely, an amount which clotted the control in a few minutes, was mixed with varying amounts of serum. The mixtures were allowed to stand at laboratory temperature for half an hour. Then into each tube there were run 2 c.c. of citrate plasma. A control tube without serum was prepared in each instance. The following results were obtained. Amount of Serum. H. C. V. ( 0.1 milligr.) E. C. V. ( 0.05 milligr.) T. G. V. ( 0.3 milligr.) C. A. V. ( 0.05 milligr.) 1 C.C. Clotted in 6 minutes. Clotted in 5 minutes. Clotted in 11 minutes Clotted in 10 minutes. 0.5 " Ditto. Ditto . Ditto . Ditto. C.1 " Ditto. Ditto . Ditto . Ditto. Nil (control) Ditto. Ditto . Ditto . Ditto. It is evident from these experiments that C. V. serum cannot prevent the. clotting action in vitro of any of these four venoms. TABLE XVIII.25 From the above series of experiment it is seen that 0.06 c.c. of H. C. V. serum completely neutralised 0.1 milligramme of the corresponding venom as far as this clotting action in vitro is concerned. It is quite inactive against the similar actions of the three other poisons. Notes and References. (1) "Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India :" 1903, No. 5. (2) "Proceedings of Royal Society :" Vol. 72, p. 419. "The Lancet :" 6th February 1904, p. 349. (3) For the venoms of Naia bungarus and Trimeresurus gramineus I am indebted to the Bombay Natural History Society; for that of Hoplocephalus curtus to Dr. Tidswell of Sydney; for that of Enhydrina valakadien to Mr. Peal, Calcutta; and for that of Crotalus adamanteus to Prof. S. Flexner of Philadelphia. The other venoms I collected myself. (4) "The Lancet :" 2nd January 1904, p. 20. (5) "Loc. cit." (6) "Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India :" 1902, No. 1. (7) "Loc. cit." (8) "Loc. cit." (9) "Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India :" 1904, No. 7. (10) "Australasian Medical Gazette :" 21st April 1902, p. 177. (11) "Proceedings of the Royal Society :" Vol. 71, p. 481, and Vol 72, p. 306. (12) "Proceedings of the Royal Society :" Vol. 71, p. 481. (13) "The Lancet :" 6th February 1904, p. 349. (14) "Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India :" 1903, No. 3. (15) "Loc. cit. (vide reference No. 1)." (16) "Proceedings of the Royal Society :" Vol. 72, p. 419. (17) "Journal of Experimental Medicine:" Vol. VI, No. 3, March 17, 1902, p. 277. "Univ. of Penna, Medical Bulletin." Vol. XV, No. 9, November 1902, p. 345. "Univ. of Penna, Medical Bulletin." Vol. XVI, Nos. 5-6, July-August 1903, p. 163. (18) "Berliner klinische Wochenschrift :" 1902, Nos. 38 and 39; 1903, Nos. 2-4. (19) "Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India :" 1903, No. 4. (20) "Loc. cit." E.
No. 10. NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. SPECIFICITY OF ANTIVENOMOUS SERA. (SECOND COMMUNICATION.) BY CAPTAIN GEO. LAMB, M.D. (GLASG.) (Indian Medical Service.) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026483.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1904. Price As. 8 or 9d.
