I P/Q B 10 No. 8. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. A PRELIMINARY REPORT ON A PARASITE FOUND IN PERSONS SUFFERING FROM ENLARGEMENT OF THE SPLEEN IN INDIA. BY LIEUT. S. R. CHRISTOPHERS, M.B., I. M. S. (On special duty) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026076.tif] CALCUTTA OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1904. Price one rupee and eight annas.
No. 8. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. A PRELIMINARY REPORT ON A PARASITE FOUND IN PERSONS SUFFERING FROM ENLARGEMENT OF THE SPLEEN IN INDIA. BY LIEUT. S. R. CHRISTOPHERS, M.B., I.M.S. (On special duty.) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT. OF INDIA, SIMLA [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026088.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1904.
Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. E. A. ARNOLD, 37, Bedford Street, Strand, Lon- don, W.C. CONSTABLE & Co., 2, Whitehall Gardens, London, S.W. SAMPSON LOW, MARSTON & Co., St. Dunstan's House, Fetter Lane, London, E.C. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & CO., Charing Cross Road, London, W.C. BERNARD QUARITCH, 15, Piccadilly, London, W. C. WILLIAMS and NORGATE, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & CO., Cambridge. ON THE CONTINENT. R. FRIEDLANDER & SOHN, II, Carlstrasse, Berlin, N.W. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. IN INDIA. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & CO., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. S. K. LAHIRI & CO., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., LD., Bombay. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & Co., Bombay. A. J. COMBRIDGE & Co., Bombay. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAM & CO., Madras. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & Co., Madras. G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH AND SONS, Mufid-i-Am Press, Lahore. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazair Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission Press, Rangoon.
A PRELIMINARY REPORT ON A PARASITE FOUND IN PERSONS SUFFER- ING FROM ENLARGEMENT OF THE SPLEEN IN INDIA. (Received February 14th, 1904.) THE parasites which are the subject of this preliminary report were describ- ed in May 1903, by Major W. B. Leishman, R.A.M.C., who found them in 1900 in the examination of a film taken post-mortem from the spleen of a case of fever apparently contracted in Dum-Dum near Calcutta.* Major Leishman observed the constant presence of a large and a small chromatin mass in the bodies, and chiefly on this account suggested that they were possibly the remains of trypanosomata, and that similar anomalous cases of so-called malarial fever might in reality be cases of trypanosomiasis. In July 1903, Captain C. Donovan, I.M.S., reported that he had found bodies identical with those described by Leishman, in blood taken from cases by splenic puncture during life. He failed to find trypanosomes in the peripheral blood of any of his cases and the bodies appeared to be so defined and characteristic that he considered them to be a new form of parasite. He sent specimens to Major Ronald Ross, I. M. S., and to Professors Laveran and Mesnil. From his examination of the specimens Major Ross came to the conclusion that the parasite was a new one, and proposed to Classify it in a new genus, Leishmania, and to call the particular parasite in question Leishmania donovani. In January 1904, Professor Marchand and Dr. Ledingham, in- fluenced by the publications of Leishman, Donovan, and Ross, published an account of a case in which similar bodies had been found post-mortem in sections of the spleen, liver, and bone marrow, in December 1902. In the meantime Professors Laveran and Mesnil had examined the specimens sent to them by Captain Donovan and had given a systematic description of the bodies and assigned to them a zoological position. They found forms included in a sub- stance which they took to be the body of a red blood corpuscle changed by the presence of the parasite. In addition to circular forms they found bodies which were distinctly pear-shaped, and this appeared to them to be the most typical form of the parasite. Bodies divided into two or more by a process of fission were also seen by them, and they finally came to the conclusion that the parasite was a new species of piroplasma and named it Piroplasma donovani. Owing to the importance of the subject I was directed to visit Madras and investigate the nature of the parasites discovered there by Captain Donovan. * Similar parasites were discovered by Surgeon-Major D. D. Cunningham, I.M.S. in 1885. See Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army of India. Part I. Printed by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India; Cal- cutta 1885.2 I proceeded at once to Madras and through the kindness of Major Donovan I have been able to examine many of his cases and specimens. I have also seen cases in the wards of Major Robertson and Captain Kirkpatrick, and have been able to minutely examine the tissues in three autopsies on fatal cases of the dis- ease. I have also been able to compare the human parasites with those of two species of piroplasmata, one in calves and the other in pariah dogs in Madras. I shall describe the points which I desire to bring forward in this report under the following headings:3 Emaciation.4 The kidneys, lungs, and heart presented no marked changes. Some punctiform hæmorrhages were present on the parietal peritoneum and on the under surface of the arachnoid. Autopsy No. 2.5 The lymphatic glands in the retroperitoneal tissue were not apparent- ly enlarged. There were some punctiform hæmorrhages on the parietal peritoneum. The red marrow in the sternum seemed increased in amount. 3. The importance of the disease. Cases exhibiting the clinical picture and post mortem appearances described above are by no means rare, nor are they confined to Madras. Ross and others have long ago noted the presence in Bengal of cases of fever accompanied by great enlargement of the spleen in which malarial parasites could not be found. In 1901, in conjunction with Stephens and James, I examined in the hospitals of Calcutta more than 6o cases which had been diagnosed as malarial cachexia. All showed greatly enlarged spleens and an irregular, often high, temperature. The operation of spleen puncture was not performed in any of the cases, but no malarial parasites were found in the peripheral blood, and the cases in which leucocyte counts were made exhibited no increase in the large mononuclear leucocytes. The post mortem lesions in some of these cases were identical with those found in fatal cases of infection with the new parasites. At the time we considered that the diagnosis of malaria in such cases was made on very slender grounds. I now recognise the identity of such cases with those I have seen in Madras in which the new parasite is found. Exactly similar cases were seen by us in many parts of India, and I have no hesitation in saying that cases of infection with these parasites are clinically identical with cases diagnosed as " malarial cachexia with enlarged spleen," so well recognised throughout India. The question naturally arises as to the relation of the cases in Madras to the disease known as kala azar in Assam. In the descriptions of kala azar stress is laid on the pigmentation of the skin, on the extreme weakness of the patients, and on the more rapidly fatal termination than in the cases of enlarged spleen seen in and about Calcutta. During my work with the Royal Society's Malaria Commission in India we did not study kala azar, but in the Madras cases I can detect no increase of pigmentation, and the weakness of the patients and the duration of the disease do not seem different to that in ordinary cases of so-called " malarial cachexia with enlarged spleen." I have, however, seen a specimen from the spleen of a case of kala azar which was sent by Dr. Bentley to Captain Donovan in which the bodies were very numerous.* If they are the cause of this disease, then the disease of Assam called kala azar and the common disease of India called " malarial cachexia with enlarged spleen " must be essentially of the same nature, though the one may possibly be a more severe form of the disease than the other. * Blood films obtained from the spleens of five cases of Kale azar which were sent to Simla by Dr. Bentley have been examined and the new parasite has been found to be present in large numbers in all. Malarial para- sites were not found in any of these films.6 4. A description of the parasites. When the bodies are present at all, they are usually to be found in large numbers. They are seen with difficulty in fresh preparations, but can be detected and distinguished from blood platelets. They are rather more refractile than platelets and often have a faint greenish tinge. One or two more refractile masses can be made out in the body of the parasite and in many cases an appear- ance like a grain of pigment is seen. On careful focussing this is seen to be a minute refractile spot like " Manson's spot " in lymphocytes. The bodies are quite motionless. In films stained by Romanowsky's method the bodies are seen with great clearness. They exhibit a remarkable uniformity in size and appearance. The majority are about 2.5 micromillimetres in diameter, but forms may be found which are a little larger, 3 to 3.5 micromillimetres, or a little smaller, 2 micro- millimetres. Very occasionally still smaller bodies, 1.5 micromillimetres in diameter, may be encountered. Most of the bodies are approximately circular in outline, but very many, and especially the larger forms, are irregularly oval and very much resemble a cockle-shell in shape (Figures 7 and 8). This, indeed, appears to be the most typical shape and even in the apparently round forms an approach to this shape can be made out. Occasionally specimens are found more elongated and distinctly pear-shaped. The bodies are very clearly outlined, and appear to possess a distinct and comparatively resistant cuticle. They retain their proper shape and are very rarely seen distorted. I have seen a body which had been crushed and from which the two chromatin masses had been squeezed out. The larger mass still lay partially within the body which had an appearance exactly resembling that of a ruptured cuticle. The bodies are very resistant to hypotonic solutions and may be recovered by centrifugalisation from blood that has been laked by such a solution. Except in very rare small forms which show only a single chromatin mass, the bodies invariably possess two chromatin masses7 on the periphery also, since it seems to be generally situated in some part of an arc lying immediately beneath the cuticle and in a plane at right angles to the . length of the body when this can be made out. There is often a " tail " joining it to the larger mass. As a rule, this appears to be formed only of a strand of protoplasm. On one or two occasions a minute chromatin particle appeared to be situated in it. The large chromatin mass stains much less darkly than the small one and is obviously of a quite different nature. It frequently stains so as to show a darker and lighter portion. It is very commonly bilobed, and often heart-shaped, or formed of two oval masses lying in contact. In some cases bodies are seen in which the large chromatin mass stains very faintly although other bodies in the same field stain normally. The large chromatin mass is situated near what would be the hinge in the cockle shell shaped forms, and in the thicker end of the pear-shaped forms. The body substance usually stains pink by the method employed (fixa- tion in alcohol, and staining by watery solutions of eosin and Romanowsky blue). In some specimens the protoplasm stains faintly blue. In a few forms a uniform pink staining hyaline substance is seen filling the body of the parasite. In the majority of bodies one or two vacuoles are present which in many cases have pushed the pink staining substance to the periphery. A ridge of proto- plasm left between the vacuoles forms the " tail," sometimes seen joining the two chromatin masses. The protoplasm is not as a rule uniformly disposed around the periphery, but is collected in greater amount on one or other side of the small chromatin mass. The bodies have a very regular external form and arrangement of parts. A cockle shell will best represent the shape of the parasite. In the thicker por- tion, where the body of the cockle is placed, lies the large chromatin mass, often divided into two lobes or even into two separate bodies8 end, and the small chromatin mass may often be seen undivided when the larger masses are widely separated. In the forms which apparently show transverse division the two large chro- matin masses are at opposite poles separated by the two (or the as yet undivided) small masses. Both these appearances represent the same process from different points of view (see accompanying diagram). Division takes place in the line of separation of what would be the two valves of the shell form. Seen from one direction (A) the double pear-shaped form is seen. Seen from B. apparent transverse division. The bilobed, heart-shaped and double forms of the chromatin mass appear to be early stages of the same process. In addition to the above, forms are seen showing division into three or more bodies. These forms are more or less circular, of larger size than the largest of the. single forms, and may be as large as a red blood corpuscle. In typical speci- mens the large chromatin masses are arranged peripherally, whilst the small rod shaped masses are nearer the centre. The formation of from 3 to 6 bodies is most common. Asexual and sexual forms.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026118.tif]
9 bodies are seen included in cells, but I have searched in vain for free bodies, and if present at all they must be in very small number only. The blue staining substance in which some of the bodies are seen is of great interest, and upon the interpretation of its nature the zoological position assigned to the parasite depends. The appearance of this substance varies slightly in differ- ent preparations. It stains faintly or more darkly blue and shows a hyaline, finely granular or reticular structure. It may be, and often is, about the size of a red cell but it may be very much smaller and it may be larger. If small, it usually con- tains only a single body. When five or more bodies are present the size exceeds that of a red cell. The outline is often very distinct, but it is sometimes blurred or quite irregular. In some cases the resemblance to a red cell altered by the simple tertian parasite is very marked. Distinct stippling is not, however, seen. Bodies resembling these, but not containing parasites, are generally numerous in preparations showing included forms. If blood containing the bodies is placed in a hypotonic solution of ammonium oxalate and the centrifugalised sediment examined, the blue staining material around the bodies becomes more clearly defined and stains more darkly blue. At the same time the protoplasm of the mononuclear leucocytes shews a marked tendency to budding and separation from the cell and stains more clearly. But the red blood corpuscles are seen only as ghosts. In one of the cases examined by us during life and post mortem, bodies resem- bling altered blood cells contained undoubted malarial pigment. In the large macrophages similar pigment was seen included in the same cell as the parasites. I think there can be no doubt, therefore, that very many of the blue staining bodies in which included parasites are seen, are pieces of detached cell protoplasm derived from the large mononuclear cells and especially from the macrophages. In many preparations the process of detachment may be observed, and buds of protoplasm containing parasites are seen projecting from the cell mass. The process appears to be assisted by the addition of hypotonic solutions and may be largely due to the fluid always present in the syringe when used for spleen puncture. Whether the blue substance is always of leucocytic nature, whether some of the bodies seen are really red cells (Fig. 19), I hesitate to say; but however striking the resemblance to the red cell may have been, we have always found the protoplasm of the leucocytes to be similarly stained. Relation of the parasites to leucocytes.10 leucocytes. They are found especially in the large mononuclear cells. Such cells contain from one to twenty bodies. The polymorphonuclear cells also often contain parasites, but rarely more than two or three. I have seen single bodies in eosinophil cells and in finely eosinophil myelocytes; also in the nucleus of some cells, but I am not sure whether these latter were not superimposed bodies. In addition to the leucocytes noted above, large cells with spherical nuclei, quite distinct from the large mononuclear forms, are seen in preparations. They are usually packed with parasites and have a most characteristic appearance. They usually contain from 20 to 100 bodies, but may contain as many as 250. Some of these cells are of gigantic size, but become broken up in films and are seen to advantage only in sections. Bodies included in the leucocytes and in the large cells described above show no signs of intracellular digestion. They stain very clearly, and when liberated from the cell show a clear outline. They do not appear to lie in vacuoles in the cell protoplasm. 5. The distribution of the parasite in the body. a. Peripheral blood.11 placing the films first in the eosin solution and then in the methy- lene blue solution as by mixing the two solutions together before pouring them on the slide. So far as I am aware, it has not yet been found possible to stain organisms in sections by Romanowsky's method. Treated in the ordinary way, sections stain merely with the methylene blue, and the nuclei show no trace of the charac- teristic red body of the Romanowsky stain. Films treated first by alcohol, xylol, and the paraffin bath, still stain quite readily, so that the reason why sections do not stain appears to be a physical one. Stephens found that Romanowsky staining was developed when films were placed first in eosin and then in the methylene blue solution, and we were accustomed to use this method when dealing with large numbers of films. By employing this method of saturating sections first with eosin and then placing them in the methylene blue solution I have been able to stain the nuclei and included parasites with the characteristic red of Romanowsky's stain. The following is an account of the method. Fix the tissues in absolute alcohol or saturated aqueous solution of perchl- oride of mercury. Use small slabs 1 to 2 millimetres thick placed upon paper so that they may harden flat. Remove carefully all adherent paper fibre and embed in paraffin, using, after complete dehydration (1 to 4 hours in absolute alcohol) only 15 minutes in xylol and at most 20 minutes in hard paraffin. Cut thin sections. Flatten by floating out on water not quite hot enough to melt paraffin. Float on to a slide. Remove the excess of water and press firmly with filter paper. No fixative is necessary if this be done. Dry a few seconds at a height above the flame just sufficient not to melt the paraffin. Melt the paraffin and treat as usual with xylol, absolute alcohol, and water. Stain for 10 to 15 minutes in 112 If, after washing, the section is dark purple or blue, wash in 1 to 400 acetic acid in distilled water, and at once plunge into water. The acetic acid removes the excess of methylene blue staining and makes the tissue much clearer. If too long washing is given, the red colour will also be removed, If the section is light reddish or light purple after washing with alcohol the acetic acid bath is unnecessary. Allow the section to dry upon the slide. It is on account of the necessity for this procedure that thin sections must be used. In the case of very thin sections shrinkage is negligable, but in thick sections it is considerable. Mount in Canada balsam or keep as a film and examine merely by placing a drop of cedar oil on the section. Quite unshrunken tissues may be examined after staining by washing and mounting in glycerine. The result is useless as a permanent preparation since the glycerine dissolves out the red stain, but it is useful for temporarily displaying the relation of parasites to the tissues. Several kinds of tissues may be examined in this way, and the parasites displayed by spreading portions of the tissues upon a slide, drying, fixing in alcohol, and staining as above. Omentum, teased muscle, connective and other tissues give good results. Micro-organisms are very well shown when present. The changes in the organs and the distribution of the parasite in the tissues were similar in all three fatal cases. Films made from the liver substance showed many bodies free and in leucocytes. The most striking feature was the presence of large leucocytic cells crowded with the bodies. The liver cells were free from parasites. Sections of the liver showed very clearly the relation of the parasites to the tissues. The lobular capillaries were dilated and the liver cells, especially in certain areas, were much atrophied. In the capillaries were seen numerous large cells crowded with parasites. The bodies of these cells were usually situated in the lumen of the capillary, but attached by several processes to the capillary wall. In many cases they were applied closely and flattened against the capillary wall. The protoplasm of these cells was often retracted so as to form a globular mass, but more usually was stretched out along the capillary in a very characteristic way. The appearance of these cells irresistibly suggests large am13 macrophages seen in the organs in cases of malaria. In one of the cases malarial pigment actually occurred in some of these cells along with the bodies under discussion. I have never seen such large cells in fatal cases of malaria, and their great development appears to be a feature of infection with the new parasites. In sections the bodies lying in the cell protoplasm showed very distinctly the two chromatin masses and a clear space. This space appeared at first to be a vacuole in which the parasite lay, but it is undoubtedly the body of the parasite itself. The chromatin masses frequently occupied exactly opposite poles. The outline of the intervening space was always in this case remarkably circular. The appearance always strongly suggested a body resistant to shrinkage and change of shape. The bodies were frequently seen singly or in small clusters in a pink stroma. This stroma could nearly always be made out to be a severed process of a macrophage. No bodies were found in red blood corpuscles (stained bright red by the method employed) or lying free. Bodies were occasionally seen lying in leucocytes in the lumen of branches of the portal vein. They were never numerous in this situation. The epithelium of the small bile ducts was unchanged. The bodies were not present in the bile. In films and sections of the spleen similar cells to those in the liver capil- laries were very conspicuous and contained the great majority of the parasites. Large mononuclear cells containing parasites were more abundant than in the liver. Occasionally a single parasite was seen in close connection with the end- othelium or stroma cells. In the red cells no forms could be detected. Free forms were never seen, In films of the red bone marrow the bodies were not so numerous in any of the cases as in the liver and spleen. In smears made with care to avoid as far as possible rupturing the large cells, the bodies were almost confined to the macro- phages, some of which contained an immense number of them. They were also contained in large mononuclear cells and isolated specimens were present in the polymorphonuclear cells and finely grained myelocytes. No forms could be seen in undoubted red cells. Megaloblasts were present. The constant presence of intestinal lesions and the marked character of the changes found make the examination of the intestine of great importance. Smears were taken of mucous membrane at the edge of ulcers and from congested patches, as well as from the small red granulations noted in the description of autopsy No 3. In this autopsy the tissues were preserved within one hour of death so that they had changed but little. The examination of sections shows that, prior to ulceration, there is a form. ation of granulation tissue in the mucosa, which may eventually be entirely replaced by new tissue. The latter then encroaches upon the crypts and surface epithelium, destroys them, and either projects as fungating granulations of
14 various sizes, or undergoes necrosis, thus leading to the formation of ulcers reaching to the muscular coats. In a number of smears made from projecting granulations and from the mucous membrane in the early stages of infiltration I have found the parasites- in large numbers. They occur (as in the spleen, liver, and bone marrow) in large cells with round or oval nuclei. In some of the films these cells, were almost as numerous as in the spleen, and many of them were so crowded with the parasites that their nuclei could be seen only with difficulty. In many instances they appeared to be lying in close connection with the crypts, and in. some sections they were situated in the tissue in the immediate neighbourhood of crypts undergoing destruction. The intestinal ulceration, which is so marked a feature of infection with the new parasite, appears, therefore, to be closely analogous with the condition found by Wright in cases of tropical ulcer. Moreover, the formation of new tissue characterised by the presence, in such diverse situations as the skin and large intestine, of large cells containing the parasites, has a close resemblance to the morbid processes found in the granulomata In all the cases a very large curved micro-organism was present in great numbers, and in one case this body vas seen in nearly pure culture in the crypts. These micro-organisms have a single chromatin mass placed near the centre of the body. One end is generally more pointed than the other and gives to the body somewhat the appearance of a sporozoit. I have seen these bodies divid- ing by transverse fission; they appear to be bacteria. In the unstriped muscle of the submucosa, especially near the bases .of ulcers, were seen many collections of bodies 1-2 micromillimetres in diameter staining an intense blue and lying in elongated spaces to one side of the nucleus of the muscle fibre. They appeared polygonal in shape and did not look like other cocci seen in the tissue. We were unable to demonstrate any chromatin in them and are unaware of their nature. The endothelium of the vessels in one case was much thickened and showed a curious hyaline appearance. In the small intestine no parasites were found nor any condition worthy of note. Smears from the lymphatic glands in the retroperitoneal tissue were examined, but no parasites were found. No parasites were found in the kidneys in the one case in which these were examined. The supra-renal bodies, the brain substance, the bile, peritoneal fluid and the lungs appeared free from the bodies. Particular attention was given to the muscles. Muscle fibres from the larynx, 15 6. A comparison of the bodies with certain species of Piroplasma. I have been able to compare the bodies in question with a species of piro- plasma common in calves in Madras. Major Donovan first pointed out to me the presence of this parasite in calves of the district. I have since found 6 out of 24 apparently healthy calves infected. Of these all but one showed small bacillary forms and forms some- what resembling the malarial parasite. In one calf large typical pear shaped forms were also present. I have also found in the pariah dogs of Madras a species of piroplasma in which large forms are present. In both species the large forms show what appear to be essential differences to the bodies occurring in the human infection. (a). Forms are readily demonstrated in the red cells. They occur sing- ly or in twos or in fours and the bigeminal division is most dis- -tinct. (b). They have a granular protoplasm staining blue and their outline is not suggestive of a body with a capsule. (c) There is no appearance at all like the highly distinctive double chromatin masses. In cases of infection with the malignant tertian malarial parasite small forms are often seen containing two chromatin masses (fig. 28), but the appearance and arrangement of these is totally unlike that of the new parasite. In piroplasma of the calf and of the dog the chromatin resembles much more that of a malarial parasite than it does that of the new bodies. (d) In piroplasma various stages of the parasite have always been seen by me in the same animal. In the large forms of piroplasma, fission takes place in a way unlike that seen in the new human parasite. In piroplasma the forms stretch across the cell to form first a long ellipse and then separate by the formation of a constriction. In piroplasma it is easy to see development in progress. In the human parasite the small number of division forms compared to the number of bodies present is remarkable. (e) The complete absence of the new human parasite in the peripheral blood in apparently all cases, is unlike piroplasma, which is found readily enough in some form or another in the peripheral blood. As a result of my researches I have shown that the distribution of the parasite in the body is very limited. Even in the liver and spleen it is chiefly as a result of an intense phagocytosis that we see the bodies. The resistance of the bodies to intracellular digestion appears to lead to the storing up of the parasite in the large macrophages of the liver and spleen. Apart from the above two organs and the bone marrow I have found the bodies only in the mucous membrane and sub-mucosa of the large intestine (especially in the tissues
16 in the immediate neighbourhood of ulcers), in the blood from the portal vein and in punctiform hæmorrhages. The origin of the bodies seems to me very obscure, and I am not satisfied that they are a form inhabiting the red cell at any stage. I can trace only a superficial resemblance to piroplasma in cattle and in the dog. Since Laveran has given so decided a verdict I can only say that the differ- ences between the two forms appear so great that strong evidence of their affinity must be forthcoming before the new parasite can be placed in the genus Piro- plasma. If the parasite were present in the red blood cells, if it presented a distinctly pear shaped form, and if there were evidence of binary fission, the grounds for doing so would no doubt be sufficient. But most of the bodies resembling red cells are undoubtedly the fragmented protoplasm of leucocytes and macropha- ges, and the fact that the bodies are present in red cells cannot be said to have been proved. The pear-shaped form seems to be but one aspect of bodies which have a shape something like a cockle-shell. The binary fission of the bodies seems to me to be quite different from that seen in piroplasmata. Until the relation or want of relation between the bodies and the red blood cell is clearly proven I think it premature to make any remarks as to their zoolo- gical affinities. The unyielding shape, the apparent possession of a cuticle, and the arrangement of the two chromatin masses, seem to me to point to an organism very distinct from one of the genus Piroplasma, and to be very suggestive of the spores of a Microsporidian. 7. The nature of the so-called " Zooglea Mass." Manson and Low have described the substance in which the parasites are frequently contained as a " Zooglea mass." That the substance is the proto- plasm of the large cells in the liver and spleen capillaries is evident from the examination of sections. That these large cells are not themselves parasitic is I think demonstrated by their resemblance to the macrophages in malaria and by the presence in specimens from one case of malarial pigment in these cells along with the bodies in question (Fig. 27). Papers referred to in the text. 1. Leishman in the British Medical Journal of May 30th, 1903. 2. Donovan in the British Medical Journal of July 11th, 1903. 3. Donovan in the Indian Medical Gazette of January 1904. 4. Laveran and Mesnil, Comptes rendus des séances de l'academie des sciences, 7th December 1903. 5. Ross in the British Medical Journal of November 14th, 1903. 6. Marchand and Ledingham in the Lancet of January 16th, 1904. 7. Manson and Low in the British Medical Journal of January 23rd, 1904. 8. Wright, Protozoa in a case of tropical ulcer (Delhi sore). The Journal of Medical Research, Vol. X, No. 3. (New series, Vol. V, No. 3). December 1903.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026151.tif]
17 Explanation of Plate. Fig. 1.No. 8. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. A PRELIMINARY REPORT ON A PARASITE FOUND IN PERSONS SUFFERING FROM ENLARGEMENT OF THE SPLEEN IN INDIA. BY LIEUT. S. R. CHRISTOPHERS, M.B., I.M.S. (On special duty.) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026169.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA: 1904. Price one rupee and eight annas.
