IP/QB, 10 m.91.b No. 19. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ON KALA AZAR, MALARIA AND MALARIAL CACHEXIA. BY CAPTAIN S. P. JAMES, M.B., I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027478.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1905. Price Re. one Annas four or 1s. 11d.
No. 19. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ON KALA AZAR, MALARIA AND MALARIAL CACHEXIA. BY CAPTAIN S. P. JAMES, M.B., I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027490.tif] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027490.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1905.
Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. H. S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, & 9, Pall Mall, London. E. A. ARNOLD, 41 & 43, Maddox Street, Bond Street, London, W. CONSTABLE & CO., 16, James Street, Hay Market, London, W. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & CO., Charing Cross Road, London, W.C. BERNARD QUARITCH, 15, Piccadilly, London, W. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 & 51, Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & CO., Cambridge. ON THE CONTINENT. R. FRIEDLÄNDER & SOHN, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin, N.W. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. IN INDIA. THACKER, SPINK & CO., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & CO., Calcutta. S. K. LAHIRI & CO., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & CO., Calcutta. HIGGINBOTHAM & CO., Madras. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & CO., Madras. G. A. NATESAN & CO., Madras. THACKER & CO., LD., Bombay. A. J. COMBRIDGE & CO., Bombay. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & CO., Bombay. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazair Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-Am Press, Lahore. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission Press Rangoon.
List of Numbers of Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India (New Series) published previous to the present issue. No. 1. Standardisation of Calmette's anti-venomous serum with pure cobra venom: the deterioration of this serum through keeping in India, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 2. Malaria in India, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price Rs. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No. 3. Some observations on the poison of Russell's Viper (Daboia Russellii), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 5 or 6d. No. 4. On the action of the venoms of the Cobra and of the Daboia on the red blood cor- puscles and on the blood plasma, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 5. Specificity of anti-venomous sera, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 6. First report on the anti-malarial operations in Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 7. Some observations on the poison of the Banded Krait (Bungarus Fasciatus), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 8. A preliminary report on a parasite found in patients suffering from enlargement of the spleen in India, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price Rs. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No. 9. Second report on the anti-malarial operations at Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 10. Specificity of anti-venomous sera (second communication), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 11. On a parasite found in persons suffering from enlargement of the spleen in IndiaON KALA AZAR, MALARIA AND MALARIAL CACHEXIA. I THE disease long known to natives of Assam by the name kala azar has been studied by medical men in India so frequently, and has occasioned so much controversy in the medical journals, that one cannot but feel some diffidence in adding, however slightly, to its already voluminous literature. For this reason I propose to present the facts I have observed regarding the disease as briefly as possible. I shall deal first with the following important problem : Is kala azar a form of malarial fever ? I have attempted to solve this problem by employing a mode of investigation which, being based upon the following considerations, is essentially different from those adopted by previous workers. All observers agree that kala azar is a very severe and, in the great majority of cases, fatal, disease. If it be a form of malarial fever, it must therefore be a very severe and fatal form such as would occur only in intensely malarious places. It follows that if we find kala azar to be prevalent in places where there is very little malaria, and especially if it is prevalent in a place where malarial fever is not present, we may conclude that kala azar is not a form of malarial fever. The following are the results of some of my investigations in this connection :2 Prevalence of malaria in Gauhati town.3 The sick-rate from kala azar in this village at the time of examination was therefore17 per cent. of the population examined, and the death-rate for the previous year was 5.6 per cent. Prevalence of malaria in Ulloobari village.4 The Civil Surgeon of Tezpur informed me that the village had always held the reputation of being heavily infected with kala azar, and during a walk through it I saw several cases in an advanced stage. With the assistance of the Civil Surgeon I was able to examine and obtain slides of finger blood from 25 young children. The results of this investigation were as follows :5 No. Age. Condition of spleen. Result of examination of slides of finger blood. 1 4 years I hand's breadth below costal margin. Positive. Simple Tertian parasites. 2 4 " 3 fingers' breadth below costal margin. Negative. 3 3 " Palpable Positive. Quartan parasites. 4 4 " I hand's breadth below costal margin. Negative. 5 4 " Ditto Positive. Malignant Tertian rings. 6 3 " Ditto Positive. Quartan parasites. 7 3 " 3 fingers' breadth below costal margin. Ditto. Ditto. 8 3 " I hand's breadth below costal margin. Positive. Simple Tertian parasites . 9 2 " Ditto Positive. Quartan parasites. 10 4 " No enlargement detected Ditto. Ditto. 11 4 " Palpable Ditto. Ditto, 12 3 " 3 fingers' breadth below costal margin. Positive. Crescents. 13 4 " No enlargement detected Negative. 14 2 " Palpable Positive. Crescents and Quartan parasites. 15 10 months To umbilicus Positive. Quartan parasites. 16 1 ½ years Palpable Positive. Malignant Tertian rings and crescents. 17 5 months 1 finger's breadth below costal margin. Positive. Malignant Tertian rings. 18 2 years 2 fingers' breadth below costal margin. Positive. Quartan parasites. 19 15 months Ditto Positive. Malignant Tertian rings. 20 2 years Ditto Positive. Quartan parasites. 21 15 " No enlargement detected Positive. Simple Tertian parasites. 22 5 " 1 finger's breadth below costal margin. Positive. Simple Tertian parasites. 23 5 " Not enlarged Negative. 24 9 " 2 fingers' breadth below costal margin. Positive. Simple Tertian parasites. 25 2 years Ditto Negative. Among the children of this village the spleen-rate per cent. was there- fore 84 and the malarial endemic index was 80. It is interesting to note also that Malignant Tertian parasites were present in 4 of the 20 positive findings. If kala azar has any connection whatever with malaria, this is the kind of village in which it should be especially prevalent.
6 We may now compare the results of the investigations in Ulloobari and Old Salonah villages thus :7 Among the children of this village the spleen-rate per cent. was therefore 69 and the malarial endemic index was 65. The prevalence of kala azar and of malarial fever in the two villages referred to may now be compared as follows :8 fever. In a previous memoir* I have shown that in very malarious places the native of India acquires an immunity to malarial fever: for example, among the syces and their families who had lived all their lives in Mian Mir the immunity of the adults was very marked: while 63 per cent. of children between 0 and 10 years of age had enlarged spleens due to malaria, among people between 11 and 25 years of age the percentage with enlarged spleens was only 23, and among people between 26 and 40 years of age it was only 8. The percentage of people with malarial parasites in their blood diminished at advancing age- periods in a similar manner. Now, the people of all ages were equally exposed to malarial infection, and it is beyond dispute that the absence of enlarged spleens. and of parasites among the adults was due to their having acquired, by repeated attacks in early life, an immunity to malarial infection. This rule, that natives who have resided during a number of years in a malarious place acquire an immunity to malarial fever, has been found to hold good in several places in India besides Mian Mir, and the following tables will show that it holds good also in malarious places in Assam :9 From these results we are justified in concluding that a native who is born on the Salonah tea estate will acquire almost complete immunity to malarial fever by the time adult age is reached, and it is obvious that if such a native, after reaching the age of 2510 II PREVIOUS observers attempted to solve the problem set forth in the preceding section by comparing the clinical signs and symptoms of cases diagnosed as kala azar by medical men in Assam, with the clinical signs and symptoms which they believed to be characteristic of malarial fever. But before any one is entitled to use this method for the purpose stated, he must prove the truth of two suppositions: one is that in Assam cases of kala azar are diagnosed accurately ; the other that he has nothing more to learn regarding the signs and symptoms of malarial fever as it occurs among natives of India. And even if the method is not condemned by the difficulty of converting these two suppositions into truths, it must be admitted that, for the purpose of fathoming the nature of a disease presumably new to science, the comparison of its clinical signs and symptoms with those of diseases already known, is a method of investigation to be avoided; for it is obvious that the signs and symptoms of two entirely different diseases may be exceedingly similar. In employing the method of investigation described in the preceding section, it was unnecessary to be able to diagnose cases of the disease known to natives of Assam by the term kala azar, nor was it necessary to know the signs and symptoms of malarial fever as it occurs among natives of that country: it was necessary only to select certain places in which the presence of a disease known as kala azar was established, and certain other places in which a disease known by this name did not occur, and to ascertain whether these places were, or were not, malarious. From the results of the investigation carried out on these lines I was convinced that, whatever the disease known as kala azar is, it is not a form of malarial fever. Thus far we were able to proceed without studying individual cases. But in order that we may be in a position to form an opinion as to what the disease is, rather than what it is not, a study of individual cases is necessary; and for this purpose we must be able to diagnose them accurately. To this matter, therefore, I propose to devote the present section. If kala azar is not a form of malarial fever, it is evident that in India there are two chief diseases (namely, malarial fever and kala azar) in which fever and enlargement of the spleen are prominent signs. In the Punjab I could find only one of these diseases (namely, malarial fever),* but the results to be detailed in this section will show that in Assam both occur. The apparent difficulty of distinguishing between them is to be explained, I believe, by the truth that * See Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India, New Series, No. 13.
11 previous observers, having confused cases of kala azar with cases of malarial fever, recorded many signs and symptoms characteristic of that disease as being present in this. So great, indeed, has been the confusion of the two diseases that it is no exaggeration to say that the symptomatology of kala azar has yet to be written, and some erroneous notions regarding the signs and symptoms of malarial fever as it occurs among natives of India have yet to be corrected. I do not propose to deal fully with so large a subject in this paper; it is sufficient for my present purpose to say that, inasmuch as previous observers often described cases of malarial fever in the belief that they were describing cases of kola azar, and cases of kala azar in the belief that they were describing cases of malarial fever, we must admit that in investigating kala azar we have to deal with a disease the symptomatology of which is not accurately known, and which, therefore, at present can be recognized only by a process of exclusion. And, fortunately, the only disease which presents any difficulty in this connection is malarial fever: the accuracy with which we shall be able to diagnose cases of kala azar will depend upon the accuracy with which we can diagnose, and therefore exclude, cases of malarial fever. I conjecture that the correct explanation of the cause of confusion between kala azar and malarial fever lies not so much in the truth that the method of investigation hitherto employed was a bad one, as in the supposition that the notions hitherto held with regard to the signs and symptoms of malarial fever as it occurs among natives of India were erroneous; and therefore, so far as my experience enables me to do so, it will be my chief object to give an account of the signs, symptoms, and method of diagnosis of this disease : for if I succeed in presenting a clear clinical picture of malarial fever as it occurs among natives of India, it will be easy for others to note the many points in which it differs from kala azar and to diagnose cases of this disease. I shall begin my remarks upon malarial fever with the statement that I intend to deal only with the subject of long-continued chronic infections such as would be diagnosed correctly under the term "malarial cachexia." To this I shall con- fine myself not only because the subject of recent malarial infections has been frequently dealt with by others, but also because it has been thoroughly established that the signs, symptoms, and temperature-curves observed in patients suffering from a recently-acquired infection are so definite and characteristic that it would be well nigh impossible for any one willing to investigate such cases carefully to confuse them with cases of any other disease. I am aware, of course, that this view is not held by all medical officers in India; for, that many medical officers of long experience have very rarely seen typical charts of Simple Tertian or Quartan malarial fever, and that the opinion is widely prevalent that the signs and symptoms of the malarial fevers of India are very indefinite, are matters of common. C 2
12 knowledge. But however much we may regret that some medical officers still hold such views13 1st Case.14 28-12-02 Spleen much reduced; its edge is two inches to the left of the- umbilicus. No parasites nor pigment after long search. 2-1-03 Four Simple Tertian parasites15 During one of these periods the temperatures shown on the chart are not higher than 99°16 the present case, but on inspecting the charts we see that in order to derive information of value from it the temperature must be recorded very frequently17 lesson arising from this conclusion. It is well known that some medical officers in India and in other countries are of opinion that unless provided with micro- scopes they cannot be expected to diagnose malarial fevers accurately. To such as hold this opinion I would commend a study of the facts of this case. The value of microscopical methods in diagnosis, no less than that of bacteriological ones, depends entirely upon the skill and experience of the observer, and the prevailing notion that if one possesses a microscope and a few of the ready-made "bacteriological tests" one can dispense almost, if not entirely, with clinical methods, cannot be condemned too strongly. It cannot be denied that, so far as the diseases of India are concerned, the use18 With the aid of my Hospital Assistant I was able to obtain a two-hour chart (chart III) of the attack which commenced about the 1st of January. The results of blood examinations and the variations in the size of the spleen were as follows :19 results of long-continued untreated malarial fever as described in text-books are applicable to the native of India, the case was one in which serious symptoms and well-marked pathological changes should have been present. But this was not so. On inspecting the temperature chart, we note that long-continued irregular fever was absent; like that of the previous case, the chart is divided definitely into periods of apyrexia and periods of pyrexia. Freedom from symptoms was a prominent feature during apyrexial periods, and the child played with other children of the village as though perfectly well; he was not emaciated, and, practically speaking, the presence of an enlarged spleen was the only sign which suggested a diagnosis of malaria. During periods of fever, however, the child was obviously ill and suffered much from vomiting and diarrh20 December, parasites were evidently becoming far less numerous, and they were found only with difficulty. Their scantiness during the relapse which lasted from about the 1st to the 12th of January is especially noteworthy, and if the patient had attended hospital for the first time during this period it is possible that a diagnosis could have been made more easily by the clinical method indicated above than by blood examinations: at any rate, the finding of parasites at a single examination of the blood would have been a very fortunate circumstance. 3rd Case.21 15-12-02 . . A few medium-sized Simple Tertian parasites; a good many crescents. 19-12-02 . . A few young Simple Tertian parasites; a few crescents. 23-12-02 . . Crescents only found. Spleen 2 inches below the costal margin. 26-12-02 . . Crescents; pigmented leucocytes; a few very young rings (? S. T.) 28-12-02 . . Crescents; pigmented leucocytes; rings and large Simple Tertian parasites. 30-12-02 . . Crescents; a few young rings; a good many medium-sized Simple Tertian parasites. 2-1-03 . . Many young Simple and Malignant Tertian rings; a few large Simple Tertian parasites; crescents. 4-1-03 . . A good many large Simple Tertian parasites; a few Malignant Tertian rings; a good many crescents. 6-1-03 . . 12 noon. Temp. 103°. Many crescents; several pigmented leucocytes: no rings seen. 7 P.M. Temp. 102.4°. Many crescents; numerous heavily pigmented leucocytes; one segmenting Malignant Tertian parasite; no rings seen. 10-45 P.M. Temp. 103°. Crescents and pigmented leucocytes ; two rings after long search. 7-1-03 . . 2-30 A.M. Temp. 103.2°. Many crescents and pigmented leucocytes; two rings. 8-30 A.M. Many crescents and pigmented leucocytes; no rings found. 4 P.M. Ditto ditto. 8 P.M. Ditto ditto. 12 P.M. Ditto ditto. 9-1-03 . . Crescents only found. Spleen 3½ inches below costal margin. 12-1-03 . . Ditto ditto. 19-1-03 . . Crescents still present in fair numbers; no other parasites found. 28-1-03 . . A few medium sized Simple Tertian parasites; crescents still present. 8-2-03 . . One Malignant Tertian ring form; two Simple Tertian parasites in stippled cells. 16-2-03 . . One ring only found after long search. 24-2-03 . . Crescents present in fair numbers. Spleen 3 inches below costal margin. Signs and symptoms; diagnosis by clinical methods.22 worse at the termination of the systematic examinations in February 1903 than he was at their commencement in November 1902. On the contrary, there was evidence that the attacks of fever were being felt with much less severity, and that he was rapidly acquiring an immunity against malarial infection. As regards diagnosis by clinical methods, I need refer only to the diagnosis during pyrexial periods. In spite of the fact that the infection was a mixed one, chart V shows that during most of the relapses even the taking of temperatures only twice daily would have sufficed to enable a diagnosis of malaria to be made; but while on inspecting such a chart we should have had no doubt that the case was one of malaria, we should have been much puzzled to state what type of parasite was present. Seeing that throughout the period of examination no other parasites than Simple and Malignant Tertian were present, it is remarkable that the chart so frequently showed a Quartan type of fever. This is seen during more than one period between December 8th and January 14th, but nowhere so plainly as between January 7th and January 14th. This portion of the chart is typical of a double Quartan infection. Had the two-hour chart (chart VI) been carried beyond the 8th of January, this curious coincidence might have been explained more easily. Diagnosis by microscopical methods.23 (5) For the purposes of diagnosis during an apyrexial period we must rely chiefly upon negative signs and symptoms: the patient does not complain of being ill; he is not incapacitated from doing his work; as a rule, he is not emaciated; he has no fever; repeated blood examinations may yield entirely negative results. (6) During a relapse of fever (pyrexial period) the temperature chart is definite and characteristic, and we are able to make a diagnosis by inspecting such a chart. Blood examinations are an important aid if positive results are obtained, but we cannot place reliance upon them if negative. Nearly all these characters of " malarial cachexia " are very different from those described in text-books as being present in this condition, and it therefore behoves us to ascertain if they are applicable to a number of examples. This we may now proceed to do. The following case is similar to many seen in military hospitals for native troops :24 but no malarial parasites were found. On the 18th, however, a few Malignant Tertian ring forms were found in a slide of finger blood and many ring forms and one crescent in a slide of splenic blood. On the evening of this day arrangements were made to have the temperature taken every two hours, and the chart reproduced here (chart VII) is the result. On the 20th a good many crescents and a few ring forms were found in a slide of finger blood; on the 21st many crescents but only one ring form; on the 22nd no ring forms after long search. Crescents were found in considerable numbers until the 27th, when the examina- tions were discontinued. This case differs in no important respect from the case of Malignant Tertian fever previously described, and although at the time when I saw him the patient was in the condition usually diagnosed in India as "malarial cachexia with enlarge- ment of the spleen," an accurate diagnosis could have been made during any of the fever periods by inspecting a carefully recorded temperature chart. Also the signs and symptoms present were very similar to those which characterised the case of Baghan. The illness was not sufficiently severe to necessitate confinement to bed, and if the patient had been a civilian, I do not doubt that, during the periods when he was free from fever, he would have carried on his usual occupation. The following are some more cases of "malarial cachexia" illustrating the signs and symptoms observed when patients suffering from this condition are admitted into hospital during pyrexial periods :25 but from the 25th to the 30th it showed the typical characters of Quartan fever. On the 27th, Quartan parasites in considerable number were found in a slide of finger blood and, on the same day, in slides of splenic blood many Quartan parasites and blocks of malarial pigment were found, but no "Leishman" or other parasites were seen. Adequate doses of quinine were administered to the patient on the 30th and subsequent days, and the fever quickly disappeared. RAJIA; aged 40; an in-patient of the dispensary at Soneput near Delhi. The patient stated that he had suffered for more than a year from occasional attacks of fever similar to the one for which he was admitted. His spleen was enlarged two inches beyond the level of the umbilicus; no enlargement of the liver was detected. He was not emaciated nor weak, and complained only of fever. His temperature was taken every four hours, and the chart exhibited typical Tertian periodicity. In a slide of finger blood a few Simple Tertian parasites were found, and two similar parasites were seen in a slide of splenic blood. No other parasites were found. Quinine was administered to the patient, and in a few days the fever disappeared, when, being of opinion that he was cured, he requested to be discharged from hospital. His spleen was still enlarged beyond the level of the umbilicus. TULSA; aged 25; seen in the Civil Hospital at Delhi. The patient had been admitted for fever, and quinine had been administered to him from the date of his admission. I saw him on the fifth day after admission, by which time his fever had ceased. The lower edge of the spleen reached to a point midway between the umbilicus and pubes, and the liver was enlarged two inches below the costal margin. A temperature chart had not been kept systematically, but I was informed that his temperature was 102° at the time of his admission and that it had risen to between 100° and 101° each evening on the three first days. From the date when I saw him it did not rise above normal during the remainder of his stay in hospital. He remained some time for the treatment of a chronic ulcer on the leg, but when this was healed he left. His spleen and liver were in much the same condition as at the time of his admission. I found no malarial parasites nor pigment and no "Leishman" parasites. These two cases illustrate the freedom from severe symptoms which, as I have already pointed out, is characteristic of native patients suffering from true "malarial cachexia," as well as the shortness of the periods during which fever is present, the amenability of the fever to quinine treatment, and, above all, the lack of heed which the patients pay to the fact that their spleens are enlarged, regarding themselves as quite well and able to carry on their usual occupations as soon as the attack of fever has passed. Finally, I shall give some instances of cases of "malarial cachexia" examined during apyretic intervals. In hospital practice among natives of India such E
26 cases unaccompanied by fever are seen commonly only in patients who seek treatment on account of other affections such as ulcers or dysentery, for, as a rule, the native of India who suffers from chronic malaria does not attend hospital unless he has an attack of fever; but when one carries out an investigation upon the inhabitants of a village, it is usual to find numerous cases. P27 When the ulcer was healed, the patient left the hospital, his spleen being enlarged to the same extent as at the time of his admission. In a previous memoir dealing with Oriental or Delhi Sore * I gave brief notes of 28 cases in many of which the condition was similar to that of this patient28 No. Place. Name and age. Condition of spleen. Other particulars of the case. Results of examination of blood. 4 Moriaputty (Golaghat district). Hait Ali; 9 years. Beyond the um- bilicus. Has suffered from occasional attacks of fever for a year; has been free from fever for nearly 2 months. Finger blood. No malaria parasites; no pigment; no other parasites. Spleen blood. No malaria parasites; no pigment; no other parasites. 5 ,, Haru Aya ; 16 years. Four inches be- low the costal margin. Liver palpable. She stated that she had an attack of continued fever, which lasted 20 days, 6 months ago. Afterwards she was well for 2 months. Since then she has had fever occasionally. No fever at time of examination. Finger blood. No malaria parasites; no pigment; no other parasites. Spleen blood. No malaria parasites; no pigment; no other parasites. 6 ,, Dalnoor; 28 years. To umbilicus. The patient stated that he had had attacks of fever for about 6 months: in the first attack, which lasted about 2 months, the fever came on every other day. He noticed that his spleen was en- larging. He was doing his work and had no fever at the time of examination. Finger blood. No malaria parasites; no pigment; no other parasites. Spleen blood. No malaria parasites; no pigment; no other parasites. 7 ,, Gopin; 18 years. To umbilicus . A history of occasional attacks of fever for a year. Lately it has come on almost every day. The patient is well- nourished and not markedly anæmic. Finger blood. No malaria parasites; no pigment; no other parasites. Spleen blood. One large Simple Tertian parasite in a stippled cell (Romanowsky's stain) found. No other parasites. 8 ,, Lakshman Singh; 25 years. Beyond the um- bilicus. Liver one inch below the costal margin. It is stated that the patient has had fever " off and on" for a year. The fever comes on at intervals and often he is free from it for a month or more. Finger blood. No malaria parasites; no pigment; no other parasites. Spleen blood. No malaria parasites; no pigment; no other parasites. 9 ,, Thor por ; 30 years. One hand's breadth below the costal margin. A history of fever nearly every day for two months. The patient is very anemic. He is attending hospital and is taking a " spleen mixture" which contains small doses of quinine. Finger blood. No malaria parasites; no pigment; no other parasites. Spleen blood. No malaria parasites; no pigment; no other parasites.
29 No. Place. Name and age. Condition of spleen. Other particulars of the case. Result of examination of blood. 10 Moiraputty (Golaghat district )30 No. Place. Name and age. Condition of spleen. Other particulars of the case. Result of examination of blood. 16 Kacharih at (Golagh at district) 31 cachexia ") which results to the native of India as a consequence of long- continued untreated infection with malaria parasites. The three characteristic or typical features of the condition have just been given, and it will be seen that they are very different from those which characterise the " malarial cachexia " of the text-books. But it must be remembered that I am dealing only with the results of malarial infection in natives of India, whilst what we may call the text-book view of " malarial cachexia" was derived largely, if not entirely, from a study of cases which occurred among Europeans. More- over, even the writers of text-books are not infallible, and, having regard to recent important additions to our knowledge, it is plainly their duty to ascertain whether their views upon " malarial cachexia "32 malaria by adequate quinine treatment, our conjecture would be verified. Such a case would present little or no difficulty to the clinician with a sound knowledge of the signs and symptoms of malarial fever as it occurs among natives of India, and it is chiefly with the object of aiding those who desire to gain this knowledge that I have written the present section. I have shown that as regards the native of India the notion that untreated malarial infections result in a condition characterised by the presence of long-continued irregular fever and, as the text-books say, "by the reduction of the patient to a most distressing condition of emaciation and weakness in which he is a prey to any secondary infection," is incorrect; and that, in short, malarial fever as it occurs among natives of this country is a disease which, even in the stage termed "malarial cachexia," presents very definite characters by the study of which it can be diagnosed without difficulty. Thus we are able to exclude the only disease which, so far as at present we know, is liable to be confused with kala azar; and I do not doubt that if those whose duty it is to diagnose cases of this disease keep constantly in mind the conclusions I have attempted to summarize in this section, they will find the problem as easy as it has seemed to myself to be.
33 III I SHALL now give the results of my examinations of the blood of 68 patients who suffered from kala azar in different parts of Assam and Bengal. The method by which a diagnosis of kala azar was arrived at in these cases has been described in the preceding section. Assam. Result of examination of finger blood, Result of examination of splenic blood. GAUHATI AND ULLOOBARI. Case 1.34 Result of examination of finger blood. Result of examination of splenic blood. GAUHATI AND ULLOOBARI35 Result of examination of finger blood. Result of examination of splenic blood. GAUHATI AND ULLOOBARI36 Result of examination of finger blood, Result of examination of splenic blood. TEZPUR AND THE SURROUNDING DISTRICT37 Result of examination of finger blood. Result of examination of splenic blood. TEZPUR AND THE SURROUNDING DISTRICT38 Result of examination of finger blood. Result of examination of splenic blood. SALONAH DISTRICT NEAR NOWGONG39 Result of examination of finger blood, Result of examination of splenic blood. SALONAH DISTRICT NEAR NOWGONG40 Result of examination of finger blood, Result of examination of splenic blood. SYLHET DISTRICT41 Result of examination of finger blood. Result of examination of splenic blood. SYLHET DISTRICT42 The results of the blood examinations made in this series of cases may be tabulated thus :43 (2) It is not due to malaria. This has been proved in Section I of the present report. (3) It is invariably associated with the presence of the Leishman-Donovan parasite in the spleen and some other organs of the body. (4) I failed to find this parasite in the splenic and finger blood of forty-eight cases of the disease I have described under the term " malarial cachexia," the signs and symptoms of which are very different from those of kala azar. (5) The recovery of patients suffering from kala azar is coincident with the disappearance of the parasite from their spleens ( ? and from other organs). This was well illustrated in the patient named Godhala (case 15), and we may assume that it was exemplified also in the patient named Mohan (case 38). (6) The parasite is present in parts of Assam where kala azar is prevalent, and apparently it is absent from parts where this disease is unknown (e.g., the Golaghat district: pages 28 to 30). This group of facts affords evidence sufficient, one would imagine, to justify the belief that the Leishman-Donovan parasite is the cause of kala azar: but the proof is not complete, any more than was the proof of the causal relation- ship of the malaria parasite to malarial fever until the developmental cycle of the parasite in the mosquito was established and the experimental infection of man by the bite of this insect effected. And, in the absence of the conclusive proof afforded by the experimental production of kala azar, there are certain facts which require explanation before all doubt that the Leishman-Donovan parasite is the cause of the disease can be removed from our minds. Perhaps the most important of these is the presence of the parasite (or of one which in appearance is indistinguishable from it) in the disease known as Oriental or Delhi Sore. In a previous memoir* I have drawn attention to the following facts : (1) a parasite indistinguishable from the Leishman-Donovan parasite is present in the great majority of ulcers known in India as Oriental or Delhi Sores; (2) the sores and the parasites in them occur in the Punjab where I was unable to find a single case of kala azar; (3) kala azar and the parasites found in it occur in Assam where I was unable to find a single case of Oriental Sore. Now, if the parasite found in Oriental Sore is identical with that found in kala azar, it will be obvious from these results that two conclusions are justifiable: one is that some other factor than the mere presence of the parasite in a district is necessary for the production of kala azar, the other that something more than the presence of the parasite in the tissues of the skin is necessary for the production of this disease. Again, if the parasites found in Oriental Sore and in kala azar are identical, there is, secondly, the fact that in most cases of Oriental Sore, even though the number of parasites present in the sores may be very great, fever is absent. * Oriental or Delhi Sore: Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India, New Series, No. 13. G 2
44 Some months ago I saw a European on whose body and limbs there were no fewer than 35 Frontier Sores. In films made from five of the sores (all that were examined) the parasites were found, and it is reasonable to suppose that they were present in all, and that the total number of parasites present in the tissues of this patient was enormous. Yet the patient, although many of the sores had been present for six months, had not suffered from fever, his spleen was not enlarged, and the only constitutional symptoms complained of were attributable to the anxiety and worry caused by the presence of the sores. I advised him to take two months' leave and gave him careful instructions regarding the treatment of the sores by local applications. At the end of the two months he wrote to inform me that all the sores were healed, and that he was feeling perfectly well. Now, kala azar is a disease characterised by almost constant fever and very severe constitutional symptoms; but a parasite indistin- guishable from that which is said to be the cause of this disease does not produce fever when present in cases of Oriental Sore: is there any reason to suppose that a protozoal parasite which is incapable of producing fever when present in the skin is capable of doing so when present in the spleen ? The simplest way of getting over these difficulties is to say that the parasites found in Delhi Sores and those found in kala azar, although indistinguishable in appearance, are, in reality, distinct, because their geographical distribution is not the same, and because they produce entirely different pathological effects; but are these reasons sufficient ? Finally, in addition to the difficulties arising out of a study of the parasites of Oriental Sore, there is a point of some importance in connection with kala azar and the parasites found in it that is not easy to understand. It is that the fever met with in cases of kala azar bears no relation whatever either to the number of parasites present in the spleen or to their condition. I was particularly struck with this in the patients Hudoo (case 2), Elizabeth (case 1), Mangu (case 9) and others. In the splenic blood of Hudoo the parasites were present in enormous numbers, and I marked out the case for special study on account of the large number of dividing forms of the parasite present. Yet the temperature carefully taken thrice daily for 33 days only rose above normal on five occasions : on three occasions it rose to 99°, on one to 101.4º, and on the fifth to 99.8°. Similar facts were observed in the cases of Elizabeth and Mangu. On the other hand, I have records of cases in which the temperature, remained continu- ously high for a long period, yet in which extremely few parasites were present in the spleen. These facts raise the suspicion that the fever met with at some time or other in all cases of kala azar is not due to the presence of the parasite under discussion; and if it does not cause the fever, may we not reasonably doubt that it causes any of the other signs and symptoms ?
45 So far as my experience enables me to do so, I may therefore summarize the evidence against the Leishman-Donovan parasite being the cause of kala azar somewhat as follows:46 I am aware, the recently-discovered fluke Schistosomum cattoi* has not yet been looked for in patients suffering from kala azar, and it is daily becoming more evident that our knowledge regarding even mammalian blood parasites is not yet complete. (7) Although I consider that the finding of the Leishman-Donovan parasite in 67 out of 68 cases of kala azar justifies me in saying that in all probability the parasite is present at some period or other in every case of this disease, the number of cases examined is, after all, comparatively small, and it seems to me not impossible that cases of kala azar may be found in which the parasite is not present. When some able clinician gives us a complete account of the symptomatology of kala azar, this problem can be studied more easily. It is not with any idea of attempting to minimize the great importance of the Leishman-Donovan parasite that I bring forward these objections, the answers to some at least of which are possibly not far to seek, but rather because, in these days of rapid discovery and hasty deduction, it behoves some of us, at any rate, to be cautious; and therefore, at the risk of being considered unnecessarily so, I would express the opinion that until proof more conclusive than has yet been adduced is forthcoming, we shall be wise if, while we agree that the Leishman- Donovan parasite is present in every case of kala azar, we suspend our judgment concerning its causal relationship to the disease. * The symptoms of the disease produced by this parasite are said to be: enlargement of the liver and spleen, morbid appetite, diarrh47 IV THE following are some opinions I have formed as a result of the work described in this paper and in my previous paper upon Oriental Sore :Chart 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027646.tif] Name, Hira. Age 14 Years. Disease, Malarial Cachexia.
Chart II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027652.tif] Name, Hira. Disease, Malarial Cachexia. Chart III. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027652.tif] Name, Baghan. Disease, Malarial Cachexia.
Chart IV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027658.tif] Name, Baghan. Age 10 Years. Disease, Malarial Cachexia.
Chart V. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027664.tif] Name. Man Singh. Age 12 Years. Disease, Malarial Cachexia.
Chart VI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027670.tif] Name, Man Singh. Disease, Malarial Cachexia. Chart VII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027670.tif] Name, Amir Khan. Disease, Malarial Cachexia.
Chart VIII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027676.tif] Name, Amir Khan. Age 25 Years. Disease, Malarial Cachexia.
Chart IX. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027682.tif] Name, Bongi. (Case 35.) Age 20 Years. Disease, Kala Azar.
Chart X. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027688.tif] Name, Sindhoo. (Case 31.) Age 30 Years. Disease, Kala Azar.
Chart XI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027694.tif] Name, Toolsa. (Case 33.) Age 22 Years. Disease, Kala Azar. Chart XII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027694.tif] Name, Godhala. Case 15. Age 25 Years. Disease, Kala Azar.
Chart XIII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027700.tif] Name, Mohisa Mal. (Case 25.) Age 35 Years. Disease, Kala Azar. Chart XIV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027700.tif] Name, Dookhawa. (Case 36.) Age 13 Years. Disease, Kala Azar and Malaria.
Chart XV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027706.tif] Name, Jettoo. (Case 16.) Age 26 Years. Disease, Kala Azar and Pneumonia. Chart XVI. Chart XVII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027706.tif] Name, Sunkopaha. (Case 26.) Disease, Kala Azar. Name, Mangu. (Case 9.) Disease, Kala Azar.
No. 19. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ON KALA AZAR, MALARIA AND MALARIAL CACHEXIA. BY CAPTAIN S. P. JAMES, M.B., I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027721.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1905. Price Re. one Annas four or 1s. 11d.
