IP/QB.10 NEW SERIES.) NO.6 SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. FIRST REPORT OF THE ANTI-MALARIAL OPERATIONS AT MIAN MIR, 1901-1903. BY CAPTAIN S. P. JAMES, M.B. (LOND.), I.M.S. (On Special Duty.) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75025734.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1903. Price 12 Annas or 1s. 2d.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75025740.tif] 3942635
No. 6. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. FIRST REPORT OF THE ANTI-MALARIAL OPERATIONS AT MIAN MIR, 1901-1903. BY CAPTAIN S. P. JAMES, M.B. (LOND.), I.M.S. (On Special Duty.) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75025746.tif] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75025746.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1903.
Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. E. A. ARNOLD, 37, Bedford Street, Strand, Lon- don, W.C. CONSTABLE & CO., 2, Whitehall Gardens, London, S.W. SAMPSON Low, MARSTON & Co., St. Dunstan's House, Fetter Lane, London, E.C. P. S. King & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. LUZAC & CO., 46, Gerat Russell Street, London, W.C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & CO., Charing Cross Road, London, W.C. BEMARD QUARITCH, 15, Piccadilly, London, W. WILLIAMS and NORGATE, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & CO., Cambridge. ON THE CONTINENT. R. FRIEDLANDER & SOHN, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin, N.W. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague. IN INDIA. THACKER, SPINK & CO., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & CO., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. S. K. LAHIRI & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & CO., LD., Bombay. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & CO., Bombay. A. J. COMBRIDGE & CO., Bombay. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAM & CO., Madras. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & Co., Madras. G. A. NATESAN & CO., Madras. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH AND SONS, Mufid-i-Am Press, Lahore. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazair Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission Press, Rangoon.
FIRST REPORT OF THE ANTI-MALARIAL OPERATIONS AT MIAN MIR, 1901-1903. PART I.2 The total number of officers and men of these regiments averages about 3,900, and in connection with the ambulance and transport establishments there are in addition about 600 native followers. The arrangement of the cantonment is as follows:3 heat increases considerably and hot winds are prevalent. Early in July there is a burst of the monsoon rain, but owing to its short duration its cooling effect: only lasts for a few days, and unless more rain comes, the great heat begins again and is made more trying by the increased moisture of the air. Throughout July and August the nights are very hot, and in the latter month strong hot breezes sometimes spring up. In September the nights begin to be less hot and from September 15th the days also are distinctly cooler. Early in October it is quite cool out of doors, and by the middle of this month the weather becomes very pleasant. This, however, is the month when malarial fevers are most prevalent. November and December days are bright and clear and the nights cold. In January and February early morning frosts are noticeable. March is very variable but generally pleasant, and in April the hot weather begins to make itself felt again. The European troops are housed in lofty one-storied stone buildings pro- vided with a wide verandah and raised some feet off the ground. In the hot. weather punkahs are provided by day and night. The drinking water for the troops is derived from the main irrigation canal. After passing through filter beds it is distributed to different parts of the canton- ment in pipes. Many of the natives, however, obtain their drinking water from wells, of which there are a large number in the cantonment. One of the worst features of Mian Mir as a cantonment is the fact that the plain on which it is situated is so level that very little of the surface water can drain away. Throughout the cantonment there are numerous brickwork surface drains, but in none of these is there sufficient fall, and the majority end abruptly on the level plain. In the construction of these storm-water drains there appears to have been no definite object, and they are indeed of more harm than good, for whenever a slight shower of rain falls, they become full of water which remains in them until dried up by the sun. For this reason they form, during the rainy season, favourable breeding places of anopheles mosquitoes. The surface layer of the soil consists for the most part of very dry finely powdered mud and sand, which, during the fierce winds of the hot weather, is blown about in clouds of dust. Beneath this superficial layer the soil consists for the most part of clay and "kankar"4 which, lasting for a week or ten days, form excellent breeding places of anopheles mosquitoes. In the absence of irrigation, Mian Mir would be little better than an arid desert during the greater part of the year. A branch of the main irrigation canal enters the cantonment and from this numerous shallow channels (irrigation watercourses or "cuts") convey water to all the gardens, grass land, and crops in the cantonment. The water is drawn up from these channels by means of Per- sian wheels ("jalahars") and distributed over the land in shallow ditches. No crops requiring continuous irrigation are grown in the cantonment, and the plan usually adopted is to water a certain area of land one day and another the next, so that all the water has time to soak into the ground or dry up before the next supply is given. In the garden portions the Persian wheels are usually worked for about three hours daily, and all the water used has generally soaked into the ground by the same evening. At certain times of the year the supply of water is frequently shut off for ten days or more at a time. This is shown in the following table:5 As will be seen from the following table, Mian Mir is one of the most unhealthy cantonments in this part of India:6 The following tables exhibit the great variations which occur in the admis- sion rates for malarial fevers at Mian Mir in different years:7 "admit" every case at once. For these reasons the statistics of any individual year may not by any means represent accurately the real prevalence of the disease. A more reliable method of estimating the prevalence of malarial fevers and the liability to infection is given, as was originally shown by Koch, by an ex- amination of young children, in order to find the percentage infected with mala- rial parasites. Doctors Stephens and Christophers have added to this method the estimation of the percentage of anopheles mosquitoes infected with sporo- zoites in the salivary glands, as indicating more accurately the actual danger of infection. Every cantonment in India has a number of followers' lines and native bazaars attached to it, and the examination of the children and of the anopheles mosquitoes in these lines and bazaars affords a ready means of estimat- ing accurately the prevalence of malaria and the liability to infection. The following table shows the results of the examinations of children in the different bazaars of Mian Mir made in October and November 1901:8 From a consideration of the above table we may say that the season of new infections in Mian Mir begins at the end of July or the beginning of August, and that the number of new infections increases steadily until it reaches a maximum in October. As soon as the endemic index begins to decrease it may be assumed that new infections have ceased, and the sudden fall in the percentage of infected children in November affords a proof of this. From November until July of the next year any cases that occur are relapses of former infections.* In considering the factors on which the prevalence of malarial fevers in Mian Mir depends, the influence of the presence of anopheles mosquitoes is of most importance. After determining the endemic indices of the bazaars in October 1901 our next object therefore was to find infection in anopheles mosquitoes. Only two species of anopheles were at all abundant, viz.: A. Rossi (Giles) and A. culicifacies (Giles). Other species, which will be referred to later, were present, but not in large numbers. A. Rossi was more abundant than A. culici- facies, but both species were found in all the bazaars, in the barracks of the troops and in the hospital and jail. In view of the fact that our previous work in India had led us to the conclu- sion that A. Rossi was a very inefficient carrier of malaria under natural condi- tions, while A. culicifacies was a very good one, we selected a bazaar for the examination of anopheles mosquitoes where the two species could be caught in fair numbers in the same houses, in order to compare their rates of infection. The results of our dissections were as follow:9 Six species of anopheles mosquitoes have been found by us in Mian Mir, viz.:10 in the irrigation watercourses which are running more or less throughout the year, A. Rossi is dependent for its breeding grounds chiefly on rain-formed pools, so that it does not appear in any abundance until the heavy rains of July commence. This connection between the flow of the irrigation water-supply and the prevalence of Anopheles culicifacies and between the rainfall and the prevalence of Anopheles Rossi is shown in the following chart :11 By means of the following chart the seasonal prevalence of anopheles mos- quitoes, of malarial fevers, and the rainfall in Mian Mir may now be compared:12 at which new infections could occur. During August, September, and October the abundance of anopheles mosquitoes and the endemic index of the bazaar increased together, and in November with the almost sudden disappearance of adult anopheles mosquitoes the endemic index quickly fell. As further illustrating the close connection which exists between the prevalence of malarial fevers in Mian Mir and the presence and relative abund- ance of anopheles mosquitoes, the conditions found in different bazaars and followers' lines may be given in more detail. The inhabitants of these bazaars live in exactly the same class of house, derive their drinking water from the same source, and are exposed to the same climate and temperature. They are in fact under precisely similar conditions except that the bazaars or lines are at different distances from breeding places of anopheles mosquitoes. As would be expected, the number of adult insects of this genus that can be caught in the different bazaars and lines varies with the distance from a breeding place. It will be seen from the following table that the prevalence of malaria is least in the lines that are furthest from a breeding place and where consequently fewer anopheles mosquitoes can be found, and greatest in the lines that are nearest a breeding place and where a large number of anopheles mosquitoes are present. Table showing the influence of breeding places of anopheles mosquitoes on the prevalence of malaria in Mian Mir. Name of locality. Distance of nearest breeding place and its character. Species of anopheles found and abundance. Endemic index. Spleen rate per cent. British Infantry Bazaar. Irrigation watercourse 30 yds. Pools 40 yds . A. culicifacies Abundant 52 80 A. Rossi A. fuliginosus Rare A. pulcherrimus A. nigerrimus Royal Artillery Bazaar. Irrigation watercourse 172 yds. Pools in bazaar. A. culicifacies Not very abundant. Abundant 35 75 A. Rossi A. Stephensi Scanty A. pulcherrimus Syce lines (A) Irrigation watercourse 125 yds. A. culicifacies Abundant 56 48 A. Rossi Syce lines (B) The same watercourse as for syce lines (A), 584 yds. A. culicifacies Scanty 20 20 A. Rossi An experiment which I carried out during the year and which will be again
13 referred to in the account of the operations, also illustrates in a remarkable way how entirely the prevalence of malaria is influenced by the presence or absence of anopheles mosquitoes. This experiment was the removal of the inhabitants of the syce lines (A), referred to in the above table, into tents on a new site ¾ of a mile from the nearest irrigation watercourse and 600 yards from any pool. No anopheles mosquitoes were ever found in these tents and the result of the experiment was the reduction of the percentage of infected children from 56 at the height of the fever season in 1901, to 4 at the same time in 1902. Only two forms of the malarial parasite have been met with in Mian Mir, viz.: the Benign Tertian and the Malignant Tertian forms. Out of 26 infections occurring in native children 40 were with the Benign Tertian parasite and 26 with the Malignant Tertian. Among the European troops the proportion of Simple to Malignant Tertian infections is greater than this. Out of 18 infec- tions among the men of the Royal Artillery in November 1901, 14 were with the Simple Tertian parasite and 4 with the Malignant Tertian. No Quartan parasites have been found in Mian Mir. The foregoing account refers to Mian Mir as a whole, but it was not con- sidered advisable to attempt to deal with so wide an area as the whole canton- ment in our experimental operations. The area occupied by the Royal Artillery lines, which are more or less isolated from the rest of the cantonment, was there- fore selected, and it is now necessary to add a few details regarding the condi- tions under which malaria prevails in these lines. I.14 (3) The Syce Lines of the Left Battery. (Fig. 1. B.) The infection of children is 20 per cent., and they are situated 400 yards from the barracks. (4) The Royal Artillery bazaar. The infection of children is 35 per cent., and it is situated 440 yards from the barracks. (5) The Servants' quarters in the officers' bungalows. A large percentage of the servants' children who live in the bungalow compounds are infected with parasites, and they form a dangerous source of malarial infection to the Europeans living in the bungalows. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75025794.tif] Fig. 1. Showing the chief sources from which anopheles mosquitoes become infected in the Royal Artillery Lines at Mian Mir. II.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75025800.tif] A Plan of Royal Artillery Lines at Mian Mir showing the irrigation watercourses and other anopheles breeding places (in red), P. P. the brick lined watercourse. No. 659. Print., India.15 The breeding places of anophelesmosquitoes in the Royal Artillery lines. In most stations the breeding grounds of anopheles mosquitoes during the rainy season and those during the dry season can be sharply marked off , from each other, but owing to the flatness of the ground in Mian Mir, and to its impervious nature, a slight shower of rain produces almost the same conditions as regards the presence of breeding places, as in other districts are produced only during the true rainy season. At almost any time of the year, therefore, numerous rain-formed breeding places may exist in Mian Mir, and it will be better for this reason to enumerate all the places where anopheles larvæ have been found at any time during the years 1901 and 1902, indicating at the same time the relative importance of each breeding place. (See plan of Royal Artillery Lines.) (1) The larger irrigation channels ("Rajbahas"). (2) The irrigation watercourses. (3) Water spread over the gardens and fields for irrigation purposes. (4) Pools left in the bed of an irrigation watercourse when the supply of water has been cut off. (5) Pools formed by overflow of the irrigation watercourses. (6) A few large ponds or "tanks" and a large number of small stone reservoirs for collecting water in the gardens. (7) Rain-filled pools, surface drains, rain-formed pools on flat areas of ground, etc. (8) Domestic utensils,viz., tins and buckets of water kept in the lines in case of fire and for other purposes. (9) The swimming baths. (10) The small surface drains, which carry off water from the stand- pipes, wells, cook-houses, baths, etc. (11) The wells. 1. The larger irrigation channels. The velocity of the water in the main canal (Rajbaha) bringing water into the Royal Artillery lines is considerable, and except in the comparatively still water near the bridges, larvæ can rarely be found. 2. In the smaller distributing channels, however (irrigation watercourses or "cuts"), which form a network throughout the cantonment, the flow of water is slow and is frequently further impeded by a thick growth of grass and vegetation along the sides of the watercourse. Many of these ditches also have no outflow, and end in the basin of a Persian wheel, so that the water in them is quite stagnant except during the time that the Persian wheel is working (about three hours daily). All these irrigation watercourses form excellent breeding places and are the main source of anopheles mosquitoes, especially of A. culicifacies, in the cantonment.
16 Many larvæ can as a rule be found in them throughout their length, but they are especially numerous in places where grass and weed are growing at the edge, and also at the bridges where the flow of water is checked. 3. The water distributed over the land dries up quickly as a rule, but even in this, dangerous breeding places of anopheles mosquitoes are sometimes found. The young trees in Mian Mir are planted along the bed of small distributing ditches, and pools of water are formed round the roots of each tree. These pools are frequently so deep that all the water given to the trees in one day does not dry up before the next supply comes on the following day, and I have frequently found anopheles larvæ and pupæ in them. Similar pools are formed in many parts of the gardens of the officers' bungalows owing to the unevenness of the ground. The supply of irrigation water to the cantonment is a very inter- mittent one, and during the comparatively short period in which it is available, every one endeavours to flood their gardens as much as possible. Owing to the impervious nature of the soil and to the general flatness of the ground, if more water is given to a garden than can all be soaked up in a day, it collects and forms pools in any depressions of the ground. These pools, being replenished daily, may last for ten days or more. 4. When the irrigation water-supply is cut off from the cantonment, many pools are left in the watercourses. The number of larvæ found in these pools varies considerably. In many of them no larvæ can be found, in others, how- ever, larvæ are so numerous that the surface of the pool is almost covered with them. In the winter these pools are of great importance, for during December, January, and February, when the irrigation water-supply is cut off for long periods at a time, anopheles larvæ can remain in a resting condition in pools under the bridges until the warm weather comes again. This is in fact the chief, if not the only, means by which some species of anopheles mosquitoes can tide over the cold of winter in Mian Mir. During the cold winter months no adult anopheles mosquitoes can be found in the houses, but in such pools as these, larvæ are found in a more or less hybernating condition17 7. Rain-formed pools are exceedingly numerous, and it is diffícùlt to realise the difference which even a small shower of rain makes in the aspect of the can- tonment. Large ponds of water cover the plain on every side, and for two days after a few hours' rain, evolutions on the Royal Artillery parade ground be- come impossible. To reach the syce lines of the batteries one has to wade through water, for several hundred yards. The whole cantonment is in a similar condition: Most of these large sheets of water dry up under the hot sun in two or three days, but pools remain in depressions of the ground and in all the surface drains until the next shower of rain. The condition, indeed, is one of the presence of innumerable pools constantly exposed to a hot sun and con- stantly being replenished with fresh water; a condition eminently suitable for the breeding of anopheles mosquitoes. It is not surprising, therefore, that in all these pools and in all the surface drains numerous larvæ are found during July and August. 8. Two large covered-in swimming baths for the troops are present in the Royal Artillery lines. Although these are constantly used by the men, numer- ousanopheleslarvæ were found in both the baths during the summer. The baths take about two days to empty and nearly a fortnight to refill, and the water in them is not completely changed more than three or four times during the whole summer. 9. The waste water from the wells, standpipes, cook-houses, and, baths is carried off in small brick channels two or three inches deep. In all of these channels anopheles larvæ were found at different times of the year. 10. Numerous tins and earthenware vessels of water are kept in the lines in case of fire and for other purposes. They frequently contained large numbers of anopheles larvæ. 11. As a rule, anopheles larvæ were not found in the wells, but they were present in a few which are only occasionally used. The above is a brief description of the conditions under which malarial fevers prevail in Mian Mir, and I shall now describe the operations which have been undertaken for their prevention. It should be noted that the primary object of the operations was to test the efficacy of mosquito destruction, and the chief efforts have, therefore, been directed to this end. In an experiment such as this, it is necessary to have some definite tests by which success or failure can be measured. 1. Tests of a reduction in the number of anopheles mosquitoes. D
18 (a) Larvæ. It can be made evident that though in previous years larvæ were readily found, yet in the year of the experiment they were not so abundant. (b) Adult mosquitoes. It is possible for an observer who has regularly collected anopheles mosquitoes in any, given bazaar or barrack to ascertain with certainty whether they are more or less abundant in the year of operations than in previous years. It is also possible to ascertain whether anopheles mosquitoes are more or less abundant in the houses within the area of operations than in those outside it. 2. Tests of a reduction in the amount of malaria. (a) A reduction in the number of admissions for malarial fevers among the troops. (b) A reduction in the percentage of infection with malarial parasites among the troops. (c) A reduction in the amount o malaria in the regimental bazaars as measured by the percentage of children found infected with malarial parasites. The first of the tests of a reduction in the amount of malaria is probably the least to be depended upon, because hospital statistics may be affected by many causes; still unless it were possible to show a marked reduction in the number of admissions into hospital for malarial fevers, the operations could not be considered successful. The most conclusive test of all would be the reduction of the percentage of infected children in the regimental bazaars. If, as a result of the operations, it could be shown that a marked reduction in the number of anopheles mosquitoes, and in the percentage of infected children in the regi- mental bazaars, had occurred, the success of the operations would be proved.
19 PART II. The operations were commenced on the 2nd of April 1902. They may be described under the following headings:20 Methods employed. These were principally confined to operations against larvæ. The methods used in the irrigation watercourses (running water) and in pools and other collections of stagnant water must be described separately. (1) Methods employed in the irrigation watercourses. (a) It has already been pointed out. that the irrigation watercourses form the chief Source of anopheles mosquitoes (especially of A. culicifacies) in the Royal Artillery lines, and that the larvæ are most numerous in these channels wherever any grass or weed is growing at the edges. Experiments which we had made in November 1901 pointed to the fact that if the sides of an irrigation watercourse are cut clean and smooth so that the flow of water is not impeded, and if all grass and weed under. which larvæ can shelter is removed from the edges, the number of larvæ found in such a watercourse is greatly dimin- ished. The chief method employed was, therefore, based on this fact, and it was hoped that by constantly keeping the sides of the watercourses smooth and free from grass for many months, they might be made permanently unsuitable for the breeding of anopheles larvæ (b) A more effective and permanent means of carrying out the above principle was to have one of the watercourses lined With brick and smoothly plastered with cement. This was done with a length of watercourse running through the centre of the lines and in front of the main barracks and hospital. (Plan of R. A. lines. p. p.1) (c) For some weeks during June and July I tried the method of drying out and cleaning each branch, once every ten days. In this way all the larvæ present in the watercourse were killed before they had time to reach the pupa stage, but on account of the expense of drying out the channels21 grass; but in spite of these experiments I consider that it would be very inad- visable to use a method from which there would be a danger of any kerosene oil reaching the crops. Nor do I think it would be advisable to use a preparation, such as "larvicide," which colours the water red. If in any year the crops were poor it, would certainly be ascribed by natives, and even by many Europeans, to the use of either of these methods. With proper precautions, however, it is quite possible in certain places to pour kerosene oil on the watercourses without any of it reaching the land; and on this point my experiments showed the following results :22 watercourses, and while these are drying in the sun, oil may be poured on them with great advantage. On account of the fact that special precautions are necessary when kerosene oil is used as a larvicide on the watercourses, this method can only be carried out under careful supervision. II.23 in various directions it was comparatively easy to drain these away into the irrigation watercourses, and this was done every time rain fell. More dangerous breeding grounds are formed by the surface drains which exist throughout the lines. From the fact that these drains have little or no fall, rain accumulates in them for many days, and after a week or so they swarm with anopheles larvæ. Owing to the large amount of water they contain they are difficult to deal with. Some were dried out with buckets, and on others oil was poured. During 1902 the rainfall was a very small one, but in years of heavy rain a great deal of labour would be required to keep these drains free from larvæ. (c) Permanent "tanks" and pools. One large "tank" near the Royal Artillery bazaar was filled in by the can- tonment authorities. Over 250 smaller tanks and pools have been filled in by contract labour. (d) Numerous other breeding places have been dealt with as they have been discovered. The small drains carrying off water from the baths, standpipes, etc., in which larvæ were frequently found, have been swept out regularly, tins and buckets kept full of water in the lines in case of fire have been emptied weekly, as have also the horse troughs and cisterns. The only breeding places which have not been dealt with in any way are the swimming baths. Numerous ano- pheleslarvæ were found in the two large swimming baths in August and September. As they take three days to empty and a fortnight to refill, it was difficult to suggest any effective method of preventing them from acting as breeding places. The following details of the work are taken from my diary during the year. The operations were commenced under favourable circumstances, for at the end of March no adult anopheles mosquitoes could be found by careful search in the houses, and as the irrigation water-supply had been cut off for some time, there were comparatively few breeding places to be dealt with. The first object was to get all the irrigation watercourses thoroughly cleaned out and their edges made smooth and free from grass and weed. Twenty coolies under a headman of the canal department were engaged, and work on the watercourses was started on the 2nd of April. The fresh supply of water entered the canals on the 9th April, and a very few anopheles larvæ were found in them on the 13th and 14th. Some of the watercourses were almost hidden from view by thick pampas grass and branches of trees which grew on their banks, and as it was very necessary that this thick growth of vegetation should be cleared away as quickly as possible, so that the watercourses might be converted into clean channels exposed to the sun and air, it was found desirable
24 to employ a larger staff of temporary men to carry out this first work. From the 21st of April to the end of the month, therefore, between forty and fifty coolies were employed daily on the irrigation watercourses. By the end of April all the watercourses in the area of the operations had been thoroughly cleaned out all the grass growing on their banks had been cut down, and their edges had been made as smooth as possible. On the 20th of April the water-supply of the canals was again shut off. As a result of this many pools were left in the watercourses and in the jalahars. A few anopheles larvæ and numerous culex larvæ were found in all these pools. Most of them were dried out by the men with tins and buckets, but as an experiment a few of the pools were covered with a layer of kerosene oil. This killed all the larvæ present in about twenty minutes, but three days afterwards (on the 24th) young anopheles and culex larvæ were again found in these pools. On the evening of the 24th of April heavy rain fell for some hours. This caused many pools to form throughout the area and gave an indication of what pools would be most dangerous during the rainy season. A map showing the more permanent pools was now made, and additional men employed to commence filling them in with earth. In the meantime the water of the superficial pools was drained away by digging small channels leading into the irrigation watercourses, and, until the more permanent pools could be filled in, they were dried by baling out the water with buckets, and throwing it on the open plain where it would dry quickly in the sun. After all the watercourses had been dealt with for the first time in the manner described, two men were permanently applied to each branch. Their duties were25 The irrigation water-supply started again on May 6th and was not shut off for more than two or three days at a time throughout the summer. In spite of the constant cleaning operations a few anopheleslarvæ, and a considerable number of culex larvæ were found in the watercourses on May 12th. By covering the shallow baskets with muslin the men were able to catch and destroy a good number of these larvæ at the same time as they collected the leaves. On May 15th the bricking of the watercourse running through the centre of the lines was commenced, and for this purpose the water was shut off from this branch and the others which obtained their supply from it. On the 14th of May slight rain fell, and the pools formed were treated in the same manner as on the previous occasion. The filling in of permanent pools with earth and the cleaning of the watercourses was continued steadily, but in spite of this, a certain number of anopheles larvae were found in all the watercourses from May 15th onwards. Along the smooth edges they were not, as a rule, to be found, but in many of the watercourses roots of trees projected into the channel, and in their shelter larvæ were generally present. All the larger roots were therefore cut off with hatchets to the level of the bank and so got rid of. From May 30th to June 3rd inclusive I made careful observations throughout the area of operations and throughout another part of the cantonment to ascertain whether any success in the reduction of the number of larvæ and adult mosqui- toes had been attained. The results showed that although in the area of opera- tions a few larvæ could be found in all the watercourses by careful search, the number present was far less than in the uncleaned watercourses in other parts of the cantonment. In the watercourses of the British Infantry bazaar for example an enormous number of larvæ were found, and even without dipping with a tin they could be seen among the grass and weed at the edges. It was evident that up to the end of May the breeding of larvæ in the watercourses of the area of operations had been prevented to a very considerable extent. Cor- responding success was attained with regard to the number of adult insects to be found in the houses. On June 3rd after careful search for over an hour I could not find a single adult anopheles mosquito in the Royal Artillery bazaar. On the same day I caught ten adult A. culicifacies in the British Infantry bazaar in about half an hour without much difficulty. During June, however, the number of larvæ in the watercourses of the area of operations increased considerably in spite of the same methods being con- tinued. I have already mentioned that by reason of some of the watercourses having no outlet, the water in them is stagnant except for about three hours a day while the Persian wheels are working. However clean they are kept, they E
26 form for this reason exceedingly favourable breeding grounds for anopheles mos- quitoes. Finding that cleaning operations were not completely successful in pre- venting larvæ from appearing in large numbers in these watercourses, I tried the plan from June 15th of making a " band " at the beginning of each branch, empty- ing out all the water in the branch, allowing it to dry in the sun, and again letting in fresh water [method (c) page 20]. By this means all the larvæ present in the branch at the time were killed. During the month of June I found that larvæ required ten to twelve days to develop from the very young stage into adults, and to kill all larvæ it was therefore necessary to dry each branch about once every ten days. I carried out this plan for six weeks, but on account of the expense of drying out the branches, which was done partly by working the Persian wheels and partly by baling out the water with tins and buckets, and the fact that such operations interfered to some extent with irrigation, I ceased it about the middle of July and returned to the method of keeping the edges of the watercourses clean and removing all floating leaves and débris. From the beginning of June the operations carried on, and the results of ex- aminations for larvæ and adults, may be more conveniently described under the headings of the various sections into which the area of operations was arbitrarily divided. I.27 again shut off and the branch dried, but before the drying was completed the branch was refilled by rain on the 10th, so it was again dried and fresh water let in on the 13th. New broods of larvæ were not found again until the 17th. On the 22nd there was very little water in this branch and numerous full- grown and young anopheles larvæ were found in it. As the supply of water was so small that none could reach the Persian wheel, oil was poured on the branch, which killed all the larvæ. Sufficient water for irrigation did not reach this branch again until the beginning of August, and on the 9th of August young larvæ were found. Full-grown larvæ were not found until the 22nd, when this branch had again become so shallow as to form only a series of pools. These pools were dried out. With the return of the irrigation water-supply cleaning operations were carried on daily, but in spite of this very many full-grown larvæ and innumerable young ones were again found on the 31st of August. With proper precautions to prevent any oil reaching the Persian wheel [see method (d) page 20], I therefore covered the whole branch with a layer of kerosene oil. On the next day no larvæ at all were found. The good effect of the oil lasted about a week; on the 7th of September young anopheles larvæ were again found and on the 15th numerous full-grown larvæ. With the same precautions as before, oil was again poured on the first half of the branch on the 17th of September, and on the 18th no larvæ were found, except a few at the very end where the oil had not reached. On the 24th of September a few very young larvæ were again found (the effect of the oil having passed off) and on the 28th when the branch was so shallow as to form only a chain of pools, full-grown larvæ were present. These pools were dried out. At the beginning of October the irrigation water-supply was cut off and this branch was dry throughout its length on the 3rd of October. The supply re-commenced on the 9th of October and young larvæ were found on the 14th. On the 22nd it contained many full-grown larvæ and some pupæ, but on this date the irrigation-supply was again cut off, so that on the 23rd this branch contained only a few pools which were easily dried out. On the 24th of October fresh pools were formed by rain, but on the 27th no larvæ were found in these pools and they were dry on the 28th. The irrigation-supply was resumed on the 5th of November, but it only ran for three days, and on the 11th with the exception of some pools under the bridges, this branch was dry throughout. A few young anopheles larvæ were found in these pools. They were dried out, and together with all the other watercourses this one remained dry until the irrigation water-supply was again given on the 29th of November. This branch had now been dry for fully twenty days, and as at this time no adult anopheles mosquitoes could be found in the houses, it afforded a good opportunity of testing whether any adults were really present, though none could be detected by careful search, or not. If adult anopheles mosquitoes were present in the houses, E 2
28 it is reasonable to suppose that they would again lay their eggs in the branch as they had done throughout the year. No young larvæ were, however, found in this or in any of the other branches from the time of arrival of fresh water on November 29th up to the end of the winter. On December 5th the irrigation supply was again cut off and a chain of pools left in the branch. These were allowed to dry in the sun, and afforded exceedingly favourable breeding places, but no eggs or larvæ appeared in them or in the pools of any of the other branches. A few details may now be given regarding the watercourse which was rendered permanently smooth and free from weed and grass, by lining it with bricks plastered with cement. The total length of the bricked portion is 4,985 feet. Before being bricked, it formed an exceedingly dirty weed-grown ditch containing almost stagnant water, running through the centre of the lines and within a few yards of the front of the barracks, the military prison, and the hospital. In addition to its being a favourable breeding ground of anopheles mosquitoes, it formed the depositing-ground for most of the old tins, bottles, and rubbish of all descriptions from the lines and barracks. As a result of the bricking it has been converted into a clean-flowing channel about five feet wide and four feet deep, running with moderate velocity and in an efficient manner. A sliding door has been placed at its commencement by means of which the flow may be regulated and the channel flushed out. The bricking was commenced on May 15th and completed at the end of July. Although from a sanitary point of view the bricking of this watercourse has been of great benefit, the result from the point of view of destruction of anopheles breeding grounds has not fully realized our expectations. We had hoped that after bricking this channel the flow of water in it would be sufficiently swift to entirely prevent its acting as a breeding place. This, however, is not the case, and, if left entirely alone, it still remains as a breeding ground of anopheles mosquitoes, though not nearly to the same extent as formerly. This is due partly to the fact that the flow of water is still only very moderate, and partly to the numerous leaves which, falling into the water from the trees above, collect at the bridges and form a suitable shelter for larvæ. During part of August I did no cleaning operations whatever on this water- course with the object of testing the efficacy of the work of bricking. Although no larvæ could, as a rule, be found along the clean plastered sides of the channel, they were numerous at the bridges and under the leaves. After this I constantly employed two men with baskets to take out all the leaves and to keep the sides of the channel clean and free from mud. As a result of this the number of larvæ to be found was very much diminished, and it may fairly be said that, while the water is actually running, one or two men constantly employed in this way could keep this bricked watercourse almost completely free of anopheles
29 larvæ. When the irrigation water-supply stops, however, a number of pools remain in this watercourse as in the unbricked ones, and these would also require constant attention.* The above descriptions may be taken as fair examples of the methods employed and the results obtained in all the watercourses of the area of opera- tions. It will be seen that though various plans were carefully tried, it was not possible to prevent anopheles larvæ constantly appearing in the watercourses in large numbers. By continuous efforts it is possible to check the breeding to a certain extent, and to kill a great many of the larvæ, but if the measures are stopped for even a week at a time, the condition becomes almost the same as it would be had no operations at all been carried out. II.30 drains in this section were found also to afford excellent breeding places for ano- pheles mosquitoes, and during this month it required great care to keep them free from larvæ. Another class of breeding place found during this month were the drains and pools formed by the waste water of the wells. This waste water of wells is difficult to deal with, for it cannot be drained away on account of the level- ness of the ground. In this section it was dealt with by collecting it in a deep pool, which was kept constantly covered with a layer of oil. During July, in spite of constant attention being paid to all breeding places, the number of adult mos- quitoes (A. culicifacies and A. Rossi) found in the houses, increased considerably, and towards the end of the month specimens of both species could be caught fairly easily at any time. During August the chief breeding places in this section were the roadside surface drains, the deep pools of the roadsides, the drains carrying off water from the wells and from the bazaars, a few irrigation pools in a garden in front of the bazaar, and the gumlahs of water kept outside each house. During part of the month the road in front of the bazaar was being relaid. In road-making it is the practice of the contractors to use the surface drain, which runs at the side of the road they are laying, as a reservior of water. One end of the drain is closed by a barrier of bricks and earth, and the drain is then filled with water for use in their work. A collection of water fifty yards or more in length is thus made, which quickly becomes swarming with anopheles larvæ. Within the limits of the can- tonment the practice of filling these drains with water was stopped with some difficulty, as the workmen refused to continue laying the roads unless it was allowed. Outside the cantonment limit it was still carried on, and the constant emptying out of the water in these drains every few days required much labour. In the absence of urgent work of this kind my men were employed filling in the roadside pools with earth. In the meantime all pools were kept covered with a layer of oil. In this month it was found necessary to repeat the oiling of pools at least every three days as the larvæ developed so rapidly, and under the great heat the oil quickly evaporated. During the month of August a very large number of A. Rossi were present in the houses of the bazaar. The number of adult A. culicifacies had also increased somewhat, though they were not by any means as plentiful as A. Rossi, nor were they so common as in other bazaars of the cantonment where no operations had been carried on. During September and October the same class of breeding places had to be dealt with. Most of the pools had by this time been filled in with earth, and, as the rains had almost ceased, the work was less. Constant inspection, however, was necessary to keep larvæ from appearing in every collection of water in and round the bazaar. Tins and other receptacles of water had to be constantly
31 emptied, shallow drains to be swept out, and a layer of oil kept constantly on overflow pools of the wells and other collections of water that could not be dealt with in any other way. During September the filling in of a large pond near the bazaar was com- pleted by the cantonment authorities. At the beginning of September there was a temporary diminution in the number of adult insects to be found in the houses, but at the end of the month and during October their numbers were certainly as great, if not greater, than during August. A few specimens of other species; viz., A. Stephensi, A. pul cherrimus, and A. fuliginosus, were also found during September. During November the development of larvæ was less rapid and the number to be found in the different breeding places gradually diminished. A progressive decrease in the number of adult anopheles mosquitoes to be found in the houses also occurred, and at the end of this month it was difficult to catch a specimen of either species. At the beginning of December no adult anopheles mosquitoes of any kind could be found in the houses, and from this time onwards no fresh batches of larvæ appeared in any of the breeding places. A similar disappearance of adults and larvæ was, however, noted in other parts of the cantonment where no operations had been carried on. III.32 The number of adult insects found in the barracks increased quickly during this month. On July 8th large numbers of A. Rossi were collected from the barracks and harness rooms, and on the 11th these rooms also contained a fair number of A. culicifacies. Throughout the month, however, the number of adult anopheles mosquitoes present in the barracks and other parts of this section was not nearly so great as in the parts of the cantonment where no operations had been carried on. The following is a list of the places where anopheles larvæ were found in this section during August:33 attention to all breeding places, adult anopheles mosquitoes could always be found in the bungalows and in the servants' quarters. In several of the compounds as many as twenty pools containing anopheles larvæ would be found at each examination, as well as small drains, iron cisterns, and the stone water reservoirs which are present in the garden of every Indian bungalow, and although all these breeding places were effectively dealt with at each examin- ation, in less than a week they had nearly all re-formed and become again swarming with larvæ. One of the most difficult breeding places to deal with in this section was the waste water from the garden wells, which caused a small marshy area to form round the well in which anopheles mosquitoes bred freely. Wherever possible this water was drained or swept away, but in most compounds frequent application of oil was all that could be done. Other difficult breeding places to deal with in this section were the pools of water round the road-side trees. As these pools are replenished daily by a fresh supply of irrigation-water, before they have completely dried up, they form favourable breeding places. VI.34 (9) A group of large pools near the Police guard. (10) 22 deep road-side pools behind the Royal Artillery Bazaar." In addition to these, most of the surface drains were full of standing water and innumerable small pools and broad collections of water covered the area on every side. Rain fell again on the 1st and on the 3rd of August, so that even the smaller pools had no opportunity of drying up for a week or more. Large numbers of anopheles larvæ were found in all these pools, and even in the broad shallow collections of water on the open plain, as early as two days after their formation. As soon as a pool was found to contain larvæ it was covered with a layer of kerosene oil, or dried out, and marked to be filled in with earth. By the end of October over 250 of the larger sized pools had been filled in with broken bricks and earth. The above is a brief account of the operations against mosquitoes carried out during the summer of 1902. The greater part of the work of filling in pools and emptying out water from the surface drains was done by contract labour, so as to avoid the necessity of constantly watching the coolies to see that they were working properly, thus leaving myself and my hospital assistant more time for searching for new breeding places. Work of this kind is also done much more quickly and less expensively by putting it out on contract than by employ- ing a large number of coolies on a stated daily wage. My object was as far as possible to deal permanently with each breeding place as it was found, so as to avoid having repeatedly to deal with the same breeding place. This, however, can only be done with a limited number of permanent pools, and the chief diffi- culty met with in Mian Mir arises from the fact that the bulk of the breeding places require constant and regular attention throughout the summer. I.35 occasionally come to the pools and lay their eggs as they had always done during the summer, for the nights during December were not invariably cold. During December, however, not a single anopheles egg or young larva was found in any of the breeding places in the area of operations. This was strong evidence that all adult anopheles mosquitoes had disappeared from the area. Further proof was afforded by the following experiments. Having chosen a house in which abundant adult anopheles mosquitoes had been constantly found during the sum- mer, I covered the floor with sheets, and having carefully closed all the outlets, four or five cones composed of a mixture of nitrate of potash, charcoal, sulphur, and pyrethrum powder were burnt in the house for two hours. During the sum- mer I had proved that two of these cones burnt in a house of the same size were sufficient to kill all the mosquitoes in it. In December, however, not a single dead anopheles was found on the sheets spread on the ground. This experiment was repeated in a number of houses, stables, sheds, arches of bridges, and other places where it appeared probable adult anopheles mosquitoes might hybernate through the winter. Numerous culex mosquitoes (which were very plentiful in December and January, and regularly laid their eggs in the breeding places), were killed by this method, but no anopheles. I conclude therefore that all insects of the latter genus had disappeared from the area or died from the cold by the beginning of December. It was necessary now to ascertain whether this disappearance was a natural one or whether it was due to the operations. Control observations were therefore made in a part of the cantonment where no operations had been carried on and in a village (Shadara) about six miles from Mian Mir where permanent breeding places of all kinds were abundant. The results of these observations which were made in January and the beginning of February were as follow:36 (3) In Shadara a fair number of adult specimens of A. fuliginosus and a few A. pulcherrimus were found in the houses throughout the winter. Both these species are at all times very rare in the Royal Artillery lines and it is not surprising therefore that in the winter none should be found there, though they were present in the village of Shadara. (4) Eggs, young larvæ and pupæ of A. fuliginosus and A. pulcherrimus were found in new breeding places formed during the winter in Shadara though no larvæ of A. culicifacies or A. Rossi were found in these pools. The only adult anopheles mosquitoes which were found in Shadara did not, therefore, hybernate in any sense of the term, but carried on their usual habit of laying eggs which developed into pupæ and adults even in the coldest months of winter. It is evident from the above observations that as regards the Punjab all species do not tide over the winter by the same methods. A. fuliginosus and A. pulcherrimus live through the winter continuing the same habits as in the autumn. The adult insects of A. culicifacies completely disappear or die off during the winter but some larvæ of this species remain alive in permanent breed- ing places in a more or less "hybernating" condition until the warm weather comes again. Both adults and larvæ of A. Rossi disappear entirely from the Punjab during the winter, and do not return again until the end of June or the beginning of July, some time after A. culicifacies has already become fairly prevalent.* The observations appeared to show that A. culicifacies, the carrier of malaria in Mian Mir, is able to tide over the Punjab winter solely by means of "hybernating" larvæ, and it was therefore my object during the winter months to kill off all such larvæ within a wide distance of the area. As no new batches of eggs were being laid in the breeding places this was not a very difficult task. Daily expeditions were made in every direction from the centre of the lines, so that the ground was covered in ever widening circles and no pool or collection of water of any kind was left unoperated upon. At the same time the experiments of burning pyrethrum cones or neem leaves in the houses of the area were continued, as I wished to leave no margin for errors of observation in the previous experiments. For a number of these experiments I used dried neem leaves instead of pyrethrum cones as it was difficult to obtain a sufficient supply of the latter. During the summer I had found that neem leaves * The observations concerning the complete disappearance of adult specimens of A. culicifacies and A. Rossi and the persistence of adults of A. fuliginosus (in the form of an interesting "winter variety") have been confirmed by Major Adie, I.M.S., at Ferozepore.
37 are quite efficacious in killing mosquitoes, if a sufficient quantity is used; and their employment has the additional advantage of not being disliked by natives. After a large number of houses in the bazaar and syce lines had been treated in this way with a negative result, it became apparent that this part of the work was unnecessary, and it was discontinued at the end of February. By the end of this month all larvæ had been killed off within a radius of nearly two miles from the outer limits of the area and I had convinced myself that no adult insects were present in the houses. Throughout March no larvæ or adults were found in any parts of the area. Throughout the winter a few adults and larvæ of A. fuliginosus and a few 38 which they are very abundant. Such a gradual invasion of a new area results from the fact that all newly hatched mosquitoes do not return to the house or village from which their parent came, but fly to houses in the opposite direc- tion; and having found their food there, proceed to breeding pools still further removed from the original village. A gradual invasion of the Royal Artillery lines by adult A. culicifacies occurred in this manner from surrounding villages where no operations had been carried on, but which were connected with the lines by isolated houses and breeding places. There is still a fourth method by which anopheles mosquitoes reach the area from outside, viz., by being conveyed in carriages, carts, and other vehicles from neighbouring towns and villages. This method was one of daily observation in our work during 1901 and 1902. When all these methods are taken into consideration, it is not surprising that in spite of the vigorous operations during the winter, anopheles mosquitoes (A. culicifacies) were again almost as prevalent in the area at the end of May as they had been at the beginning of the previous year's work. As in the previous year, however, no A. Rossi or its larvæ had been found in the area or in surround- ing villages up to this time, and if the seasonal prevalence of this species during the present year is similar to that of last year they cannot be expected until the end of June or the beginning of July. It will be apparent from the results just recorded that the destruction of anopheles mosquitoes in Mian Mir is a task which must be repeated every year. II.39 and contained about 78 children, 56 per cent. of whom had malaria parasites in their blood in October 1901. In August 1902 I caused all the inhabitants (men, women, and children) of this series of syce lines to be moved into tents on a site ¾ of a mile from the nearest irrigation watercourse and over 600 yards from the nearest pool. As a result of this no adult anopheles mosquitoes were found in any of the tents during September and October of the year of operations. In every other respect, however, these people were under precisely the same conditions on the new site as they had been on the old, except that, being in tents, they were more exposed to the sun and rain than they had been in their houses on the old site. The result of this experiment is given in Part III (page 44). This experiment also afforded an opportunity of testing to a certain extent the practicability of the method of 40 grains of quinine according to age,* once a day for the first ten consecutive days and afterwards, irrespective of age, a dose of ten grains of quinine twice a week throughout September, October, and November. In the middle of October when, in spite of the treatment, a few new infections occurred among the children, ten days41 PART III. Results. In considering the results of the operations up to the end of May 1903, the results obtained with regard to the prevalence of anopheles mosquitoes may be taken first. On this important point the following conclusions must, I think, be admitted:42 canals was certainly less than in the uncleaned ones, and for this reason less than could be found during the preceding year. (8) Regarding A. Rossi it cannot, I think, be said with certainty that the number of adult insects present in the area was less than in other parts of the cantonment, nor was it, to any appreciable extent, less than during the preceding year. In all parts of the cantonment during both years this species was so abundant that any difference which existed was negligable. Except on the supposition that they came from some place outside the area of operations, it is very difficult to account for the almost sudden appearance of large numbers of this species at the beginning of July. It is also difficult to account for the fact that in spite of all breeding places of this species within the area (which ex- tended to a distance of nearly half a mile in every direction from the houses where the adult insects were caught), being regularly dealt with, the number of adult insects present in the houses increased considerably instead of diminishing. (9) During the winter all anopheles adults had, as far as could be ascer- tained by careful search and experiment, entirely disappeared from the area, and all larvæ were killed off within a radius of nearly two miles in every direc- tion from its outer limits. In the spring, however, anopheles larvæ and adults re-appeared in the area and at the end of May, 1903, A. culicifacies was almost as prevalent as it had been at the same time in the previous year. (10) For a few days during May, 1903, the area was flooded with numerous adult A. fuliginosus, which apparently came from the village of Kora, 2½ miles away, and which disappeared almost as suddenly as they had come. It is evident, therefore, that the problem of materially reducing the number of anopheles mosquitoes in Mian Mir is a difficult one. The chief difficulty arises from the fact that the majority of breeding places are such that they cannot be permanently done away with, and it seems doubtful whether any operations short of permanent extermination of all possible breeding places will produce a marked reduction in the number of anopheles mosquitoes. It should be remembered, however, that the operations have only been in progress one year, and that by continually rendering all possible breeding places inhospitable for larvæ, a per- manent diminution may in time be effected. Secondly we may consider whether any reduction in the amount of malaria has been effected, and if so, the means by which this has been brought about. The tests of a reduction in the amount of malaria are, in order of importance:43 (3) A reduction in the percentage of infection with malaria parasites among the troops. I.44 destruction was carried on, is represented by the proportion as 1.75: 1, a much greater decrease than can be accounted for solely by the fact of the year being an exceptionally healthy one. The difference between the relative decrease of the spleen rates in theses two bazaars is not so marked, being represented by the proportions as 1.159:1 in the British Infantry Bazaar and as 1.171: 1 in the Royal Artillery Bazaar, respectively, but this may be accounted for by the fact that in places where there are a large number of chronically enlarged spleen cases, even in the entire absence of new infections, it takes many months for the spleen rate to diminish very markedly.* The difference between the percentage of infected children in these two bazaars in September was much greater than in October and it is reason able to conclude from the following table that the onset of the season of greatest liability to infection had, as a result of the operations against mosquitoes, been delayed, and that the season had been shortened in the Royal Artillery Bazaar. Table showing the percentage of infected children during some months of the years 1901 and 1902 in the Royal Artillery Bazaar and in the British Infan try Bazaar, respectively. Oct. 1901. Nov. 1901. Dec. 1901. Apl. 1902. June 1902. July 1902. Aug. 1902. Sept. 1902. Oct. 1902. Nov. 1902. Royal Artillery Bazaar 35 45 The results of this experiment were very striking. The old site was situated within 140 yards of an irrigation watercourse, in which numerous anopheles mosquitoes (A. culicifacies) were breeding, and many adult insects of this species were present in the houses in October 1901. At that time 56.5 per cent. of the children were found infected with malaria parasites. The new site was situated on the open plain, ¾ of a mile from the nearest irrigation watercourse and over 600 yards from the nearest pool. As a result of this no adult anopheles mos- quitoes were found in any of the tents during September and October of the year of operations, not a single case of fever occurred among the adults throughout the season, and on October 24th (the height of the fever season) parasites were only found in one child out of twenty-five examined. That is, by their removal from the vicinity of anopheles breeding places and without treatment of any kind, the percentage of infection of these children had been reduced from 56.5 in October 1901 to only 4 in October 1902. Their spleen rate also had decreased from 75 per cent. in April 1902 to 60 per cent. in October 1902. This experiment proves that if it is possible to do away entirely with breeding places of anopheles mosquitoes in any place, malaria quickly disappears. It has already been mentioned that in every respect other than proximity to breeding places of anopheles mosquitoes, this body of people were under the same condi- tions on the new site as they had been on the old, except that being in tents they were more exposed to the sun and rain than they had been in their houses on the old site. (3)46 begin the treatment earlier in the season. The effect of the treatment on the spleen rate is shown in the following table:47 The following tables have been furnished me by the Senior Medical Officer, Mian Mir:48 ROYAL ARTILLERY HOSPITAL. Jan. 1902. Feb. Mar. Apl. May. June. July. Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Average monthly strength. * * 98 311 298 287 276 267 272 263 * * Admissions 4 5 4 8 1 1 2 1249 the regiment, and no control was exercised to see whether the men took the dose or not. It is probable that not one man in ten ever took the quinine, for very few European soldiers will take quinine, if they can possibly avoid doing so, being in this respect far more difficult to deal with than natives. During 1902, however, all the troops were marched to the hospitals twice a week, and the quinine was given under the supervision of a medical officer. To this fact, therefore, I attribute in large measure the low admission rate for malarial fevers among the British Infantry. At any rate as regards the statistics of the British Infantry hospital also, a certain margin must be allowed for errors in diagnosis. I am informed that during 1901 it was the rule to admit every case of "fever" at once, and return it as "ague." During 1902, much greater care was taken in diagnosis, and it is even possible that in the British Infantry hospital some cases, which were really cases of malarial fever, were returned under some other heading; for it is difficult to believe that during August and September not a single case of malarial fever should have occurred among over 300 men, at a time when the endemic index of the regimental bazaar was increasing rapidly, (15 per cent. in August and 32 per cent. in September), and when, from the reports of British officers living in the lines, a large number of native servants were suffering from malarial fever.* The events which happened in 1902 render it very difficult to form a correct estimate from hospital statistics of the efficacy of the operations of mosquito destruction and of the other measures carried out in the Royal Artillery lines. These events were the arrival of a second regiment into the British Infantry lines at the beginning of October, and the departure of both batteries of Royal Artillery to Delhi at the end of that month. At the most important time of the year, therefore, the statistics of the Royal Artillery were rendered valueless, because after about the 4th of October any man of the Royal Artillery who was attacked with malaria on the line of march to Delhi was returned to Mian Mir and admitted into the hospital there. Mian Mir was in fact kept as a sick depôt to which the men who fell ill on the line of march were returned. For this reason the statistics for men of the Royal Artillery during November show 9 admissions for malarial fever out of a strength of 54 and during December 16 admissions out of a strength of 47. The inclusion of these figures in the annual return has made it appear that the ratio of admissions per 1,000 among * Seventy-eight admissions into the station hospital at Mian Mir during 1902 were returned as having been due to congestion of the liver. The number is considerably larger than in any previous year on record and it is very probable that in ordinary years many of these cases would have been returned under the heading of ague. The monthly numbers of cases returned as congestion of the liver were: 0 in January, reach in February and March, 7 in April (after the commencement of the ante-malaria operations), 6 in May, 9 in June, 28 in July, 13 in August, 6 in September, 7 in October, and 1 in November. It may also be mentioned that there were 34 cases returned as simple continued fever during 1902 as compared with only 1 in 1901. H
50 the Royal Artillery was greater during 1902 than that among the British Infantry. (Table II. Ratio of admissions of Royal Artillery 384 per 1,000; of the British Infantry 234 per 1,000.) Where so many factors affect the statistics it is in fact impossible to obtain any results of value from their consideration. It is, however, a matter for congratulation that although during 1900 and during 1901 the death rate for malarial fevers among the Royal Artillery was higher than among the British infantry, during 1902 the results are reversed in favour of the Royal Artillery. (Table II.) I regret that from want of time I have been unable to carry out the third test, viz., the examination of films of blood from a large number of men in the British Infantry and Royal Artillery respectively in order to ascertain whether a reduc- tion in the percentage of infection of the troops themselves has taken place. A few words may be added regarding the respective value of the different methods of prophylaxis attempted in Mian Mir. That mosquito destruction, if it can be carried out successfully, will effec- tually banish malaria, is I think sufficiently proved by the results obtained in the Royal Artillery Bazaar and in the first series of syce lines. Even though it was not possible to reduce the number of anopheles mosquitoes very markedly in the Royal Artillery lines, a decrease in the amount of malaria in the Royal Artillery Bazaar greater than can be accounted for by reason of the year being an unusually healthy one, occurred, which can only be attributed to the opera- tions against mosquitoes. In the syce lines (which by their removal were taken entirely out of the range of anopheles mosquitoes) malaria almost entirely disappeared. The chief drawback to mosquito destruction is its difficulty and expense. It must be admitted that although we have been given, practically speaking, a free hand in matters of expenditure and in the amount of labour employed, and although my own services and those of a hospital assistant have been confined exclusively to this work, we have, up to the present, made but little impression on the number of anopheles mosquitoes. It remains to be seen what the results of the second year's operations, will be, but unless a more marked reduction in the number of anopheles mosquitoes can be effected this year than during the previous one, it would, I think, be inadvisable to continue operations on these lines in Mian Mir during a third year. I attribute great value to the other operations carried on, viz., the attempt to lessen the effects of obvious sources of infection of anopheles mosquitoes in cantonments, and it is, I think, of some importance to have shown the practi- cability of the method of treating large numbers of native children regularly with quinine. This is a measure which requires no special knowledge and one which is applicable to every place where large bodies of native children are gathered together in the vicinity of European troops. One of the features of
51 the year was the marked freedom from attacks of malaria of the adult syces in the Royal Artillery lines. No statistics are available regarding these men, but the fact was apparent to all the officers in the Royal Artillery. During 1901 all the adult syces received a prophylactic dose of ten grains of quinine twice a week, but I am informed that, in spite of this, great difficulty was frequently experienced in getting the work done, on account of the large number of syces incapacitated by fever. During 1902, however, although none of the adult syces received a prophylactic dose of quinine, scarcely a single case of fever occurred among them throughout the year. I attribute this almost entirely to the continued and systematic treatment with quinine of the children (who are un- doubtedly the chief source of infection) and in the case of the first series of syce lines to their removal to a place where no mosquitoes could be found. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75025911.tif]
52 APPENDIX A. Charts of some cases of fever admitted into the Royal Artillery Hospital at Mian Mir in which repeated examinations failed to show the presence of malaria parasites and which recovered without quinine treatment. Such cases are, however, frequently returned in hospital statistics as ague. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75025914.tif]
53 APPENDIX B. Rough statement of expenses incurred for the anti-malarial operations at Mian Mir (up to October 31st, 1902 ). No. Item. Amount. R a. p. 1 Wages of coolies at As. 4 each per day 711 ... ... 2 Filling poolsNo. 6. NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. FIRST REPORT OF THE ANTI-MALARIAL OPERATIONS AT MIAN MIR, 1901-1903. BY CAPTAIN S. P. JAMES, M.B. (LOND.), I.M.S. (On Special Duty.) ISSUED UNLER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75025932.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1903 Price 12 Annas or 1s. 2d.
