IP/QB, 10 m 91 b. No. 21. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ON THE STANDARDISATION OF ANTI-TYPHOID VACCINE. BY CAPTAIN GEORGE LAMB, M.D., I.M.S., (Director, Pasteur Institute of India), AND CAPTAIN W. B. C. FORSTER, M.B., D.P.H., I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028259.tif] CALCUTTA : OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1906 Price annas 6 or 7d.
No. 21. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ON THE STANDARDISATION OF ANTI-TYPHOID VACCINE. BY CAPTAIN GEORGE LAMB, M.D., I.M.S., (Director, Pasteur Institute of India), AND CAPTAIN W. B. C. FORSTER, M.B., D.P.H., I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028271.tif] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028271.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1905.
Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. H. S. KING & CO., 65, Cornhill, & 9, Pall Mall, London. E. A. ARNOLD, 41 & 43, Maddox Street, Bond Street, London, W. CONSTABLE & CO., 16, James Street, Hay Market, London, W. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & CO., Charing Cross Road, London, W.C. BERNARD QUARITCH, 15, Piccadilly, London, W. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 & 51, Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & CO., Cambridge. ON THE CONTINENT. R. FRIEDLÄDER & SOHN, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin, N.W. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. IN INDIA. THACKER, SPINK & CO., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. S. K. LAHIRI & CO., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & CO., Calcutta. HIGGINBOTHAM & CO., Madras. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & CO, Madras. G. A. NATESAN & CO., Madras. THACKER & CO., LD., Bombay. A. J. COMBRIDGE & CO., Bombay. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & CO., Bombay. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazair Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-Am Press, Lahore. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission Press, Rangoon. SUNDER PANDURANG, Bombay. A. M. & J. FERGUSON, Ceylon.
List of Numbers of Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India (New Series) published previous to the present issue. No.1. Standardisation of Calmette's anti-venomous serum with pure cobra venom: the deterioration of this serum through keeping in India, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 3 or 4d. No.2. Malaria in India, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No.3. Some observations on the poison of Russell's Viper (Daboia Russellii), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 5 or 6d. No.4. On the action of the venoms of the Cobra and of the Daboia on the red blood cor- puscles and on the blood plasma, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No.5. Specificity of anti-venomous sera, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 3 or 4d. No.6. First report on the anti-malarial operations in Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No.7. Some observations on the poison of the Banded Krait (Bungarus Fasciatus), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No.8. A preliminary report on a parasite found in patients suffering from enlargement of the spleen in India, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No.9. Second report of the anti-malarial operations at Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 10. Specificity of anti-venomous sera (second communication), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 11. On a parasite found in persons suffering from enlargement of the spleen in IndiaON THE STANDARDISATION OF ANTI-TYPHOID VACCINE. FEW will deny that vaccination against typhoid fever has now taken its place amongst the measures of preventive medicine. This achievement is princi- pally due to the brilliant work and the untiring exertions of Wright, who since 1897 has devoted so much time and energy to the various problems which surround this subject. That success has crowned his efforts is certain from the facts, (1) that three scientific committees, successively convoked to examine into the matter, have decided that the statistical evidence is sufficient to show that the incidence and case mortality are reduced by inoculation, and (2) that the Germans have adopted it in their army in the case of troops proceeding to foreign service in Africa. There are still, however, many problems to be solved before anti-typhoid vaccination becomes generally adopted by all who practise preventive medicine, and one of the most important of these problems is the elaboration of some method of standardisation. Before we consider the various methods of standardisation which have been employed heretofore, it will be necessary to glance for a moment at the nature and constitution of the vaccines which are in common use. An anti-typhoid vaccine may be prepared in any of the following ways:2 This was the original method described by Wright2 in 1897. It is the method now recommended by a committee of German bacteriologists convoked at the instance of the Prussian Government3. Such a vaccine we propose to call 'agar vaccine'. An agar vaccine is of similar composition to a broth vaccine, the constituents of the broth and the extra-cellular toxins being, however, in very small quantity. (c) Dissolving up the bodies of the bacteria, either in a broth culture or in the emulsions of the agar cultures, and then filtering through a porcelain filter. It was first shown by Wright and Windsor4 that the filtrate of a broth culture of bacillus typhosus, which had been macerating at 37°C. for a period of five months, diminished the bactericidal power of a serum with which it was mixed to exactly the same degree as the unfiltered culture. These workers did not suggest the use of such a filtrate as a vaccine. Strong5 working with the cholera vibrio prepared a vaccine in the following manner :3 conferred is as great as that given by other vaccines which contain the bodies of the bacteria and lasts as long. Other methods of preparing anti-typhoid vaccine, such as that described by Macfadyan and Rowland, have been promulgated from time to time, but as far as we know all vaccines at present in common use are obtained by one of the methods described above. With this introduction we may now pass on to the question of the standar- disation of these several vaccines, a question which is generally recognised to be of dominating importance. The first desideratum in this connection is of course to place before ourselves a perfectly clear mental picture of what is connoted by the term standardisation. It seems to us that Wright7 has supplied us with an excellent definition of the term. He says, ' Standardisation involves, on the one hand, the determination of the amount of immunising element contained in a standard volume of the vaccine material; on the other hand, the adjustment of the dose administered to the resisting powers of the man or animal subjected to the inoculation.' If we accept this definition, it is evident that the first problems which have to be settled before any scientific method of standardisation can be evolved are problems concerning the nature of the immunising element of the vaccine and the manner in which it accomplishes its object. Let us for a moment consider these questions. It will, we think, be acknowledged by all pathologists that the immunity induced by anti-typhoid vaccination is in the main, if not entirely, a bactericidal immunity, that is to say, that it depends on an increased power of the individual to kill the typhoid bacteria by means of his body fluids, and that there is no evidence so far of an antitoxic immunity. This increased power is due, using the language of Ehrlich, to an increase of the specific amboceptor or immune body in the body fluids and not to any increase of the complement. It is also probable that the organism, after an anti-typhoid inoculation, acquires a habit of producing these protective substances on a stimulus of a much slighter nature than before the inoculation. Such an hypothesis would account for the presence of a certain degree of immunity after the amount of protective substances, which are increased considerably in quantity immediately after an inoculation of anti-typhoid vaccine, had again fallen to normal. It is, however, possible that we have also to deal with the action of the substances called by Wright ' opsonins ' or of the substances named by Metchnikoff 'stimulins'. But the proof of these substances taking any part in the process of typhoid immunity is still lacking. We need not, therefore, take them into account at the present moment. We have consequently only to account for an increased production of immune body which is called forth as a result of the inoculation of the immunising substances contained in the vaccine. B 2
4 Now, it has been proved that, if a considerable quantity of immunising substances be injected into an animal, this increase of immune body is preceded by a diminution called by Wright the ' negative phase' 8. This diminution must be due to a union of the receptors of the immunising substances and the immune body. The mental picture, therefore, which we have formed of the process is as follows :5 The next step in the direction of estimating the amount of bacterial protoplasm was made by Wright 11 when he introduced the blood counting method of estimating both the living and dead germs in a unit volume of vaccine. Leishman and his colleagues 12 were unable to obtain consistently satisfactory results by this method. They found that in the case of broth vaccines errors of from 50 to 100 per cent. in counts of the same film, made by different observers, were by no means uncommon. Harrison 13 has recently introduced a modification of Wright's method for counting the bacteria contained in a culture. In this worker's hands it has given better results than any method he has tried, and it seemed quite possible to keep the error below ± 10 per cent. in every case. Finally 14 the amount of bacterial protoplasm in a vaccine has been esti- mated by weighing the dried bacterial bodies in a measured quantity of vaccine. This method has not, as far as we know, actually been used in standardising anti-typhoid vaccine, but it has been suggested as likely to be of great help in estimating the strength of a vaccine. All these methods of standardisation aim at an estimation, as accurate as possible, of the bacterial protoplasm contained in a unit of vaccine. They, therefore, are quite inapplicable to the standardisation of 'filtrate vaccines.' Further, if our ultimate aim is a determination of the receptor content of a vaccine, these methods all fall short of an accurate estimate, inasmuch as they take no cognisance of those receptors which are free in the vaccine either as a result of their disassociation from the bacteria or as a result of the dissolution of the bodies of dead germs. Probably this objection might not hold good in the case of agar vaccines or in the case of broth vaccines prepared from young cul- tures, that is, 24 to 48 hours old, if the enumeration or weighment be made before any receptors have become free in the vaccine fluid. It would, however, with our present methods of experimentation be impossible to arrive at any estimate of when this takes place. It appears to us that we must assume that, since bacteria in cultures are constantly dying, receptors will be constantly being set free into the fluid medium. Another objection which can be raised to all these methods of standardisation is that they take no cognisance of the virulence of the organism, the cultures of which are used in the preparation of the vaccines. Now, working with the vibrio choleræ Pfeiffer and Friedberger 15 showed that in the case of killed cultures of this organism the immunising effects were proportional to the virulence of the inocu- lated strain. They concluded that the virulent and the avirulent organisms differ in the number or degree of affinity of their haptophore groups; they demonstrated this conclusion by experiments in which it was shown that a virulent organism bound many more times the number of amboceptors than certain avirulent ones.
6 Strong 16 has recently confirmed and extended the work of Pfeiffer and Friedberger. This observer in a research which had as its object the determi- nation of the exact relationship between the virulence of an organism and its power of binding amboceptors and of producing immunity arrived at the follow- ing conclusions :7 If the dose of vaccine administered is to be adjusted to the resisting powers each individual inoculated, this would involve a careful determination of the amboceptor content of the individual's serum on several occasions before the inoculation. Such an investigation is of course impossible when a large body of men is to be inoculated, but an average, such as has been done recently by Leishman and his collaborateurs,18 can always be obtained, by the system devised by them of pooling equal measures of the different sera and testing the bactericida power of this mixture. As we are dealing here only with an average, this determination may be ignored in practice. But on further consideration of this proposition it is at once clear that the adjustment of the dose of any anti-typhoid vaccine to the average resisting powers of man, that is to say, the determination of the proper proportion of immunising element to the average amboceptor content of human plasma, which should be injected so as to give rise to the best immunity, can only be estimated by direct experiment. Such an experiment has been begun and is still in progress under the direction of Lt.-Col. Leishman.19 Groups of men have been inoculated with different doses of an anti-typhoid vaccine, the constitution and bacterial protoplasm content of which have been carefully noted. The changes which these inoculations brought about in the blood have been thoroughly investigated during a period of four weeks after the first inoculation. While these original investigations have traced the origin and development of the protective substances and the immediate effects with different doses of vaccine, the further observations which are to be prosecuted in India, where the inoculated men have proceeded, will show us the fate of these substances and, what is of great importance, will give us an idea of the degree of immunity which has been conferred on each group of men. When this information has been obtained we shall be in a position to undertake the relative standardisation of anti-typhoid vaccines in general on the basis of the receptor content. For it is to be hoped that we shall then be in possession of a standard vaccine which will be available to all laboratories which manufacture anti-typhoid vaccine for the purpose of relative standardisation after the manner of the Ehrlich unit in the case of diphtheria antitoxin. Being provided with such a vaccine it will be the business of all to standardise against it every vaccine issued. We, therefore, propose to detail a method which we have elaborated with this end in view. This method is in reality an application of the principle upon which Wright's suggestion was based and consists of a comparison of the anti-bactericidal power which is exerted on a normal serum by the standard vaccine and those vaccines with which it is to be compared. Given a certain bactericidal serum we estimate what dilution of the various vaccines when mixed in equal parts with the serum is able to completely remove the bactericidal power of that serum, in other words, in what dilution of vaccine the receptors completely neutralise the amboceptor content of the serum.
8 The following is the detailed description of the technique. The materials required are:9 For each vaccine a series of sterile covered watch glasses numbered from 1 to 10 is placed in front of the operator. Into glass No. 1 undiluted vaccine is placed. From this by means of the diluting pipette, which has been previously sterilised, different dilutions are prepared with normal salt solution, starting with a two-fold dilution and finishing with a ten-fold dilution. In making this series of dilutions we have found it convenient, first to measure out the normal salt solution into the respective watch glasses, and then to add the requisite quantity of vaccine to each. The following table shows at a glance for each dilution the most convenient amounts of the two substances:- No. of watch glass. Dilution. Normal salt solution. Vaccine. 2 2 fold. 100 cm. 100 cm. 3 3 10 to obtain from day to day cultures containing approximately the same number of living bacteria. In a large number of experiments made to test this point we have found that such a culture contains on an average 400,000,000 living bacteria per c.c., when the enumeration was done in the manner described by Wright 21. We can, therefore, calculate that 50 cm. of a 1,000,000-fold dilution of such a culture will on an average contain eight bacteria, a number eminently suitable to indicate whether or not the anti-bactericidal effect of the dilution of vaccine on the serum has been complete. We, therefore, proceed to prepare in sterile watch glasses and by means again of Wright's diluting pipette a 1,000,000-fold dilution of the typhoid culture, using sterile broth as the diluent. The actual amount of this dilution which must be made ready depends of course on the number of vaccines which are being tested. To each tube there is then added 50 cm. of the 1,000,000-fold dilution. The tubes are then thoroughly shaken to insure an even distribution of the bacteria throughout the contents. They are again placed in the incubator at 37°C. and left there for from 18 to 24 hours. At the end of this time 0.5 cc. of sterile broth is added to each tube. They are again incubated, this time for three days. After this interval it is easy to see in which tubes a growth has taken place and in which the contents are sterile. If there be any doubt on this point, or if there be any irregularities, samples are planted on to agar and any resulting growth stained and examined in the usual way. Before passing on to put forward some examples of this method of compar- ative standardisation we have to note several points which have to be carefully attended to in connection with the technique above described. (1) The vaccine, unless it be a filtrate vaccine, must be thoroughly shaken up before testing so as to insure an even distribution of the suspended bacteria. (2) After the serum has been added to the vaccine dilutions the tubes must be thoroughly shaken before being incubated. If the vaccine is one containing the bodies of the bacteria, it is well to shake the tubes once or twice during the period they are in the hot-air chamber. (3) While adding the 50 cm. of the culture dilution to each tube great care must be taken to avoid soiling the sides of the tubes with the living bacteria. The end of the pipette should be carefully introduced, without touching the sides, to the very bottom of the tube before the 50 cm. are expelled. If this point is not consistently attended to, the most discordant results will be obtained. The sides of the tubes become soiled with living bacteria, on which the serum is not able to exert its bactericidal action and which, therefore, grow after the addi- tion of the sterile broth. (4) After the addition of the living bacteria all the tubes must be again thoroughly shaken before being incubated.
11 (5) At least four tubes containing only sterile broth should be inseminated with 50 cm. of the 1,000,000 dilution of the typhoid culture, in order to control the certain presence of living bacteria in the quantum added to each tube. In our experience, however, we have never found that any of these tubes remained sterile. (6) In order to test the sterility of the vaccines, of the serum and of the salt solution samples of these should always be planted on agar or in broth. (7) After the addition of the sterile broth it is necessary to incubate the tubes for three days, as owing to the inhibitory action of the serum growth may be considerably delayed. As an example of the results which are to be obtained by this method, we have now to detail comparative observations made with two vaccines, one broth and one agar, and the sera of three different goats. The vaccines were prepared as follows:12 It will be seen from this table that vaccine I in a two-fold dilution completely removed the bactericidal action of the serum, while in a three-fold dilution it failed to do so. We may, therefore, for purposes of calculation hereafter take it that " neutralisation " between receptor of vaccine and amboceptor of serum would be obtained when a dilution of 2.5 of vaccine was added in equal parts to the serum. on the other hand, the neutralisation point in the case of vaccine II and the serum would be obtained in a 5.5-fold dilution. Thus we see that, as regards receptor content, vaccine I stands in relation to vaccine II as 2.5 to 5.5, or as 1: 2.2. In other words, vaccine 11 is 21 times 'stronger' in immunising elements than vaccine I. 12th May 1905. Experiment II. Serum of goat V. Dilution of vaccine. Vaccine I. Vaccine II. Undiluted Growth. Growth. 2-fold dilution Sterile. ,, 3 ,, ,, ,, ,, 4 ,, ,, ,, Sterile. 5 ,, ,, ,, ,, 6 ,, ,, ,, ,, 7 ,, ,, ,, ,, 8 ,, ,, ,, ,, 9 ,, ,, ,, ,, 10 ,, ,, ,, ,, In this experiment the serum was evidently richer in amboceptor content than was the case in the previous observation. Thus, the neutra- lisation point in the case of vaccine I would be obtained in 1.5-fold dilution and with vaccine II in a 3.5-fold dilution. Thus, the relation of their receptor contents would be as r5 to 3.5, or as 1: 2.3. In other words, vaccine II
13 contains about 21/3 times the amount of immunising element that vaccine I contains. 19th May 1905. Experiment III. Serum of goat VII. Dilution of vaccine. Vaccine I. Vaccine II. Undiluted Growth. Growth. 2-fold dilution ,, ,, 3 ,, ,, 4 Sterile. ,, 5 ,, ,, 6 ,, ,, 7 ,, ,, 8 ,, ,, 9 ,, Sterile. 10 Growth. ,, The growth in tube 10 of vaccine I was evidently an experimental error. It is, therefore, left out of account. It is clear that the serum in this observation was much less bactericidal than in either of the two experiments previously detailed. We can calculate, in the same way as we have done before, that vaccine II is 2 ½5 times stronger as regards its immunising power than vaccine I. When we compare the results of these three observations made with the same two vaccines but with three different sera on three different days, we find that the relative strengths, as regards receptor content, were practically constant, namely, (1) 1: 2.2, (2) 1: 2.3,and (3) 1: 2.4; the average of the three observations being 1:2.3 We can, therefore, take it that vaccine I as regards its immunising power is 2.3 times weaker than vaccine II and that the dose of the former should be 2.3 times greater than in the case of vaccine II. If the dose of vaccine II be I cc., then we would expect the same immunising effect from 2.3 cc. of vaccine I. In conclusion, we have now to show that this method of comparative stan- dardisation is also applicable to filtrate vaccines. Wright and Windsor12 have already demonstrated that the filtrate of a broth culture of bacillus typhosus
14 which had been macerating before filtration at 37°C. for a period of five months, was able to diminish the bactericidal power of serum to the same degree as the original culture. In other words, the receptors of the typhoid bacteria after five months' maceration had become completely dissociated from the protoplasm molecule and were found free in the fluid part of the vaccine. We now tested side by side, (1) a broth vaccine which had been grown for seven weeks before sterilisation and then allowed to macerate at 37°C. for a further period of four weeks before testing, and (2) the filtrate of this culture got by passing it through a Berkfield filter after the four weeks of maceration. The following was the result: Dilution of vaccine. Broth vaccine. Filtrate vaccine. 10-fold Sterile. Sterile. 9 ,, ,, 8 ,, ,, 7 ,, ,, 6 ,, ,, 5 ,, ,, 4 ,, ,, 3 ,, ,, 2 Growth. ,, Undiluted ,, ,, *Dilution of serum ,, ,, 2-fold ,, Growth. 3 ,, ,, *In the two last tubes of each series the diluted serum was mixed with an equal quantum of undiluted vaccine. From this table it is seen that the broth vaccine possessed between three and four times the anti-bactericidal power of the filtrate vaccine, Maceration had not evidently been continued long enough to allow of the total receptors being completely set free from the bacteria.
15 References. (1) 'Journal of Hygiene,' Vol. 5, No. 3, July 1905, p. 380. (2) 'British Medical Journal,' 30th January 1897. (3) 'Lancet,' 27th May 1905, p. 1453. (4) 'Journal of Hygiene,' October 1902. (5) 'Bulletin of the Bureau of Government Laboratories,' Manila, September 1904 No. 16. (6) 'Deutsche Med. Wochenschr,' 4th May 1905, p. 697. (7) 'British Medical Journal,' 4th April 1903, p. 786. (8) Lancet,' 14th September 1901, p. 715. (9) 'British Medical Journal,' 30th January 1897. (10) 'British Medical Journal,' 20th January 1900, p. 122. (11) 'Lancet,' 5th July 1902, p. 13. (12) 'Loc. Cit.' (13) 'Journal of the Royal Army Medical Corps,' March 1905. (14) 'Journal of Hygiene,' Vol. 5, No. 3, July 1905, p. 380. (15) 'Centralblatt für Bakteriologie, Bd. XXXIV, No. 1, 1903, p. 70. (16) 'Bulletin of the Bureau of Government Laboratories,' Manila, October 1904 No. 21. (17) 'Lancet,' 1st June 1901, p. 1532. (18) 'Loc. Cit.' (19) 'Journal of Hygiene,' Vol. 5, No. 3, July 1905, p. 380. (20) 'Proceedings of the Royal Society'; Vol. 71, p. 54. (21) 'Lancet ', 1st June 1901. (22) 'Journal of Hygiene,' October 1902.
No. 21. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ON THE STANDARDISATION OF ANTI-TYPHOID VACCINE. BY CAPTAIN GEORGE LAMB, M.D., I.M.S., (Director, Pasteur Institute of India), AND CAPTAIN W. B. C. FORSTER, M.B., D.P.H., I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028343.tif] CALCUTTA : OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1906 Price annas 6 or 7d.
