IP/QB,10 No. 4. (NEW SERIES. SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ON THE ACTION OF THE VENOMS OF THE COBRA (NAJA TRIPUDIANS) AND OF THE DABOIA (DABOIA RUSSELLII) ON THE RED BLOOD CORPUSCLES AND ON THE BLOOD PLASMA. BY GEORGE LAMB, M.D., CAPTAIN, I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75023878.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1903. Price As. 8 or 9d.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75023884.tif]
No. 4. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ON THE ACTION OF THE VENOMS OF THE COBRA (NAJA TRIPUDIANS) AND OF THE DABOIA (DABOIA RUSSELLII) ON THE RED BLOOD CORPUSCLES AND ON THE BLOOD PLASMA. BY GEORGE LAMB, M.D., CAPTAIN, I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75023890.tif] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75023890.tif] CALCUTTA : OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1903.
Agents for the Sale of Books published by The Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. E. A. ARNOLD, 37, Bedford Street, Strand, London, W.C. CONSTABLE & CO., 2, Whitehall Gardens, London, S.W. SAMPSON Low, MARSTON & CO., St. Dunstan's House, Fetter Lane, London, E.C. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. LUZAC & CO., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W . C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CO., Charing Cross Road, London, W.C. B. A. QUARITCH, 15, Piccadilly, London, W. WILLIAMS and NORGATE, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & CO., Cambridge. ON THE CONTINENT. R. FRIEDLON THE ACTION OF THE VENOMS OF THE COBRA (NAJA TRIPUDIANS) AND OF THE DABOIA (DABOIA RUSSELLII) ON THE RED BLOOD CORPUSCLES AND ON THE BLOOD PLASMA. THE action of the different varieties of snake venom on the constituents of the bood and on the blood coagulability is a subject which has engaged the attention of various observers in America, Australia, and India. A study of the literature of the subject' makes it evident that all venoms which have been worked with have a marked action on the blood, the effect of which is mani- fested in the production of changes of a destructive nature on the red corpus- cles, as well as in an alteration of the coagulability of the plasma. From such a study, however, it is apparent that no investigator has attempted to note care- fully the differences which exist between the various poisons in these respects. So much so is this the case, that Calmette of Lille 2holds the opinion that all snake venoms have exactly the same physiological actions and only differ from one another in the degree of toxicity which they possess, one being more toxic than another. And, again, Martin of Melbourne 3has put forward the working hypothesis, founded on his own experiments with the venoms of the Australian snakes, Hoplocephalus and Pseudechis, and on the researches of others with various venoms, that all snake venoms contain two or more poisonous proteids, and that in the varying proportions of these in venoms from different species of snakes may be found the explanation of the different effects which follow the inoculation of the several poisons. He thought that the proteids coagulable by heat acted on the blood and heart, while the incoagulable proteids acted on the central nervous system. Along with Dr. Hanna 4I have shown that Calmette's statement is without foundation and also that Martin's theory does not, in all probability, apply to the two venoms with which I propose to deal in this paper. Further, the facts which I have now to record support my previous observations and show without a doubt that in their physiological actions, the effects of which are seen in the changes in the blood constituents and plasma, the venoms of the cobra and of the daboia differ markedly from one another, and that Calmette's statement and Martin's hypothesis can no longer pass unchallenged and must be consid- erably modified to fit the facts now available. In the present communication, then, I propose to deal (I) with the action which the venom of the cobra (Naja tripudians) and the venom of the chain viper (Daboia Russellii) exert on the red blood corpuscles both in vivo and in vitro, the result of which action is manifested by hæmolysis: and (2) with the action which these two poisons A2
2 have, also in vivo and in vitro, on the blood plasma, as seen in an altera- tion of its coagulability. At the outset it would be well to give a short account of the methods which were employed to collect and to conserve the poisons used in the experi- ments recorded below, so as to ensure that the results obtained were uniform and comparable amongst themselves. The venom in both instances was collected over a period of some months from a number of healthy living snakes by 'milking', or rather squeezing, the poison glands, the secretion being caught in a watch-glass held in a pair of long forceps. The liquid poison was then thoroughly and rapidly dried over calcium chloride. The stock of venom, got in this way, was kept in an air-tight tube away from the light. It has been shown by many investigators that snake venoms, stored dry in this manner, preserve their toxicity unimpaired for an in- definite period. Before being weighed the venom was pounded to a very fine powder and was then kept in a weighing bottle over sulphuric acid or calcium chloride. This precaution is necessary in a climate in which the atmosphere is saturated with moisture such as is the case in Bombay. As they were re- quired, solutions of definite strengths made with saline solution of varying strength, as indicated in the protocols, were prepared. No solution was kept longer than an hour or two before being used. As the supply of venom was always abundant, fresh solutions were prepared every day upon which experi- ments were made. In this way any diminution of toxicity, which, there is no doubt, takes place when snake venoms are kept in solution for any length of time, was avoided. With this introduction we may now pass on to consider3 punctures a marked infiltration into the areolar tissues of a purple blood-like fluid, and that this infiltration contains few red blood corpuscles. In experimental observations on animals, especially on horses and donkeys, the abscess which sometimes forms, when a sub-lethal dose of cobra venom is given, contains thin red-coloured pus. Further, the mucous discharges are sometimes stained red. Thus, I have seen a marked red-stained discharge from the rectum of an ass which had received a little over the minimum lethal dose of cobra venom. As I have said, however, in animal experiments with cobra poison all observers are agreed that repeated microscopic examinations of the blood of animals, which die from cobra venom intoxication, show an entire absence of any appreciable structural change in the red blood cells. The probable explanation of this fact is, either that, when a large dose has been injected, death takes place so rapidly that such a marked destruction of the cells has not had time to take place as to be demonstrable by microscopic examination, or that, when a smaller dose has been given and death is delayed, the quantity of venom injected is not large enough to cause any extensive destruction of the red cells. While this fact is undoubted, Cunningham 8has shown in several experi- ments that, if the blood of an animal which has received a large dose of cobra venom, either intravenously or subcutaneously, be withdrawn from the body after death and allowed to clot, the serum which exudes from the clot is of a red colour; also that, if a fowl has been the animal employed, many free nuclei of the red cells are found on examining the blood at death; there has been, in fact, a considerable solution of the bodies of the red cells. Further, this observer has demonstrated that, if the dose of venom injected into a fowl is a very large one, namely, 100 to 300 milligrammes, the blood at death contains a great abundance of free nuclei, and the remaining red cells appear deformed ; he has also shown that, if the specimen be allowed to stand, at the end of a few hours complete destruction of the red cells will have taken place. I have been able to confirm these statements of Cunningham. These observations, therefore, conclusively show that cobra venom does have a certain amount of hæmolytic action in vivo, even when it is injected in moderate doses. When, however, a quantity of venom, which will bring about this effect in a marked degree, is injected into an animal, the animal dies so rapidly that there has been time for complete destruction of only a comparatively few cells to take place. It would appear, therefore, from â priorî reasons, that the hæmolysis which results from this action of cobra venom can have little or no connection with the nervous symptoms which are always observed in cases of intoxication with this poison, and cannot be a factor in producing the fatal result. An oppo- site opinion is, however, strongly held by Cunningham.
4 The destructive action of cobra venom on the red blood cells in vitro has been investigated by several observers. Thus, Cunningham,9 by drawing blood directly into solutions of cobra venom, found that the serum which exuded from any clot which formed was dark red or brownish in colour. He demon- strated this phenomenon both with mammalian bloods and with fowl's blood. Kanthack,10 Stephens,11 and Myers 12 have also demonstrated the marked hæmo- lytic action of cobra venom in vitro. These observers further noticed that the blood cells of different animals were of different susceptibility to this hæmolysing poison, and that this susceptibility of the blood cells bore no relation to the general susceptibility of the animals to subcutaneous injection of the poison. The most convenient and most reliable method to demonstrate and to estimate this hæmolytic action in vitro, the method which I have employed in all my experiments, is stated as follows. The venom is dissolved in a solution of common salt, isotonic 13 for the parti- cular blood under observation. This solution of venom is made of a strength of 1 c.c..=2 milligrammes, namely, 0.2 per cent. From this original solution a suc- cession of two fold dilutions, made with salt solution of the same strength as the original solution of venom, is prepared in a series of test tubes, so that each dilution contains half the amount of poison of the one just above it in the series. A conve- nient quantity, namely, 0 5 c.c., of each dilution is then measured into a series of small test tubes. To each tube a measured quantity of fresh blood is added by means of a graduated capillary pipette. The quantity of blood I found most suit- able to add to each tube was 0.005 c.c. In these operations care must be taken to avoid, as far as possible, any bacterial contamination. Ordinary precautions, however, of having sterile tubes, sterile salt solution and sterile pipettes are all that are requisite. Control tubes of salt solution and blood alone are prepared in all experiments. The mixtures are allowed to stand at laboratory temperature (about 25° C.) for 20 to 24 hours. It is then observed in which tubes complete laking has taken place, in which partial laking and in which no laking at all. When there is any doubt from the naked eye appearances as to whether complete or only partial hæmolysis has taken place, a microscopic examination will soon settle the point. Working in this way, I have been able to confirm the general results got by the observers mentioned above; and, further, to estimate fairly accurately the hæmolysing power of cobra venom towards the blood of several varieties of animals. But, inasmuch as the results obtained lead to the same conclusions as were arrived at by the observers mentioned above, it is unneces- sary to detail these experiments. It is, however, well to point out that slight variations occur, from time to time, in the minimum amount of venom which will produce hæmolysis of the blood of any particular species of animal. Such variations were also noticed by Kanthack, but they are never so marked as to
5 invalidate the general results. They are, in fact, quite explicable on the ground of experimental error. In view of Martin's hypothesis, mentioned on page I, it is important to be able to put on record some experiments which bear on the effect which heating solutions of cobra venom has on the hæmolytic action of this poison. In Table I of the protocols are shown the results of such experiments. From this Table it will be seen that, while heating solutions of cobra venom so as to precipitate all the coagulable proteids does not destroy the hæmolysing power of the venom, such heating does cause a diminution of this power, and that this diminution is more marked if the solution which is heated be a comparatively weak solution. Thus, two solutions of cobra venom were made of 1 per cent. and 0.1 per cent. strength respectively. These were heated in the same water bath for half an hour at 73° C. The coagulated proteids were then filtered off. The hæmolysing power of the same sample of venom, unheated, and of these two heated solutions, was estimated after the method I have described above. A reference to the protocols will show that the greatest dilution of venom, in which complete or almost complete hæmoloysis was obtained in each instance, was as follows:6 bowel, from the mouth,7 hours a firm clot had formed, and the serum which had exuded was of the same colour as the whole plasma got by centrifugalisation. The urine collected from the bladder was dark in colour like porter. It contained exceedingly few red blood corpuscles, only two or three being visible in a microscopic field. I have been able to produce similar symptoms and evidence of marked hæmolysis by injections of this venom into monkeys, rabbits, and pigeons. These observations, therefore, show positively that daboia venom has a very marked and intense destructive action in vivo on the red blood corpuscles of most animals, and that the effects of this action are important factors in the production of the symptoms observed and of the fatal result. To anyone who has worked with both cobra and daboia venoms the marked difference which exists between their hæmolytic actions in vivo must be apparent. The hæmo- lysis produced by cobra venom might easily escape observation, while in the case of daboia poison it is a most prominent feature of the intoxication. Such being the case, one would expect to find that a marked hæmolytic action with daboia venom would be easy to demonstrate in vitro, similar to the hæmolytic action which I have mentioned is easily got in vitro with cobra venom. This surmise, however, does not hold good. Thus Stephens,17 as a result of a few experiments only, has come to the conclusion that, while daboia venom dissolved in saline solution has no hæmolysing power in vitro on the red cells of men, this poison has a marked destructive power on the human red corpuscles if it is dissolved in normal horse serum. On the other hand, Cunningham 18 found that, if the blood of a fowl is run into solutions of daboia venom, the serum which exudes from the clot, which, he remarks, is always soft and tremulous, is dark and red in colour, showing that a considerable destruction of the red cells has taken place. Using a similar technique to that which I have described above in the experiments with cobra venom, I have found that it is possible to demonstrate that daboia venom dissolved in saline solution does produce in vitro laking of the blood of many animals. This action, how- ever, is somewhat variable. Care has to be taken that the salt solution is not of too great a strength; that, in fact, it is just slightly stronger than the solution which would of itself produce a certain amount of laking. In Table II of the protocols the results of five series of experiments of this description are detailed. The bloods used were those of man, monkey, rabbit, guinea-pig, and pigeon re- spectively. The strength of the salt solution employed for each variety of blood was previously determined by actual experiment. This strength is in each instance indicated in the protocols. A glance at this table will show that, while the control tube in every in- stance showed no hæmolysis, a marked and even complete laking took place B
8 in many of the venom tubes. It will also be seen that the action is somewhat variable, that is to say, the hæmolysis obtained in a tube containing a weak solution of venom is sometimes more complete than in tubes containing stronger solutions. Thus, it has often been observed in one series of tubes that while the stronger solutions of venom have only a slight or no destructive action on the red cells, the result of the action of the weaker solutions is an absolutely complete hæmolysis. Such a result is well shown in the series of experiments with the blood of a rabbit tabulated in Table III of the protocols. This variability in the hæmolytic action of daboia venom in vitro is in marked contrast to the results obtained with cobra venom. This, however, is a point to which I shall return. When a weak solution (viz., 0.1 per cent.) of daboia venom is heated so as to coagulate the coagulable proteids, the hæmolytic property, which the unheated venom has in vitro, is completely destroyed. In Table IV of the protocols two parallel series of experiments are detailed in order to demonstrate this face. In these observations a 0.1 per cent. solution of venom in 0.6 per cent. saline solution was divided into two portions. One por- tion was left unheated, while the other portion was heated in a water bath for half an hour at 75° C. The coagulated proteids were then filtered off. The hæmoly- sing power of each portion, heated and unheated, was then determined in the manner I have already described, the blood of the same rabbit being used in each instance. It will be seen from this table that, while the unheated solution showed a well marked hæmolytic action in many of the tubes, no laking was observed in any of the tubes containing the dilutions of the heated venom. We may pause here for a moment to sift the data contained in the obser- vations and experiments which I have put forward above, with the view of sum- marising the differences which exist between the hæmolysing action of cobra venom and that of daboia venom. Firstly, as regards the hæmolysis which these venoms produce in vivo, it is important to note that cobra venom, howsoever introduced into the body, exerts only a slight destructive action on the red cells, so that, as a rule, no symptoms result. Indeed the results of this particular action of the poison have generally escaped observation. On the other hand, the hæmolytic action of daboia venom in vivo is well marked and leads to a train of symptoms, which are very prominent to even a casual observer. Secondly, when the hæmolysing power of these two poisons is estimated side by side in vitro, using exactly the same technique in each case, we have seen that, while this action of cobra venom is well marked and regular, varying according to the strength of the venom solution used, no matter from what species of animal the blood is taken, the destructive effect on the red cells
9 of daboia venom, under similar circumstances, varies considerably and often apparently does not depend on the strength of the poison solution with which the blood is brought in contact. This action of daboia venom in vitro is, in fact, by no means so definite as the corresponding action of cobra venom. Thirdly, we have seen that heating a 0.1 per cent. solution of cobra venom, while diminishing, does not completely destroy, the hæmolysing property of the poison; and that heating a solution of daboia venom of the same strength and in exactly the same manner has the effect of completely destroying the hæmoly- tic power which the unheated solution possessed. It seems, therefore, justifiable to conclude from these three facts that, as far as the hæmolysing substances of these venoms are concerned, we are dealing with substances different but resembling one another, and that in this respect, as in all other respects, cobra venom and daboia venom, although at first sight presenting a superficial resemblance, yet differ materially from one another. The action of cobra and daboia venoms on the blood coagulability in vivo. It has been known for some time that many snake venoms have a well marked action on the coagulability of the blood plasma in vivo. To this fact attention was first drawn by Fontana,19 who more than a hundred years ago noticed that the blood remained fluid in animals dead of viper-bite. Brainard 19 and. Weir Mitchell 19have also shown that rattle-snake venom has a marked ac- tion on the coagulability of the blood. The former observer noticed that in animals which died immediately after a rattle-snake bite, the blood was clotted ; while, if death was delayed for any length of time, the blood remained fluid in the vessels. Weir Mitchell, while confirming those observations, explained the differences by the hypothesis that in cases of very rapid death the poison had not had time to affect the blood. In Australia, Halford 19observed the same fluidity of the blood to follow the injection of the venom of some Australian snakes. Further, the continued fluidity of the blood after death from the bite of the Indian viperine snakes has been frequently noted by numerous observers in this country. The work, however, of Martin of Melbourne 20with the venoms of the two Australian snakes (Hoplocephalus and Pseudechis) put this problem on a firmer basis. This careful observer has shown that the venoms of these two species of snakes produce, when injected intravenously in sufficient amount, such a marked increase in the blood coagulability as to lead to an extensive intravascular throm- bosis, but that, if the quantity injected is not sufficient to cause death from this B 2
10 thrombosis, then a marked deficiency or negative phase of the blood coagula- bility follows a short-lived phase of increased coagulability. Here, then, was the probable explanation of the results obtained by the American investigators with crotalus venom. Martin, further, put forward the hypothesis that all snake venoms prob- ably contained, in greater or less quantity, the same proteid substance which brought about this most remarkable effect on the blood coagulability, one venom differing from another in the amount of this constituent. Along with Dr. Hanna 21 I was, however, able to show that this hypothesis was not a sufficient explanation as far as our Indian snakes were concerned. For we proved beyond a doubt that, while the effect of the action of daboia venom on the blood coagu- lability was apparently the same as Martin had described with regard to the venom of the Australian species, cobra venom did not at any rate, even when injected intravenously in very large quantity, produce intravascular clotting. Again, in a paper on "Some effects upon the blood produced by the injection of the venom of Pseudechis," Martin 22critically sifts the available data, in an endeavour to find an explanation of the significance of the phenomena which he described. He arrives at the conclusion that the great changes which snake venoms bring about on the blood coagulability are in all probability due to nucleo-proteids set free from various cells, especially the red blood corpuscles, as a result of their destruction by the venom, and he compares the phenomena he observed in using snake venom with the phenomena which Wooldridge described, as resulting from an injection of nucleo-proteids directly into the blood stream of an animal. It is unnecessary to follow this observer in the close reasoning which runs through this paper. It is, however, necessary to point out that at the close of the paper he sums up as follows :11 of snake poison will have to be considered separately. I propose, then, to take my considerations and observations in more or less chronological order; firstly, stating briefly the action of cobra and daboia venoms on the coagulation of the blood as observed in vivo ; and secondly, passing on to consider more in detail their effect on the coagulability of the whole blood and of the blood plasma in vitro. Wall 23 states in his work on Indian snake venoms, that the blood in the human subject at post-mortem examination of cases of cobra venom intoxication is, as a rule, in a fluid condition and clots badly on being withdrawn from the vessels. In animal experiments, however, this observer found that the blood on post-mortem examination was always clotted solidly. On the other hand, Cunningham 24 has shown that, if an animal received a large quantity of cobra venom and died very shortly after the injection, the blood drawn just before or immediately after death remained unclotted for a considerable length of time, and the clot which did ultimately form was semi-fluid, loose and soft, and no serum separated out. Neither of these observers makes any record of finding immediately after death any intravascular thrombosis. This condition, however, they might easily have overlooked, in the same way as they both failed to ob- serve the intravascular clotting which results from an intravenous injection of daboia venom. In a recent publication along with Dr. Hanna 25 I was able to record defin- itely the fact that cobra venom, even when injected in large quantity into a vein, does not produce any intravascular clotting. An amount of cobra poison, as great as fifty times the amount of daboia venom which can cause extensive intra- vascular thrombosis, was found to have no such effect. It is, therefore, certain that, in whatever other respects these two venoms may differ from one another, they do differ in this particular physiological action, namely, cobra venom does not produce intravascular clotting; while, as we shall see, daboia venom intro- duced intravenously even in minute doses does possess this remarkable property. If a non-lethal dose of cobra venom is injected subcutaneously into an animal, one seldom sees any symptoms which might point, as is the case with daboia venom, to any diminution of the blood coagulability. I have, however, observed on several occasions during the process of immunisation of horses and donkeys which received an injection of this venom over the shoulder, a large 12 at this table will show that in every experiment a slight lengthening of the normal coagulation time of rabbit's blood followed the venom injection, and that this diminution in coagulability was more marked the nearer the quantity of venom injected approached to the minimum lethal dose. These experiments might also explain Wall's failure to observe any post-mortem fluidity of the blood in his animal experiments and Cunningham's success in this respect. For it is apparent that, if a dose of cobra venom which kills in from 6 to 10 hours be given, the deficiency in coagulability may not have had time to develop or may be so slight as to escape observation on post-mortem examination, while a larger quantity, such as Cunningham used, and which killed within a few minutes, may cause a marked deficiency in the blood coagulability of fairly rapid onset by reason of " mass action." To sum up, then, it is certain that cobra venom in vivo does not produce any increase but rather a deficiency of the blood coagulability, the amount of this deficiency depending upon the quantity of venom injected, the mode of its injection and the time allowed for its action to take place. Before passing on to the consideration of the action of cobra venom on the whole blood and on the blood plasma in vitro, it would be well, in order to secure a consecutive story, to draw attention briefly to some observations which I have, along with Dr. Hanna, already published 25 on the action of daboia venom on the blood coagulability in vivo. Both Wall 26 and Cunningham 27 attributed the rapid death which follows the intravenous or subcutaneous injection of daboia venom to a direct action of the poison on the central nervous system. They considered that daboia venom in all instances caused a fluidity of the blood, sometimes amounting to complete loss of coagulability. Hanna and I, 28 however, were able to show that this hypothesis was erroneous and that the rapid death which follows an injection of daboia venom is invariably caused by extensive intravascular thrombosis. Further, we showed that, if the amount of venom injected is not sufficient to cause this thrombosis, a negative phase of diminished coagulability results, sometimes amounting to complete inhibition of clotting, and that this diminished coagula- bility is probably an important factor in the production of some of the symptoms which are observed in these cases. We found that, while 0.1 milligramme of daboia venom per kilo of weight when injected intravenously into a rabbit causes extensive intravascular clotting, 0·4 milligramme has the same effect when in- jected subcutaneously into a pigeon. This thrombosis may be confined, if the quantity of venom injected has not been excessive, to the portal veins, the right heart and the pulmonary arteries: in these cases the blood collected from the other veins, and from the left heart specially, remains unclotted or clots only after a long interval of time, when the clot is very loose and gelatinous. We
13 also showed that, when the negative phase of diminished coagulability had once set in, it was impossible to produce increased coagulability and thrombosis by the injection of any quantity of venom which under normal circumstances injected intravenously would have been ample to bring about these phenomena. The action, then, of daboia venom on the blood coagulability in vivo is very definite and well marked, and corresponds exactly, as far as can be judged from the observation of the symptoms and the results of post-mortem examinations, to the action, as described by Martin, of the venoms of the two Australian colubrine snakes, namely, Hoplocephalus and Pseudechis. Until, however, researches have been made with the specific sera prepared with these poisons, it would be premature even to suggest that daboia venom was of the same nature as Hop- locephalus and Pseudechis venoms even as regards its blood poison. The action of cobra and daboia venoms on the coagulability of the blood in vitro. We may now pass on to consider if these snake venoms have any definite action on the coagulation of the blood when mixed with this in vitro, In this connection I shall have to put on record some experiments which I have made with cobra and daboia venoms with the whole blood and with the blood plasma freed from red cells. With the poison of Pseudechis, Martin 29 found that by running fresh blood into a solution (·01 per cent.) of this venom, clotting was considerably delayed, and the clot which did form was soft, and on shrinking failed to entangle the corpuscles. Working with crotalus poison, Weir Mitchell and Reichert 30 were able to prevent coagulation of the blood altogether in vitro. These observers drew the blood directly into a vessel containing a strong solution of venom sur- rounded by a freezing mixture. On allowing the temperature to rise gradually they found the blood remained permanently liquid. Further, both Cunningham 31 and Kanthack 32 have shown that when fresh blood was run into a strong solution of cobra venom, either it remained perma- nently unclotted, or the clot which formed after a considerable delay was soft and gelatinous and no serum exuded. The former of these observers also states that in three experiments, in which blood was run into solutions of daboia venom, although clotting took place with normal rapidity, the clots which formed were loose, soft, and tremulous. These observations, therefore, would tend to show that in vitro all snake venoms have a similar action on the blood coagulation, namely, an inhibitory action. In view of the facts recorded above as regards the action of cobra and daboia venoms on the blood coagulability in vivo, it appeared to me necessary
14 to investigate further this action in vitro of these two venoms, the only two which were available to me at the time. After many failures to get any definite results by the method followed by the older investigators, namely, the method of allowing fresh blood to flow directly into a solution of venom, I was led to use blood which was kept liquid by the addition of citrate of soda. At a later date I found that similar results were obtained with citrate and oxalate plasma, which had been completely freed from the red corpuscles by allowing these latter to sediment, and then syphoning off the clear supernatant fluid. The observations, therefore, which I have now to record naturally fall into two groups, as follows :15 blood stream, produce intravascular clotting, it was not to be expected that this poison would have the property of clotting citrate blood in vitro. Such a surmise was found to be correct. For it will be seen on reference to Table VI of the protocols that when 20 or even 30 milligrammes of cobra venom were added to 1 c.c. of citrate blood, no clot formed after 2 hours, and further, that on the addition, after this interval of time, of such an amount of soluble lime salt as clotted the control in 3 minutes, the blood remained permanently liquid. As we shall see later, this is a very different result to that got in similar experiments with daboia venom. We can say, then, that a large quantity of cobra venom does not increase blood coagulability in vitro but completely prevents clotting taking place. We have also seen above that cobra venom, injected subcutaneously or in- travenously even in small sub-lethal doses, has the effect of diminishing the coagulability of the blood. By means of a technique such as I have described above, the optimum quantity of lime solution necessary for rapid clotting of the control being added to each tube two hours after the addition of the cobra venom, a result comparable to what obtains in vivo can be got in vitro with citrate whole blood. Thus, I was able to estimate fairly accurately, as judged from a number of experiments, the minimum quantity of cobra venom which can keep 1 c.c. of citrate rabbit blood permanently liquid in vitro, and the minimum quantity which distinctly inhibits, but does not altogether prevent, coagulation. The result of such an estimation is detailed in Table VII of the protocols. From this table it will be seen that 0.4 milligramme of cobra venom kept 1 c.c. of blood liquid for at least 20 hours, and that 0·01 milligramme had a distinct inhibitory action on the coagulability of the same amount of blood, lengthening the coagulation time, as compared with the control, by about half an hour. It may be mentioned in passing that the interval of time allowed to elapse between the addition of the venom and the soluble lime salt in some cases affects the results of experiments such as I have collated above. Especially is this the case when the quantity of poison used is not greatly in excess of the mini- mum amount requisite to keep the blood permanently liquid. A reference to Table VIII will make the meaning of this statement clear. It requires no further explanation, except to state that it was, however, found in many experiments that even when the cobra venom and the lime solution were added together, the same inhibition of coagulation resulted, as when a certain interval of time was allowed to elapse. Such a result as I have tabulated in Table VIII is exceptional and cannot be depended on. In view of Martin's hypothesis, that the proteids coagulable by heat are the constituents of snake venoms which affect the blood, it is important to be C
16 able to record an observation bearing on the effect which heating a solution of cobra venom, so as to coagulate the coagulable proteids, has on this anti-clot- ting power of the poison. Such experiments are detailed in Table IX of the protocols. Inasmuch as the same technique was used in these experiments as was employed in the similar series of experiments with unheated venom detailed in Table VII, one is able to compare the results recorded in these two Tables. From such a comparison it is evident that, while heating a solution of cobra venom at 75° C. for half an hour, that is to say, so as to coagulate all proteids coagulable by heat, does not deprive the venom of its anti-clotting action on the blood, such heating, nevertheless, diminishes this particular physiological action of the poison to a considerable extent. For a reference to these two Tables will show that, while 0·4 milligramme of the unheated venom suffices to keep 1 c.c. of citrate blood permanently liquid after the addition of the lime solution, 0·4 milligramme of the heated venom, from which the coagulable proteids had been removed, delayed clotting for a considerable interval of time, but did not pre- vent it from ultimately taking place. Larger quantities of the heated venom had a still greater inhibitory action on the coagulation of this blood, but even 2 milligrammes did not completely prevent clotting. Such a result would appear to point to the conclusion, that it is not the coagulable proteids contained in cobra venom which affect the blood coagulability, but rather some non-coagu- lable substance which, however, is considerably diminished in activity by heating. This result, therefore, lends no support to Martin's theory, a conclusion the same as was arrived at with respect to the hæmolysing constituent of cobra venom. These two similar results, in fact, are strong proof against the cor- rectness of this hypothesis. Such, then, is the effect of the action of cobra venom on the coagulability of citrate whole blood. We may now pass on to the consideration of some similar experiments which were made with daboia venom. We have seen above that daboia venom, injected into animals in sufficient quantity, so increases the blood coagulability as to lead to extensive and rapid intravascular clotting, and further that, when the quantity injected is not suffi- cient to cause thrombosis, a negative phase of marked diminution in the blood coagulability sets in. As regards the in vitro experiments with citrate rab- bit blood, now to be put on record, it is unnecessary to detail again the tech- nique used, which was similar to that employed in the experiments with cobra venom. But inasmuch as the first series of experiments was made with the object of ascertaining if daboia venom had any effect on increasing the coagula- bility of citrate blood, it is apparent that, in order to demonstrate such an action to the best advantage, it was not feasible to add the lime solution to each tube in such amount as would clot the control in from 2 to 3 minutes.
17 It was found that a good result was obtained by the addition of a very small amount of calcium chloride, a quantity, in fact, which did not clot the control even after six hours. A reference to Table X will show the results which were obtained by work- ing in this way. The control tube with a small quantity of lime added remained unclotted after six hours; the tubes to which from 1 to 0·0078 milligrammes of daboia venom were added clotted solidly in from 5 to 10 minutes; and that to which 0·0002 milligramme was added clotted solidly after one hour. We have here, then, a perfect demonstration in vitro of the positive phase of increased coagulability caused by daboia venom. A further series of experi- ments was then made with the object of ascertaining whether or not the nega- tive phase of diminished coagulability could be demonstrated with citrate blood in vitro. A technique similar to that used in the series of experiments noted above was employed. But much smaller quantities of venom were used, and the poison was added to the blood one hour before the addition of the lime solution. Further, the quantity of lime solution added to each tube was slightly increased, so that a clot formed in the control tube in about four hours. It is evident, then, that these conditions of experimentation were in every way favourable to show any diminution in the coagulability of the blood which the venom might cause. No such diminution, however, took place. In fact, quite the opposite result was obtained. For a glance at Table XI of the protocols will show that very minute quantities of daboia venom had a distinct effect in increasing the coagulability of citrate blood, even 0·0000009 milligramme added to 1 c.c. of citrate blood causing a slight shortening of the coagulation time as compared with the control. A similar series of experiments to that recorded in Table XI was then made, the only difference being that 0·3 c.c., instead of 0·1 c.c., of lime solution (0·5 per cent.) was added to each tube. This amount of lime clotted the control tube in about two minutes. As it was found that the contents of all the tubes to which the venom had been added clotted in about the same time as the control, some of them in fact even more quickly, this series of experiments need not be further considered. It confirms the results already plainly demonstrated in Table XI, namely, that daboia venom, even in minute quantities, does not cause any diminution in the coagulability of citrate blood in vitro, similar to the effect which is produced by cobra venom. This result, therefore, throws no light on how the negative phase of coagulabil- ity caused by daboia venom in vivo is brought about. It does show, how- ever, that this action of daboia venom is something quite different from the action of cobra venom in this respect, and that, in all probability, it is not due to a direct action of the poison on the blood cells or on the plasma. In the above experiments with daboia venom a small quantity of soluble lime salt was added to the citrate blood. I have now to put forward the results of some experiments in which no lime salt was added, daboia venom alone being C 2
18 run into each tube of citrate blood. Two series of experiments of this descrip- tion are tabulated in the protocols (Tables XII and XIII). Firstly, in the series of observations detailed in Table XII the citrate was present in the proportion of 1 to 100 to the blood, that is to say, the minimum amount which can be depended on to keep rabbit's blood permanently liquid.33 A reference to this table will show that 0·5 milligramme of venom clotted 1 c.c. of the citrate blood in a little over half an hour, and 0·0312 milligramme in about two hours. Smaller quantities than this caused no clot in two hours. Secondly, in the series of experiments detailed in Table XIII of the proto- cols the citrate was present in the proportion of 1 to 50 to the blood, namely, a quantity double the amount which is necessary to keep rabbit's blood unclotted in vitro. Under this condition it was found that 2 milligrammes of venom were required to cause clotting of 1 c.c. of blood in half an hour, that 0·6 milli- gramme caused clotting only after 1¾ hours, and that 0·2 milligramme caused only a slight clot after 2 hours. Thus, it is seen that the presence of an excess of citrate, while not preventing the clotting action of the venom, certainly lessens this power to some extent. The results, then, of these two series of experiments, taken with the results of the two series detailed in Tables X and XI, show that daboia venom can of itself cause clotting of well citrated blood in vitro, but that the clotting is more rapid and the clot is firmer, the nearer the quantity of lime salts in solution in the blood approaches to that contained in normal blood. I do not for a moment urge that daboia venom of itself is able to cause clotting of blood which contains no lime salt in solution, as the citrate of lime is not an absolutely insoluble salt. However, the fact that daboia ve- nom does of itself clot citrate blood in vitro is important and interesting, as I know of no other substance which has this action without the addition of a small quantity of soluble lime salt. In a recent paper by Dr. Hanna and myself, 34 we pointed out the fact that heating a weak solution of daboia venom completely destroys the property which this poison has of causing any increase of the blood coagulability in vivo. We showed that after heating a 0·1 per cent. solution for half an hour at 75° C. a large quantity of the filtrate can be introduced into the blood stream of animals without causing any symptoms. I have found that a comparable result is obtained with citrate blood in vitro, that is to say, heating a weak solution of daboia venom at 75° C. for half an hour completely destroys the clotting action the unheated venom has on cit- rate blood. Such an experiment is detailed in Table XIV of the protocols. From this Table it will be seen that even 2 milligrammes of venom (0·2 per cent. solution), heated for half an hour at 75° C., does not clot 1 c.c. of citrate blood after 3 hours. When we consider that 0·03 milligramme of the unheated venom clots in 2 hours this amount of blood, citrated to the same extent, we must
19 conclude that heating in this way completely destroys this constituent of the poison. I have shown above that it is not possible, even with minute quantities of venom, to demonstrate in vitro the negative phase of diminution of blood coagulability, which negative phase is such a marked phenomenon in chronic cases of daboia intoxication. I have also shown in the case of cobra venom that a marked diminution in the blood coagulability produced by this poison is capable of demonstration both in vivo and in vitro. It was thought that the failure of daboia venom to cause diminished coagulability of the blood in vitro might possibly be due to the fact, that the constituent of this poison which causes clotting is a different substance to that which causes the diminution of coagula- bility in vivo and that this latter is not able to exert its specific action in vitro in the presence of the former. Now, we have seen that heating a weak solution of cobra venom diminishes, but does not destroy, the power which, this poison has to prevent coagulation of citrate blood in vitro, while heating a solution of daboia venom completely destroys its power to cause an increase of coagulability. If the above hypothesis were correct, then it would be found that by heating a weak solution of daboia venom, thereby completely destroying the constituent which causes coagulation of citrate blood, the heated poison would have the effect of completely inhibiting or diminishing the coagulability of citrate blood. This theory, however, was not supported by experimental data. For a reference to Table XV of the protocols will show that 2 milligrammes of daboia venom, heated in weak solution, after being in contact with 1 c.c. of citrate blood for 3 hours, had no effect of lengthening the coagula- tion time of the blood, when a quantity of lime solution sufficient to clot the control in about 2 minutes was added. This result, then, strongly supports the conclusion I have already put forward on page 17, namely, that the sub- stance in daboia venom, which causes the diminution of coagulability in vivo, differs both in nature and in method of action from the substance in cobra venom, which has such a marked inhibitory effect on the blood coagulability both in vivo and in vitro. Further, it is evident that the observations on the action of daboia venom on the coagulability of the blood in vitro neither support nor disprove Martin's hypothesis, namely, that the constituent of all snake venoms which acts as a blood poison is a proteid coagulable by heat. Finally, when we consider the results of all the observations with cobra and daboia venom detailed above, there can be no possible doubt that in their action on the cell constituents of the blood and on the blood plasma, the differences between these two venoms are fundamental differences, and not only differences in degree of toxicity. These observations, in short, support my contention, that Calmette's statement, that all snake venoms are alike in their physiological actions, is quite wrong and evidently not founded on experimental data carefully worked out.
20 The action of cobra and daboia venoms on the coagulability of citrate and oxalate plasma. We may now pass on to consider whether or not results, similar to those which have been collated above in the case of citrate whole blood, can also be obtained with citrate or oxalate plasma which has been freed from red cells by a process of sedimentation. The importance of such an investigation is evi- dent in view of the theory put forward by Martin (page 10), namely, that the action of snake venoms on the blood coagulability in vivo probably depends on the fact that, as a result of a great destruction of cells, especially of the red cells of the blood, by the poison, a large quantity of nucleo-proteids is set free and that it is these nucleo-proteids which affect the blood coagulability. Some of the experiments detailed below were made along with Professor Martin, to whom I am indebted for much valuable suggestion and encourage- ment. In these experiments the same samples of citrate and oxalate plasma were used throughout, so that it will suffice once for all to give a short description of the manner in which these were obtained and kept. They were both got from the horse. In the case of the citrate plasma one litre of blood was drawn into 50 c.c. of a 20 per cent. solution of citrate of soda (0.75 per cent, saline solution), that is to say, there was I per cent. citrate in the whole blood. This was kept in an ice chest (temperature about 14° C.) for 48 hours. Then the supernatant plasma was syphoned off into small bottles, which were stored in an ice chest till required. In the case of the oxalate plasma one litre of blood was drawn into 40 c.c. of a 5 per cent. solution of oxalate of potash (0.75 per cent, saline solution), that is to say, there was 0.2 per cent. oxalate in the whole blood. This was then treated in exactly the same way as the citrate blood. The plasma was likewise stored in the ice chest till required. Strict aseptic precautions were observed in the collection and storing of these samples of plasma. Just before use in both cases the bottles were well shaken up and heated in an oven at 37° C. for a short time. The next step was to determine the amount of soluble lime salt which it was necessary to add to a given quantity of each plasma to procure rapid and firm clotting. To save repetition it may be stated here that in all these experi- ments 2 c.c. of plasma was the amount run into each tube, and that a 1 per cent. solution of calcium chloride was employed as the lime solution. The results of this estimation are detailed in Table XVI of the protocols. From this Table it will be seen that 0.5 c.c. of the lime solution clotted 2 c.c. of citrate plasma in less than 8 minutes, and that 0.4 c.c. of lime solution clot- ted 2 c.c. of oxalate plasma in to minutes. These, then, were the quantities of lime solution used in the experiments with cobra venom. Having by preliminary observation ascertained that cobra venom did
21 prevent clotting of both citrate and oxalate plasma, I next proceeded to estimate the amount of venom which was able to effect this, when added to the plasma 2 hours before the addition of the quantity of lime solution sufficient to cause clotting of the control in a few minutes. The results of these estimations are detailed in Tables XVII and XVIII of the protocols. In the case of citrate plasma (Table XVII) it was found that I milligramme of cobra venom was sufficient to keep 2 c.c. of plasma perma- nently liquid, and that amounts less than this, down to 0.2 milligramme, had a very marked inhibitory action on coagulation, the clot which had formed after 20 hours being always soft and loose. The control, with the same amount of lime as the venom tubes, clotted solidly in a few minutes. The similarity between this result and that detailed in Table VII, the series of experiments in which citrate whole blood was used, allowance being made for the plasma being double the amount of the whole blood, is striking and worthy of note. In the case of oxalate plasma (Table XVIII) it was found that even 0.2 milligramme of cobra venom was able to keep 2 c. c. of plasma unclotted for a period of at least 20 hours. The control, with the same quantity of lime added, clotted solidly in 10 minutes. These results, then, confirm and further extend the observations with citrate whole blood, which I have already recorded. They show that the hæmolytic action of cobra venom is quite independent of its action in inhibiting coagulation, that, in fact, the action which this poison has on the blood coagula- bility does not depend on the destructive effect which it has on the red blood corpuscles and other cells. It would, therefore, appear certain that the action of one venom at any rate, namely, cobra venom, on the blood coagulation in vivo cannot be explained by Martin's hypothesis, that is to say, the setting free of nucleo-proteids as a result of the great destruction of the cells of the body in general, and of the red cells in particular, which is caused by this poison. It cannot, however, be said from these experiments that nucleo-proteids play no part in this phenomenon, as plasma prepared in the manner I have described is rich in these substances, derived, as they are, from disintegra- tion of the white cells of the blood after its withdrawal from the vessels. With the view of further investigating this action of cobra venom, two series of experiments were made with a sample of hydrocele fluid. This sample did not clot on the addition of a soluble lime salt, but was clotted solidly by the addition, either with or without a small amount of lime, of a small quantity of citrate donkey plasma (1 per cent.). It was found that 0.1 c.c. of this plasma clotted 2 c.c. of hydrocele fluid in about 20 minutes. A reference to Tables XIX and XX of the protocols will show that even 0.1 milligramme of cobra venom was sufficient to inhibit completely the clotting of this sample of hydrocele fluid, as brought about by the addition of a small amount of citrate plasma, when the venom was allowed to act on the plasma for 10 minutes before the addition [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75023956.tif]
22 of the hydrocele fluid. The addition of a small quantity of soluble lime salt did not affect this result in any way. Taking these observations along with the others already recorded, into consideration, I can only conclude that cobra venom owes its anti-clotting power either to some obscure chemical combina- tion which it effects with the nucleo-proteids, rendering these substances inert as far as coagulation is concerned, or to an action of a destructive nature on the hypothetical fibrin ferment contained in plasma. I have been unable, so far, to obtain nucleo-proteids, except as contained in plasma, which were able to cause clotting of any sample of hydrocele fluid which I could procure. It is impossible, therefore, to exclude the action which the venom may have on any ferment which may be contained in plasma. Further experiments are, however, in progress and will form the subject of another communication. I may now pass on to put on record some experiments, which bear on the action which daboia venom has on the coagulability of citrate and oxalate plasma in vitro. As the same samples of plasma as were employed for the experiments with cobra venom were used for these experiments, it is unnecessary to again detail the method of their preparation. We have already seen (Tables X to XV) that daboia venom has a marked action on the coagulability of citrate whole blood. It has been demonstrated that it can, even without the addition of any soluble lime salt, produce solid clotting of citrate whole blood and, further, that it contains no substance strictly analogous to the substance contained in cobra venom, a substance which has such a remarkable power of completely inhibiting the coagulation of citrate blood as brought about by the addition of a soluble lime salt. Three series of experiments were made with daboia venom and citrate and oxalate plasma. In the first series varying quantities of the venom alone were added to a series of tubes each containing 2 c.c. of citrate plasma. A reference to the protocols (Table XXI) will show that, as in the case of citrate whole blood, daboia venom causes clotting of citrate plasma without the addition of any lime. Thus any quantity of venom from 3 to 5 milligrammes clotted 2 c.c. of plasma in less than 3 hours: with an amount between 0.4 and 1 milligramme clotting occurred, but was delayed for about 20 hours, while 0.2 milligramme caused only a slight clot after 20 hours. The second series of experiments (Table XXII) was similar to the above series, only oxalate plasma was substituted for citrate plasma. The results obtained show that daboia venom causes very slight clotting of plasma of this nature, for even 5 milligrammes of venom produced only a feeble clot in 2 c.c. of plasma after 20 hours; smaller amounts down to 0.6 milligramme had the same effect; while 0.4 milligramme produced no clotting at all. The third series of experiments was made with the object of ascertaining
23 the reason of this difference between citrate and oxalate plasma. In this series (Table XXIII) to each tube of oxalate plasma, at the same time as the daboia venom was added, there was run in a small amount of soluble lime salt, an amount, however, not sufficient to clot the control in 20 hours. As a result of this addition of lime the contents of each tube clotted solidly in about 10 minutes. It is, therefore, apparent that the failure of daboia venom to produce solid clotting of oxalate plasma, while it does clot citrate plasma, is due to the fact that the oxalate of lime is a more insoluble salt than the citrate. The coagulation of plasma by daboia venom does not take place independently of a certain amount of lime salt in solution. The venom acts, evidently, by increasing the coagulability of the plasma, but solid formation of clot cannot take place unless a small quantity of lime in solution, in some form or other, is present as well. With a view of further searching for a working hypothesis to explain this action of daboia venom on blood plasma, experiments were made to ascertain whether or not this poison caused clotting of hydrocele fluid, either with or without the addition of a soluble salt of lime. The sample of hydrocele fluid used was clotted solidly on the addition of a small amount of oxalate plasma; it was, in fact, the same sample which was employed in the experiments with cobra venom detailed in Tables XIX and XX of the protocols. The results of both these series of experiments were, however, entirely negative (Table XXIV of protocols). Even 5 milligrammes of venom produced no clotting in 2 c.c. of hydrocele fluid either alone or when lime was added. It is evident, then, that in whatever manner daboia venom does act in increasing coagulability, it cannot replace the substances in plasma, be they nucleo- proteid, ferment or both, which are so intimately connected with the pheno- menon of coagulation. Further, Martin's hypothesis, namely, that the remarkable intravascular clotting which some snake venoms produce in vivo is due to the setting free of a large quantity of nucleo-proteids, the result of the great destruction by the venom of cells and of red blood corpuscles in particular, receives no support from the observations with daboia poison which I have collated above. When we consider that this venom is able to increase markedly the coagulability of citrate or oxalate plasma, which no doubt contains nucleo-proteids but is free from cells, it is at once apparent that this 'destruction' theory of Martin does not furnish a sufficiently definite mental picture of the phenomena, when looked at in the light of these new facts which I have put forward above. It would appear, rather, that the ultimate cause of this increase of coagulability produced by daboia venom is some obscure inter-action between the poison and the nucleo-proteids, or between the poison and the clotting ferment. It is certainly not the result of the setting free of normal nucleo-proteids through the destruction of the cells by the poison. D
24 We have seen that cobra venom can prevent the coagulation of citrate plasma, which takes place on the addition of a soluble salt of lime, and that, on the other hand, daboia venom has a marked action in increasing the coagula- bility of this plasma. It is interesting, now, to be able to record a series of experiments which were made with the object of determining what would be the result of the addition of cobra and daboia venoms together to citrate plasma. In this series of experiments 5 milligrammes of cobra venom were added to each tube of a series containing 2 c.c. of plasma. This, as we have seen; is a quantity of venom five times greater than the amount which can completely inhibit the coagulation of citrate plasma that takes place on the addition of a soluble salt of lime. Half an hour afterwards a different amount of daboia venom was run into each tube. This amount varied from 5 to 0.2 milligrammes. When we compare the results obtained in this series of experiments (Table XXV) with the results obtained in the series of experiments already detailed (Table XXI) in which daboia venom alone was added to the plasma, it will be seen that the previous addition of this large quantity of cobra venom had no effect in even delaying the time in which the various amounts of venom brought about coagulation of the plasma. In other words, the presence of a large quantity of cobra venom does not inhibit in the slightest degree the clotting action of daboia venom. Although it is hardly justifiable to make deductions from the results of experiments in vitro, as to what obtains in vivo, it appears to me interesting and important to draw attention to the following considerations. I have mentioned in an early part of this communication that, when a quantity of daboia venom not sufficient to cause intravascular clotting is introduced directly into the blood stream of an animal, the blood coagulability becomes markedly diminished. Further, along with Dr. Hanna, I have shown that, when this negative phase of blood coagulability has once developed, the injection of even large quantities of daboia venom does not increase the blood coagula- bility, and that in consequence it is now impossible to cause death from intravas- cular thrombosis. Again, I have shown in this paper that this negative phase of blood coagulability is not obtained in experiments with daboia venom and citrate blood in vitro. When we consider these facts in the light of the ex- periments, both in vivo and in vitro, with cobra venom, the results of which have been collated above, namely, that this poison has both in vivo and in vitro a marked power of preventing coagulation or diminishing the coagulability of blood, and in the light of the experiments in vitro with cobra and daboia venoms together, great support is given to the conclusion, which I have already stated, namely, that the substances contained in cobra venom which affect blood coagulability are quite different, both in nature and in action, from the substances contained in daboia venom which affect the coagulability of the blood. While,
25 therefore, superficial and cursory observations might lead one to conclude that the action of cobra and daboia venoms on blood plasma differed only in degree and not in nature, I hold that these observations are sufficient to show that this is not the case, and that in this, as in other respects, these two snake venoms differ widely from one another. Finally, I may sum up the conclusions, which the observations detailed in this paper would appear to justify, as follows:26 foreshadowed in a paper on daboia venom which I published along with Dr. Hanna.35 (6) Martin's other hypothesis, namely, that the action of snake venoms on the blood coagulability in vivo is due to the setting free of a large quantity of nuclec-proteids, the result of the destruction of cells, and especially of red blood cells, by the venom, is not a theory which forms a complete mental picture of the phenomena in the light of the new facts I have put forward. It is evident that it will have to be considerably modified to suit these facts. Protocols. TABLE I.27 TABLE II.28 TABLE III.29 TABLE V.30 TABLE VII.31 containing 1 c.c. of citrate blood. A quantity of calcium chloride solution, namely, 0.5 c.c. of a 1 per cent, solution, was added to each tube at varying intervals after the venom. This amount clotted the control in 2 minutes. Citrate blood (1 in 50). Cobra venom, 1 milli- gramme, added at Calcium chloride solution 1 (1 per cent.) (0.5 c.c. added at Result. 1 c.c. 2.23 p.m. 2.23 p.m. Solid clot in 2 hours. 1 c.c. 2.43 p.m. 2.58 p.m. Slight clot in 2 hours. 1 c.c. 2.17 p.m. 2.47 p.m. Liquid after 2½ hours. 1 c.c. 2.17 p.m. 3.17 p.m. Ditto. 1 c.c. (control) Nil. 3 p.m. Solid clot in 2 minutes. TABLE IX.32 TABLE X.33 TABLE XI.34 TABLE XII.35 Varying amounts of a 0.2 per cent. solution of daboia venom were added to each tube. No lime solution was added. Citrate blood (1 in 50). Daboia venom in milligrammes. Result. 1 c.c. 2 Solid clot in 37 minutes. 1 c.c. 1.6 Solid clot in 39 minutes. 1.c.c. 1.4 Solid clot in 41 minutes. 1 c.c. 1.2 Solid clot in 43 minutes. 1 c.c. 1 Solid clot in 1 hour and 12 minutes. 1 c.c. 0.8 Clotted but not solid in 1 hour. 1 c.c. 0.6 Solid clot in 1¾ hours. 1 c.c. 0.3 Clotted but not solid in 2 hours. 1 c.c. 0.2 Ditto. TABLE XIV.36 TABLE XV.37 TABLE XVII38 The following was the result obtained:39 TABLE XX.40 The following was the result obtained:41 daboia venom. The strengths of the venom were 1 per cent. and 0.2 per cent. dissolved in normal saline solution. The following results were obtained:42 TABLE XXIV. 43 TABLE XXV.44 (3) Allbutt's "System of Medicine," Voulme II, page 809. (4) 'Journal of Pathology and Bacteriology :' Edinburgh and London, 1902, Volume VIII, page 1. (5) Wall: " Indian Snake poisons, their nature and effect :" W. H. Allen & Co., London, 1883. (6) 'Lancet,' January 5th, 1901, page 25. (7) Loc. Cit. (8) 'Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army in India :' Part IX, 1895, page 1, and Part XI, 1898, page 1. (9) Loc. Cit. (10) 'Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army in India :' Part XI, 1898, page 31. (11) 'Journal of Pathology and Bacteriology: ' Edinburgh and London, 1900, Volume VI, page 273. (12) 'Journal of Pathology and Bacteriology :' Edinburgh and London, 1900, Volume VI, page 415. (13) The term 'isotonic' is not used in the strictly physiological sense. I have employed it to mean the weakest strength of salt solution in which no 'laking' of the blood was observed: in other words, 'laking' and not swelling of the corpuscles was taken as a standard. (14) Loc. Cit. (15) Loc. Cit. (16) Loc. Cit. (17) 'Journal of Pathology and Bacteriology :' Edinburgh and London, 1900, Volume VI, page 273. (18) Loc. Cit. (19) Quoted from a paper by Professor Martin: 'On some effects upon the blood produced by the injection of the venom of the Australian Black Snake (Pseudechis porphyriacus) ': 'Journal of Physiology,' Volume XV, No. 4, 1893. (20) 'Proceedings of Royal Society of N. S. Wales :' July 3rd, 1895. Clifford Allbutt's 'System of Medicine,' Volume II, page 809. (21) Loc. Cit. (22) 'Journal of Physiology,' Volume XV, No. 4, 1893. (23) Loc. Cit. (24) Loc. Cit. (25) Loc. Cit. (26) Loc. Cit. (27) Loc. Cit. (28) 'Journal of Pathology and Bacteriology :' Edinburgh and London, 1902, Volume VIII, page 1. (29) 'Journal of Physiology,' Volume XV, No. 4, 1893. (30) Quoted by Martin in above paper. (31) Loc. Cit. (32) Loc. Cit.
45 (33) Many experiments were made to ascertain the minimum amount of citrate of soda which could be relied on to keep rabbit's blood permanently liquid. It was found that when the citrate was present in the proportion of 1 in 150, clotting sometimes occurred and sometimes did not, and when in the proportion of 1 in 100, the blood always remained fluid for an indefinite time. (34) Loc. Cit. (35) Journal of Pathology and Bacteriology :' Edinburgh and London, 1902, Volume VIII, page 1.
No. 4. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS. BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ON THE ACTION OF THE VENOMS OF THE COBRA (NAJA TRIPUDIANS) AND OF THE DABOIA (DABOIA RUSSELLII) ON THE RED BLOOD CORPUSCLES AND ON THE BLOOD PLASMA. BY GEORGE LAMB, M.D., CAPTAIN, I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE .GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75024043.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1903. Price As. 8 or 9d.
