IP/QB, 10 m.91.b No. 16. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. THE SPECIFICITY OF ANTIVENOMOUS SERA WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO A SERUM PREPARED WITH THE VENOM OF DABOIA RUSSELLI. BY CAPTAIN GEORGE LAMB, M.D., I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027176.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1905. Price Annas 6 or 7d.
No. 16. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. THE SPECIFICITY OF ANTIVENOMOUS SERA, WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO A SERUM PREPARED WITH THE VENOM OF DABOIA RUSSELLII. BY CAPTAIN GEORGE LAMB, M.D., I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027188.tif] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027188.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1905.
Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. H. S. KING & CO., 65, Cornhill, and 9, Pall Mall, London. E. A. ARNOLD, 41 and 43, Maddox Street, Bond Street, W. London. CONSTABLE & CO., 16, James Street, Hay Market, W. London. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & CO., Charing Cross Road, London, W.C. BERNARD QUARITCH, 15, Piccadilly, London, W. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 51, Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & Co., Cambridge. ON THE CONTINENT. R. FRIEDLANDER & SOHN, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin, N.W. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris, MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. IN INDIA. THACKER, SPINK & CO., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & CO., Calcutta. S. K. LAHIRI & CO., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & CO., Madras, G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. THACKER & CO., LD., Bombay. A. J. COMBRIDGE & Co., Bombay. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & CO., Bombay. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazair Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH AND SONS, Mufid-i-Am Press, Lahore. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission Press, Rangoon.
THE SPECIFICITY OF ANTIVENOMOUS SERA, WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO A SERUM PREPARED WITH THE VENOM OF DABOIA RUSSELLII. IN two previous communications1 on the specificity of antivenomous sera I brought forward evidence which pointed to the conclusion that a pure antivenomous serum, that is, a serum prepared with a single poison, is markedly, if not absolutely, specific for the venom which has been used in its preparation. This conclusion was based on the results of the testing of two antivenomous sera, one prepared with pure cobra poison and the other with the pure poison of the Australian tiger snake (Hoplocephalus curtus), against the general actions in vivo, the hæmolytic actions in vitro and the actions on the coagulability of the blood plasma also in vitro, of ten different venoms, some of which were the poisons of colubrine species while others were of viperine origin. It is un- necessary to enter into the details of the experiments which were then carried out and which have been set forth in the papers above mentioned. Before, however, passing on to the subject matter proper of the present communication, to wit, some observations made with the object of the testing of a serum prepared with a pure viperine venom, that of Daboia Russellii, I have to refer briefly to the results which were obtained in vivo with the cobra venom anti-serum and the poisons of some of the other colubrine snakes against which it was tested. This refer- ence is necessary in view of the fact, that the results which have been obtained by Captain Rogers2 with Calmette's serum differ from those which I have obtained with the serum prepared with pure cobra venom. It is, however, to be remem- bered in this connection that Calmette's serum is made by vaccinating with a mixture of venoms, of which mixture cobra venom is the preponderating consti- tuent. This fact alone might have been brought forward as an adequate explanation of the differences between my results and those obtained by Captain Rogers, had not this observer in a more recent paper3 stated that, using a serum prepared in London by Messrs. Burroughs and Wellcome with pure cobra venom, he obtained similar results to those which he had previously got with Calmette's serum. Further, in a letter to the 'Lancet' Captain Rogers4 has recently stated, that Dr. Calmette has told him that the serum with which he was supplied and which he used for his experiments happened to be prepared with pure cobra venom. His experiments, therefore, are strictly comparable with those which I have made with a pure cobra venom anti-serum. In what then do the differences consist, and how are they to be explained? B
2 In the first place, let us consider the experiments with the venom of the king cobra, a snake belonging to the same genus as the cobra. Captain Rogers, working with a serum, 1 c.c. of which, he showed, was able to neutralise 0.56 milli- gramme of cobra venom, found that the same quantity of serum could completely neutralise 0.3475 milligramme of the venom of the king cobra, the toxicity of which poison is practically the same as that of cobra venom. Now, in my ex- periments with a cobra venom anti-serum, 1 c.c. of which was able to neutralise 1.5 milligrammes of its homologous poison, it was found that, while large amounts of serum were able to delay death in cases of intoxication with the venom of the king cobra, no complete neutralisation took place: that 1 c.c. of serum could not neutralise even 0.13 milligramme of this poison. It will be seen, therefore, that while the serum I used was, as far as cobra venom was concerned, nearly three times as strong as that employed by Captain Rogers, it failed to neutralise about a third of the amount of king cobra venom which this observer found Calmette's serum could effectually neutralise. It is to be noted that in both series of experiments the sera were tested against ten lethal doses of venom, but that while Captain Rogers used pigeons I employed rabbits. I have recently repeated the observations which bear on this point. In these experiments a serum prepared with pure unheated cobra venom was again employed: 1 c.c. of this serum was able to neutralise 0.7 milligramme of pure cobra venom. It was now tested against only 6 lethal doses of king cobra venom by subcutaneous injection into rabbits, the serum and venom being allowed to stand in vitro at room temperature for half an hour before injection. A reference to the protocols (table I) will show that even 15 c.c. of serum could not save the life of the animal. We can, moreover, calculate that 1 c.c. of serum had failed to neutralise 0.11 milligramme of this poison. From this series of experiments, therefore, we arrive at the same conclusion as we had come to previously, namely, that, while a serum prepared with pure cobra venom and strongly antitoxic for this venom delays death in cases of intoxication with the venom of the king cobra, it does not completely neutralise this poison even when used in large quantities. It is difficult to reconcile my results with those obtained by Captain Rogers. It is, however, to be noted that Captain Rogers' experiments were made with pigeons while mine were carried out with rabbits. It might be conceivable that a certain action of the poison in mammals was wanting in birds, and that the con- stituent which caused this action remained unneutralised in my experiments. That all the constituents of king cobra venom are not neutralised by a cobra antivenom is evident, as I have shown,5 from the fact that such a serum has no hindering effect on the hæmolytic action of king cobra poison when tested in vitro. Further, Rogers does not definitely state that in his experiments the
3 minimum lethal dose of the venom was determined for pigeons, the animals on which the serum experiments were carried out: in fact, by stating that, on account of a difficulty in obtaining rats, pigeons were used for the serum experiments, he leads one to suppose that the minimum lethal dose had been determined for rats and not for pigeons. It is possible, therefore, that in his serum experiments with pigeons he was using not ten lethal doses but a very much smaller number. The only other possible explanation that I can think of is that the poison with which Captain Rogers was working was not that of the king cobra. I may state that the king cobra venom which I used was collected directly under my own supervision or that of Colonel Bannerman, I.M.S., from snakes the property of the Natural History Society, Bombay. In the second place we have to consider the experiments with the venom of Bungarus c4 those following poisoning by cobra venom, whereas the results obtained by the three workers mentioned above indicate, " that while the symptoms are similar, still they differ so much in relative degree as to render it doubtful if they can in future be spoken of as identical." Further, I hope to show at a later date that the action of this venom on the central nervous system is quite different from that of the poison of the cobra. I may state that the krait venom which I used for my observations was collected at the Plague Research Laboratory, Bombay, either under my own supervision or that of Colonel Bannerman. As regards the experiments with the venoms of the other colubrine snakes Captain Rogers and I are in agreement, namely, that in relatively large amount a cobra venom anti-serum is able to neutralise in vivo the poison of one of the sea snakes, Enhydrina vaiakadien, while it delays death but does not neutralise the venom of Bungarus fasciatus. In this latter case Captain Rogers is of opinion that the colubrine constituents of the venom are neutralised, the animal dying of chronic viperine poisoning. To this point I shall again refer in a paper, to be written along with Dr. Hunter, on the action of viperine poisons on the central nervous system. From these considerations it seems to me that the conclusions arrived at in my last paper on the specificity of antivenomous sera were quite justified, namely, that a serum of a horse immunised with pure cobra poison is strongly antitoxic for the venom used in its preparation: when used in large quantity it has a slight neutralising power for the venom of Enhydrina valakadien, one of the common sea snakes: further, it delays death in cases of intoxication with the venom of the king cobra, a species belonging to the same genus as the cobra, and also in cases of intoxication with the venom of Bungarus fasciatus: it does not, however, completely neutralise these poisons even when used in large quantities. The serum would be of little or no therapeutic value in cases of bites from these three snakes. Finally, the serum contains no antitoxic sub- stances, which are active against the venom of Bungarus c5 a dose of 500 milligrammes could be given without causing any disturbance other than considerable local reaction. The serum was now tested against the same ten poisons as were used in the testing of the cobra venom anti-serum. Further, the same plan of testing was adopted in this case as was employed on the previous occasion. Thus, in the first place, the serum was tested against the general actions in vivo of the several poisons: in the second place, it was tested against their hæmolytic actions in vitro and, in the third place, it was tested against the actions of several of the poisons on the coagulability of the blood plasma also in vitro. It will be seen, therefore, that in this case also the serum has been tested in a fairly exhaustive manner. Let us first consider the experiments made with the object of ascertaining if the serum had any neutralising effect on the general actions in vivo of the various poisons. Colubrine snakes.6 had been under treatment for only a year, and the maximum amount of venom it had received at one injection was 500 milligrammes. Echis carinata.7 prevented death, while 3 c.c. delayed, but did not prevent, a fatal issue (protocols, table VII). We can, therefore, calculate that 1 c.c. of serum would be able to neutralise the general action in vivo of at least 0.45 milligramme of the venom of Crotalus adamanteus. These experiments conclude the observations which have been made with this serum and the various venoms, as far as their general actions in vivo are concerned. We have found, that a serum prepared with the pure venom of Daboia Russellii, a typical viperine poison, has no action whatever on any of the colubrine poisons, five in number, against which it was tested: that it neutralises well its homologous venom: that it has a certain, but not very marked, neutralising effect on the venom of another viper, namely, the American rattlesnake: and that it has no antitoxic action for the venom of a closely allied viper, Echis carinata, nor for that of another Indian viper, Trimeresurus gramineus. We have now to pass on to the consideration of some observations which were made with the object of determining if a daboia venom anti-serum has any hindering effect on the hæmolytic actions in vitro of a number of poisons, ten in all. The technique employed was identical with that used in a similar series of experiments, detailed in the last communication, with the anti-serum for cobra venom and that for the poison of Hoplocephalus curtus. The following is a short summary of the method. The red cells of the dog, as being very susceptible to hæmolysis by all venoms, were chosen. The blood was first gently defibrinated: the red cells were then carefully washed several times with salt solution (0.85 per cent.), being centrifugalised between each washing. A 5 per cent. suspension of the washed red cells was then made in sterile 0.85 per cent. salt solution. It was found that these manipulations completely removed all serum complement. As a preli- minary measure it was necessary to determine the minimum complete hæmolysing dose of each venom for 1 c.c. of the 5 per cent. red cell suspension, when a fixed amount of serum complement was added. The complement used was that of the dog, and the amount employed was 0.5 c.c. of a two-fold dilution of fresh serum. The tubes were placed in the incubator (37° C.) for one hour and then in the ice chest over night. Working in this way the hæmolysing value of each poison was accurately determined, and it was easy to fix the minimum amount of venom which could bring about complete hæmolysis of a fixed quantity of red cells. This amount, or a very small multiple of this amount, was the quantity of venom which was used as a test dose to determine whether or not daboia venom anti-serum had any hindering effect on the hæmolytic actions of the various poisons. The test dose of venom dissolved in 0.85 per cent. salt solution was mixed with varying amounts of the serum and the mixtures were allowed to stand at laboratory temperature for at least half an hour. To each tube was then added 1 c.c. of a 5 per cent. suspension of dog's washed red cells and 0.5 c.c. of
8 a two-fold dilution of dog's fresh serum. The preparations were then treated as described above. A reference to the protocols (table VIII) will show at a glance the results obtained. In the first place, it was found that this serum had no hindering effect whatever on the venom of any of the six colubrine snakes against which it was tested. In the second place, it was found that it neutralised equally well the venom with which it was prepared and the venom of Echis carinata: that it had a considerable but less neutralising effect on the venom of the American rattlesnake, but no hindering effect on the venom of Trimeresurus gramineus. These results are of considerable interest and call for some comment. We have previously seen that this serum has a certain neutralising effect on the general action in vivo of the venom of Crotalus adamanteus. We now find a corresponding effect on the hæmolytic action in vitro of this poison. We have also seen that it has no neutralising effect on the general action in vivo of the venom of Echis carinata: we now find that it prevents the hæmolytic action of this poison as well as it prevents the same action of its homologous venom. It is evident, therefore, that while the results got in vivo may correspond with those obtained in vitro, we cannot, by any means, depend on this being always the case, and that if we had been led to appraise the effect of the serum in vivo from the results got in vitro, a procedure which would appear justifiable from the testings with the venom of Crotalus adamanteus, we should have fallen into serious error. Further, it is easily calculated that the neutralising value of a specific serum for its venom as estimated by its effect in preventing the hæmolytic action of the poison in vitro is no criterion of its power on the general action of the poison in vivo. Thus, a reference to the protocols will show that 0.04 c.c. of serum was able to completely neutralise the hæmolytic action of 0.025 milligramme of daboia venom. From this it can be estimated that 1 c.c. would be able to neutralise 0.625 milligramme. Now, we have already seen that 1 c.c. of the same serum could neutralise 2.8 milligrammes of poison in vivo, an amount 4½ times more than that which the same quantity of serum could neutralise when tested against the hæmolytic action. We have now to take up the concluding portion of the present investigation, that is, the consideration of some observations which were made with the view of ascertaining if a serum prepared with daboia venom has any hindering effect on the action which some venoms exert on the coagulability of the blood plasma as tested with citrate plasma in vitro. As I have pointed out previously 8 daboia venom has a marked action in increasing the coagulability of the blood, which action can also be demonstrated in vitro with citrate plasma. I have also shown that this action is of the nature of a ferment activity. Further, I have investigated this phenomenon with
9 the venoms of several other species and have found that all viperine venoms and some colubrine poisons have a similar action to that of daboia venom. On the other hand, the venoms of the cobra and of the king cobra have a direct anti- ferment action, diminishing the blood coagulability in vivo and delaying or completely inhibiting the clotting of citrate or oxalate plasma in vitro. The venoms of the following snakes with which I have worked increase the coagula- bility of the blood plasma, which action can be easily demonstrated with citrate plasma in vitro: (1) Daboia Russellii, (2) Echis carinata, (3) Trimeresurus gramineus, (4) Crotalus adamanteus and (5) Hoplocephalus curtus. If a suitable amount of any of these poisons be added to citrate plasma clotting takes place, in the case of the last four almost instantaneously. The action of daboia venom in this respect is not so marked nor so energetic as that of the others: it takes a larger quantity and a much longer time to bring about clotting than any of the other four poisons. Daboia venom anti-serum was now tested against this action of this group of poisons. The test dose of each venom used was such an one as caused solid clotting of 2 c.c. of citrate plasma within a short time. The following was the method employed in all instances. The test dose of venom was mixed with varying amounts of serum. The mixtures were allowed to stand at laboratory temperature for half an hour. To each tube were then added 2 c.c. of citrate horse plasma (1 per cent.). The results were noted at short intervals. From table IX of the protocols it will be seen that, while the serum in small amount had a complete hindering effect on this action of its homologous venom, it had no neutralising effect on the other poisons against which it was tested. In this respect it appears to be specific. As regards the venom of Crotalus adamanteus this result appears to be in contradiction to the result obtained in the experiments made in vivo. It is, however, to be noted that the test dose of this poison used in the animal experiments did not produce an intravascular thumbosis: death was due to other causes. The following conclusions may now be drawn:10 3. When tested in vitro against the hæmolytic actions of the various poisons, it is found that this serum has no neutralising effect on this action of any colubrine venom: that it neutralises the venom of Echis carinata as well as it does that of the poison with which it is prepared: that it has a marked but not equally great effect on the venom of Crotalus adamanteus; and that it has no neutralising action on the venom of another viper, namely, Trimeresurus grami- neus. Further, when tested in vitro against the fibrin ferment actions of various poisons, it is found that, while this serum neutralises well its homologous venom, it has no effect on the poisons of four other species, one colubrine and three viperine, namely, (1) Hoplocephalus curtus, (2) Echis carinata, (3)Trimeresurus gramineus and (4) Crotalus adamanteus. 4. These observations lead us to the same conclusion which was previously arrived at and which receives the support of Noguchi's observations,9 namely, that an antivenomous serum is markedly but not strictly specific and that in treating any case of snake bite the homologous serum must be used. Protocols. The two antivenomous sera, which were used in the observations detailed below, were as follows:11 The following results were obtained :12 The following was the result :13 TABLE IV.14 Two experiments were made :15 TABLE VII.16 The letters at the top of each column are the initial letters of the genus and species of each snake as follows :17 soluble salt of lime. The technique employed to test if daboia venom anti-serum had any hindering effect on this action was as follows :18 References. 1 'Scientific Memoirs by officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India': New series: Nos. 5 and 10. 2 'Phil. Trans. of the Royal Society', Series B, Vol. 197, pp. 123-191. 3 'Indian Medical Gazette': Sept. 1904, p. 332. 4 'The Lancet ', Feb. 11th, 1905, p. 388. 5 'Scientific Memoirs by officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India': New series: No. 10. 6 'Phil. Trans. of the Royal Society ', Series B, Vol. 197, pp. 327-345. 7 'The Lancet', Nov. 5th, 1904. 8 'Scientific Memoirs by officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India: New series: No. 4. 9 'Brit. Med. Jour.' Sept. 10th, 1904, p. 580. G. I. C. P. O.No. 16. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. THE SPECIFICITY OF ANTIVENOMOUS SERA WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO A SERUM PREPARED WITH THE VENOM OF DABOIA RUSSELLI. BY CAPTAIN GEORGE LAMB, M.D., I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027260.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING INDIA. 1905. Price Annas 6 or 7d.
