IP/QB, 10 m. 91. b No. 15. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ON A PARASITE FOUND IN PERSONS SUFFERING FROM ENLARGEMENT OF THE SPLEEN IN INDIA.No. 15. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ON A PARASITE FOUND IN PERSONS SUFFERING FROM ENLARGEMENT OF THE SPLEEN IN INDIA.Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. H. S. KING & CO., 65, Cornhill, and 9, Pall Mall, London. E. A. ARNOLD, 41 and 43, Maddox Street, Bond Street, W. London. CONSTABLE & CO., 16, James Street, Hay Market, W. London. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & CO., Charing Cross Road, London, W.C. BERNARD QUARITCH, 15, Piccadilly, London, W. B. H. BLACKWELL, 5o and 51, Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & CO., Cambridge. ON THE CONTINENT. R. FRIEDLANDER & SOHN, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin, N.W. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. IN INDIA. THACKER, SPINK & CO., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & CO., Calcutta. S. K. LAHIRI & CO., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & CO., Calcutta. HIGGINBOTHAM & CO., Madras. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & CO., Madras. G. A. NATESAN & CO., Madras. THACKER & CO., LD., Bombay. A. J. COMBRIDGE & CO., Bombay. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & CO., Bombay. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazair Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH AND SONS, Mufid-i-Am Press, Lahore. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission Press. Rangoon.
ON A PARASITE FOUND IN PERSONS SUFFERING FROM ENLARGEMENT OF THE SPLEEN IN INDIA,2 confirmation of this view of their nature, but it was apparent from an examination of the illustrations attached to his article that the bodies which Captain Rogers regarded as fully-developed trypanosomes differed considerably from ordinary trypanosomes found in animals. They possessed no undulating membrane, the micro-nucleus or centrosome was situated at the end of the parasite from which the flagellum emerged, and the flagellum appeared to pass out of the parasite directly from the micro-nucleus. In a later communication* Captain Rogers recognized these differences, and stated definitely that in no instance was an undulating membrane present, nor did the flagellum pass forwards towards the macro-nucleus. So far as I am aware, no other observer than Captain Rogers has yet described the extra-corporeal development of the bodies, and it is therefore advisable to summarize the main facts noted by him. His procedure appears to be very simple, the technique being described as follows :3 with the growth of each young form until the characteristic groups of the oval bi-nucleated fully grown spleen parasite result, which are not very rarely seen in good specimens of spleen puncture blood." (2) Development at 22ºC. "On next reducing the temperature of the cold incubator down to about 22ºC. and making further cultures in a new series of cases of citrated spleen blood, further and more important changes were soon found." The various stages of development at 22ºC. are given as follows:4 some of the flagellated forms found on the fourth day in case 47, in addition to which there were much more numerous double pyriform organisms without flagella, for only a very small percentage of the conjugating forms eventually reach the flagellate stage under the artificial conditions of the cultures, which must be very far from being as favourable to the development of the organism as the natural conditions in which it takes place, whatever it may be." With regard to elongate forms, Captain Rogers notes that, though they occurred in several of his cases, yet they did not always appear. He also notes that the extremely long attenuated forms figured by him in his first publica- tion are exceptional, both in that elongation was more marked than usual, and in that this great degree of development had taken place in 24 hours. In the main I have been able to confirm Captain Rogers' results. Indeed, most of the forms figured by him, including very elongate forms, have occurred in my preparations. In addition I have been able to observe certain further appearances not described by him, which appear to take place at a later date, and to add some details of description. On the other hand, I have been unable to accept his conclusions regarding conjugation of the large oval forms or to be convinced that the nature of the bodies is yet finally settled. Technique.5 Immediately before puncture any excess of fluid is ejected from the syringe, only a little being allowed to remain in the needle and nozzle. A successful puncture should one-third or one-half fill the barrel of the syringe. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027123.tif] Illustrating author's method of studying development of bodies in citrated blood. Blood from the syringe is ejected with the fullest precautions as to sterility into small sterile tubes. I have found "arsenic tubes" (straight 3 "X 3/8") very suitable, their narrowness and length being antagonistic to desiccation and contamination during the frequent examination of the blood. For steriliza- tion these tubes may be heated to 120° C. in the autoclave, or merely passed through the flame till "browning" of the cotton plug takes place. No citrate solution is added to the tubes. After blood has been ejected into the tubes, I have found it convenient to enclose them in a small tin canister containing a little damp wool and provided with a tightly fitting lid. As I was obliged to use an ordinary ice chest, the cultures were exposed to a somewhat varying temperature, but it did not rise above 24°C. Blood for examination is removed by means of a platinum loop, great care being taken each time to prevent bacterial contamination. As the tubes employed were long and narrow, it was necessary to use a long, rather thick, platinum wire instead of the ordinary loop with a holder. Before removal of a drop for examination, the blood is shaken up to mix the corpuscles and plasma thoroughly. This enables more satisfactory films to be
6 made as well as ensures parasites being equally distributed. In good preparations the blood corpuscles remain unchanged for 15 days or more: they cannot be distinguished under the microscope from the corpuscles of freshly drawn blood. The leucocytes show marked degenerative changes, and the nucleus becomes swollen and irregular. Nevertheless in some cases the variety of cell could be distinguished easily after several days. Development.7 measuring in some instances as much as 8 8 indicated in one or two of his figures. It is seen as a pink staining area about the same size as the large chromatin mass. It lies generally in the neighbourhood of the small chromatin mass. It appears to be of the nature of a vacuole, but con- tains strands or flocculi of a material which stains light pink. In all later stages a proportion of the parasites showed this appearance more or less clearly. The extrusion of the cement substance.9 being rarely less than the size of the red cell. In almost all instances large masses of red staining material had been thrown out. Most of the bodies were pear-shaped or elongated. The extremities of the parasite containing the small chromatin masses invariably lay close together, whereas the rounded swollen portions projected freely. The pink vacuole was a conspicuous feature in many of the forms, and others possessed distinct, clearly outlined, deeply staining flagella. Flagellate forms.10 of the forms showed the pink staining vacuoles already described. Elongate forms were not more numerous than on the previous day. Fission appeared to be proceeding actively. Ninth day .11 and added to about double its volume of distilled water, and placed again in the ice chest. A further portion was similarly added to normal salt solution. Two days later prolonged search failed to reveal any structure resembling the parasites. On the fifteenth day about half the blood remaining was removed in a pipette and added to another tube, the whole process being very carefully conducted to avoid bacterial contamination. The tube was then enclosed in a moist chamber and incubated at 35ºC. On the second day films were examined for the bodies. Only a very few forms all showing marked degenerative changes, bordering on dissolution, were seen. On the fourth day no trace of the parasites could be observed. The preparation was, so far as could be seen under the microscope, free from micro-organisms. There could be no doubt from this case that, under the conditions described by Captain Rogers, profound developmental changes in the bodies had taken place. These appeared to be of the following nature and order of sequence: enlargement together with changes in the large chromatin mass and the proto- plasm, proceeding until the bodies are at least as large as a red blood corpuscle; fission occurring at least twice and forming groups of two and four large oval bodies loosely, or not at all attached; formation of the vacuolic area and extrusion of the cement substance; flagellation of certain of the bodies, and the formation of numerous fission forms many of which flagellate; finally, the formation of large groups of closely aggregate forms of various sizes. The time taken in this case for the different stages was as follows: large fully developed forms appeared by the fourth day; the vacuole, the extrusion of the cement substance, and the early stages of the flagella formation, all first appeared on the fifth day. Fully developed flagella were not seen till the sixth day. Elongate flagellate forms were specially numerous on the sixth and seventh days. From the ninth day onwards the formation of masses of pear-shaped and irregular forms was the chief feature. Captain Rogers notes large forms on the second day and flagellate forms on the third day. He does not note any further stages than those seen on the fourth day, which correspond with those obtained by me on the fifth and sixth days. Case 2.12 a good many quite unaltered bodies were seen, and some large forms at the same stage as those seen on the fifth day. Preparations were not again examined until the twenty-first day, when only one or two undeveloped bodies were noted. In this case development, although started, apparently failed to progress. Case 3.13 drawings, in stating that they are trypanosomata. The relation of the flagellum to the large chromatin mass, seven in the very elongate forms, does not suggest that the characteristic arrangement met with in trypanosomes is in process of develop- ment. On the other hand, it cannot be denied that the forms bear a very close resemblance to some of the developmental forms seen in cultures of T. lewisi, and further study must determine what relation, if any, exists between the new parasite and the trypanosomata of mammals.
14 EXPLANATION OF PLATE. Fig. 1. Bodies as seen in films made direct from splenic blood. Figs. 2, 3 and 4. Forms seen prior to 3rd day in citrated blood. Case 1. Fig. 5. First undoubted developmental change, 3rd day. Case 1. Fig. 6. Form which has developed to full size, 4th day. Case 1. Figs. 7, 8 and 9. Primary fission forms seen on 4th and 5th day. Fig. 9 shows a group of five such forms. Case 1. Fig. 10. Bodies forming a group held together by a light staining substance, 5th day. Case 1. Fig. 11. Elongate forms with the small chromatin mass at one extremity, 5th day. Case 1. Fig. 12. Group of four bodies showing fission, the first appearance of the flagellum and the formation of the vacuole, 6th day. Case 1. Fig. 13. Bodies showing first appearance of the cement substance, 6th day. Case 1. Figs. 14, 15. Groups of flagellate forms seen on the 6th day. Case 1. Fig. 16. Group of bodies showing elongate flagellate forms, 6th day. Case 1. Figs. 17, 18. Groups of bodies bound together by voluminous cement substance in which flagella are seen embedded. Case 1. Fig. 19. Form showing long flagellum. Case 1. Figs. 20 and 21. Groups of bodies, which appear to have arisen from forms included in cells. Fig. 22. Group of secondary fission forms showing cement substance, small forms, irregular subdivision and flagellate bodies, 12th day. Case 1. The changes seen after the twelfth day are not figured. G. I. C. P. O.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027153.tif] Photogravure. Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, February 1905.
No. 15. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ON A PARASITE FOUND IN PERSONS SUFFERING FROM ENLARGEMENT OF THE SPLEEN IN INDIA.