IP/QB, 10 No. 20. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. SERUM-THERAPY OF PLAGUE IN INDIA ; REPORTS BY MR. W. M. HAFFKINE, C.I.E., AND VARIOUS OFFICERS OF THE PLAGUE RESEARCH LABORATORY, BOMBAY. EDITED WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY LIEUT.-COL. W. B. BANNERMAN, M.D., B.SC., F.R.S.E., I.M.S., Director, Plague Research Laboratory, Bombay. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027838.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1905.
INDIA. Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. IN INDIA. H. S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, & 9, Pall Mall, London. THACKER, SPINK & CO., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & CO., Calcutta. E. A. ARNOLD, 41 & 43, Maddox Street, Bond Street, London, W. S.K. LAHIRI & CO., Calcutta. CONSTABLE & CO., 16, James Street, Hay Market, London, W. R. CAMBRAY & CO., Calcutta. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & CO., Madras. G. A. NATESAN & CO., Madras. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & CO., Charing Cross Road, London, W.C. THACKER & CO., LD., Bombay. BERNARD QUARITCH, 15, Piccadilly, London, W. A. J. COMBRIDGE & Co., Bombay. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 & 51, Broad Street, Oxford. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & CO., Bombay. DEIGHTON BELL & CO., Cambridge. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay. ON THE CONTINENT. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazair Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. R. FRIEDLANDER & SOHN, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin, N.W. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-Am Press, Lahore. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission Press, Rangoon. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. SUNDER PANDURANG, Bombay. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. A. M. & J. FERGUSON, Ceylon.
List of Numbers of Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India (New Series) published previous to the present issue. No. 1. Standardisation of Calmette's anti-venomous serum with pure cobra venom: the deterioration of this serum through keeping in India, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 2. Malaria in India, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No. 3. Some observations on the poison of Russell's Viper (Daboia Russellii), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 5 or 6d. No. 4. On the action of the venoms of the Cobra and of the Daboia on the red blood cor- puscles and on the blood plasma, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 5. Specificity of anti-venomous sera, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 6. First report on the anti-malarial operations in Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1S. 2d. No. 7. Some observations on the poison of the Banded Krait (Bungarus Fasciatus), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 8. A preliminary report on a parasite found in patients suffering from enlargement of the spleen in India, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No. 9. Second report of the anti-malarial operations at Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 10. Specificity of anti-venomous sera (second communication), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 11. On a parasite found in persons suffering from enlargement of the spleen in IndiaSERUM-THERAPY OF PLAGUE IN INDIA. INTRODUCTION. THE papers published in this number relate to trials in the Bombay Municipal Plague Hospitals, of the sera prepared according to the me thods of Professor Lustig of Florence, Professor Terni, formerly of Messina, now of Milan, Dr. Brazil of San Paulo, Brazil, and Dr. Roux of the Pasteur Institute of Paris. Originally they were submitted to Government in the form of letters report- ing results as the experiments progressed, and the work of the editor has simply been to produce connected reports from the materials submitted to him for this purpose. Though it has been necessary therefore to recast the reports, the sense and, as far as possible, the original wording, have been retained. The first to try anti-plague serum in India was Yersin, who reached Bombay early in 1897, bringing with him serum prepared in Tongkin and at the Pasteur Institute at Paris. Its mode of preparation is thus described by Roux. " The anti-plague serum from horses 21 and 31 was prepared in the following way :2 so it was weaker than that used last year in China, and the doses to be injected consequently had to be largely increased. "2 The following summarises those cases treated either by himself or under his directions by other medical men, in the Bombay hospitals. In the Parel Old Government House Hospital 27 persons were inoculated with Yersin's serum; the first three being injected by Yersin himself and the rest by Captain Thomson, I.M.S. Three of these must be excluded as the patients were not suffering from plague, but from (a) meningitis with osseous tumour pressing on the medulla, (b) hepatitis and remittent fever, (c) some other disease not specified. One healthy woman was given a prophylactic injection, and must also be excluded. Of the remaining 23 individuals who undoubtedly had plague, 14 died and 9 recovered, giving a percentage mortality of 6o.86.3 The general mortality in the Parel Hospital at the time was 64.5, but as the Medical Officer in charge points out, there were among them a large number of moribund cases, which more than accounts for the difference. Captain G. S. Thomson, M.B., I.M.S., who was in charge of the cases, reports that " the temperature, pulse and respirations were recorded and taken personally immediately before injection in each case." He notes the following as results following the injection of the serum :3 It will be noticed that the case mortality in hospital is almost the same as that recorded for the same class of patients in Dr. West's report on the trials with Roux's serum last year (vide p. 60). Further trial of serum made on this system was carried out about the same time by the German Plague Commission on 26 patients in the Bombay Plague Hospitals. Of these 13 died and 13 recovered4; but as noted by the Indian Plague Commission, these results are not compared with any parallel series of controls, and are not therefore of much statistical value, though the case mortality is below the average met with in plague. The serum used for these cases is described by the German Commission as belonging to " the older " sample supplied to them, and they record that " the only certain inference which can be drawn is that the injections of serum have had no perceptible immediate or remote harmful results." The next trial with Roux-Yersin serum was made by Captain H. D. Mason, M.R. C. S., R . A .M .C., in the State of Cutch, during May and June 1897. The serum was obtained direct from the Pasteur Institute in Paris. " The serum was administered to human plague patients in doses from 10 to 6o c.c. The smaller closes were employed in the cases first treated, the larger doses being resorted to as experience was gained. Quantities larger than 60 c.c. were not administered, because it was found that with this last dose the patients began to suffer from painful swelling of the joints.5" The amount given varied from 10 c.c. (in one case) to 220 c.c. The following table shows the numbers who received (a) less than 100 c c. of serum, (b) those who received 100 c.c. and above, and (c) those who received 200 c.c. or above, with the case mortality in each :4 evidenced by the mortality of 83 per cent. in the hospital. The plague patients, however, who were treated with serum, were, with the exception of the first 5 cases treated, admitted to hospital during a period of four months of a declining epidemic, when we may presume the type of the disease to have been much milder. Again, only 31 of the 100 serum cases were admitted into the Brahmapuri Hospital, this apparently being in consequence of the decline of the epidemic in Cutch Mandvi. The remaining 69 cases were admitted into hospital in smaller places in the neighbourhood of Cutch Mandvi. The serum cases were thus hardly comparable with the control cases. It is indeed recognised by Captain Mason that the average severity of the disease in the control was greater than that in the serum cases." A comparison of the serum cases treated in the Brahmapuri Hospital from the 30th of May to the 9th of June 1897, i.e., within a week after the date of admission of the last control case shows the following result :5 The next observations with this serum were those of Dr. Simond of the Pasteur Institute, Paris, who came out to India and conducted the experiments personally. At Karad in the Satara District, 32 persons were treated by him between the 5th and 24th September 1897, in the hospital there.9 The doses varied from 10 c.c. (in one case) to 30 c.c.; and the largest total given to any one patient was 90 c.c. in 4 doses. The following table shows the numbers who received (a) less than 40 c.c. and (b) 40 c.c. and above :6 From these figures they conclude that (a) the type of case admitted to hospital while the serum was being used, was gradually becoming less severe, as indicated by the progressively lessening case-mortality returned from the hospital; this corresponding to the rapid decline of the epidemic in the latter half of May and beginning of June 1898 in Karachi town; and (b) that possibly the cases in the non-treated group "included a large number of moribund or hopeless cases," for otherwise it is hard to explain the somewhat higher case- mortality as compared with the rate in the pre-serum period, and the dispropor- tionate height as contrasted with the immediately succeeding period. It is thus impossible to form "a definite conclusion as to the effect exerted by the serum on the case-mortality." It is unfortunately impossible to found anything on the figures showing that the serum was more effective when used in the first days of illness, for the reason that the patients universally declared they were recently affected, from fear of prosecution for concealment of cases. As to the clinical effects of the serum, it appears that "in fatal cases the treatment had not the slightest permanent effect on the temperature."11 In certain cases, however, the temperature fell two or three degrees, especially after the evening injection. In cases ending in recovery, the serum appeared to act in much the same way, and the temperature did not reach normal any sooner than under ordinary treatment. The pulse, however, often became less rapid, and the tongue clean and moist after an injection of serum, and general improvement in symptoms was seen in many cases, even when recovery did not eventually ensue. The serum had no effect on septicæmic or pneumonic cases, and hardly any on cases developing secondary pneumonia, nor did it prevent this latter complication. Convalescence was likewise not affected by the treatment, and four cases developed rheumatic articular pains. The Indian Plague Commissioners made trial of samples of this serum, kindly placed at their disposal by the authorities of the Pasteur Institute in Paris. Patients were treated by Lieutenant Stewart Douglas, I.M.S., at Banga- lore in December 1898 and January 1899.12 The cases in the South Camp Hospital were treated with serum, those in the North Camp Hospital were observed as controls; both hospitals admitting a similar class of patients. In all, 49 plague patients were treated, these being all the cases of undoubted plague admitted, save those manifestly convalescent or in articulo mortis. Of these, 31 died giving a case-mortality of 61.2 per cent. The serum was adminis- tered once a day, the quantity given to the first 28 cases varied from 10 c.c. to 20 c.c., and to the remaining 21 cases 40 c.c. on the first day, and generally 20 c.c. on each subsequent day. Seventeen patients received less than 40 c.c. of serum, and of these 10 died, a percentage case-mortality of 58.8; while 32
7 patients received 40 c.c. of serum or more and had 21 deaths, a percentage case- mortality of 65.6. With the exception of eight all were well marked bubonic cases. For the purpose of comparison the Indian Plague Commissioners give the following table which shows the admission of plague patients to the North and South Camp hospitals during the period covered by the administration of serum :8 The following shows the general result :9 uncertain or when the patient was actually on the point of death. The serum was given hypodermically: at first 20 c.c. daily in one dose; later, an additional 10 c.c. was given in the evening, and later still the morning dose was increased to 30 c.c. These doses were finally increased to 40 c.c. in the morning and 20 c.c. at night. " More than half the cases were treated with the later doses."16 The following table shows the result :10 chronic disease induced by the injections, associated with wasting and swelling of the joints, and their serum therefore was not used. Serum from the horses, cattle and sheep was used in a large number of cases at Poona in the autumn of 1897. Preliminary experiments on animals had proved its efficacy in small doses to protect against lethal injections of living plague germs.19 It was first used on human beings in the Byculla Jail and Arthur Road hospital, Bombay, in the early part of the same year. On account of the small amount of serum then available no clear indication as to its usefulness, or otherwise, could at that time be obtained. The serum procured from the animals was therefore stored in hermetically sealed test tubes till a sufficient amount had accumulated for the purposes of a crucial test. In the autumn of 1897, when plague was on the increase in Poona, an opportunity presented itself of making a series of systematic observations on the plague patients admitted to the special hospital there. Mr. Haffkine, accompanied by the present writer, accordingly visited the plague hospital every morning, and by the kindness of Captain J. L. T. Jones, M.B., I.M.S., in charge of the hospital, was enabled to treat with this serum every alternate patient admitted to the hospital during the three hours or so we remained there daily. As most of the cases were admitted in the morning as the result of house- to-house visitation by the authorities, and as some 20 or 30 patients were admitted daily, it was possible to obtain in a fortnight a decided opinion on the usefulness of the serum. No selection was made except when two patients arrived simultaneously. In such a case that patient was chosen for injection who seemed to us to be in the more serious condition. In this way close on 200 cases of plague passed through our hands, half of which were treated with varying amounts of serum, often in very large amounts. No evidence from clinical observation was obtained of any effect attributable to the serum, and the case-mortality was, probably on account of the method of selection noted above, some 14 per cent. higher in those treated with serum than in the controls. A hint of beneficial action was obtained in the case of patients treated with the sheep serum; but none in the case of those injected with the cattle or horse serum prepared in this way. No further experiments were therefore performed with this serum. Lustig's Serum. Professor Lustig of Florence, having by experiment on small animals arrived at the conclusion that a curative serum for plague could be prepared by the injection of horses with nucleo-albumen derived from masses of plague germs treated with certain chemicals, was sent to Bombay by the British Government
11 in June 1897 for the purpose of trying his serum on human beings. By this time the plague epidemic of the first year had run its course and only a few sporadic cases were available for this purpose. Dr. Choksy, the Medical Officer in charge of the Arthur Road Hospital, where it was first tried, reported that it was "the only serum which gave anything like satisfactory results as out of 7 cases treated with this serum 6 recovered, and at Lanowli 16 cases were treated and 12 recovered."20 Professor Lustig reports21 that in Bombay and Poona he treated 30 patients with 24 recoveries. On the strength of these favourable results and the report of further experiments on animals in Florence, the Municipal Corporation of Bombay asked Professor Lustig to prepare serum for them in Florence and agreed to engage the services of Dr. (now Professor) G. Galeotti, Professor Lustig's Assistant, and to arrange for the manufacture of serum on the spot. Dr. Galeotti and his Assistant Dr. Polverini arrived in Bombay on the 11th of March 1898 bringing a supply of serum which had been made in Florence by Professor Lustig. The cases treated with this Florence-made serum numbered 257, all under the care of Dr. Choksy at the Arthur Road Municipal Hospital, and admitted in the period from March to October 1898. The serum was given hypodermi cally in doses of from 10 to 30 c.c. night and morning. "The patients to whom the serum was therapeutically administered were to some extent selected, all moribund patients being excluded, except in March and part of April. The case-mortality of the selected patients who were submitted to the serum treat ment was compared with the case-mortality in the remainder of the hospital patients, including, as this did, the moribund patients who were excluded from the serum group. The results as set forth by Dr. Choksy were as follows"22:12 unconsciously, have operated in the direction of including within the serum group the milder, to the exclusion of the severer, cases of plague." They therefore believe that these statistics "do not afford any conclusive evidence of the efficacy of Lustig's serum." The Bombay Municipal Corporation having resolved to start the manufac ture of Lustig's serum on the spot, work was begun with five horses on the 1st of November 1898. Drs. Galeotti and Polverini were in charge of the labo ratory and Professor Lustig himself came to Bombay in January 1899 to see its working and found it "completely satisfactory in every regard." Later in the year Dr. Galeotti had to return to Italy, when Dr. Polverini, his assistant, assumed charge and with the assistance of Dr. A. Mayr was responsible for the production of the serum till the close of the Municipal Laboratory in June 1902. Dr. A. Mayr has kindly written out a clear statement of the methods used by them in the immunisation of the horses (vide Appendix A), which is most valuable as giving the results of the experience accumulated in this matter. The first trial of Lustig's serum as locally manufactured in Bombay was made in the period from February to April 1899, and relates to 403 serum- treated patients admitted to the Arthur Road Hospital under the care of Dr. Choksy. "In this series of observations only patients admitted in the acute stages of the disease and in a non-moribund condition were treated with the serum. The residuum of patients admitted to the hospital during the corresponding period was, as in the series of observations that have just been considered, taken as control."24 The result was as follows :13 admitted to the latter institution were chosen for serum treatment, an opportunity was not afforded for an appreciable increase in case-mortality in the large number of cases not so treated. They, therefore, conclude that this second series of observations cannot be regarded as affording conclusive evidence of an advantage accruing from serum treatment. The third series of observations made at the Arthur Road Hospital is dealt with at length by Mr. Haffkine in his report (vide p. 28) and need not therefore be referred to here. In the other hospitals in Bombay, Lustig's serum was used as follows 25 :14 the patient not absolutely moribund, was submitted to the injections."27 Of these 10 died, which is equivalent to a case-mortality of 77 per cent. These cases were injected by Drs. Galeotti and Polverini with Florence-made serum. In the Modikhana Hospital in 1900 a fairly extensive trial of Lustig serum as made in Bombay was carried out by Dr. D. A. Turkhud, M.B. (Edin.), in charge of that plague hospital. The method of selection was as follows :15 injections before 8 o'clock,16 A capsule of blood was taken from each patient on admission, and sent to the Plague Research Laboratory, Bombay, where it was examined by culture and injection into animals. The results are shown below :17 The difference in these two sets of figures may be accounted for on the supposition that Dr. Choksy being rightly regarded as an expert in plague, was called in consultation to see cases where the treatment of others had failed. As regards the effects of early treatment on these private patients, Dr. Choksy remarks :18 The second patient was a male, aged 35, admitted to hospital on the 11th February 1901 in the second day of illness and treated on the 12th idem. The patient was a strong man, quite sensible, and a markedly milder case than the former one. Temperature ranged between 101.2° and 102.8º F., pulse 132 fairly strong, respiration 25 per minute. Bubo in left femoral region, painful and 19 metal sieve with a mesh of 0.1 m.m., or through a piece of sterilised cloth. It is inoculated intravenously in increasing quantities, beginning with 5 c.c., and the animals then give a serum of exceptional curative value." Brazil's Serum. A trial consignment of this serum was received through the Secretary of State for India towards the end of 1902. The consignment consisted of 36 sealed test tubes of serum, but unfortunately only 8 were found fit for use on opening the boxes. Under Mr. Haffkine's directions two cases were chosen " of a typically severe type, in order to avoid such as might recover under treatment without serum." One received hypodermically 66 c.c. of serum, the other 10 c.c. Both died, and no evidence was found either clinically or otherwise of benefit attri- butable to the serum treatment. Both were treated in the Modikhana Hospital, under the observation of Dr. Costello. In August 1903 another consignment of 600 tubes was received with which the trial reported on by Mr. Haffkine and Dr. West was made. (Vide p.47.) The mode of preparation of this serum is thus described by Dr. Vital Brazil, Director of the State Serum Institute, San Paulo, Brazil33 :20 were not in all respects strictly comparable for one reason or another with those receiving the serum treatment. The tables I and II below show at a glance the results obtained in each case. TABLE I.21 TABLE II.22 therefore to study a large series of cases treated by ordinary methods and by serum side by side, in a strictly scientific manner, before a conclusion could be arrived at. This has, I think, been to a large extent secured in the case of the trials enumerated in Table I, and it is by a consideration of these alone, that a true estimate of the worth of serum treatment for plague as at present practised can be reached. To take first the case of the Roux Yersin serum, it is seen that in all the trials, save one, the case-mortality of those treated with serum is as high or higher than that of the control patients. The one exception is in the series of 28 cases treated in Bombay by the Indian Plague Commission, in which one patient fewer on the serum side died than among the controls. The element of chance must be reckoned with here, as the numbers are small. With regard to the trial of the serum sent personally by Dr. Roux and dealt with fully in Dr. West's report, it is a matter for regret that permission to employ the intravenous method was not obtained at an earlier stage of the experiment, so that a greater number of patients might have been thus treated. Dr. Roux maintains that subcutaneous injection, entailing as it does slow absorption of the serum into the circulation, gives time for the formation in the patient of anti-bodies to the serum anti-toxin so that the plague bacilli in the blood are not affected by the serum. They may even, as Ainley Walker34 has pointed out, become accustomed to the presence of the anti-toxin and thereby have their virulence increased. Roux maintains that the full dose of serum should be injected straight into the blood stream, so that the bacilli may be overwhelmed at once, by mass-action as it were. If the patients dealt with in this trial be divided into three groups, according as they were treated :23 From a study of the case-mortality of the control cases corresponding to those treated with serum as above divided, it is evident that the epidemic was declining in severity as time went on. It is not therefore possible to say that the lessened case-mortality shown by the 13 cases treated according to (c) is due to that treatment, for a corresponding and even greater lessening of the case- mortality is exhibited by the 13 alternate control cases receiving the ordinary treatment. We must, therefore, reluctantly conclude that the serum treatment, as judged by these figures, did not affect the case-mortality in the slightest degree. In three out of the four trials made with Lustig's serum we find that the case-mortality of the serum-treated patients is higher than among those receiving ordinary treatment. The exceptional case is that treated at length in the report forming the first of those published in this memoir. From Table II of this report we learn that of the category showing the lowest mortality (i.e., those in whom both pulse and respiration were slow) the serum group of patients had 46, while the control group comprises only 24 such cases. Table III of the same report shows that cases without buboes were "practi- cally all fatal." Of these the controls had 29, while the serum-treated cases had only 5. Table V shows that the sex distribution likewise is in favour of the serum cases. From a consideration of these tables and the details set forth in Mr. Haffkine's report we must reluctantly arrive at the conclusion, that, judged by these figures alone, there is no certain evidence that the serum is efficient. The trial made with Terni's serum shows the difference in favour of the injected patients to be 0.91 per cent. only, an amount which cannot be regarded as of the slightest significance. As regards Brazil's serum it seems highly problematical if the 2.85 per cent. of the life-saving shown amongst the treated cases can be credited to the effects of the treatment. For in one hospital we find that of the serum-treated patients ten per cent. more died, while in the other, eight per cent. fewer of the cases had a fatal termination. From the stand-point of clinical evidence, however, there is more hope in the outlook. Almost all the clinicians who have reported on the use of serum in their hospitals or in private practice are emphatic that it acts favourably on the course of the disease. It seems, for instance, that the serum-treated cases live longer than the control cases.
24 The following statement brings this out :25 In such a virulent disease as plague is in India, these are no small gains, but it must be remembered that 60 per cent. of all bubonic cases are at the time of admission to hospital septicaemic. It has been urged by certain competent authorities (e.g., Roux) that it is quite out of the question to expect to get any results with cases far advanced in the disease 37 and that therefore the alternate method hitherto tried in Indian hospitals is not one to bring out the true value of serum treatment. But perhaps it would be possible to get an experienced clinician to select such cases as he deemed suitable for serum treatment and to admit them to a separate ward where they could be submitted to the alternate method of treatment by an independent observer. When comparing the effects of the various sera as described in this memoir, it is necessary to remember that they differed much as regards freshness. Thus Lustig's serum being made locally was often used within a few days of separa- tion from the blood; Brazil's serum had been kept for six months in the ice chest after receipt in India, and so on. Particulars as to date of receipt and use will be found in the detailed reports. In view of the somewhat discouraging results obtained among hospital patients in India, it seems necessary to commence anew the study of the serum therapy of plague. This, as suggested by the Indian Plague Commission, should be done by studying the action of plague toxines on animals and the blood changes taking place in men and animals injected with living plague or its toxines. It would be necessary also to find out whether the insusceptible horse is the best manufacturer of plague curative serum. Brazil and Haffkine seem to have been the only experimenters with serum from animals other than the horse. Judged by the effect of serum on rabbits it appears 38 that the toxicity of serum from various species of animals may be arranged in the following order of decreasing virulence, viz.,26 REFERENCES TO INTRODUCTION. 1 Report of the Indian Plague Commission, Vol. III, p. 382, Note 1. Vide also La Peste Bubonique, Par M. M. Yersin, Calmette et Borrel, Annales de l' Institut Pasteur, 1895, p. 591. 2 Gatacre's Report, pp. 145-6. "Times of India" Press, Bombay, 1897. 3 Report of the Indian Plague Commission, Vol. I, p. 395, also vide The Bombay Plague, Condon, 1900, p. 85, and General Gatacre's Report, 1897, pp. 78 and 80. 4 Indian Plague Commission Report, Vol. V, p. 308. 5 Ibid, Vol. V, p. 298, and Vol. III, p. 380. 6 Ibid, Vol. V, p. 299. 7 Ibid, Vol. V, p. 300. 8 Ibid, Vol. V, p. 301. 9 Ibid, Vol. III, p. 136 and V, p. 303. 10 Ibid, Vol. V, p. 306. 11 Ibid, Vol. V, p. 307. 12 Ibid, Vol. III, pp. 59327 30 In a letter to the writer. 31 Vide Appendix B, Epitome of Greig's unpublished paper. 32 Vide pages 11328 REPORT ON A SERIES OF 484 CASES OF PLAGUE TREATED WITH LUSTIG'S ANTI-PLAGUE SERUM. BY W. M. HAFFKINE, C.I.E., Director-in-Chief, Plague Research Laboratory, Bombay. THE patients were those received into the Bombay Municipal Plague Hospital at Arthur Road, which is under the care of Khan Bahadur N. H. Choksy, M.D. (Hon. causâ, Freiburg), L.M.&S., Special Assistant Health Officer of the Bombay Municipality. The patients were treated by this officer and by Professor Lustig's assistants, who made the serum in Bombay. Those to whom the serum was administered were selected from the patients proved to be suffering from plague, who were admitted to the Arthur Road Muni- cipal Plague Hospital between the 1st of May 1899 and the 31st of July 1900. After the diagnosis had been made in the hospital, every second plague patient was at once injected with the serum, while the alternate individuals were kept without this treatment and observed as "controls." In this way 484 cases diagnosed by competent medical men as plague were treated with this serum, while 484 cases similarly diagnosed and admitted alter- nately with them were observed for comparison, and not given serum at any time. All these 968 plague patients were treated in the ordinary symptomatic way, the only difference being the injection of serum in the case of half the number. The following report is compiled from an examination of the temperature charts kept in the hospital and submitted to me for this purpose by order of Government. The actual clinical data submitted to analysis are those in which the personality of the observer plays no part, viz., the temperature, the pulse-rate, the number of respirations, the situation of the buboes and the ultimate issue of each case. The general results may be formulated as follows:29 temperature on admission, so much the greater is the mortality. The number of serum treated patients, however, is slightly less in the graver categories, and more in the milder forms; though indeed, the difference is not great. From Table II, it is seen that the lowest mortality occurred among patients in whom both pulse and respiration were slow. Of these, the serum cases had 46; the control cases 24. On the other hand, patients in whom the pulse or respiration, or both, were so imperceptible or irregular that they could not be recorded, showed the highest mortality; of these, the control cases had a very considerable preponderance. Plague cases without buboes, i.e., septicæmic and pneumonic cases, are practically all fatal. From Table III it will be seen that the controls had 29 such cases, while the serum treated cases had only 5. It is evident then that among the serum patients there must have existed a group of 24 cases of a type milder than these cases without buboes. It is found from Table V that the highest mortality occurs in both sexes between the ages of 21 and 40; but it is seen that the control group had 20 more such cases than the serum group; the numbers being 264 and 244, respectively. From the same table we learn that the lowest mortality was in males below 15 years of age, and of these the treated cases had more than those not treated; the numbers being 63 and 52, respectively. As the same individuals figure afterwards in other columns and tables where they are considered from other points of view, the effect of the unequal gravity of the cases will be seen in the form of a lower mortality in each of the cate- gories and sub-divisions in which they are grouped. It is impossible to maintain that this uneven distribution of cases, which in most instances was quite unavoidable, accounts for the preponderance of deaths observed in the control group, for in certain other sub-divisions showing a lessened but still high mortality, there was a considerable though less prepon- derance of serum cases. But it is impossible also to say with certainty how many of the excess survivals, if any, are due to the serum. In my original plan of investigation into the efficiency of plague anti-toxic sera, I had foreseen difficul- ties of this kind, and, as a corrective, added the postulate that in every instance in which a choice has to be made between two patients admitted to hospital at the same time, the more severe case be taken for serum treatment and the milder one for the purposes of control observations.* If the mortality is influenced favourably in these circumstances, a proof is obtained à fortiori of the beneficial action of the treatment applied. In the case under consideration this postulate has not been complied with. * NOTE.30 If we admit that the distribution of patients between the control and serum groups was sufficiently uneven to influence, at least partially, the mortality rates, we must be prepared to find that it played also a part in the difference shown by the two groups in regard to the duration of life in the fatal cases (vide Table 1, columns 7 and 11). It was expected that the favourable effect of a serum injection would manifest itself in an immediate or early reduction of the fever temperature. In a number of cases this expectation was not fulfilled; in a large number of others the temperature began to go down after admission to hospital without any serum injection; but when we compare the proportions, we find a favourable difference attributable to the serum, but perhaps partially also to the better condition of the serum cases (Table VI). This initial favourable effect of the serum was unfortunately not maintained, for when we consider the temperature chart throughout the patients' illness we do not find that the fever left the treated cases sooner than the controls (Table VII), or that in the recovery cases the normal temperature was reached sooner by the serum cases than by the controls (Table VIII). A paradoxical result is observed in many of the facts recorded. Thus, for instance, femoral buboes gave to the controls a mortality of 79.74 per cent.; serum would seem to have "reduced" it to 55.05 per cent. Cervical glands appear somewhat less fatal (75.86 per cent.), still the serum was much less "successful" here, the serum cases having had a mortality of 73.52 per cent. (Table III). Similarly patients with multiple neighbouring glands seem to die more frequently (mortality of controls 82.44 per cent.) than those with multiple scattered and opposite glands. Still the serum would seem to have "reduced" the mortality in the first and "increased" it in the two other categories (Table III). Males are shown in the group under study to recover more frequently than females (Table V); but under the serum treatment a higher proportion of the latter than of the former recovered. Among the male control cases the highest mortality is found among those between the ages of 21 and 40, while those below 15 years of age show the lowest death-rate. The serum would appear to have been very successful with the first, and to have failed entirely with the second. The temperature of a plague patient has a natural tendency to go down towards the morning and to rise towards the evening; one might therefore expect that if the serum injection had the virtue of bringing down the temperature, this would be more often manifested in the morning temperatures after evening injections than in the evening temperatures after morning injections. Indeed in
31 the recovery cases this was so; in the fatal cases it would seem, on the contrary, as if the serum had interfered with the natural morning fall of the fever (Table VI). And so on. The above paradoxical cases seem to suggest that in the facts observed there were, apart from the serum injections, other factors which influenced the course of the disease and the recovery or death of the patients very powerfully. Were clinical symptoms actually and effectively improved by the serum, and this improvement maintained for the greater part of the illness, this need not necessarily have led to an improved mortality rate. I may illustrate my meaning by the fact that the injection of water in cholera has a most striking effect on the symptoms, probably such as no other operation has in the case of any other disease; the effect on the mortality appears, however, so absolutely negative that the injections have been abandoned in practice. Similarly, from the analysis of the plague cases treated with Dr. Terni's curative serum in the Modikhana and Maratha Municipal Plague hospitals, it will be seen that the facts recorded present indications of an improvement effected by the serum in the clinical features of the disease. Notwithstanding this, the mortality rate was 90 deaths in 110 serum cases and 89 deaths in 110 controls. Considering that the cost of the serum is something like Rs. 60 per patient treated (not patient saved), the results obtained so far from the Lustig, Terni and Brazil sera are not favourable to a general adoption of the treatment. I beg to acknowledge the able assistance given me by Dr. E. S. Winter of this Laboratory in the laborious task of compiling from the hospital documents the figures reproduced in the tables attached.
32 Analysis of 968 hospital charts referring to 484 patients treated with Professor Lustig's plague curative serum and 484 alternate cases observed as controls, in the Arthur Road Municipal Plague Hospital, Bombay, under Dr. N. H. Choksy, between May 1899 and July 1900. I. CONTROL CASES. TREATED CASES. Number of patients. Number of deaths. Mortality per- centage. Average stay in hospital be- fore death (in days). Number of patients. Number of deaths. Mortality per- centage. Average stay in hospital before death (in days). I. State on ad-mission. Tempera-ture: Patients whose first recorded tempera- ture was33 III. CONTROL CASES. TREATED CASES. Number of patients. Number of deaths. Mortality percentage. Average stay in hospital before death (in days). Number of patients. Number of deaths. Mortality percentage. Average stay in hospital before death (in days). I34 V. CONTROL CASES. TREATED CASES. Number of patients. Number of deaths. Mortality percentage. Average stay in hospital before death (in days). Number of patients. Number of deaths. Mortality percentage. Average stay in hospital before death (in days). I- (contd.) State on admis- sion. Sex, Age, Caste, Na- tionality. Among the patients there were35 Serum Cases36 VIII. Temperature of twenty patients who recovered (treated and controls) who had the highest admission temperature, and average interval between the first application of treatment or admission to hospital and the time when temperature became for the first time permanently normal :37 REPORT ON A SERIES OF 110 CASES OF PLAGUE TREATED WITH TERNI'S ANTI-PLAGUE SERUM. BY W. M. HAFFKINE, C.I.E., Director-in-Chief, Plague Research Laboratory, AND C. T. COSTELLO, M.B., B.Ch., B.A. (Dublin), Attached to the Laboratory. THE patients treated were those admitted to the Modikhana Municipal Plague Hospital, Bombay, between November 1902 and July 1903. This hospital was under the charge of Dr. D. A. Turkhud, M.B., C.M. (Edin.), and the ordinary symptomatic treatment of the cases was carried out by him. The serum employed was supplied by Professor Terni of Messina and sent for trial through the Secretary of State for India. It was sent out in 10 c.c. bottles, which is presumably the average dose to be given at one time. In reply to an enquiry Professor Terni informed one of us (W. M. Haffkine), that he considered the application of his treatment to some 300 patients would prove its utility, and accordingly sent the requisite amount of serum for this purpose ; viz., 1,500 bottles, or an average of 5 bottles, or 50 c.c., for each patient. Four patients received less than this amount (vide Table V) because they died before the full quantity could be administered; 42 received 50 c.c. or the prescribed amount and the rest (65) were given more than this quantity, receiving from 60 to 130 c.c. or above. All were injected hypodermically. The injections were carried out by one of us (C. T. Costello) at the hospital and he also watched the patients and compiled the returns from which the subsequent analysis was made. The method of selecting the cases was the alternate plan, modified as follows :38 The number treated with serum was 111, and the number admitted alter- nately with them was 112. The hundred and twelfth patient (who recovered) not being required, is omitted from the subsequent analysis. Further, the chart of control patient No. 105 having been mislaid in the hospital, it is necessary to omit the corresponding serum-treated case. The number dealt with below is therefore reduced to 110 cases in each category. When patients coming under the headings (a), (b), (c), (d), noted above, were received, they were passed over, and the next admission taken for treatment with or without serum, as the list demanded. The following is the general result of the analysis of the tables below. The mortality in the two groups was practically equal, i.e., 89 deaths among 110 cases treated with serum, 90 deaths among 110 not so treated. The serum-treated cases lived on the average about 8 hours longer than those not treated, vide Table I. The good effects one would expect from an early administration of the remedy are not consistently apparent in Table I. Similarly inconsistent results are seen in Table II. where patients are grouped according to the apparent severity of the disease. The serum appears to have benefited the severer cases, but not those of a milder type. Taking the first recorded temperature of the patients as a guide, it is found in the control group that the higher this is, the greater is the death-rate among them. But the serum showed most success in those with a temperature between 101° and 102.9° F., and least in those whose temperature on admission ranged between 99° and 100.9°. There is no such inconsistency when we consider the patients from the point of view of the pulse and respirations recorded on admission. The figures referring to the presence or absence of buboes or their posi- tion are small, but where they are considerable (single axillary, femoral or inguinal buboes), the result is not consistent. The groups to which the less fatal cases belong do not show improved results under serum treat- ment. In the table setting forth the age-distribution, the control cases show the greatest mortality in those above 25 years of age, but it is just in these cases that the serum seems to have had best effect, while in patients below that age, where the untreated cases had a lessened mortality, the serum seems to have failed. From Table III it seems that the first application of serum had some effect in reducing the temperature and pulse-rate within 24 hours after admission ;
39 but unfortunately the mortality appears higher among the treated than among the controls. The injections appear also to have reduced slightly the number of respirations per minute. Table IV shows that the injections tend to reduce the temperature, pulse and respiration at an earlier date than in the case of the controls, though the mor- tality is not favourably affected. Table V shows that the results are not improved by increasing the initial dose, nor by increasing the total amount of serum given. Those receiving more than 20 c.c. show the highest mortality. There is thus no reason to suppose that better results would be obtained by giving doses larger than those recommended by Professor Terni. In the year 1904 observations were made on 16 cases of plague admitted to the Maratha Plague Hospital of the Bombay Municipal Corporation. These were treated hypodermically with Terni's serum in large doses, several hundred c.c. being given in some cases. A similar number of plague cases admitted alternately with them were observed as controls. The results are shown below :40 Analysis of 220 clinical charts referring to 110 plague patients treated with Professors Term and Bandi's curative serum, and 110 alternate cases observed as controls, in the Modikhana Municipal Plague Hospital, Bombay, under Dr. Turkhud, between November 1902 and July 1903. I. CONTROL CASES. TREATED CASES. Number of patients Number of deaths Mortality percentage Average stay in hospital before death (in days) Number of patients Number of deaths. Mortality percentage Average stay in hospital before death (in days). I. Previous History 41 II.42 III. CONTROL CASES. TREATED CASES. Number of patients Their propotion to total (per cent) Number of deaths Mortality percentage Average of extent of in- crease or decrease. Number in patients Their proportion to total (per cent). Number of deaths. Mortality percentage. Average extent in- crease or decrease. III Condition of patients after first application of treat- ment. Duration of Life. Died within 24 hours of ad- mission 18 16.36 18 100.0 ... 19 17.27 19 100.0 ... Lived for more than 24 hours . . . . 92 83.63 72 78.28 ... 91 82.72 70 76.92 ... Temperature. Total admitted with 100º F. and over, who lived for more than 24 hours . 83 ... 64 77.10 ... 79 ... 63 79.74 ... Patients admitted with temperature above 100º F. in whom the next temperature recorded after treatment (or in controls after admis- sion), showed43 III44 IV45 IV46 V. Doses of serum injected47 REPORT ON A SERIES OF 70 CASES OF PLAGUE TREATED WITH BRAZIL'S ANTI-PLAGUE SERUM. BY W. M. HAFFKINE, C.I.E., Director-in-Chief, Plague Research Laboratory, AND W. G. WEST, M.R.C.S. (Eng.), L.R.C.P. (Lond.), M.D. (Geneva), Attached to the Laboratory. THE serum used in this series of cases was prepared by Dr. Vital Brazil, Director of the State Sero-therapeutic Institute of San Paulo, Brazil, and sent out for trial by the Secretary of State in August 1903. The serum was supplied in sealed test-tubes each containing about 20 c.c. Of these, 600 were received and stored in an ice-box till February, when a sufficient number of patients began to come to the hospitals. The patients treated were those admitted to hospital between the 10th of February and the end of March 1904. Fifty were treated in the Maratha Municipal Plague Hospital (in charge of Dr. N. H. Choksy) and 20 in the Modikhana Municipal Plague Hospital (in charge of Dr. D. A. Turkhud). These medical men were responsible for the ordinary symptomatic treatment, which was used for all cases whether or not they also received the serum treatment. Every alternate patient received serum treatment, the others being kept to serve as controls. In the Modikhana hospital, which received a somewhat different class of patients, several (79, with a subsequent mortality of 67.1 per cent.) refused to undergo the serum treatment. In such circumstances the serum was offered to the next patient admitted until one was found willing to undergo the treatment, when the next case was taken as a control case. This did not disturb the experiment to any extent; but more difficulty was found with patients admitted with no definite symptoms of plague. These had to be kept separate till a definite diagnosis was arrived at. The procedure was thus the same as in the trial of Terni's serum (vide p. 37). The serum injections, which in all cases were hypodermic, were given by one of us (W. G. West), who was likewise responsible for the correctness of the history of each patient, as observed by him at the hospitals. The initial dose injected was 40 c.c. in all the cases (20 in number) treated in the Modikhana Hospital, while in the Maratha Hospital two cases received 20 C.C., six received 40 c.c., while the remainder (42) got 60 c.c. The doses were repeated once in 24 hours, so that those who lived for some time, or recovered, received as much as 340 to 360 c.c. in some cases. This method
48 of administration was generally in accordance with the instructions sent by Dr. Brazil. The tables below show the results obtained in the two hospitals :49 Analysis of one hundred hospital charts referring to 50 patients treated with Dr. Brazil's plague curative serum and 50 alternate cases observed as controls in the Maratha Municipal Plague Hospital, Bombay, under Dr. N. H. Choksy, in 90450 CONTROL CASES. TREATED CASES. Number of patients. Number of deaths. Mortality percentage. Average stay in hos- pital before death (in days). Number of patients. Number of deaths. Mortality percentage Average stay in hos- pital before death (in days). II51 CONTROL CASES. TREATED CASES. Number of patients. Number of deaths. Mortality percentage. Average stay in hospital before death (in days). Number of patients. Number of deaths. Mortality percentage. Average stay in hos- pital before death (in days). II52 III. CONTROL CASES. TREATED CASES. Number of patients. Their proportion to total (percentage). Number of deaths. Mortality percentage. Average extent of increase or decrease. Number of patients. Their proportion to total (percentage). Number of deaths. Mortality percentage. Average extent of increase or decrease. III. Condition of patients after first application of treatment. Lived for more than 24 hours ... 45 90 40 88.88 ... 45 90 36 80 ... Temperature. Total admitted with 100° F. and over, who lived for more than 24 hours. ... 37 ... 32 86.49 ... 34 ... 27 79.41 ... Patients admitted with temperature above 100° F., in whom the next temperature, recorded after treatment (or, in controls, after admission), showed53 IV. CONTROL CASES. TREATED CASES. Number of patients. Their propor- tion to total (percentage). Number of deaths. Mortality percentage. Number of patients. Their pro- portion to total (per- centage). Number of deaths. Mortality percentage. IV. Condition of patients throughout the treatment. Temperature. TOTAL 25 ... 20 80.0 23 ... 16 69.56 Patients admitted with temperature above 100°F., who lived for more than 48 hours, and in whom the tem- perature, after the first application of treat- ment or, in controls, after admission), reach- ed maximum54 V. Recovery cases: Interval between admission to hospital and the time when the temperature, pulse, and respiration become normal. Control cases. Treated cases. Temperature 5.90 days 9.64 days. Pulse-rate 5.55 8.42 Respiration 6.66 ,, 9.42 ,, VI. Average stay in hospital of fatal cases. CONTROL CASES. TREATED CASES. 2.25 days. 2.56 days. VII. Doses of serum injected (subcutaneously) into the 50 Patients treated. Initial dose injected (in c.c.). Total quantity injected (in c.c.). Number of patients so injected. Number of recoveries among them. Number of deaths among them. 20 20 1 ... 1 20 40 1 ... 1 40 40 1 ... 1 60 60 15 ... 15 20 80 1 1 ... 40 100 1 ... 1 40 120 1 ... 1 60 120 8 ... 8 20 140 1 1 ... 60 180 5 ... 5 60 200 1 ... 1 60 240 4 ... 4 40 260 1 1 ... 60 260 1 1 ... 60 280 3 2 1 60 340 2 2 ... 60 350 1 ... 1 60 360 2 1 1
55 Analysis of Forty clinical charts referring to 20 patients treated with Dr. Brazil's plague curative serum and 20 alternate cases observed as controls, in the Modikhana Municipal Plague Hospital in Bombay, under Dr. Turkhud, in 1904. I. CONTROL CASES. TREATED CASES. Number of patients. Number of deaths. Mortality percentage. Average stay in hospital before death (in days). Number of patients. Number of deaths. Mortality percentage. Average stay in hospital before death (in days). I. 1 day 3 2 66.66 .66 ... ... ... ... Previous history. 2 days 5 1 20 3.50 4 4 100 7.25 Patients who stated they had been ill before admission for56 CONTROL CASES. TREATED CASES. Number of patients. Number of deaths. Mortality percentage. Average stay in hos- pital before death (in days). Number of patients. Number of deaths. Mortality percentage. Average stay in hos- pital before death (in days). II57 III. CONTROL CASES. TREATED CASES. Number of patients. Number of deaths. Mortality percentage. Average extent of increase or decrease. Number of patients. Number of deaths. Mortality percentage. Average extent of increase or decrease. III. Condition of patients after first applica- tion of treatment. Temperature. Patients admitted with temperature above 99° F., in whom the next tem- perature, recorded after treatment (or, in controls, after admission), showed an58 IV. CONTROL CASES. TREATED CASES. Number of patients. Number of deaths. Mortality percentage. Number of patients. Number of deaths. Mortality percentage. IV. Condition of patients throughout the treatment. Temperature. Patients admitted with temperature above 99°F., who lived for more than 48 hours, and in whom the tem- perature, after the first application of treatment (or, in controls, after ad- mission), reached maximum59 V. Recovery cases (treated and controls): average interval between application of treatment or admission to hospital, and the time when (1) temperature, (2) pulse, and (3) respirations became for the first time normal. Control cases. Treated cases. Temperature 7.20 days 7 days Pulse 9.32 ,, 6.33 ,, Respirations 6.66 ,, 6.33 ,, VI. Amount of serum injected (subcutaneously) into the 20 patients. Total of serum injected. Initial dose injected on admission. Patient 1, 80 c.c. injected in the vicinity of bubo60 REPORT ON A SERIES OF 68 CASES OF PLAGUE TREATED WITH ROUX' ANTI-PLAGUE SERUM. By W. G. WEST, M.R.C.S. (Eng.), L.R.C.P. (Lond.), M.D. (Geneva), Attached to the Plague Research Laboratory, Bombay. THE serum was sent from the Pasteur Institute, Paris, in the middle of March 1904, by Dr. Roux, in response to a telegram from Mr. Haffkine, and was received here in the beginning of the following month. Twenty litres of serum were sent out in bottles containing 100 c.c. each, secured by India-rubber caps and stoppers. The experiment was in all its details planned by Mr. Haffkine, before his departure from India, but the watching of the patients and administration of the serum was carried out in hospital by the present writer. The patients treated were those admitted to the Maratha Municipal Plague hospital (under the care of Dr. N. H. Choksy) between the 8th of April and the 5th of May 1904. Between these dates 160 cases were admitted, 80 were placed in the serum group and 80 alternate cases in the control group. Twelve patients of the serum group were either moribund or convalescent on admission and were therefore not injected. These 12 cases, as well as the 12 corresponding control cases, have therefore been excluded from the 160 cases, thus leaving a total of 68 cases on each side. As regards the doses given, Professor Roux' recent recommendations (vide page 63, Roux' letter) were as far as possible carried out, viz. :61 (b) 12 patients were injected both subcutaneously and intravenously, the initial injection in these patients being done subcutaneously. Of these, 8 died, giving a mortality percentage of 66.66 per cent. and, lastly,62 The method adopted for demonstrating microbes in the blood was as follows : A small capsule of blood was taken from the patient, sealed up and sent to the laboratory. This blood was then placed in a watch glass, mixed with sterile salt solution and injected subcutaneously into a rat, by one of the laboratory officials. When the rat died, an examination by spleen smear and culture from the heart blood was made to ascertain the presence or absence of plague germs. It is unfortunate that owing to pressure of work in the laboratory the examination of the rats dying after injection could not be carried out in a regular manner. Such entries as "rat decomposed" occur frequently in the records, and it is therefore impossible to say that the ratio of 8 to 19 represents the true proportion of septicæmic cases in the two groups. As the cases were chosen impartially, it seems incredible that such a large proportion of septicæmic cases should have found their way into the serum group. But the fact remains that this is so, and it must be kept in mind in reckoning the results of treatment in this series of cases. All the tables appear to demonstrate that, although no reduction of the mortality could be attributed to the treatment, yet life was prolonged in many cases. That the initial effect of the serum had the power of reducing the tempera- ture, pulse and respirations would appear to be probable, vide Table III, but this favourable initial effect was not maintained.
63 Copy of a letter from Professor Roux, Paris, to W. M. Haffkine, Esq., C.I.E., Director-in-Chief, Plague Research Laboratory, Bombay; dated Paris, the 25th March 1904. " MON CHER DR. HAFFKINE, " En réponse à votre télégramme je vous ai fait expedier 10 litres de sérum antipesteux en flacons de 100 c.c. Ce sérum a donné d'excellents résultats à Marseille chaque fois que nous l'avons essayé et aussi au Brésil, en République Argentine, et au Mexique. Ce dont il faut être bien convaincu c'est que les grandes doses sont nécessaires. Les médecins veulent toujours employer le sérum antipesteux comme ils employent le sérum anti-diphtérique et ils n'ont que de mauvais effets. " La peste et la diphtérie ne sont pas des maladies comparables et le sérum antipesteux n'agit pas à la manière du sérum anti-diphtérique. Si vous voulez guérir vos pestifères, injectez 100 c.c. en une seule fois et réitérez l'injection dans les 12 heures. Ne craignez pas d'injecter en tout 300 et plus. " L'injection intra-veineuse demande moins de sérum et est plus efficace. Une première injection de 40 c.c. suivie d'une seconde de même quantité quelques heures aprés suffit le plus souvent. " Mais cette petite opération doit être faite avec soin; il faut faire tièdir le sérum, s'assurer qu'il n'y a pas trace de dépôt et pousser l'injection très lentement en interrompant à la moindre gêne respiratoire. Les médecins re- doutent ces injections intra-veineuses qui ont si bien réussi à Calmette et à Salimbeni lors de l' épidémie de Porto. " Vous serez bien aimable, mon cher Haffkine, de me dire ce qui arrivera de vos essais de séro-thérapie pesteuse. " Recevez, je vous prie, l'assurance de mes sentiments les meilleurs et les plus dévoués." (Sé.) DR. ROUX.
64 Analysis of Sixty-eight clinical charts of patients under treatment with Roux serum. I. CONTROL CASES. TREATED CASES. Number of pati- ents. Number of deaths. Mortality per- centage. Average stay in hospital before death (in days). Number of pati- ents. Number of deaths. Mortality per- centage. Average stay in hospital before death (in days). I. Previous history. Patients stated to have been ill before ad- mission for65 II66 II67. III. CONTROL CASES. TREATED CASES. Number of patients. Their ptopotion to total (per cent.) Number of deaths Morality percentage. Average extent of increase or decrease. Number of patients. Their ptopotion to total (per cent.) Number of death Morality percentage. Average extent of increase or decrease. III. Condition of patients after first application of treat- ment. Duration of life. Died within 24 hours of ad- mission. ...... 9 13.23 9 100 ... 6 8.82 6 100 ... Lived for more than 24 hours ...... 59 86.76 32 54.23 ... 62 91.17 39 62.90 ... Temperature. Total of patients admitted with 100ºF. and over, who lived for more than 24 hours. ...... 48 70.58 29 6o.41 ... 55 80.88 36 65.45 ... Patients admitted with more than 100°F., in whom the next tempera- ture, examined after treatment (or, in controls, after admission), showed an68. IV. CONTROL CASES. TREATED CASES. Number of pati- ents. Their proportion to total (per cent.). Number of deaths. Mortality per- centage. Number of pati- ents. Their proportion to total (per cent.) Number of deaths. Mortality per- centage. IV. Condition of patients throughout the treat- ment. Temperature. Patients admitted with more than 10069 V. Additional Information :70 (2) The time (in days) when (1) temperature, (2) pulse, and (3) respirations became for the first time normal, after the application of treatment or admission into hospital(in days). CONTROL CASES. TREATED CASES. Temperature. Pulse. Respirations. Temperature. Pulse. Respirations. 8.42 9.20 9.02 6.24 8.40 7.04 (3) Average stay in hospital of fatal cases (in days). Control cases. Treated cases. 4.19 7.59
71 APPENDIX A. Method of preparation of Lustig's Anti-Plague Serum, as employed by Drs. G. Polverini and A. Mayr in the Bombay Municipal Laboratory at Parel, until May 1902. By A. Mayr, M.D. 1. Cultures of B. pestis were made from the blood of plague patients. These were grown on the ordinary 1 per cent. peptone agar in large glass dishes (10" diameter) for 272 on the experience that serum of such activity showed decided curative effects in plague patients in doses of about 60 c.c. The serum was neither sterilised nor was an antiseptic added to it, but its sterility was controlled bacteriologically and its innocuity by injection in white mice before issue. Every thing used for the preparation of the serum was of course sterilised. APPENDIX B. Abstract of an unpublished paper by Captain E. D. W. Greig, M.B., B.Sc., Edin., I.M.S., "On the Infection of the Blood in Bubonic Plague" (From the Plague Research Laboratory, Parel, Bombay, 18th June 1902). Object of the research:73 and greatly increases the gravity of the prognosis; and that there is really no distinction to be drawn between bubonic and septicæmic plague, the one type merging into the other. A further interesting point is the varying length of time patients live after the appear- ance of plague germs in their blood. This may be ascribed to a variation in the bactericidal power of the blood in different individuals. Wright (Lancet, March 22, 1901) has shown that human blood usually exhibits little or no bactericidal power towards the plague bacillus, and this may serve to explain the fatal nature of septicæmic cases in this disease. The following are briefly the conclusions to be drawn from the above research :No. 20. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. SERUM-THERAPY OF PLAGUE IN INDIA; REPORTS BY MR. W. M. HAFFKINE, C.I.E., AND VARIOUS OFFICERS OF THE PLAGUE RESEARCH LABORATORY, BOMBAY. EDITED WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY LIEUT.-COL. W. B. BANNERMAN, M.D., B.Sc., F.R.S.E., I.M.S., Director, Plague Research Laboratory, Bombay. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028105.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1905.
