IP/QB. 10 m. 91. b. No. II. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ON A PARASITE FOUND IN PERSONS SUFFERING FROM ENLARGEMENT OF THE SPLEEN IN INDIA, SECOND REPORT. BY LIEUT. S. R. CHRISTOPHERS, M.B., I.M.S. (On special duty.) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026496.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1904. Price Rupe s 2, or 3 Shillings.
No. II. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ON A PARASITE FOUND IN PERSONS SUFFERING FROM ENLARGEMENT OF THE SPLEEN IN INDIA, SECOND REPORT. BY LIEUT. S. R. CHRISTOPHERS, M.B., I.M.S. (On special duty.) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026526.tif] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026526.tif] CALCUTTA : OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1904.
Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. E. A. ARNOLD, 37, Bedford Street, Strand, Lon- don, W.C. CONSTABLE & CO., 2, Whitehall Gardens, London, S.W. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & CO., Charing Cross Road, London, W.C. BERNARD QUARITCH, 15, Piccadilly, London, W. C. WILLIAMS and NORGATE, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & CO., Cambridge. ON THE CONTINENT. R. FRIEDLANDER & SOHN, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin, N.W. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. IN INDIA. THACKER, SPINK & CO., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & CO., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & CO., Calcutta. S. K. LAHIRI & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & CO., LD., Bombay. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & CO., Bombay. A. J. COMBRIDGE & CO., Bombay. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAM & CO., Madras. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & CO., Madras. G. A. NATESAN & CO., Madras. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH AND SONS, Mufid-i-Am Press, Lahore. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazair Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission Press Rangoon.
ON A PARASITE FOUND IN PERSONS SUFFERING FROM ENLARGEMENT OF THE SPLEEN IN INDIA, SECOND REPORT. IN my first report I recorded briefly the result of the researches of different observers on the parasite recently discovered by Leishman and Donovan in cases of tropical splenomegaly. Such investigations, in many cases of enlarged spleen, have shewn in blood drawn during life from the spleen and liver or in films of these organs post-mortem the presence of certain very definite bodies of peculiar nature and uniform morphology. In the case of preparations made during life a matrix-like substance is conspicuous in which many of the bodies lie embedded. The actual nature of the matrix has given rise to much discussion. It is con- sidered by Laveran and Mesnil to be altered red corpuscle, by Ross a parent mass producing the bodies, by Manson and Low it is termed a " zooglea mass." In my last report I gave many reasons for considering the matrix to be largely, if not entirely, the fragmented, budded and vacuolated cytoplasm of cells in which, in sections, the bodies are seen lying. In all the researches mentioned the attention of the observer had been entirely occupied with the presence of the parasite in the blood. Wright's announcement that similar or very closely related bodies occurred in large numbers in the tissues of tropical ulcer gave rise therefore to considerable surprise. The microscopical appearances of tropical ulcer were described by Cunningham in 1885.1 He notes extensive infiltration of the corium and subcutaneous tissues by granulation tissue containing bodies which he considered to be parasitic in nature. From Cunningham's drawings it would appear that these were macro- phages or other cells containing the bodies described by Wright, though Cunningham figures no structure in these latter and terms them nucleoid bodies. Wright 2 defines tropical ulcer as a single or multiple focal lesion of the skin characterised by the formation of elevated and indurated areas which ulcerate and eventually cicatrise. He draws attention to the resemblance to certain forms of cutaneous tuberculosis and syphilis. He describes, and gives photographs. shewing an extensive infiltration of the corium and subcutaneous tissue with cells. In addition to plasma cells and various kinds of lymphoid cells, he notes large cells with vesicular nuclei, the cytoplasm of which contains numerous peculiar bodies having a very constant morphology and structure. An examina- tion of the excellent photographs of these bodies leaves no doubt as to their B
2 morphological identity with the forms seen in cases of enlarged spleen in Madras. Wright describes the bodies as largely occurring in the cytoplasm of cells, especially of the large cells with vesicular nuclei. His photographs shew that the great majority of the bodies are situated in the cytoplasm of these cells which appear identical with those I have already described in the spleen, liver, and bone-marrow and which I have termed macrophages. Wright's discovery would appear to modify considerably existing views as to the nature of the parasite, since the presence of the bodies in immense numbers in the cytoplasm of infiltrating cells in a focal skin lesion seems opposed to their supposed rôle as parasites of the red cell or even as solely parasites of the blood. Laveran and Mesnil,3 however, still maintain the relation of the parasite to piroplasma. Examining slides sent to them by Donovan, they describe very small and rare forms in the peripheral circulation which may be free or may be situated in an unaltered red cell. The small size, the evident great rarity and especially the absence of the characteristic double chromatin masses make the relation of these forms to the parasite very doubtful. I have examined both peri- pheral and splenic blood for appearances which would seem to point to the origin of the bodies in the red cells, but without result. In my first paper I drew attention to certain very definite clinical features of this disease which is, as a rule, readily diagnosed. I also described three autopsies and gave the result of an examination of some of the organs and tissues. In the present report I shall consider the results arrived at under the following heads. (1) A description of four further autopsies. (2) The salient and pathological nature of the disease. (3) The relation of the parasite to the tissues of the host, especially demonstrating a type of infection in which the vascular endothe- lium is principally implicated. (4) Certain points in the morphology of the parasite and in the nature of the " matrix" or " zooglea mass." (5) A comparison of the conditions found post-mortem in infection with the new parasite with those found in trypanosomiasis. Autopsies in fatal cases of the disease. AUTOPSY 4.3 The line of demarcation between the pale tissue and the darker liver tissue was very distinct. Microscopical examination shewed that the above appearances were due to the fact that in the centre of the lobule the liver cells were markedly atrophied, and the liver substance almost replaced by the large cells described in the last report. Intestines.4 Liver.5 encapsuled bacilli were seen in leucocytes. In the capillaries of the brain some of the endothelium cells were packed with this organism. Some of these post-mortem appearances would appear to have been due to a secondary bacterial infection. AUTOPSY 6.6 Distribution of the parasite.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026571.tif] CASE 1.7 cases in the lungs. In the blood of the large veins they appear to be fairly numerous included in various types of cells. The Clinical and Pathological nature of the disease. In the first report I drew attention to certain very constant clinical features in cases of systemic infection by the parasite. These were8 Abdominal symptoms.9 and elbows of cases of the disease. I have examined scrapings and small pieces of tissue snipped from such ulcers in three advanced cases of the disease and have found bodies in small numbers in each case. The ulcers usually seen are small, from 2 to 10 m.m. in diameter. They are covered with a thick raised scab and the base of the ulcer is usually depressed and devoid of granulations. The edges are usually thickened. The origin of the ulcers is doubtful. I have always failed to detect sarcoptes in them and they appear to arise from ulceration of a papular eruption which is generally found along with them. In some cases larger ulcers are seen about the legs. They vary from the size of a shilling to extensive raw surfaces several inches in diameter. In autopsy 7, ulcers of this nature in section shewed scattered bodies throughout the tissues of their bases, and in the healthy skin in the immediate neighbourhood Very scanty bodies were also seen in snippings taken from such ulcers in a similar case (Pl. II, fig. 12). In the granulation tissue surrounding the caseous mass in the dermis of case 5, bodies were present in considerable numbers, and large numbers of bodies were found in sections of a femoral gland above this lesion. I have examined a number of large and small ulcers in the out-patient depart- ment, but so far have never detected bodies where there was no general infection with the new parasite. Papular eruption.10 The relation of the Parasite to the tissues of the Host. SKIN.11 fine capillaries throughout the whole area of the section including the dermis beneath the unulcerated epidermis. In the vessels above the size of capillaries, large cells containing from 6 to 12 bodies were occasionally seen. 3. Thin slices of the caseous nodule and the surrounding tissue described in autopsy 5 were fixed in absolute alcohol, cut in paraffin, and stained with Roma- nowski's stain. The central caseous mass was seen to consist of necrotic cells of several varieties, chiefly small lymphoid cells and large mononuclear elements. A certain number of polymorphonuclear cells were present, but they did not form the great majority of cells as in ordinary pus. The necrotic area was surrounded by granulation tissue which extended to a distance of a few millimetres between the layers of dense fibrous tissue, which surrounded the whole. Bodies were found readily in the granulation tissue, and wherever an infiltration of healthy tissues with cells was taking place. As many as ten, and in some cases more, bodies were to be seen in each field of the microscope. In the young granulation tissue composed of lymphoid cells and larger mononuclear cells the parasites were seen in every case lying embedded singly in the latter type of cell. In the capillaries in the neighbourhood, bodies were seen lying singly, or in twos and threes, in the endothelium cells. In the smaller vessels in the neighbourhood of the granulation tissue, large cells containing numerous parasites were seen. These were similar to the cells seen in the liver and spleen. They were most often attached by one side to the vessel wall whilst the mass of the cell projected into the lumen of the vessel (Pl. II. fig. 9). In the somewhat larger vessels they were often much more free in the lumen. In a sweat gland which had been invaded by the granula- tion tissue, many cells, each containing several bodies, were seen. These lay in close connection with the coils of the gland, apparently in fine capillaries which surrounded the coil. In adipose tissue which had been invaded by granula- tion tissue, single bodies lying in the endothelium cells of capillaries were readily seen. In parts of the section remote from the granulation tissue, bodies could not be found either in the capillaries or larger vessels. In the capillaries of healthy adipose tissue no bodies were to be made out. In these sections all stages between unaltered endothelium cells containing a single body, and large cells partially detached from the vessel wall and containing many bodies, could be made out. 4. Sections of apparently normal skin from the thigh of the same case were carefully searched, but no bodies were found. In the neighbourhood of the pale cicatrix-like areas already noted, many large cells loaded with pigment of the same nature as the epithelial pigment were seen in the tissues and occasionally in the smaller vessels. 5. Areolar tissue from the skin and subperitoneal tissue were spread upon slides and stained by the Romanowski method. The tissue elements were well displayed, but no bodies were seen. C 2
12 6. Films from various sized chronic ulcers apart from general infection have failed to shew parasites. In ulcers encroaching upon the skin, large cells with single or double nuclei, and exactly resembling the smaller macrophages, are seen filled with balls of a greenish pigment which appear to be derived from the skin. LYMPHATIC GLANDS.13 these cells are in reality endothelial in nature, since they resemble closely cells seen forming the walls of small vessels exposed in tangential section. I have thought it possible that they may become detached from the vessel wall after death (Pl. II. fig. 6 and fig. 7). SPLEEN AND LIVER.14 2. Large rounded cells with extensive protoplasm and a round or oval nucleus. Small specimens of these cells may give rise to a puzzling appearance in films since they resemble, as far as the nucleus goes, a small mononuclear leucocyte. The protoplasm is, however, much more extensive than is the case with the leucocyte. Even large cells of this type are often seen whole or only partially disrupted in films. Their protoplasm is often like ground-glass in appearance and is usually vacuolated. Masses of the protoplasm of these cells readily become separated from the cell (Pl. II. fig. 4), and may assume a globular shape. They contain often 20 or more bodies. In sections of the testis and of granulation tissue, cells which appear to be of this type are seen in the smaller vessels attached as a rule by one side and projecting freely into the lumen. Similar cells are seen in blood taken post-mortem from the large veins, femoral, portal, hepatic. (Pl. II. figs. 7 and 9.) 3. In both the liver and spleen, immense numbers of very large cells are seen lying in the capillaries. They may be extended along the capillary, or their cytoplasm may be massed together. In the spleen, large cells are seen with long processes extending in among the smaller cells of the pulp. Both types of cell appear to be of the same nature. They have a single or double vesicular nucleus, and their cytoplasm, which stains lightly, has numerous included bodies lying either scattered more or less evenly throughout, or in groups. 4. In both the liver and spleen, but especially in the latter, extremely large cells are seen in which the nucleus is small, stains intensely and is pushed to one side or extremity of the cell. The cytoplasm of these cells stains more darkly than does that of the last mentioned variety, and in some cases takes on a curious dirty hue suggesting marked necrotic changes. The centre of the cell is occupied by a large vacuolated space, and arranged around this are numerous parasitic bodies. The cytoplasm of many of these cells is reduced to a mere pellicle con- taining a crowd of parasites, and such cells appear to be on the point of rupture. Cells of this and the last mentioned type are rarely seen whole in films unless special precautions are taken by fixing in ¼ per cent. osmic acid. One such cell in the bone-marrow contained as many as 250 bodies (Pl. II. figs. 10 and 11), also (Pl. I. fig. 6). Peripheral blood.15 to me very convincing, and even these must be of extreme rarity. In two advanced cases approaching a fatal termination, I have found in the peripheral blood a considerable number of typical forms possessing double chromatin masses and in every way resembling those found in the spleen, but these were all included either in polymorphonuclear or mononuclear leucocytes. In one case 37 parasites, nearly all in polymorphonuclear leucocytes, were seen during a count of 500 leucocytes. In the other case, 7 parasites were seen whilst counting a similar number of leucocytes. In both cases leucocytes were in excess of the number usually found in the disease in which, as a rule, the most marked leuco- p16 THE NATURE OF THE INFECTIVE PROCESS.17 our knowledge, much more probable that the final disintegration of large necrotic cells is the means by which fresh swarms of the bodies are set free to be taken up again by the endothelial cells of the spleen and elsewhere. A consideration of the main features of the process here exemplified, namely, an endothelial infection, invites comparison with the processes in certain other diseases. DISEASES OF SEPTICÆMIC TYPE.18 formed in the dermis quite apart from ulceration which is evidently a secondary process. That the organism under discussion is the cause of this deposit cannot be doubted in the face of Wright's description. It is difficult to conceive of the massing of a parasite of the red cell in such a position, and we most probably have in tropical ulcer a granulomatous lesion in which the new parasite is the exciting cause. It is premature to discuss the relation of the systemic infection by the parasite to diseases of granulomatous type. Much depends upon the relation of the disease to the small ulcers and papules described in this paper. The morphology of the parasite. I have already drawn attention to the presence, noted by all observers, of two chromatin masses in the bodies. I shewed that the arrangement of these and the structure of the parasite in general is remarkably constant, and that a schema of the parasite could be devised which would exhibit when viewed from different directions most, if not all, the appearances shewn by the parasite in films. The "tail" described by some authors as joining the large and small nucleus I considered a strand or ridge of protoplasm left between two vacuoles. In a proportion of the bodies, especially in the larger forms, I have since made out a further detail of structure. This is a very distinct darkly-stained line, starting from the neighbourhood of the small chromatin mass and ending as a rule abruptly at a distance from the large mass. This line is nearly always at right angles to the tail previously described, and by means of the schema it is possible to make out that it lies in the line of division of the two hypothetical valves (Pl. II. fig. 1). In the first report I described the appearance in the bodies of a distinct cuticle. Ross7 draws attention to the same appearance and the bodies as a rule shew it to a marked degree. Instances of apparent rupture of this cuticle are often seen (Pl. II fig. 2). In some cases, especially when the tissues are taken post-mortem, the bodies appear as protoplasmic masses only, and the appearance of a cuticle is absent. The bodies also undoubtedly rapidly break up after the death of the host. There appears some doubt then as to the resistant power of the apparent capsule, and the appearance may be deceptive. As the bodies appeared not to be piroplasma, and as from their number, their size and their morphology they appeared to resemble somewhat the spores of microsporidia, I have made many attempts to cause protrusion of the filament but without success. Blood from the spleen containing the bodies was mixed with ether, strong and weak acids and ammonia. Films were then made, thoroughly washed first in alcohol and then in water, and stained by Romanowski's method. Films made from blood containing the bodies
19 were placed, without being allowed to dry, over the fumes of strong acids and the vapour of ether. In most cases the bodies were to be readily made out, and, even in the case of the strong acids, stained characteristically. No appearance of a filament was detected. The matrix.20 and the peritoneum, no lesion had been produced and no bodies were found in the spleens of the animals inoculated. Comparison of the conditions found post-mortem in infection by the new parasite, and in Trypanosome infection. The organism used for comparison was a highly pathogenic trypanosome which occurs naturally in the pariah dogs of Madras. This trypanosome causes death in dogs in from 6 to 7 weeks after inoculation, and in rats in from 8 to 10 days. The symptoms caused were emaciation, weakness, slight 21 contained included forms. Some of the forms shewed double chromatin masses and had, as in the case of included trypanosomes, a slight resemblance to the new parasite. In spite of many examinations nothing more than this superficial resem- blance was encountered. Contrary to the state of affairs in the case of the new parasite, intracellular digestion appeared to be in progress and many forms shewed disorganised and scattered chromatin. Conclusions. 1. The bodies described by Wright in tropical ulcer are indistinguishable from those found in cases of enlarged spleen in Madras. In both cases the bodies are for the most part included in the cytoplasm of cells of endothelial nature. In tropical ulcer the bodies appear to be giving rise to a lesion of a dis- tinctly granulomatous type. 2. In so-called malarial cachexia of India the bodies are very numerous in the spleen, liver and bone-marrow. They are in considerable numbers, in some cases at least, in the lungs and testes. In the kidney they do not appear to be in large numbers. In the above named viscera they may occur in leucocytes, but for the most part they are seen in cells of endothelial nature, especially in large cells crowded with the bodies (macrophages). 3. Bodies may be present in large numbers in the granulation tissue associated with ulceration of the large intestine in cases of so-called malarial cachexia. 4. Bodies may generally be found in small numbers in the granulation tissue of small and larger ulcers, and in unulcerated papules in the skin of advanced cases of so-called malarial cachexia. In this case, as in the testis, the bodies are found for the most part lying singly in endothelial cells of the finest capillaries. 5. Bodies were found in a lymphatic gland which drained a skin lesion containing the bodies. They were not found in a lymphatic gland draining only normal skin. 6. Bodies may be found in leucocytes in the peripheral blood. I have not seen unmistakeable forms in red cells either in peripheral or splenic blood. 7. The vast majority of the bodies lie in the cytoplasm of endothelium cells. The cachexia is essentially an infection of the vascular endothelium and resembles in many ways a chronic septicæmia. 8. The process of infection appears to be as follows. Bodies are taken up by, or invade, endothelium cells in the visceral and certain other capillaries, e.g., gra- nulation tissue. The endothelium cells increase in size and become more and more distended with the parasites (macrophages). The cells finally undergo necrosis and appear as mere bags filled with large numbers of the parasites. Eventually such cells would appear to rupture and the contained bodies, which exhibit no trace of intracellular digestion, are thus set free to be taken up again by cells. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026643.tif]
Explanation of Plates. PLATE I. FIG. 1.PLATE I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026673.tif] Photogravure. Survey of India 0ffices, Calcutta, May 1904.
PLATE II. FIG. 1.PLATE II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026685.tif] Photogravure. Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, May 1904.
Papers referred to in the text. 1. Cunningham. Scientific Memoirs by Medical Officers of the Army of India. Part 1. 1885. 2. Wright. Protozoa in a case of Tropical Ulcer. The Journal of Medical Research, vol. X, No. 3 (new series, vol. V, No. 3). December 1903. 3. Laveran and Mesnil. Comptes rendus des séances de l'academie des Sciences, t. CXXXVIII, p. 187. 25th January 1904. 4. Kuhnan. Zeit. f. Hygiene. Bd. 25, p. 492. 5. Werigo. Annales de l'Institut Pasteur. 1892. 6. Donovan. Indian Medical Gazette. March 1904. 7. Ross. Thomson-Yate's Reports.
No. II. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ON A PARASITE FOUND IN PERSONS SUFFERING FROM ENLARGEMENT OF THE SPLEEN IN INDIA, SECOND REPORT. BY LIEUT. S. R. CHRISTOPHERS, M.B., I.M.S. (On special duty.) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026706.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1904. Price Rup s 2, or 3 Shillings.
