IP/QB.10 m.91.b No. 13 (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ORIENTAL OR DELHI SORE. BY CAPTAIN S. P. JAMES, M.B., I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026929.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1905. Price Annas 10 or 1s.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026935.tif] 3942672
(NEW SERIES.) No. 13. SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ORIENTAL OR DELHI SORE. BY CAPTAIN S. P. JAMES, M.B., I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026941.tif] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026941.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1905.
Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. E. A. ARNOLD, 41 and 43, Maddox Street, Bond Street, W. London. CONSTABLE & CO., 16, James Street, Hay Market, W. London. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & CO., Charing Cross Road, London, W.C. BERNARD QUARITCH, 15, Piccadilly, London, W. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 51, Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & CO., Cambridge. ON THE CONTINENT. R. FRIEDLANDER & SOHN, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin, N.W. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig, KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig, ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. IN INDIA. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. S. K. LAHIRI & Co., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & Co., Madras. G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. THACKER & Co., LD., Bombay. A. J. COMBRIDGE & Co., Bombay. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & Co., Bombay. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazair Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH AND SONS, Mufid-i-Am Press, Lahore. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission Press. Rangoon.
ORIENTAL OR DELHI SORE. THIS paper contains an account of my work upon the subject of the etiology of Oriental or Delhi Sore, for the investigation of which I was placed on special duty in April 1904. I have examined specimens from twenty sores diagnosed by Civil Surgeons either as Delhi Sore, Lahore Sore, Sind Sore, or Frontier Sore, according to the places in which they originated, but I was able to see only five of the eighteen cases from which the specimens were obtained. Specimens from the remaining thirteen cases were sent to me by Civil Surgeons2 On the skin of the right cheek, over the angle of the lower maxilla, there is a patch of small papules covering an area of about a square inch. The whole patch is somewhat raised above the general surface of the skin, and the area around it is distinctly indurated. At the summit of each papule there is a crust of papery scales. One of the papules has ulcerated and is exuding a clear fluid. The patient says that the lesion began a year ago as a single small spot which caused no irritation or pain; he thinks he contracted it by cutting himself whilst shaving. He has tried many native remedies, and says that the sore was " burnt away " three times but formed again. The Civil Surgeon considers it to be a true example of a Delhi Sore, basing his diagnosis chiefly upon its long duration, its resistance to all remedial treatment, the appearance of the fluid exuding from the ulcerated surface, and the induration which can be felt for some distance round the lesion. A small piece, including one of the papules and the edge of the ulcer, was cut from the sore. Films were made by smearing the cut surface of this piece of tissue upon glass slides, and sections were cut from it after it had been fixed in alcohol. In both the films and sections numerous very characteristic bodies, indis- tinguishable in appearance from the parasites recently discovered in the spleen and other organs of certain cases of tropical splenomegaly, were found. These bodies which I shall allude to in future as parasites, will be fully described later. Bacilli were not seen in any of the specimens. Films were made from the clear fluid exuding from the ulcerated surface, but in these the characteristic bodies were not found. The peripheral blood of the patient was examined on several occasions, but nothing abnormal was found. Six months later this case was seen again. The sore had decreased in size and all signs of ulceration had disappeared. A number of papules still remained, and there was a good deal of induration round the margin of the lesion. A small piece, from which films and sections were prepared, was removed from the sore, but on this occasion none of the characteristic parasites could be found. At a second examination a few days later, a similar negative result was obtained. The sore was evidently healing slowly, but had it been seen for the first time at this period it would, in all probability, have been regarded as a fairly typical Delhi Sore, and for that reason the negative result of the subsequent exa- minations was important. It was interesting that at this second examination of the case an enlarged gland about the size of a haricot bean was detected in the anterior triangle of the neck below the sore. Enlarged glands had been carefully searched for at the former examination of the case, but none had been found. Unfortunately the
3 patient refused to have the enlarged gland excised. Throughout the eighteen months during which the sore had lasted he had not suffered from fever or any other constitutional symptom, and at none of the examinations was any enlarge- ment of the spleen nor anything abnormal in the peripheral blood, detected. Case 2.4 In both slides numerous parasites similar to those found in Case 1 were present. Case 5.5 The oldest sore was covered with a thin white scab, from underneath which a little clear fluid could be squeezed out. Over an area of about a square inch round the sore the upper layers of skin had peeled off and the surface was smooth, red, and raised as if by a deposit of new tissue beneath it. Considerable indura- tion could be felt round the area covered by the scab. The sore on the great toe was a small open ulcer surrounded by an inflammatory areola. At the centre of the third sore (on the front of the ankle) there was a small open ulcer from which clear fluid could be squeezed out. Over an area of about a quarter of a square inch round the ulcer the skin surface was raised in small irregular patches as if by deposits of new tissue beneath it, and outside this a reddish areola extended for about an inch in every direction. The facts that two of the sores, though on different toes, were almost touch- ing each other, and that the sore on the great toe had commenced some time after that on the second toe, made it probable that the former had been con- tracted by accidental inoculation from the latter. Films made from scrapings obtained from each sore showed the presence of numerous parasites similar to those found in Case 1, and sections prepared from a piece of tissue removed from the oldest sore presented the same appearances as had been observed in sections from the sore of that case. The patient suffered from no constitutional symptoms and no enlarged gland was detected. Nothing abnormal was found in his blood, examined on several occasions. Case 11.6 The cases may be tabulated as follows :7 a good many, however, are quite round, and some are pointed at both ends so as to resemble in shape minute torpedoes. The bodies vary considerably in size, but the length of the majority is about half the diameter of a red blood corpuscle. Their circumference is remarkably regular and distinct as though they were provided with a definite capsule. The greater part of their substance stains a faint blue, but near the centre is a large unstained (? vacuolic) area sometimes divided into two by a streak of the blue-stained body-substance. In the interior of each body two masses of chromatin will be seen. One of these is of large size, more or less rounded in shape, and usually situated near the centre8 such non-nucleated masses containing large numbers of parasites are shown in figure 1. (2) Forms of multiplication. I have observed three forms of the para- site which may perhaps be regarded as stages in a process of multi- plication. They are the following :9 Description of sections.10 small, deeply staining bodies, which in thick sections look like large cocci, in thinner sections like large cocci surrounded by a clear space, and in the thinnest sections present the characteristic structure of the parasitic bodies already de- scribed as present in films made from the fresh tissues. Owing to the contraction undergone by the tissues during fixation the bodies appear more rounded and smaller than when seen in films, but when very thin parts of the section are examined the two characteristic nuclei of each body are easily seen, and there can be no doubt that the bodies are identical with those seen in films. On the other hand it is easy to understand how Cunningham and Reihl, who had no opportunity of examining films, were unable to make out any definite structure in the bodies seen only in sections. The parasitic bodies are not contained in all the large cells composing the deposit of fresh granulation tissue. Comparatively large areas of tissue may be examined in the cells of which no bodies are present, but in these areas the cells themselves are of the same character as those containing the bodies. In parts of the section the invasion of hair follicles and sweat glands by the new tissue can be observed, and in figure 5 is shown a portion of a section in which nothing remains but a dead hair encased in the characteristic cells containing parasites. In addition to the large parasite-containing cells there are seen in sections a number of cells resembling lymphocytes and rarely one or two polynuclear cells. In the almost complete absence of polynuclear cells, however, both films and sections from a true case of Delhi Sore differ markedly from specimens obtained from other sores. Summary of results as regards the presence of parasites in Delhi Sores.11 to the effects of treatment must be ascribed the absence of parasites in these three cases and their scantiness in cases 14 and 17. Does the parasite occur as a cause of enlargement of the spleen in places where it occurs as a cause of Delhi Sore?12 Number. Place. Name. Age. Condition of spleen. Condition of liver. Other particulars of the case. Results of examination of slides obtained by splee puncture and by scraping of ulcers. 9 Soneput Jai Lal 32 One hand's breadth beyond umbilicus. Oneinch below costal margin. Admitted for dysentery; no fever lately; duration of splenic enlargement 2 years. No malarial parasites or pig- ment; no Leishman para- sites. 10 Soneput Ganashi 30 Two inches below umbilicus. Two inches below costal margin. History of enlarged spleen for 10 years. Is greatly emaciated and has ascites, ten pints of fluid being re- moved by tapping on 3rd April 1904. No fever now. Ditto ditto. 11 Soneput Kurarya 25 One hand's breadth below costal margin No enlargement de- tected. Admitted for dysentery; no fever now. No malaria parasites or pigment; no Leishman parasites. 12 Soneput Rajia 40 Two inches below umbilicus. Not examined History of occasional fever for two years. Simple Tertian malaria para- sites; no Leishman para- sites; finger blood also contains S. T. malaria para- sites. 13 Soneput Ram Nath 30 To umbilicus. Ditto History of acute fever; is much jaundiced. Simple Tertian malaria para- sites and much pigment ; finger blood not examined. 14 Soneput Badl oo 15 Ditto No enlargement de- tected. ...... No malaria parasites or pigment; no Leishman parasites. 15 Soneput Bhola 30 Nearly to umbilicus Ditto A strong, healthy-looking man. Has fever occa- sionally. Ditto ditto. 16 Soneput P h u la n (female) 23 To pelvic brim Two inches below costal margin. Is very anæmic and weak. History of much fever. Is taking quinine. Has a chronic ulcer on leg. No malaria parasites or pigment; no Leishman parasites; no parasites in scrapings of ulcer. 17 Soneput Ramkalla 18 To umbilicus . No enlargement de- tected. History of fever . Much malarial pigment both free and in large mononu- clear leucocytes; no Leish- man parasites. 18 Soneput . Harnarain 20 Beyond umbilicus Ditto Has several chronic ulcers on legs. No malaria parasites or pig- ment; no Leishman para- sites; no parasites in scrapings of ulcers. 19 Soneput . Sundar ... 1½ hands' breadth below costal margin. Ditto ...... No malaria parasites or pigment; no Leishman parasites. 20 Soneput Kabal 45 To umbilicus Ditto The splenic enlargement has been considerably dimi- nished under quinine treat- ment. Ditto ditto. 21 Soneput Gokhal 30 Midway between umbilicus and pube One inch below costal margin. Is very emaciated and anæmic. Duration of splenic enlargement 12 years. Ditto ditto. 22 Soneput Adami 26 To umbilicus No enlargement detected. Ditto ditto. 23 Soneput Ram Ram 24 1½ hands below costal margin Ditto History of frequent fever for 6 months. Scanty malignant Tertian rings and crescents; no Leishman parasites.
13 Number. Place. Name. Age. Condition of spleen. Condition of liver. Other particulars of the case. Results of examination of slides obtained by spleen puncture and by scraping of ulcers. 24 Soneput Molar 40 Beyond umbilicus No enlargement detected. Has a large chronic ulcer on leg; for which he was admitted. No malaria parasites or pigment; no Leishman para- sites; no parasites in scrap- ings from ulcer. 25 Karnal Ali Mahomed 14 Nearly to pubes Five inches below costal margin. Evening rises of temperature to 99°; is taking quinine ; very weak and anæmic. Spleen and liver punctured : no mal arial parasites or pig- ment; no Leishman para- sites. 26 Karnal Nan hin 27 To umbilicus No enlargement detected. Admitted for chronic ulcer of leg; is taking quinine. No malaria parasites or pig- ment; no Lehman para- sites. 27 Karnal Abdulla 30 Beyond umbilicus Ditto . Has occasional attacks of fever, but has been taking quinine and says he is well now. Ditto ditto. 28 Karnal Setaram 22 Nearly to umbilicus Ditto Admitted for a chronic ulcer on leg. No malaria parasites or pig- ment; no Leishman para- sites; no parasites in scrap- ing from ulcer. So far as I could ascertain these cases were typical of the class of more advanced chronic fever cases attending the dispensaries of such places in the Punjab as I visited. It seemed unnecessary to carry out the operation of spleen puncture upon more than the above 28 cases, for from the absence of parasites resembling those of Delhi Sore in any of these cases, selected on account of their apparent resemblance to cases known to be caused by such parasites, it was reasonable to conclude that parasites resembling those of Delhi Sore do not occur as a cause of enlargement of the spleen in the Punjab. During a subsequent tour in Assam it was possible to carry out an investigation converse to that just described, viz., to ascertain whether parasites similar to those causing kala azar ever exist in Assam as a cause of local sores resembling Delhi Sores. Although I took every opportunity while in Assam of examining speci- mens from sores of all kinds, I obtained no evidence there either of the occurrence of sores resembling Delhi Sores or of the occurrence of parasites resembling those of kala azar as a cause of only local lesions.* These facts seem to me to be important for, if on the one hand we regard the parasites of Delhi Sore as being identical with those of kala azar, they show that while these parasites produce in one part of India only a local infection of minor *I am aware that when a chronic ulcer of the skin exists in a case of splenomegaly caused by the so- called Leishman-Donovan parasites, a few parasites may be found in sections made from the tissues in the neighbourhood of the ulcer, but I believe I am in agreement with Dr. Christophers in considering that the ulcers are not caused by the parasites. Similar chronic ulcers are as common in cases of true malarial cachexia as in cases caused by the parasites under discussion, and in the latter disease the presence of one or two parasites in the neighbourhood of the ulcers probably indicates no more than that such ulcers are possibly a path of exit of the parasites from the body.
14 importance as regards danger to life, in another they produce a very serious and dangerous general disease; and on the other hand, the most probable explanation of the facts is that the parasites of Delhi Sore and those of kala azar, though indistinguishable in appearance, are in reality quite different in that they produce entirely different pathological effects. Attempts to communicate the disease to animals.15 In the absence of any experimental work upon this organism it is perhaps scarcely justifiable to give even the above scant description of it. I do so only with the object of throwing out the suggestion that the so-called Delhi Sores reported to occur commonly among dogs and other domestic animals may possibly be of a different nature and caused by an organism different from that of the true Delhi Sores occurring in man. CONCLUSIONS. 1. The deposit of a tumour-like formation of granulation tissue is the essential condition in Delhi Sore. The new tissue infiltrates, destroys, and replaces all the structures of the true skin, and pressing upon the epidermis causes it to atrophy and disappear, so that an ulcer results. Many of the cells compos- ing the new tissue contain parasites which, almost certainly, are the primary cause of the lesion. 2. The parasites cannot be distinguished by examination under the micro- scope from those obtained from the spleen and other organs in certain cases of splenomegaly and kala azar. 3. On the other hand the parasites met with in the Punjab are apparently capable of producing only the comparatively mild local disease known as Delhi Sore, while those in Assam produce only the dangerous general disease known as kala azar. This raises many interesting questions, as, for example, whether the parasites of Delhi Sore and of kala azar, though obviously belonging to the same class, are different species. 4. A probable mode of infection in Delhi Sore is by the accidental inoculation of material containing the parasites, and it is reasonable to suppose that such inoculation may be effected by a biting insect. 5. The evidence adduced points to the fact that even when numerous parasites are present in a Delhi Sore on the skin for a long period, no general disease, such as kala azar, results, and (assuming that the parasites of kala azar and Delhi Sore are identical) for this reason as well as for the reason that no case of general infection with the parasite was found in the Punjab where local skin infections with it are not uncommon, it is improbable that the path of infection in kala azar is by way of the skin. And if any biting insect were proved to be the infecting agent of Delhi Sores, it would not necessarily follow that this is the mode by which kala azar is contracted. 6. The parasites were found in Oriental Sores contracted in Delhi, Karnal, Shahabad, Lahore, Quetta, and Dera Ismail Khan, and for this reason it may be concluded that "Delhi Sores," "Lahore Sores," "Sind Sores," "Frontier Sores," etc., are one and the same disease caused by the same parasite. The ulcers
16 known as "Naga Sores" in Assam, however, are apparently of a different nature. 7. Attempts to communicate Delhi Sore to two dogs failed. No experi- ment was made on human beings, but one of the sores of Case 10 was probably contracted by accidental inoculation from another. The generally accepted opinion that true Delhi Sores occur on dogs and other domestic animals has yet to be confirmed. 8. There has been a tendency of late to regard all cases usually diagnosed in India as "malarial cachexia with enlargement of the spleen" as being due to the parasite recently discovered in the spleen and other organs of some cases diagnosed under this designation in Madras and Calcutta. The evidence in this paper shows that such an opinion is not justifiable in the light of the fact that as regards most cases of great enlargement of the spleen occurring in the Punjab a diagnosis of "malarial cachexia" would, in all probability, in the present state of our knowledge, be correct. G. I. C. P. O.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026995.tif] Photogravure. Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, November 1904.
(NEW SERIES.) No. 13 SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ORIENTAL OR DELHI SORE. BY CAPTAIN S. P. JAMES, M.B., I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027010.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1905. Price Annas 10 or 1s.
