IP/QB.10 m. 91. b. No. 9. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. SECOND REPORT OF THE ANTI-MALARIAL OPERA- TIONS AT MIAN MIR, 1901-1903. BY LIEUT. S. R. CHRISTOPHERS, M.B., I.M.S. (On special duty.) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026181.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1904. Price As. 10 or 1s.
M.91.b.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026187.tif] 3942665.
No. 9. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. SECOND REPORT OF THE ANTI-MALARIAL OPERA- TIONS AT MIAN MIR, 1901-1903. BY LIEUT. S. R. CHRISTOPHERS, M.B., I.M.S. (On special duty.) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT. OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026193.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1904. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026193.tif]
Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. E. A. ARNOLD, 37, Bedford Street, Strand, Lon- don, W.C. CONSTABLE & CO., 2, Whitehall Gardens, London, S.W. SAMPSON Low, MARSTON & CO., St. Dunstan's House, Fetter Lane, London, E.C. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & CO., Charing Cross Road, London, W.C. BERNARD QUARITCH, 15, Piccadilly, London, W. C. WILLIAMS and NORGATE, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & CO., Cambridge. ON THE CONTINENT. R. FRIEDLANDER & SOHN, II, Carlstrasse, Berlin, N.W. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. IN INDIA. THACKER, SPINK & CO., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & CO., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. S. K. LAHIRI & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & CO., LD., Bombay. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & CO., Bombay. A. J. COMBRIDGE & CO., Bombay. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAM & CO., Madras. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & CO., Madras. G. A. NATESAN & CO., Madras. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH AND SONS, Mufid-i-Am Press, Lahore. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazair Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission Press, Rangoon.
SECOND REPORT OF THE ANTI-MALARIAL OPERATIONS AT MIAN MIR, 1901-1903. PART I. SUMMARY OF THE OPERATIONS ANTECEDENT TO THOSE WITH WHICH THIS REPORT DEALS. THE operations at Mian Mir and the conditions under which they were carried on have been described in previous reports,* but it will not be out of place to briefly refer to their main features. The operations were intended to demonstrate the reduction of malaria in a cantonment by measures based upon recent knowledge of the ætiology of this disease, and as started by the Royal Society's Commissioners, together with Captain James, I.M.S., were primarily directed against mosquitoes. There were many reasons at the time why this method of prevention should have first consideration. Not only did the reduction of the number of anopheles appear to be the most complete and satisfactory of all measures, but it was a method of malarial prophylaxis con- cerning which nothing was as yet known of the ease or difficulty with which it could be carried out. In the course of their researches in Africa, the Commissioners had become doubtful of the practical value of operations against mosquitoes in the moister regions of the world. But in the semi- desert conditions prevalent in North India, and especially in the Punjab, they saw what appeared to them to be the proper sphere for such operations. A cantonment in the North-West of India which offered the best conditions for the experiment was therefore sought for. But most cantonments which appeared to be favourable for operations were comparatively healthy, whereas those at which high admission rates for malarial fever were constantly recorded were generally found to be unfavourable for operations. The more malarial stations for troops in North-West India, as shown by the admission rates for intermittent fever, are:2 It is important to note that, on examination, each of these stations was found to possess some serious drawback to the carrying out of successful anti- mosquito operations. Delhi Fort was found to be in close proximity to the native town of Delhi as well as to an extensive tract of sand and water in the bed of the Jumna. Ferozepore was found to have extensive waters not far removed in the bed of the Sutlej River. Even in Mian Mir, which was eventually chosen, it soon became evident that the presence of irrigation in this canton- ment was a condition much more unfavourable to operations than had been anticipated. But on the whole Mian Mir appeared to be best adapted to the carrying on of the experiment, and the conditions seemed sufficiently favour- able to allow of a marked success being achieved in the fight against malaria. This cantonment, however, covered an area of about 12 square miles, and only a portion was therefore chosen for the experiment. The selected area was, to a large extent, isolated from the rest of the cantonment. It contained the barracks of the Royal Artillery, a large and some small native bazaars, officers' bungalows and their gardens, and was representative of most canton- ments in North India. About three-quarters of the cantonment was left untouched, and this part, being under the same physical conditions as the chosen area, formed a valuable control in all operations. The experiment was commenced in September 1901, but actual operations were not undertaken until April 1902, since the first six months were devoted to a thorough investigation into the conditions present. At the time when the investigation was commenced, little was known as to the breeding-places of anopheles. It was customary to discuss points of biology as relative to the whole genus anopheles, and considerable discussion still took place as to the presence of anopheles larvæ in this or that situation. The work of Stephens and Christophers1 and of Daniels2in Africa, James3, in India, Grassi4, Nuttall5, and others in Europe had gradually made it evident that anopheles were not so restricted in their breeding-places as was at first supposed. Immediately prior to the experiments at Mian Mir, it had also been shown by Stephens, Christo- phers, and James, that individual species of anopheles frequented particular kinds of breeding-places, and that one or other species bred in almost every possible kind of collection of water, even in foul water (A. Rossii) and in pots, 1 Stephens and Christophers. Reports to the Malaria Committee of the Royal Society, 1st, 6th and 7th series. 2 Daniels. Reports to the Malaria Committee of the Royal Society, 3rd series. 3 James. Ind. Med. Gazette, Dec. 1899. "Malaria in India." Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India. New series, No. 2. 4 Grassi. Studi di uno zoologo sulla malaria. Secunda edizione,note-volmente accrescinta, October 1901. 5 Nuttall, Cobbett and Strangeways-Pigg. Journal of Hygiene. Vol. I, No. 1.
3 earthenware vessels, etc. (A. Stephensi). In Mian Mir the irrigation channels were found to be a prolific source of anopheles. Larvæ were found in the shelter of grass or fringing vegetation even in the more swiftly-flowing channels, whilst they swarmed in many of the sluggish, weed-containing ones. The interesting discovery was made that the larvæ in the canals were almost entirely those of a single species, viz., A. culicifacies. Pools formed by rain were also found to swarm with larvæ, but these were, with rare exceptions, those of A. Rossii. Earthenware vessels, fire pots, and other utensils, though not im- portant sources of anopheles, were interesting as containing larvæ of A. Stephensi. A few species, quite rare in comparison with the two species mentioned above, viz., A. fuliginosus, A. nigerrimus, and A. pulcherrimus, bred in a few grassy and weedy pools in the surrounding country. The two species A. culicifacies and A. Rossii4 the canals, it was nevertheless decided to undertake vigorous operations against them, and to add to the above:5 interest since they gave some idea as to how far the conditions at this time could be influenced. The rainy season in Mian Mir is very short and the rainfall not great. Nevertheless, as Captain James points out, the ground is very impervious, so that rain water readily collects in shallow pits or even upon the flat ground. He notes the following as the main additional breeding-places in the rains:6 was unfortunate for the outcome of the experiments that the year 1902 was an exceptionally healthy one for all troops in the Punjab. Though a very small number of admissions for malaria occurred among the Royal Artillery, an equally small number occurred among the British Infantry, who lived in a portion of the cantonment where no operations had been carried on. Moreover, Captain James notes that during the Delhi man7 The operations were, however, without effect, and in May 1903 anopheles were as abundant as ever. The results of the operations directed against anopheles, in spite of the thoroughness with which they were carried out, cannot be regarded as very encouraging, and Captain James, in his concluding remarks, is distinctly of opinion that as far as the first year was concerned the operations were very far from being an unqualified success.
8 PART II. OPERATIONS FROM JULY TO NOVEMBER 1903. THE operations dealt with in the present report were carried on from July 1903, and included the rains from the 15th of July to the 11th of September, and the fever season from August to November. They afforded the opportunity of a second estimation of the value of the operations. On the whole the operations were similar to those in the previous year. But as the canals had been cleaned and a large number of pits filled, it was possible to still further extend the area of the operations against rain-formed breeding- places, and this was done to a distance of nearly three-quarters of a mile in every direction. At the same time the greatest care was taken that no breeding-places were left nearer at hand, and the various sections of the area were carefully gone over at short intervals. The whole area of the operations extended over about four square miles, and is shown in the map which accompanies this report. The physical conditions of Mian Mir, and especially the conditions in relation to malaria in this cantonment, have been sufficiently described in Part I, and it will not necessary to do more than describe the operations as they were carried out in the present year. These operations may be very conveniently divided into9 present year the whole of the canals in the immediate area and to a distance of half a mile, or a little less in some cases, were oiled, and the process repeated at first every week and later at intervals of 12 days. The latter time was determined by experiment (see time of development of larvæ in Mian Mir, page 23), and was the time taken for larvæ to become full grown but not to pupate. After the institution of this regular oiling nymph10 By emulsifying kerosene oil, therefore, its effectiveness is almost doubled, the difference being due to the much more perfect film produced. The cost of the soap and the small amount of labour necessary (the oil readily emulsifying) may be neglected, and a saving in the amount of oil used is effected. In experiments in which pure oil and half the quantity of emulsion were used on canals the pure oil was found to be somewhat more effective, so that in actual practice the difference was not so marked, and on the whole it was found most convenient to use ordi- nary oil. Under certain circumstances, however, the emulsion might be used with benefit, especially where very large amounts of oil are used, or where it is desired to prevent the oil being taken for other purposes than those intended. Although, after each oiling, larvæ in a canal were found to have completely disappeared, yet within two or three days young larvæ were always found to be present. As the season advanced, larvæ in the canals, and especially in certain portions of these, became more and more abundant in spite of the oiling. It appeared at this time that adult culicifacies were increasing in the area in spite of the operations. Several times during the season the water of the canals was shut off for a variable number of days. On these occasions the water remaining in the canal was at first baled out, but the process was not persevered with, since the water was readmitted before the mud became dry, and experiments had shown that larvæ could remain alive a considerable time even upon mud that was nearly dry (see notes on the biology of mosquitoes in Mian Mir, Part IV). At the time when the water was cut off and consequently lying very low in the canal, it was usual to find larvæ in much greater numbers. The explanation at first seemed difficult, but appeared to be that with the fall of the water larvæ were washed out from numerous Persian wheels and other cul-de-sacs, and, passing beneath the syphon bridges, entered the canals in the area. Whenever, therefore, the water was shut off, the residual waters were oiled. From October the water in the canals was shut off for ten days or more at a time. When such an opportunity occurred, the whole of the canals in the area were baled out, and became quite dry. Unfortunately at this time larvæ were diminishing in numbers and the fever season was nearing its end. II.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026235.tif] No. 850, Secy to the Sany. Comr., India.11 sources, as well as in kerosene tins, earthenware vessels, etc., left full of water. Breeding-places of this nature were carefully sought for and destroyed, the whole area being examined at least once a week. Although those just mentioned are the breeding-places which would, in an ordinary way, have been dealt with in operations confined to the immediate neigh- bourhood of the barracks, I am of opinion that they were of little comparative importance. As sources of anopheles, such breeding-places in Mian Mir were infinitely small compared with the canals and with innumerable pits which sur- rounded the area on all sides (see map). In this connection I may remark that our experience in Mian Mir has led us to look upon measures confined to the pits and puddles in the immediate neighbourhood of buildings as quite futile. III.12 in the land, both brick and earth drains are liable to remain full of water, and in some of the latter larvæ of A. culicifacies were found. Perhaps the most noticeable and important feature of Mian Mir in the rains is the presence of numbers of "rain-filled pits." In the building of every native hut, the making of walls, rifle butts, and other structures, it is the practice to dig earth from the ground somewhere in the neighbourhood. The result is the formation of a large number of pits varying from a few feet in diameter to 50 yards or more, and from one to ten feet in depth. In the more central area these pits were, as a rule, small and not very numerous, but near the cantonment limits they occur in hundreds and under natural conditions swarm with the larvæ of A. Rossii. A. Superficial drainage. 13 direction of Captain James. There remained, however, within the area under- taken at least an equal number more, and as the filling of these was a work of great magnitude, only those pits in the more central area were filled during the present operations. In endeavouring to fill a large number of pits in so flat a country as Mian Mir, difficulty arises as to the source from whence the earth with which to fill them can be obtained. Most of the pits in the present instance were filled by earth taken from old rifle butts and a disused brick kiln. In filling pools it was found advisable to fill them to a higher level than the sur- rounding ground, since subsidence takes place after a time and a new pool reforms on the site of the old. In some cases pits were purposely only partially filled, since rain does not at first collect in these owing to the porous nature of the freshly laid down earth. Such pits are, however, liable at any time to become breeding-places and require to be constantly watched. In some cases very large pits were only partially filled, in order that the operation of " baling-out" might be more readily performed. C. Baling-out.14 them occupied several days. Later, however, when operations had been simpli- fied by many small devices, it was found possible for twelve coolies to empty them in a single day. In baling out water, devices for hastening the process may be very advantageously employed. The large pits just mentioned, which contained water over 10 feet in depth, were first partially filled by tearing down the earth at their sides. The result of this was to enlarge their area, but to greatly dimin- ish their depth. A channel with a deep hole at the end was then dug in order to bring the water to the edge of the pit, where it was baled out with ease by relays of two men at a time. In some cases a double channel had to be formed in order to lift the water to the desired height. In others two channels were made to enable relays of four men to operate. By making a few small " bands" water was prevented from flowing back into the pit. Once the coolies employed in baling out realised the great saving of labour to be obtained by such devices, they showed much ingenuity in applying them. The operation of baling out appeared to be particularly adapted to opera- tions at the end of the rains. In the present instance within ten days of the cessation of the last rain the whole of the pits in the area were rendered free from water and thus eliminated as breeding-places. The only groups shown in the map not so treated were the Group P. and some few others to be noted in the next paragraph, which required different treatment. D. " Oiling."15 required per month. This is less than the cost of wages to coolies for baling these out, so that, except at the end of the rains, oiling would appear to be the most suitable means to adopt against pools of the above nature when these cannot be permanently obliterated by filling them with earth. There were in the area two large wells used by washermen, the waste water from which was allowed to sink into the ground. After a time the ground became so saturated that the whole area in the neighbourhood of the wells was boggy and full of innumerable puddles. Such collections are shown on the map at V and IV. At IV it was found possible to conduct the waste water into a large drain and so to dispose of the pools. At V, however, it was impossible to drain the area, and since larvæ of anopheles and culex swarmed in the puddles in spite of the foulness of the water, oiling had to be resorted to. The water was, however, almost hidden in the grass, and oiling was found quite ineffective unless very large quantities of oil were used. In order that the oiling might be effective, it was in this case neces- sary to have most of the grass scraped away by coolies.
16 PART III. RESULTS. IN order to test the efficacy of the operations it is well to discuss separately:17 number of larvæ in the area, in spite of repeated wholesale destruction, showed no tendency to diminish. II.18 add that in many of such recorded operations no attempt whatever was made to show by search in the houses that the number of anopheles was really diminished. In the present experiment operations against the larvæ might have been considered most successful if the destruction of breeding-places only was taken count of, or if popular opinion as to the presence of mosquitoes was con- sidered evidence. It was, for instance, common in the present year to hear that mosquitoes had almost disappeared. The remark was, however, as often made by people living outside the area as by those within, and in any case referred obvi- ously to Stegomyia which, from its habit of biting in the day, calls special atten- tion to itself. (See operations against culex.) I may here call attention to some experiments directed against the breed- ing-places of culex. In the course of the periodical examination of the bungalow section, attention was given to the breeding-places of culex (C. fatigans, S. sugens, and S. fasciata), and a large number of collections of waste water, and water in tubs, tins, and especially in pots were oiled or emptied. All stray tins or pots were inverted, broken, or removed. By these operations19 III.20 I have previously mentioned the presence in the area of several native communities, viz., the regimental bazaar, the syce lines and hospital followers' lines. The people living in these, especially the children, form a much more suitable community for testing the efficacy of the operations than the troops. It is, however, obvious that if by mosquito destruction operations the health of native communities is improved, the station is also rendered more healthy for troops. In discussing the effect upon malaria we may therefore notice:21 (b) Malaria among troops.22 PART IV. CERTAIN POINTS IN THE BIOLOGY OF MOSQUITOES NOTED DURING THE ANTI-MALARIAL OPERATIONS. THE species of anopheles found in Mian Mir have so far been23 The Culicidæ * other than anopheles found in Mian Mir were24 pools were abundant. By the middle of September the larvæ of M. Rossii had increased in numbers enormously and swarmed in the pools around the bazaars. They were also to be found in the large majority of pools throughout the whole country side, as well as in countless shallow puddles lying in the furrows of arable land. At this time, no matter how far from habitations search was made, the larvæ of M. Rossii were always readily found. By the end of September the breeding-places of this species had become much reduced, from the drying up of the more shallow pools, and a few weeks later the breeding places were localised to a few spots where water still remained. The adult insects showed a corre- sponding increase, and though before the rains found with the greatest difficulty, they were to be caught in immense numbers in every bazaar and village in the neighbourhood a few weeks later. They remained in large numbers in spite of the reduction in breeding-places until the end of October, and then rather rapidly disappeared. Tables showing increase of M. Rossii in August and September. Observations in British Infantry Bazaar. LARVÆ. Day after first shower of rain. Number of pools in imme- diate neighbourhood. Extent to which larvæ were present. 7 6 No larvæ found. 21 8 Abundant larvæ in one pool. 42 17 Larvæ abundant in 6 pools. 58 26 Larvæ present in every pool, swarming in many. ADULTS. Day after first shower of rain. Number of adults in bazaar. 7 2 Specimens found after long search. 21 Adults very scanty. 42 Anopheles very abundant (M. Rossii). 58 M. Rossii "swarming." 98 Numbers of M. Rossii much reduced. This increase in the numbers of M. Rossii, from a species difficult to obtain to one swarming in every situation, is undoubtedly due to the formation by the rains of abundant breeding-places suitable for the species. The extremely small number of larvæ of this species in the first week or two of the rains goes to show that at the end of the dry weather adults had almost disappeared. The enormous increase during the later rains and ending when the rain pools have
25 become dry is then a very striking feature in the life history of M. Rossii. Such a time of swarming is not confined to the Punjab, for in several parts of India we have observed a similar phenomenon. In July, larvæ of M. culicifacies were not abundant. Even uncleaned canals contained very few whilst the cleaned ones were remarkably free from larvæ. An increase, however, in the number of the larvæ in the canals began to be noticed in August, and they increased steadily throughout September and abounded in both cleaned and uncleaned canals in October. They then under- went a striking diminution and almost disappeared with the onset of the cold weather in November. The adults of M. culicifacies appeared to outlast those of M. Rossii and captures of anopheles in the middle of November contained more specimens of this species than of M. Rossii, a reversal of the conditions prevailing earlier in the season when M. Rossii was caught far more readily than M. culicifacies. In the case then of M. culicifacies there also occurred a very marked increase at this time. The increase in M. culicifacies, however, could not have depended upon an increased area of breeding-place, though the condi- tions may have been rendered more favourable by a copious addition of rain water to the canals. It is also worthy of note that the numbers of culicifa- cies reached their maximum in October, whereas at this time M. Rossii was diminishing. On the whole the period of greatest prevalence of M. culicifa- cies corresponded more closely with the highest incidence of malaria than did that of M. Rossii. This is in keeping with what has been previously noted in regard to the relation of these two species to malaria. Rather late in the season N. fuliginosus and C. pulcherrima became more common in the area and appeared to share in the general increase in September and October. The occurrence of N. fuliginosus at this time was peculiarly significant, since all grassy pools in which the larvæ were detected had long been dried out. Specimens of this species must almost certainly have flown in from beyond the limits of the area.* Other Culicid26 where an abundant food-supply existed anopheles travelled long distances (¾ of a mile or more) to reach it, and that they traversed an equal distance if necessary to lay their eggs. Where, however, a suitable breeding-place lay near at hand they did not appear to pass it over. It has been already noted that the larvæ of M. Rossii swarmed in pools immediately around bazaars, villages, etc. In the height of the anopheles season such pools often contained so many larvæ that they appeared, when looked at from a short distance, to be covered with a scum. Around the edges of these pools also the ova were so abundant as to form a dis- tinct black line. Such a state of affairs was, however, never seen under natural conditions at any great distance from a large food-supply. But after all breeding- places had been destroyed in the neighbourhood of the Royal Artillery bazaar by the drainage or filling-in of all pools, larvæ were found in enormous numbers in distant pools at T and M (see map). In order to determine exactly how far anopheles will fly under these circumstances the above-mentioned pools were all dried by baling out the water. The result of this measure was that larvæ then swarmed in the pools of groups S, and N, where previously they had been present only in small numbers. That the larvæ in these pools were derived from adult M. Rossii coming from the bazaar was certain, and the flight of anopheles over a distance of ¾ of a mile was therefore demonstrated. Very abundant adult M. Rossii were found during August in the saddle rooms in connection with the Royal Artillery stables. By this time all breeding- places in the neighbourhood had been drained or filled up, and the pools at A, B, and F, had been regularly controlled by oiling or baling out. Larvæ at this time were swarming in the pools at C, though not in some pools still further away. As adults continued to increase in the saddle rooms, they undoubtedly came from the pools at C, the nearest pool being 900 yards distant. We must then look upon the maximum distance to which anopheles (M. Rossii) will fly as not yet known. Under the conditions at Mian Mir, however, the above experiments show that they fly to and fro a distance of at least half a mile. In has been already remarked that adults of N. fuliginosus were not un- common in the bazaars, stables, etc., and this in spite of the fact that larvæ of this species only occurred on the extreme limits of the area. In the case of N. fuligi- nosus there also appears to be a very considerable power of flight. With regard to M. culicifacies it is also difficult to see where the adults came from in the later part of the season unless distances of half a mile or more were traversed by this species. It is important, before leaving this subject, to briefly note what appear to be the conditions influencing the flight of anopheles. That anopheles do not fly long distances without good reason is most likely, and from many observations it is our experience that the abundance of the food-supply is the factor deter-
27 mining the presence of anopheles. It is indeed only under very exceptiona circumstances that a crowded community in the tropics is free from anopheles. In the Nagpur district, ¼ of a mile was found by Stephens and Christophers* to be readily traversed by anopheles in passing between their breeding-places and villages. In this locality, however, the distance of half a mile appeared to put a considerable check upon their presence. In Mian Mir, on the contrary, anopheles appeared to traverse half a mile as readily as shorter distances. The distance travelled in Mian Mir, however, was over a bare plain with little or no obstruction to the passage of light or sound. We believe indeed that it was largely on account of the extremely flat and open nature of the country around Mian Mir that such long distances were traversed by anopheles. Further experi- ments upon this point are, however, of the utmost importance. III.28 3. By flight over the open plain surrounding the area on the south and east aspects. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026310.tif] Showing infiltration of adult anopheles into an area. The large arrows indicate flight in search of breeding-places; the short arrows flight towards lights, sounds, etc., after eggs have been laid. Reference has already been made to a portion of canal in which larvæ were especially abundant. This lay between the Royal Artillery bazaar and the Native Cavalry lines, but considerably nearer to the former. It appears probable that in the radiating flight from the Cavalry lines a number of anopheles would reach this canal, but having laid their eggs, would as readily fly to the Royal Artillery bazaar as to the more distant Cavalry lines. Thus no amount of oiling of this portion of the canal would prevent anopheles using it as a means of reaching the Royal Artillery bazaar. (See the above diagram shewing the method of infiltra- tion of adult anopheles into an area.) That anopheles adults are constantly changing their feeding and resting place is rendered very evident by the remarkably constant sporozoite rate in M. culicifacies. It matters little in this respect from which house, shed or stables this species is taken, since the percentage of infected individuals is much the same in all places.
29 IV.30 V.31 VI.32 PART V. QUININE ADMINISTRATION. IN addition to operations against mosquitoes, experiments were made in regard to the efficacy of quinine administration to British troops, native troops and the native children of the followers' lines. In all cases where adults were concerned a dose of 15 grains of quinine was given on two consecutive days weekly. In the case of native children proportionate doses were given. Conse- cutive days were chosen, since, in the majority of cases, double infection with the benign tertian parasite was found. Quinine, when employed as a prophylactic against malaria, is usually distri- buted to British troops through non-commissioned officers. It was our experi- ence, however, that by such a method of administration a very small proportion of the men really took any quinine. Unfortunately it was found impossible to get a satisfactory method of administering quinine to large bodies of men. Even when the men were mustered and a roll called, many were found absent on various duties. On the whole, except in very special cases, administration of quinine to large bodies of men was always more or less imperfect. It will be necessary, in order to arrive at any conclusion as to the value of quinine administration, to consider the experiments under three heads. (a) Experiments limited to a small number of men where quinine was administered with scientific accuracy.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026328.tif] Black line = British Infantry (outside the area) Dotted line = Royal Artillery (Within the, area)
33 (b) Administration to large bodies of men under very strict conditions.34 is almost certain that such a thorough giving of quinine would be found extremely difficult. In the case of the experiment dealing with the British Infantry the administration of quinine was made, it is believed, as thorough as is possible except under very special circumstances, and here although the results were not to be compared with those in the smaller experiment, a very distinct reduction in malaria appeared to take place. As a routine practice, under conditions existing at present, we do not believe quinine administered to troops is of much value. Could, however, very much more stringent regulations be brought to bear upon the carrying out of this measure, quinine appears to be a most effective means of lowering the fever rate. The Administration of Quinine to Native Children. Attention has several times been called to certain native quarters situated in the neighbourhood of the Royal Artillery barracks. Early in the operations it was recommended that one of these (syce lines), within 150 yards of the barracks and at a less distance from the hospital and prison, should be removed to a greater distance. Another much larger source of infection existed in the regimental bazaar which, at the time, was considered too large to remove. Since then, however, the Government of India have taken steps to have this bazaar pulled down and re-erected at a safe distance. In the case of the syce lines there were certain objections to their removal, and since they formed a comparatively small community, experiments were instituted by Captain James as to the possi- bility of treating all the children with quinine. The results obtained by him were satisfactory, and similar experiments with regard to this point were carried out in the present year. In the early part of the season a generally low rate of in- fection prevailed among the children in the area. Towards the end of September a rapid rise in the endemic indices of the different bazaars was noticed. At this time then it was thought that a good opportunity for the demonstration of the value or otherwise of the administration of quinine to these children existed. No difficulty was found in getting all the children in the lines to take the drug. A list of all the children was obtained from the Cantonment authorities and a gift of native sweets made to each child after taking the quinine. To my surprise the children readily took large doses (5 to 10 grains) and did not com- plain of any symptoms of cinchonism. The effect upon the spleen rate was very distinct, as is shown in the following tables. During October the spleen rate in these children was reduced from 67.8 per cent. to 54 per cent. In the Royal Artillery bazaar, the children in which had not received quinine, the rate remained high, viz., 64.5 per cent., as also in the hospital followers lines, viz., 60 per cent. Looked at in detail the results were still more striking. A glance at the accompanying tables will show that in nearly every case in which the spleen
35 was enlarged it was reduced in size by the treatment, whilst in many cases enlargement of the organ was no longer perceptible. Table showing the effect of one month's administration of quinine to native children. Children. Spleen before taking quinine. Spleen after taking quinine. 1 1 finger's breadth below costal margin Just palpable Decrease. 2 4 fingers' 36 PART VI. GENERAL CONCLUSION. THE conclusions arrived at by myself are in close accordance with those expressed by Captain James, I.M.S., in the first report. It has, however, in many cases been possible to confirm and render these more certain. We may tabulate what has been demonstrated in the Mian Mir operations as follows :37 which can be unhesitatingly denounced as tending to foster malaria. These cannot be removed at once, but their gradual removal is in most cases, we believe, possible. In the experiments efforts were made to obtain immediate results, and the permanent removal of widespread insanitary conditions was not attempted. It is possible that the conditions in Mian Mir were more difficult of control than in some other cantonments. We have, however, no certain knowledge of the conditions in other cantonments, and until a detailed examination and careful mapping of these has been carried out, it is impossible to say how far measures directed against malaria based upon these lines are likely to be successful. With regard to quinine administration we think the difficulty of maintaining efficient administration will prevent this measure from being of much use as a routine one. Moreover, it appears to us that gradual but permanent im- provement in the health of stations by well-directed sanitary reforms, wherever these can be carried out, will in the end yield the best return. G. I. C. P. O. No. 2696 S. C.No. 9. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. SECOND REPORT OF THE ANTI-MALARIAL OPERA- TIONS AT MIAN MIR, 1901-1903. BY LIEUT. S. R. CHRISTOPHERS, M.B., I.M.S. (On special duty.) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026361.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT FRINTING, INDIA. 1904. Price As. 10 or 1s.
