Ip/Q No. 7. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. SOME OBSERVATIONS ON THE POISON OF THE BANDED KRAIT BUNGARUS FASCIATUS). BY CAPTAIN GEORGE LAMB, M.D. (GLAG.), I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75025942.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1904. Price 8 Annas or 9d.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75025948.tif]
No. 7. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. SOME OBSERVATIONS ON THE POISON OF THE BANDED KRAIT (BUNGARUS FASCIATUS). BY CAPTAIN GEORGE LAMB, M.D. (GLAG.), I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75025954.tif] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75025954.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1904.
Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. E. A. ARNOLD, 37, Bedford Street, Strand, Lon- don, W.C. CONSTABLE & CO., 2, Whitehall Gardens, London, S.W. SAMPSON LOW, MARSTON & CO., St. Dunstan's House, Fetter Lane, London, E.C. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. LUZAC & CO., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W.C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & CO., Charing Cross Road, London, W.C. BERNARD QUARITCH, 15, Piccadilly, London, W. WILLIAMS and NORGATE, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & CO., Cambridge. ON THE CONTINENT. R. FRIEDLANDER & SOHN, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin, N.W. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris, MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague. IN INDIA. THACKER, SPINK & CO., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & CO., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & CO., Calcutta. S. K. LAHIRI & CO., Calcutta. THACKER & CO., LD., Bombay. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & CO., Bombay. A. J. COMBRIDGE & CO., Bombay. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAM & CO., Madras. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & CO., Madras. G. A. NATESAN & CO., Madras. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH AND SONS, Mufid-i-Am Press, Lahore. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazair Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission Press, Rangoon.
SOME OBSERVATIONS ON THE POISON OF THE BANDED KRAIT (BUNGARUS FASCIATUS). IN recent papers1 on the problems surrounding the physiological actions of the venoms of the different species of snakes and the antitoxic sera prepared with these venoms, I have brought forward facts, which show that no con- clusions can be drawn regarding the action of the poison of one species of poisonous snake from the observations made on the action of the venom of another species, no matter how closely allied to each other the two spe- cies may be; facts, which show that the venom of each species must be studied separately. Let us take, for example, the case of the poisons of Naia tripudians (cobra) and of the snake known as Bungarus fasciatus. The former of these snakes is a species of the genus Naia and the latter of the genus Bungarus. Both these genera belong to the same sub-family, viz., Elapinæ, of Colubridæ, and are very closely allied. Now, I have shown that an immune serum prepared with the venom of Naia tripudians causes a well-marked precipi- tum with this poison but has no such action when tested with the venom of Bungarus fasciatus. We can, therefore, conclude that the proteids of cobra venom are of a different nature, or at any rate do not possess the same 2 In the present communication we shall consider some observations which were made with the venom of Bungarus fasciatus, and compare, as far as can be compared, the action of this poison with the actions of the two venoms mentioned above. When opportunity and material permit, I propose to do the same with the venoms of Bungarus caeruleus, Naia bungarus and Echis carinata. Up to the present time very few observations have been made with the poison of any species of the genus Bungarus. As a result of a few experiments with the venom of Bungarus fasciatus, Wall 3 has come to the conclusion that this poison differs markedly in physiological action from the venom of the cobra. He has pointed out that experimental cases of intoxication with the venom of Bungarus fasciatus may be divided into two classes; (1) a class of acute cases, and (2) a class of chronic cases. In the acute cases death takes place within 48 or 72 hours after the injection of the poison. There is some- times slight swelling at the site of inoculation: profuse salivation, accompanied sometimes by vomiting, is a common symptom: ultimately paralysis with twitch- ing of the muscles developes: death rapidly follows from paralysis of respiration. Wall states that these cases present symptoms which are indistinguishable from the symptoms seen in the case of cobra venom intoxication; there is, however, one difference, namely, that the local reaction is not nearly so severe as is the case in cobra venom poisoning. At the post-mortem examination he found a slight effusion of a pale pinkish serum in the areolar tissue round the site of inocula- tion: there was no extravasation of blood and apparently little or no breaking up of the red cells. The blood was found to clot solidly on withdrawal from the vessels. Wall has stated that in his experience in cases of cobra venom intoxication, if the animal survives 49 hours, ultimate recovery takes place. While not limit- ing myself to this exact interval of time, I can say from observations on a very great number of these cases, that if an experimental case of cobra venom poisoning is going to end fatally it does so within the first two or three days. Wall's second class of cases of intoxication with the venom of Bungarus fasciatus shows that the same statement cannot be made as regards this poison. For, in the class of chronic cases described by him death is long delayed, per- haps for ten or twelve days. After the injection of the poison there is an interval varying from two to six days, during which period no symptoms are observed, the animal being apparently in perfect health. After this interval of time a more or less chronic disease begins, which, Wall states, invariably ends fatally. The symptoms observed during this late period of intoxication are not in the least like the symptoms seen in the acute form of poisoning either with cobra venom or with the venom of Bungarus fasciatus itself. There are loss of appetite and great depression: there is a marked diminution in the urinary secretion.
3 Then follow a slight failure of the respiratory function and irregular elevations of temperature, accompanied by great muscular weakness. Purulent discharges from the eyes, nose and rectum are also seen. There is no tendency to hæmorrhages. Death closes this scene after a few days' illness. As a result of the observation of the symptoms in these two groups of cases, Wall arrived at the conclusion that the venom of Bungarus fasciatus acts mainly on the central nervous system, causing paralysis in the acute cases and great weakness and depression in the chronic cases. On the coagulability of the blood he considered it had little or no action, although in the chronic cases he noticed that the coagulum was of a loose and imperfect character. Further, he thought that it had a slight destructive action on the red blood corpuscles, as shown by the pale pinkish exudate at the site of inoculation. This short description completes the summary of Wall's researches. The observations which I shall bring forward in this communication, while confirming Wall's statements in almost every detail, further extend his results and also demonstrate some new facts as regards the action of this particular venom. The material which was used in all my experiments was pure, dry, fresh venom of Bungarus fasciatus. This was collected, under my personal super- vision, during a period of a month or two from two full-sized living snakes. The poison was obtained by allowing the snakes to bite through a sheet of American cloth tightly stretched over the mouth of a strong wine-glass. When the poison had been thoroughly dried over lime, it was added to the general stock, which was preserved in an air-tight tube kept from the light. Before the venom was weighed, it was reduced to an impalpable powder and again dried over lime. In this way it was found possible to obtain a poison of uniform strength for all experiments at different intervals of time, thereby ensur- ing observations comparable amongst themselves. Amount of coagulable proteid in the venom of Bungarus fasciatus. The temperature at which the coagulable proteids were thrown down was found to be between 70° and 75° C. An experiment was made with the view of estimating the amount of proteid which was coagulated at this latter temper- ature. A reference to the protocols (series No. 1) will show that this amount was about 20 per cent. of the total venom. I have already 4 detailed some similar experiments which were made with cobra and daboia venoms. As the samples of the venoms which were used for these estimations had been procured by squeezing the glands of the snakes, it was suggested to me by Professor Martin of Melbourne, that this rather rough treatment of the glands might cause a certain amount of serous exudation into them, and that in this way the coagulable proteids of the venom B2
4 might be augmented. To get rid of this possible fallacy I made another experi- ment with cobra venom, using the same technique as before, with the exception that the sample of venom was obtained from three snakes by allowing them to bite through a sheet of rubber stretched over a strong wine-glass, no pressure being made over the glands. The amount of coagulable proteid obtained in this experiment was found to be 24.6 per cent., practically the same quantity as in the first observation, the details of which have already been published. We may, therefore, take it that squeezing the glands causes no increase in the amount of coagulable proteid contained in the venom. For the sake of comparison the results of the estimation of the coagulable proteids in the three poisons with which I have worked are tabulated as follows:5 RABBIT 18.6 exemplified in the following experiments, which are typical of the results I have obtained:7 3-40 P. M.8 return later on to the consideration of the action which the venom of Bungarus fasciatus has on the blood plasma and on the red blood corpuscles. Chronic cases of intoxication with the venom of Bungarus fasciatus. The observations which I have made in this class of cases confirm Wall's statement, namely, that there is a chronic form of intoxication following the injection of this venom, a condition which is never met with in cases of cobra venom poisoning. The following experiments will serve as examples of this disease, which has been studied both in monkeys and in rabbits:9 MONKEY 6.10 29th January and 30th January.11 great muscular atrophy and, as a result, great weakness. In some of my cases, however, I am inclined to think that paralysis accompanied this muscular atrophy. Lastly, Wall has mentioned that no case under his observation had recovered, if once these late symptoms had begun. I have observed one such case which recovered, i.e., rabbit 12. This animal, as we have seen, showed well marked symptoms, namely, loss of appetite and depression, great loss of weight, muscular atrophy and a purulent discharge from the eyes. It ultimately made a good recovery. This condition, even when well marked, can be recovered from. In the great majority of cases, however, if the typical symptoms have once appeared, a fatal result follows. It is important and interesting to be able to put on record the histological appearances which were found in the central nervous tissues of two of these chronic cases, namely, monkeys 2 and 6. I am greatly indebted to Dr. Walter K. Hunter of Glasgow for cutting, examining and describing the sections of the tissues with which I provided him. The following are Dr. Hunter's reports:12 and lumbo-sacral enlargements not more than 3 or 4 normal cells are to be seen. Many cells have an almost clear plasma with a few dust-like granules scattered throughout, but most of the cells have a darker plasma with more of these dust- like granules. The degenerative process seems to affect the whole of the cell uniformly, though in a few cells the fragmentation is more marked at the periphery than round the nucleus. The nucleus in almost all the cells still remains central. Considering the appearances generally it may be said that the chromato- lysis above described does not present the typical picture such as one sees it, e.g., in a case of alcoholic neuritis. In the latter case the dust-like fragments are better defined and more closely and orderly packed in the cell plasma. In the case before us the fragmented granules are more scattered and, as has been noted in the cortical cells, there is the vacuolation of the plasma. The process here seems as if it were more acute than in alcoholic neuritis, more as if the granules were being dissolved out, rather than definitely broken up. MONKEY No. 6.13 In the cortex the degenerative change was about as marked as in the cord, there being many 'ghost cells ' and many more deeply stained cells, some with fragmented granules and some with no granules at all. A considerable proportion of the cells was vacuolated. It is difficult to give a reliable opinion as to whether or not there was any considerable loss in the number of the cells of the cortex. The importance of these observations is at once evident. We have now direct evidence of the action of the venom of Bungarus fasciatus on the nervous system, an action which results in marked degenerative changes in the ganglion cells of the cortex, cord, medulla and pons. These degenerative changes afford also an explanation of the symptoms which are observed in these chronic cases of intoxication which I have described above. The depression, muscular atrophy and paralysis are no doubt dependent on these pathological changes which are so striking and well marked. With these preliminary observations we have opened up a fruitful line of research, the results of which should set at rest many disputed points as regards the physiological actions of the venoms of the different species of poisonous snakes. They should also, no doubt, throw some light on neuro-pathological problems in general. The action of the venom of Bungarus fasciatus on the blood plasma in vivo and in vitro. We have already seen (vide page 4) that, when a sufficiently large quantity of the venom of Bungarus fasciatus is injected directly into the blood stream of a rabbit, death takes place very rapidly, and that on post-mortem ex- amination made immediately after death a more or less extensive intravascular thrombosis is found. This clotting is confined to the pulmonary arteries and right heart and does not appear to be present in the portal system of veins. The quantity of poison which is necessary to produce this result is very much greater than is the case with daboia venom. Further, the thrombosis is not nearly so marked or so widespread as one finds with this latter venom. There can be no doubt, however, that we are also dealing in this instance with the pheno- menon of an increase of blood coagulability, brought about by the action of the poison on the plasma, so great as to lead to an intravascular clotting in those vessels in which it is more liable to occur, and that death in these cases is due to thrombosis of the pulmonary arteries. We have, now, to consider what is the condition of the blood coagulability in those cases of intoxication, in which this temporary increase does not result in a fatal thrombosis. When death takes place within a few hours after the
14 injection of the poison, as we have seen occurs in the more rapidly fatal of the acute class of nervous cases, the blood taken from the heart and from the inferior vena cava is found to clot almost immediately after withdrawal, and the clots. which form are firm and solid. This condition of blood coagulability was found in four rabbits. The details of the experiments on these rabbits have already been described, viz., rabbits 4, 5, 6 and 22. It is evident, then, that in this short interval of time, viz., up to three or four hours, and with the quantities of venom used, no appreciable diminution of the blood coagulability had developed, When, however, death is delayed for a day or two after the injection of the venom, there is evidence to show that an appreciable deficiency of blood coagu- lability has developed. Thus, in the case of two rabbits, namely, Nos. 10 and 14, the experiments on which have been recorded above, it was found that the blood collected from the heart and from the inferior vena cava at the post-mortem examinations made immediately after death clotted much more slowly than normally, and that the clot which formed was loose and imperfect. These animals died 48 and 26 hours, respectively, after the injection of the venom. In addition to these observations the blood coagulation time has been estimated at intervals in the case of five animals, namely, two rabbits and three monkeys, which received an amount of venom that did not produce any acute nervous. symptoms, and which later on developed nervous symptoms of the chronic type, to which I have already drawn attention. The details of these observations are given in the protocols, series No. II. A reference to this table will show that in every instance a considerable deficiency in the blood coagulability was present. This deficiency was observed on the first or second day after the injection of the poison and persisted, as a rule, till the disease was ended by death or by recovery. In previous papers6 I have recorded similiar series of observations made with both cobra and daboia venoms. In the case of the former poison I was able to show that a slight diminution of blood coagulability takes place after the subcutaneous injection of non-lethal doses, and that this diminution of blood coagulability was more marked the nearer the quantity of venom injected ap- proached to the minimum lethal dose. Further, in cases of cobra venom poisoning one seldom sees any symptoms which might be due to this deficiency of blood coagulability. Lastly, this poison causes no primary phase of increased coagu- lability. With daboia venom the lengthening of the blood coagulation time is much more marked, amounting in some instances to a complete loss of coagulability, the blood when drawn from the vessels remaining permanently liquid. Further, in the case of intoxication with daboia venom I pointed out that symptoms, such as widespread 15 ciency of blood coagulability might be an ætiological factor in the produc- tion of these symptoms. In the case before us now, i.e., that of intoxication with the poison of Bungarus fasciatus, the diminution of the blood coagulability is by no means ex- cessive and cannot be said to be an important factor in the production of any general symptoms observed. For, with the exception of an insignificant local swelling at the site of injection no 16 plasma in sufficient quantity. We have seen above that 8 to 10 milligrammes per kilo. of this venom injected rapidly into the blood stream of a rabbit are required to be certain of so increasing the blood coagulability as to lead to a fatal intravascular thrombosis. Now, I have stated that a fatal intra- vascular clotting can be brought about by 0.1 milligramme per kilo. of daboia venom, when injected intravenously into a rabbit, a quantity 80 to l00 times less than the amount of the venom of Bungarus fasciatus required to produce the like effect. I have also mentioned that 0.4 milligramme of daboia venom causes a firm clot to form after 20 hours in 2 c.c. of citrate plasma. Therefore, if there is any analogy between the actions of these two venoms on the blood plasma, an analogy which is almost certain in consideration of their actions on the blood coagulability in vivo, we should expect that it would require between 30 and 40 milligrammes of the venom of Bungarus fasciatus to produce any clot in 2 c.c. of citrate plasma, provided always, as was the case in my experiments, that the amount of citrate in the samples of plasma used was the same. It is to be regretted that the quantity of venom at my disposal did not allow of such a large amount as this being used. Therefore, until experiments are carried out with much larger quantities of poison than I used, it is impossible to affirm that the action of the venom of Bungarus fasciatus on the plasma is in any way different from the action of daboia venom. It can, however, be said that daboia venom is in this respect of much greater potency than the poison of Bungarus fasciatus. We have seen above that in the more or less chronic cases of intoxica- tion with the venom of Bungarus fasciatus there is a certain amount of defi- ciency in the blood coagulability, but that there are few or no symptoms which can be said to depend on this deficiency. A second series of experiments was undertaken with the view of ascertaining if this poison had the power of preventing the clotting of citrate plasma which results from the addition of a soluble salt of lime. To each tube containing 2 c.c. of plasma varying amounts of venom were added. From one to two hours afterwards there was added to each tube a quantity of calcium chloride solution which clotted the control in less than 15 minutes. A reference to the protocols (series No. IV) will show that in every instance, both in the case of donkey plasma and in the case of horse plasma, solid clotting took place after the addition of the lime solution. In the paper to which I have referred above I showed that cobra venom tested in the same manner, prevented the clotting of citrate plasma. The action, therefore, of cobra venom on the blood plasma is evidently of a different nature from that of the venom of Bungarus fasciatus. I showed, further, that daboia venom, even in infinitesimal quantities, did not prevent this clotting. From the consideration of all these experiments and observations it would appear that the action of the venom of Bungarus fasciatus on the coagulability
17 of the blood plasma is analogous to that of daboia venom. The positive phase of increased coagulability, which is seen in vivo when large quantities of this venom are injected directly into the blood stream, is comparable to the similar phenomenon brought about by small amounts of daboia venom. Again, both these poisons produce in vivo a secondary negative phase of diminished coa- gulability. This condition, however, is much better marked in cases of daboia venom intoxication than in cases of poisoning with the venom of Bungarus fasciatus, and is no doubt a factor in the ætiology of several of the symptoms which are seen in cases of poisoning with the former venom. Further, when tested in vitro with citrate plasma both these poisons failed to produce any diminution in the normal coagulability of this plasma. The only discrepancy in the analogy between these two venoms, as far as their action on the coagulability of plasma is concerned, is the failure of the venom of Bungarus fasciatus to produce clotting of citrate plasma. I have already explained the reason of this failure in my experiments, namely, a deficiency in the amount of venom added to each preparation. While, therefore, it is certain that the actions of these two poisons on the blood plasma are similar, we have seen that daboia venom is, as regards this particular action, of much greater potency than the poison of Bungarus fasciatus, the action of which is mainly on the nervous system. In this connection of analogous action of the venoms of Daboia Russellii and Bungarus fasciatus it is interesting to remember that the former snake is classified among the Viperidæ, and the latter among the Colubridæ. The action of the venom of Bungarus fasciatus on the red blood corpuscles in vivo and in vitro. All experiments go to show that the venom of Bungarus fasciatus has only a slight destructive action in vivo on the red blood corpuscles. In his description of the physiological action of this poison Wall draws attention to the fact that in a few fatal experimental cases he found an effusion of a pale pinkish serum into the areolar tissue around the site of inoculation. In no instance does he mention any symptoms or post-mortem appearances which might be dependent on any great destruction of the red cells. The experience I have had with this venom points to the same conclusion. I have never seen any hæmoglobin-stained exudations, nor any red-stained discharge from any orifice. Further, at many post-mortem examinations, I have collected blood from the heart and from the larger vessels, have allowed this blood to clot and have noted that the serum which exuded from the clot was perfectly clear and free from hæmoglobin. The venom of Bungarus fasciatus, therefore, in vivo has only a slight if any destructive action on the red blood corpuscles. Experiments were next undertaken to ascertain ìf this poison had any D
18 destructive action in vitro on the red blood corpuscles of the rabbit. The method which was used in these experiments was the following. The venom was dissolved in a solution of common salt which was isotonic8 for the red cells of the rabbit. The strength of this solution was 1 c.c.= 2 milligrammes, namely, 0.2 per cent. From this original solution a succession of two-fold dilutions, made with salt solution of the same strength as used for the original solution of venom, was prepared in a series of test tubes, so that each dilution con- tained, half the amount of the poison of the one just above it in the series. A convenient quantity, namely, 0.5 c.c., of each dilution was then measured into a series of small test-tubes. To each tube a measured quantity, namely, 0.005 c.c., of fresh blood was added by means of a graduated capillary pipette. A control tube of salt solution and blood alone was also prepared. The preparations were allowed to stand at laboratory temperature (about 25° C.) for 20 hours, when the results were recorded. At the same time observations were made in an exactly similar manner with a heated solution of venom. A 0.2 per cent, solution was heated in a water bath for half an hour at 75° C. and then filtered. The filtrate was treated in the same way as the original un- heated solution. The results of these observations are detailed in the protocols, series No. V. A glance at this table enables us to come to the conclusion that the venom of Bungarus fasciatus has only a slight destructive action on the red corpuscles in vitro and, further, that the heated venom has the same hæmolysing power as the unheated venom. In consideration of this result, and also in consideration of the observations in vivo to which attention has been already drawn, we can conclude that the action which the venom of Bungarus fasciatus has on the red blood corpuscles is slight and of quite minor importance compared with its action on the nervous system. Toxicity of the venom of Bungarus fasciatus. In order to compare the toxicity of this poison with the toxicity of the venoms of other species of snakes with which I have worked, several series of experiments were undertaken. The results of these observations have now to be put on record. In the first place, the minimum lethal dose for rabbits of the venom under consideration was determined both by intravenous and subcutaneous in- jection. A reference to the protocols (series Nos. VI and VII) will show that it was found that 0.7 milligramme per kilo. was the smallest quantity which killed, a rabbit when the injection was made directly into the blood stream, but that 2.5 to 3 milligrammes per kilo. were required to cause death when the injection was made under the skin. In the second place, a series of experiments was undertaken to determine the
19 minimum lethal dose of this venom for rats of about 118 grammes in weight. A glance at the protocols, series No. VIII, will show that the results following the injection of small quantities of venom into rats were variable. Thus, it was found that in two instances 0.5 milligramme caused a fatal result, while in an- other case 1.5 milligrammes brought on very urgent symptoms but did not kill. Again, in one instance one milligramme caused death, while in another experiment this amount failed to kill. It appears, therefore, that in order to be certain of producing a fatal result a greater amount than 1.5 milligrammes would have to be given. In the third place, the minimum lethal dose of the venom of Bungarus fas- ciatus for monkeys, when the poison is injected subcutaneously, was determined. A reference to the protocols, series No. IX, will show that this amount was ascertained to be about 3 milligrammes per kilo. With a view of comparing the toxicity of this poison with that of cobra venom, two series of experiments were made to determine the minimum lethal dose of this latter venom for rabbits and monkeys, respectively, when the injec- tions are made subcutaneously. It was found (vide protocols, series Nos. X and XI) that 0.35 milligramme per kilo. for rabbits and 0.25 milligramme per kilo. for monkeys were the smallest amounts which were able with certainty to produce death. In previous series of experiments,9 which have been already published, I demonstrated that the minimum lethal dose of cobra venom for rats of about 118 grammes in weight was about 0.05 milligramme: it was found to vary between 0.04 and 0.07 milligramme according to the sample of the venom employed. From these data we can construct the following table, showing the minimum lethal doses of the venoms of the cobra and Bungarus fasciatus for three species of animals, when the poison is injected subcutaneously :20 particular physiological action daboia venom is about 100 times more potent than the poison of Bungarus fasciatus. Injected subcutaneously into a rabbit daboia venom varies greatly as regards the smallest amount which can cause death. As a result of a great number of experiments on rabbits I have found that a dose of from 1 to 2 milligrammes per kilo is required in most cases. Thus, when given subcutaneously the venom of the daboia is still somewhat more toxic than the poison of Bungarus fasciatus, for we have seen that from 2.5 to 3 milligrammes per kilo of this latter venom is required to kill a rabbit. The neutralising power of two antivenomous sera for the venom of Bungarus fasciatus. I have now to place on record some observations which were made to test the neutralising power of two antivenomous sera for the poison of Bungarus fasciatus. The details of these observations have been already incorporated in a paper on the ' Specificity of Antivenomous Sera '.10 It is, however, thought that the present observations would not be complete unless some reference was made to the results obtained. In the first place, two series of observations were made with Calmette's serum, an antivenomous serum which this observer claims to be efficacious against the venom of all species of snakes.11 In both series of experiments rab- bits were the animals employed, and the injections were made directly into the blood stream. We have already seen (vide protocols, series No. VI) that the mini- mum lethal dose of Bungarus fasciatus venom for rabbits by intravenous injec- tion is 0.7 milligramme per kilo. In the first series of experiments (vide proto- cols, series No. XII A) four milligrammes, i.e., about six lethal doses, were mixed in vitro with different quantities of serum. The mixture was allowed to stand at laboratory temperature (about 25° C.) for half an hour. It was then injected into the marginal vein of the rabbit's ear. A glance at the table appended will show that even 5 c.c. of serum were of no avail to save the life of the animal, the rabbit which received this amount of serum along with the test dose dying after practically the same interval of time as the control animal. In the second series of experiments with Calmette's serum and the venom of Bungarus fasciatus (vide protocols, series No. XII B) two milligrammes of venom, i.e., about three lethal doses, were used as the test dose. With this exception the same technique was employed as in the previous series of experiments. It will be seen by refer- ence to the protocols that even with this test dose, small multiple as it was of the minimum lethal dose, 5 c.c. of serum were not able to preserve the life of the animal. The rabbits, however, which received 4 c.c. and 5 c.c. of serum, respec-
21 tively, lived somewhat longer than the control animal. Inasmuch as the test dose in these cases was such a small multiple of the minimum lethal dose, this result does not appear to me to influence the conclusion to which we are led by these two series of observations, viz., that Calmette's serum has practically no neutralising power for the venom of Bungarus fasciatus. In the second place, a series of experiments was made with a serum prepared by Dr. Tidswell of Sydney with the venom of the Australian tiger-snake (Hoplo- cephalus curtus). This snake belongs to the same sub-family, viz Elapinæ, of Colubridæ, as Bungarus fasciatus. The details of the preparation of this venom and the results which he obtained with it are to be found in a paper by Dr. Tidswell in the Australasian Medical Gazette.12 It need only be mentioned here, that Tidswell found this serum to be strongly antitoxic to the venom with which it was prepared, but to be quite inactive towards the venom of three other Australian snakes. For this series of experiments rabbits again were the animals employed. The test dose of venom used was 4 milligrammes per kilo., namely, about six lethal doses. This test dose and different quantities of serum were mixed in vitro. The mixture was allowed to stand at laboratory temperature for half an hour. It was then injected into the marginal vein of the ear of a rabbit. It will be seen from the protocols that the rabbit which received 5 c.c. of serum along with the test dose died in even a shorter time than the control which received no serum. We have, therefore, to conclude that the serum had failed to neutralise even a modicum of the venom. The bearing of the results of these observations has already been entered into in full in the paper from which they are now summarised. It need not further be discussed here. We may summarise the main conclusions to be drawn from the above observations as follows :22 (2) The venom of Bungarus fasciatus has an action on the blood plasma in vivo. Injected directly into the blood stream in considerable quantity it produces an increase of the blood coagulability which may end in a fatal intravascular thrombosis. In the more or less chronic cases of intoxication there is a deficiency in the blood coa- gulability, but this deficiency cannot be said to be a factor in the ætiology of any symptoms observed. No definite results were ob- tained with citrate plasma in vitro. (3) The venom of Bungarus fasciatus has only a slight destructive action on the red blood corpuscles. This action is of little or no account as far as the production of symptoms is concerned. (4) The venom of Bungarus fasciatus is much less toxic than the venom either of the cobra or of the daboia. (5) The venom of Bungarus fasciatus is not neutralised either by the serum prepared by Calmette of Lille or by a serum prepared by Dr. Tidswell of Sydney with the poison of another colubrine snake, namely, Hoplocephalus curtus. Protocols. SERIES No. I.23 Weight of coagulated proteid = 0.0179 gramme. (b) Weight of platinum basin and dried residue = 56.7133 " Weight of platinum basin alone = 56.6389 " Weight of dried residue = 0.0744 " Thus, there were recovered from 93 milligrammes of venom 17.9 milli- grammes of coagulated proteid and 74.4 milligrammes of incoagulable residue, a total of 92.3 milligrammes. We arrive, therefore, at the following percentage composition :24 SERIES No. III.25 which there was then added a different amount of the venom of Bungarus fasci- atus. The strengths of the venom solutions used were 0.1 per cent. and 1 per cent. From one to two hours afterwards there was added to each tube a quantity of calcium chloride solution which clotted the control in less than 15 minutes. The following were the results obtained :26 The following were the results obtained :27 From the above table it appears that about 0.7 milligramme per kilo. of the venom of Bungarus fasciatus is the minimum lethal dose for a rabbit when the injection is made intravenously. SERIES No. VII.28 The following were the results obtained :29 of the solution was 0.2 per cent. The injections were made subcutaneously In front of the chest. The following were the results obtained:30 SERIES No. XI.31 From this series of observations it will be seen that 5 c.c. of serum failed to neutralise 7.2432 From this series of experiments it is at once evident that the serum of a horse immunised with the venom of Hoplocephalus curtus has no power to neutralise the venom of Bungarus fasciatus. Notes and References. (1) (a) "Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India." New series, 1903, No. 3. (b) Ditto: New series, 1903, No. 4. (c) Ditto: New series, 1903, No. 5 (d) Lancet: August 16th, 1902 (2) Loc. cit. (3) " Indian snake poisons, their nature and effect." London, W. H. Allen and Co., 1883. (4)" Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India." New series, 1903, No. 3. (5)Loc. cit., vide reference 4. (6) Loc. cit. (7) " Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India." New series, 1903, No. 4. (8) The term ' isotonic' is not used in the strictly physiological sense. I have employed it to mean the weakest strength of salt solution in which no 'laking' of the blood was observed; in other words, 'laking' and not swelling of the corpuscles was taken as a standard. (9)" Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India." New series, 1902, No. 1. (10)" Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India." New series, 1903, No. 5. (11)" Notice sur le sèrum antivenimeux et sur le traitment des morsures des ser pents." Lille 1901. (12)" Australasian Medical Gazette." April 21st, 1902, p. 177.
No. 7. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. SOME OBSERVATIONS ON THE POISON OF THE BANDED KRAIT BUNGARUS FASCIATUS). BY CAPTAIN GEORGE LAMB, M.D. (GLAG.), I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75026065.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1904. Price 8 Annas or 9d.
