IP/QB, 10 m. 91. b No. 22. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. MEDITERRANEAN FEVER IN INDIA: ISOLATION OF THE MICROCOCCUS MELITENSIS. BY CAPTAIN GEORGE LAMB, M.D., I.M.S. AND ASSISTANT SURGEON M. KESAVA PAI, M.B., C.M. (Madras). ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028350.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1906. Price ten annas or 1s.
No. 22. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. MEDITERRANEAN FEVER IN INDIA: ISOLATION OF THE MICROCOCCUS MELITENSIS. BY CAPTAIN GEORGE LAMB, M.D., I.M.S., AND ASSISTANT SURGEON M. KESAVA PAI, M.B., C.M. (Madras). ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028362.tif] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028362.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1906.
Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. H. S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, & 9, Pall Mall, London. E. A. ARNOLD, 41 & 43, Maddox Street, Bond Street, London, W. CONSTABLE & CO., 16, James Street, Hay Market, London, W. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRBNER & CO., Charing Cross Road, London, W.C. BERNARD QUARITCH, 15, Piccadilly, London, W. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 & 51, Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & CO., Cambridge. ON THE CONTINENT. R. FRIEDLNDER & SOHN, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin, N.W. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. IN INDIA. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & CO., Calcutta. S. K. LAHIRI & CO., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & CO., Calcutta. HIGGINBOTHAM & CO., Madras. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & Co., Madras. G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. TRACKER & CO., LD., Bombay. A. J. COMBRIDGE & CO., Bombay. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & CO., Bombay. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazair Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-Am Press, Lahore. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission Press, Rangoon. SUNDER PANDURANG, Bombay. A. M. & J. FERGUSON, Ceylon
List of Numbers of Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India (New Series) published previous to the present issue. No.1. Standardisation of Calmette's anti-venomous serum with pure cobra venom: the deterioration of this serum through keeping in India, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 3 or 4d. No.2. Malaria in India, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No.3. Some observations on the poison of Russell's Viper (Daboia Russellii), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 5 or 6d. No.4. On the action of the venoms of the Cobra and of the Daboia on the red blood cor- puscles and on the blood plasma, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No.5. Specificity of anti-venomous sera, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 3 or 4d. No.6. First report on the anti-malarial operations in Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No.7. Some observations on the poison of the Banded Krait (Bungarus Fasciatus), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No.8. A preliminary report on a parasite found in patients suffering from enlargement of the spleen in India, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No.9. Second report of the anti-malarial operations at Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 10. Specificity of anti-venomous sera (second communication), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 11. On a parasite found in persons suffering from enlargement of the spleen in IndiaMEDITERRANEAN FEVER IN INDIA: ISOLATION OF THE MICROCOCCUS MELITENSIS*, SINCE Wright's 1 discovery in 1897 that the serum of patients who are suffering from or who have recovered from Mediterranean fever has a specific agglutinating reaction on M. Melitensis this method of diagnosis has been applied to the elucidation of the continued Indian fevers. Thus Wright and Smith 2 have tabulated 10 cases invalided from India, in which the serum gave a sedimenta- tion reaction with M. Melitensis in dilutions ranging in most cases from 1 in 150 to 1 in 300. Many of these cases at the time of the examination presented the usual sequelæ of the disease. At a later date 10 other examples were observed by Birt and Lamb 3 in the Royal Victoria Hospital, Netley, in patients who had been invalided for such diseases as malaria, typhoid fever and rheumatism. It is worthy of remark that 14 out of the total of 20 cases thus observed came from Mian Mir; the other places where infection had occurred were Calcutta, Sabathu and Nowshera. In 1900 one4 of us working in Bombay had the opportunity of studying five cases of Mediterranean fever, which had evidently been contracted in that city. These were cases of irregular fever without definite symptoms, although marked sweating and pains in the joints were present in all instances. A definite diagnosis was arrived at only by means of the serum agglutination reaction. A short time afterwards four cases were diagnosed in Simla.5 All these showed clear clinical symptoms and the sera of two of the patients gave positive reactions with M. Melitensis. The sera of the other two cases were not examined. In 1901 Greig 6 reported three cases of Mediterranean fever occurring in the Swat valley. This diagnosis was reached by means of the serum agglutination reaction, although the clinical symptoms were also very suggestive. In 1904 Konrich,7 working in Kolle's laboratory, made a series of agglutina- tion experiments with M. Melitensis, which consisted in testing the agglutina- tion and sedimentation reaction of seven strains of M. Melitensis with the sera * This paper was received for publication on August 22nd, 1905.
2 of 17 men, many of whom had been treated with tuberculin. He records having in some instances observed sedimentation in a dilution of 1 in 500; in dilution of 1 in 10 and 1 in 20 nearly all gave complete sedimentation. It was also noted that all the strains used did not give the same results, but that no difference was observed between patients previously treated with tuberculin and those not so treated. On this point Konrich's results are in direct opposition to those obtained by Birt and Lamb,8 who in a series of over 150 controls found no sedimentation in dilution above 1 in 10, and also to those of M. C. Nicolle,9 who, after an examination of the sera of 35 persons suffering from other diseases, concluded that a complete reaction in dilution of 1 in 10 was strong evidence of the case being one of Mediterranean fever. Cornwall 10 examined the blood of nine healthy men and of nine cases of long- continued, but ill-defined, fever which were clinically not characteristic of Mediterranean fever, as regards their agglutination reaction with M. Melitensis. He relates having got in some of these cases a complete or partial reaction in dilution varying from 1 in 20 to 1 in 400, and concludes by saying "that even in dilutions of 13 here, once and for all, to mention the technique employed and to state the pre- cautions taken with a view to control these observations. All agglutination experiments were made macroscopically in the capillary tubes devised by Wright,12 by means of which also the serum dilutions were effected. Equal quantities of the various dilutions of serum, made with normal salt solution, and of sterile emulsions of the micrococcus were employed in all instances. The preparations were allowed to stand at laboratory temperature (about 18° C.) for 24 hours, when the results were recorded. The emulsions were all made in exactly the same way, namely, an uniform growth on agar of from 4 to 7 days was emulsified with sterile normal salt solution, about 2.5 cc. of the latter being used for each agar culture; the bacteria were then killed by heating at 60° C. for 15 minutes and finally 0.5 per cent. carbolic acid was added. During the period that the observations to be related anon were in progress controls with the bloods of healthy individuals and of persons suffering from other diseases were made almost daily. In this way an ample number of control ex- periments were obtained both with the stock organism and with the several races isolated from our cases. Thus, we tested as controls the following bloods :4 The cases of Mediterranean fever which have come under our investigation at the present time naturally fall into two groups : (a) those in which M. Melitensis was isolated from the spleen during life; and, (b) those in which no splenic puncture was made, the diagnosis resting solely on the clinical history and the serum agglutination reaction. Group a.5 Case I.6 occasion it gave a complete reaction with the stock M. Melitensis in dilution in 640. On the second occasion the following was the result:7 weeks' illness patient was sent on sick leave, the temperature not yet having come to normal. There were no other prominent symptoms. The serum was examined as regards its agglutination reaction with M. Melitensis at the beginning of the third week. The following was the result:- Dilution of serum. Stock. Multan I. 18 Blood was taken from the spleen on the second day of the fourth week, namely, the first day on which the temperature was normal. A pure culture of M. Melitensis was obtained (Multan V). Case VI.9 eight days after the temperature had come to normal. The result, the same on both occasions, was as follows:10 Blood was withdrawn from the spleen at the beginning of the sixth week. The tubes were all contaminated with a white staplylococcus, but M. Melitensis was easily isolated. (Multan VIII). Case IX.11 Again, at the end of the sixth week and a fortnight after the temperature had come to normal the serum tested with the same two emulsions gave the follow- ing reaction:12 The serum reaction was tested with the same emulsions twice afterwards, namely, in the middle of the fifth week and towards the end of the sixth week. The result, the same on both occasions, was as follows:13 TABLE I. Rabbit I. Immunised with emulsions of stock M. Melitensis. RACES OF M. MELITENSIS. Dilution of serum. Stock. MULTAN. Ferozepore. i ii iii iv v vi vii viii ix i ii 200 * * * * * * * * * * * * 400 * * * * * * * * * * * * 600 * * * * * * * * * * * * 800 * * * * * 14 It will be seen from these tables that all the races isolated by us gave good agglutination reactions with both sera. We have also mentioned that in two instances a monkey was infected with a strain of M. Melitensis isolated by us. The following are the details of these two experiments. Monkey I.15 There was a well marked local reaction at the site of inoculation; this resolved without abscess formation. The animal was never at any time as ill as the first monkey had been; it never refused food and, in fact, appeared always to be in fair health. For temperature see chart. The serum agglutination reaction with three races of M. Melitensis was estimated on three occasions. First, before inoculation no reaction was obtained in dilution of 1 in 4 with stock, Multan I or Multan II. Secondly, at the beginning of the third week complete sedimentation in dilution of 1 in 40 was observed with all three strains. Thirdly, at the beginning of the fourth week the following result was obtained:16 The case at first was thought to be one of pneumonia, as there were slight physical signs at the base of both lungs. The lung condition, however, soon cleared up and at no time was it sufficient to account for the continued fever and the prostrate condition of the patient. Death took place from cardiac failure on the thirteenth day of illness. On the eleventh day of the illness the serum agglutination reaction with M. Melitensis was tested by us. At that time the only strain available was the stock. With an emulsion of this race a complete reaction was obtained in dilution of 1 in 1200. Case XIII.17 result of these examinations was always negative. No complaint of pain in the joints was made. At the beginning of the tenth week the blood was sent to us for examination. The following was the result of the serum agglutination test with M. Melitensis:18 procure an evacuation. Quinine was without effect. There were no joint pains complained of at any time. The serum agglutination reaction with M. Melitensis was estimated in the middle of the seventh week. The following was the result :19 to draw attention to one or two questions which have appeared during the course of the investigation. In the first place, it is important to note the great differences in the agglu- tination value of the sera in the different cases. A complete reaction in some cases was obtained in no higher dilution than 1 in 40, while in other cases a complete reaction was observed in a dilution of 1 in 1200 or even higher. The significance of these variations has been already pointed out by Birt and Lamb13 and by Bassett-Smith. 14 In the second place, it is of interest to note that M. Melitensis was iso- lated from the spleen at various stages of the disease. In most instances the temperature was still high and the illness in a more or less acute stage. But in case VI the temperature was falling and came to normal eight days after- wards; in case V the spleen was punctured on the first day of apyrexia; while in case VII the temperature, which had only been raised for seven days, had been subnormal for eight days before M. Melitensis was isolated from the spleen. In the third place, case VII is of great interest. It will be remembered that this man was in hospital suffering from " remittent fever" from 5th September to 2nd November 1904. It is probable, in view of the facts which we shall refer to in a moment, that this illness was Mediterranean fever. For six months after this illness he was free from fever and able to do his duty as a sepoy in the regiment. After this interval he was again admitted into hospital suffering from fever, which only lasted for seven days. There were at this time no other symptoms. Now, the fact that M. Melitensis was isolated from the spleen eight days after the temperature came to normal is positive proof that this fever of short duration was an attack of Mediterranean fever. The question, then, is at once raised, as to whether this last illness was a relapse after six months' interval or a fresh infection. If it were a relapse, we have to assume that the causal bacterium had remained alive in the spleen or other internal organ for six months without giving rise to any symptom. If, on the other hand, it were a fresh infection, we have to conclude that one attack of Mediterranean fever does not confer immunity for any length of time. This latter conclusion is quite contrary to all clinical experience. We are, therefore, inclined to support the other view, namely, that we were here dealing with a relapse. In the fourth place, there is an interesting point in the epidemiology of this disease which is raised by an analysis of our cases. Of the 17 cases which we have recorded above, 11 occurred in one regiment, namely, the 27th Punjabis. We have seen that one of these cases was probably a relapse, the original attack having occurred some months previously. The remaining ten cases were admitted into hospital between the 4thMarch and 18th May 1905, but seven of these ten cases were admitted during the month
20 of March. At first sight it would appear easy to trace a common source of infection for these cases. But a careful investigation by the medical officer in charge of the regiment failed to bring forth any likely method of common infection. The men belonged to different companies, to different races in fact, slept in different barracks and practically never met. When this small epidemic occurred the regiment was stationed at Multan in the Punjab. They arrived there from Ferozepore, also in the Punjab, on the 29th January 1905. On careful inquiry it was found out that shortly before leaving Ferozepore several cases of continued fever, some with a history of neuralgia and pain in the joints, had been treated in hospital. No chart or detailed records of these cases were available, but the bloods of a few of them were found to sediment M. Melitensis. These cases are as follows :21 This regiment on its departure to Multan was succeeded in the same barracks in Ferozepore by the 15th Sikhs, which, however, did not arrive till the 4th April, more than two months after the 27th Punjabis had left. The 15th Sikhs came from the Samoena, on the Afghan frontier, where they had been stationed for a little over a year. During this time the records show that no cases at all resembling Mediterranean fever were treated in hospital, although while in Peshawar in 1903, before going to the Samoena, two cases, both clinically typical of the disease and in which the serum agglutination reaction with M. Melitensis was positive, had occurred. Such being the facts, it was, therefore, of the greatest interest to find a case of Mediterranean fever among the 15th Sikhs occurring about three weeks after the regiment had arrived in Ferozepore, namely, case X. We have made repeated enquiries from the medical officer of this regiment, and have examined the bloods of several cases of fever which have occurred recently, but this is the only case of Mediterranean fever which has been discovered.15 There is no doubt that this man became infected in Ferozepore. But the infection left behind by the 27th Punjabis cannot have been of a serious or widespread nature at the time of the arrival of the 15th Sikhs, otherwise we should have expected to find a more or less considerable epidemic breaking out among the new-comers. The probable explanation of this exemption is, we imagine, to be found in the fact that more than two months had elasped between the departure of the one regiment and the arrival of the other. This explanation receives support from the observation of Horrocks,16 that M. Melitensis survives for 43 days in soil allowed to dry naturally and for 72 days in a damp soil. In conclusion, it is our pleasant duty to have to thank the following officers, without whose assistance the present investigation would have been impossible :22 Notes and References. (1) The Lancet, March 6th 1897, p. 656. (2) British Medical Journal, April 10th, 1897. (3) The Lancet, September 9th, 1899. (4) Indian Medical Gazette, September 1900, p. 337. (5) Indian Medical Gazette, September 1900, p. 367. (6) Indian Medical Gazette, March 1901. (7) Zeitschrift für Hygiene; Vol. XLVI, 1904, p. 261. (8) Loc. Cit. (9) Comptes Rendus de la So ciété de Biologie, T. 59, 1905, p. 240. (10) Indian Medical Gazette, June 1904, p. 236. (11) Reports of the Commission for the investigation of Mediterranean fever under the supervision of an Advisory Committee of the Royal Society. Parts I & II, London, Harrison & Sons, 1905. (12) British Medical Journal, February 5th, 1897. (13) Loc. Cit. (14) British Medical Journal, September 20th, 1902, p. 861. (15) Three cases of Mediterranean fever have occurred in the 15th Sikhs since this paper was sent to press. These occurred in September 1905, that is, five months after the regiment arrived in Ferozepore. (16) Reports of the Commission for the investigation of Mediterranean fever, Part I, p. 14. G. I. C. P. O.Case I. Sher Hussain, Age 24, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028440.tif] Case II. Hakim. Singh, Age 22, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028440.tif] Case III. Teja Singh, Age 36. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028440.tif] Case V. Secunder Khan, Age 27. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028440.tif] Case IV. Sahib Singh, Age 29. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028440.tif]
Case XVI. Mrs. P., Age 28. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028446.tif] Case XVII. Amalak Shah, Age 17. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028446.tif] Monkey I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028446.tif] Monkey II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028446.tif]
Case XI. Mr. M., Age 32. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028452.tif] Case XII. Sohun., Age 32. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028452.tif] Case XIII. Mian Jan, Age 23. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028452.tif] Case XIV. Abdulla, Age 48. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028452.tif] Case XV. Mr. J. D., Age 22. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028452.tif]
Case VI. Bishan Singh (1), Age 20. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028458.tif] Case VII, Bishan Singh (2), Age 34. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028458.tif] Case VIII. Labh Singh, Age 23. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028458.tif] Case IX, Gulab Khan, Age 19. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028458.tif] Case X. Dalhara Singh, Age 22. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028458.tif]
No. 22. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. MEDITERRANEAN FEVER IN INDIA: ISOLATION OF THE MICROCOCCUS MELITENSIS. BY CAPTAIN GEORGE LAMB, M.D., I.M.S. AND ASSISTANT SURGEON M. KESAVA PAI, M.B., C.M. (Madras). ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028473.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1906. Price ten annas or 1s.
