IP/QB,10 m.91.b (NEW SERIES.) No. 14. SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ON A PARASITE FOUND IN THE WHITE CORPUSCLES OF THE BLOOD OF DOGS. BY CAPTAIN S. P. JAMES, M.B., I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027017.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING INDIA. 1905. Price Annas 10 or 18.
No. 14. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ON A PARASITE FOUND IN THE WHITE CORPUSCLES OF THE BLOOD OF DOGS. BY CAPTAIN S. P. JAMES, M.B., I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027029.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1905.
Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. E. A. ARNOLD, 41 and 43, Maddox Street, Bond Street, W. London. CONSTABLE & CO., 16, James Street, Hay Market, W. London. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S. W KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CO., Charing Cross Road, London, W.C. BERNARD QUARITCH, 15, Piccadilly, London, W. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 51, Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & CO., Cambridge. ON THE CONTINENT. R. FRIEDLANDER & SOHN, II, Carlstrasse, Berlin, N.W. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. IN INDIA. THACKER, SPINK & CO., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & CO., Calcutta. S. K. LAHIRI & CO., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & CO., Calcutta. HIGGINBOTHAM & CO., Madras. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & CO., Madras. G. A. NATESAN & CO., Madras. THACKER & CO., LD., Bombay. A. J. COMBRIDGE & CO., Bombay. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & CO., Bombay. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazair Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH AND SONS, Mufid-i-Am Press, Lahore. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission Press, Rangoon.
ON A PARASITE FOUND IN THE WHITE CORPUSCLES OF THE BLOOD OF DOGS. SO far as I am aware there is no record in literature of the discovery of para- sites of the white blood corpuscles of mammals. For this reason I am led to record some observations I have made upon a leucocytic parasite which is not uncommon in the peripheral blood of dogs in Assam. Although I do not consider that the parasite I am about to describe has any connection with the leucocytic parasites of birds described by Danilewsky, Sacharoff, Ziemann, and others, it will not be out of place if I refer briefly to the work of those observers, for parasites of the leucocytes have been discovered so rarely that our knowledge regarding them is very slight. Danilewsky 1 discovered a parasite in the white blood corpuscles of a screech-owl between 1884 and 1886. He studied it only in fresh preparations. In his first communication he described it as a spherical or oval lightly granular body contained in a delicate transparent homogeneous envelope provided with a large biscuit-shaped nucleus. He did not describe a nucleus as being present in the parasite itself and evidently was interested chiefly in the nature of the mass in which the parasite was contained. From the size and shape of this envelope, the absence of grains of melanin in it, and the appearance and size of its nu- cleus he concluded that it was a white blood corpuscle2 almost homogeneous layer of leucocytic protoplasm which had lost the power of am3 always be made out; (2) forms resembling these but enclosed in a sharply out- lined mass (leucocyte) possessing numerous small granulations. The body of this form stained deeply and contained dark-staining granules and light un- stained spots. Its nucleus was round and stained deeply. The leucocyte in which the parasite was contained was often shaped like a whetstone and oc- casionally reached a length of 44 micromillimetres: its nucleus was dumb-bell- shaped and partially encircled the parasite; (3) round forms two or three times as large as the previous form with larger and more numerous clear spots. Ziemann did not observe multiplication stages of any kind and in the internal organs of two owls upon which post-mortem examinations were made the para- sites presented the same appearances as in the peripheral blood. He regarded the parasites found by him as different from those found by Danilewsky. Berestneff4 studied leucocytic parasites in an owl, a crow, and a magpie. In the owl and crow they were present together with Halteridium danilewskyi and in the crow filariæ also were present. In the magpie no other parasites were seen. In fresh preparations of the owl's blood the leucocytozoon was present in long spindle-shaped and round forms. The spindle-shaped forms contained numerous small round granules and a clear round nucleus; the round forms had the appearance of a large ring containing dull protoplasm in which an oval nu- cleus was seen. Almost the whole of the latter form of the parasite was encircled by the nucleus of the leucocyte. In preparations stained by Romanowsky's method the body of the spindle-shaped forms stained intensely blue and contained small deep violet-coloured granules and unstained round spots. The nucleus was usually oval in shape and only faintly stained: near it lay a deeply coloured round or irregularly shaped "nucleolus" of about .7 to 1.5 micromillimetres in diameter. The second form was about the length of the diameter of a red blood corpuscle. Its body-substance stained faintly and was homogeneous or only slightly granular. The nucleus was considerably larger than that of the first form. The nucleus of the leucocyte was closely applied to the parasite and often was of an irregularly quadrilateral shape. Young stages of the second form of parasite were seen by Berestneff in mononuclear leucocytes (large lymphocytes). Their protoplasm was faintly stained and contained a large nucleus and some deep blue granules. He regarded both types of the parasite seen by him as sexual forms, those with feebly staining body-substance and a large nucleus being the males, and those with deeply staining body-substance, a small nucleus, and a "nucleolus," being the females. He was unable to confirm the observations of previous workers regard- ing the development of flagella bodies from the parasites. Laveran5 and Schaudinn 6 have also studied these leucocytozoa in the blood of owls. Laveran described a female form and an immature male form observed
4 in the blood of an owl, Syrnium aluco. Neither form contained pigment. In opposition to Ziemann and other observers he regarded the elongated, spindle- shaped elements in which the parasites were included, not as leucocytes, but as deformed red blood corpuscles with hypertrophied nuclei. He considered that the male and female gametes carried out fertilization in the same manner as mem- bers of the genera Plasmodium and Halteridium and therefore regarded the parasites as Hæmam5 residual body, become much elongated, and develop into typical spirilla. These spirilla migrate into the malpighian tubes of the mosquito and undergo multipli- cation by longitudinal division. They are to be considered as having periods of rest and periods of movement. During the former they enter the cells of the malpighian tubes; during the latter they become free, multiply by longitudinal division, and after having flooded the malpighian tubes reach the anterior part of the 6 Trypanosoma, but to the genus Spirillum, and names them Spirillum ziemanni. Ziemann 7 now agrees with Schaudinn in regarding the so-called leucocytozoa found in the peripheral blood of owls as stages in the development of a trypano- some-like organism and Edmond and Etienne Sergent 8 have partially confirmed Schaudinn's observations. So far as I can ascertain, the above is a brief summary of all that is known regarding parasites of leucocytic blood cells, and now I shall describe the parasite I have studied in the blood of dogs. Observations upon this organism are simpli- fied by the fact that there can exist no doubt regarding the nature of the anatomical element of the blood in which it is contained. In June 1904 Dr. C. A. Bentley, of Borjulie, Assam, informed me that he had found a peculiar body in the leucocytes of the blood of a dog. He thought the body might be a parasite of some kind, but, with the stain he was then using he had been unable to bring out any details of structure in it. He showed me a slide in which some of the leucocytes contained a body having the appearance of a large regularly shaped vacuole. In a few of the bodies a very faintly stained nucleus could be seen. Fortunately Dr. Bentley knew the owner of the dog in the blood of which the bodies had been found, and the next day we were able to procure more slides from it and to study the parasite together for some days. Afterwards I made a practice of examining the blood of such dogs as I was able to obtain in the places I visited, with the following results:7 greatly in the different cases. The following results of differential counts of the leucocytes made in four cases will show this, as well as the relative proportions of the different varieties of leucocytes present :8 examination of 2,855 leucocytes in films from the four cases mentioned above as well as during less minute examinations of slides from two other cases, I have seen only one parasite which was free in the plasma; every other was contained in a polymorphonuclear cell. In the second place it is necessary to mention that in order to bring out the structure of the parasites distinctly the films must be well and deeply stained. When this has been done the parasites are seen very clearly and cannot easily be passed over during the routine examination of a slide. As will be seen from the drawings at the end of this paper the chief characteristic of the bodies as they present themselves during the examination of a stained film is their remarkable uniformity in size and appearance. They are usually about 1½ times as long as the diameter of a red blood corpuscle and the majority are almost ex- actly twice as long as they are broad. The shape of the body may perhaps be best compared to that of a bean. On careful examination of a well-stained film it will be seen that these characteristic bean-shaped bodies present in the leucocytes consist of two parts, viz., (1) a definite oblong almost quadrilateral capsule or cytocyst, the outline of which is often coloured bright pink with Romanowsky's stain; and (2) a parasite enclosed within this capsule. The capsule or cytocyst would appear to be formed from the protoplasm of the leucocyte as the result of the presence of the parasite. It is thick and evidently resists considerably the penetration of the stain through it, for unless prolonged staining has been employed, the parasite itself remains uncoloured and the appearance presented is like that of the body shown in one of the leucocytes in figure 7. The sides of the capsule are often pressed inwards and folded over so that in stained films they appear as in figure 10. The parasite itself is inside the capsule. This it often completely fills and in such cases its outline cannot be clearly differentiated from the outline of that structure (Figs. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.). In many cases, however, it is somewhat retracted or shrunken so that there is a clear space between its circumference and that of the capsule (Fig. 5). In these cases its shape and characteristics are clearly seen. It is an oblong bean-shaped body composed of a homogeneous or very slightly granular protoplasmic body provided with a large oval or round chromatin nucleus. Its body-substance stains a faint sparrow-egg blue colour and its nucleus, which is usually situated near one end, stains in the same manner as the nuclei of the leucocytes. The parasite has a clearly defined circumference but apparently is not surrounded by a definite membrane, and its appearance is such as to indicate that when not imprisoned within its leucocytic capsule, it has the power of movement. It contains no grains of pigment.
9 The great majority of the parasites seen in a stained film will be found to correspond with the above description; they are oblong, nucleated, unpigmented bodies contained in a definite bean-shaped capsule or cytocyst apparently formed from the body-substance of the polymorphonuclear leucocyte in which the parasite is situated. By a careful examination of a large number of parasites the following additional facts may be made out. 1. As regards the position of the parasite in the leucocytes and its effect upon them.10 It is possible that they are less mature forms than the more common encapsuled bean-shaped parasites. (c) During the examination of stained films from six cases, I have seen only one example of a parasite free in the plasma. Its outline was regular and of the general shape of an almond, being considerably thicker at one end than at the other. The nucleus was much elongated and lay near the centre, but touching one edge, of the parasite. The micro-nucleus or centrosome was remarkably distinct. (d) Two parasites may occasionally be present in the same leucocyte (Fig. 13). I have observed this twice during the examination of films from six cases. 4. As regards the nucleus of the parasite.11 as a considerable number of scattered chromatin granules disposed throughout its substance. Whether this body is to be regarded as having any connection with the parasites under discussion I am unable to say. I have performed no post-mortem examination on any animal infected with the parasite, so that my observations regarding it are limited entirely to its appearance in the peripheral blood. While it undoubtedly has affinities with the hæmogregarines the fact that it is parasitic upon the leucocytes and that it represents a hitherto entirely unknown form of mammalian blood infection would seem to justify its recognition as the type of a new genus. Until further resear- ches shall have revealed its exact zoological position the name Leucocytozoon canis appears to me to be an appropriate one for purposes of reference. So far as I was able to ascertain the dogs were but little, if at all, affected by the presence of the parasites. The temperature of one heavily infected dog was taken as frequently as possible during a period of ten days with the following results:12 References to literature. 1 Danilewsky. "La parasitologic comparée du sang". Charkoff, 1889. Développement des parasites malariques dans les leucocytes des oiseaux (Leucocytozoaires) Annales de l' institut Pasteur, 1890, page 427. Ueber den Polymitus malariæ, Centralblatt für Bakteriologic und Parasitenkunde 1891, Vol. IX, No. 12, page 397. 2 Sacharoff. Recherches sur les hématozoaires des oiseaux, Annales de l' institut Pasteur, 1893, No. 12, page 801. Ueber die selbständige Bewegung der Chromosomen bei Malaria- parasiten, Centralblatt für Bakteriologie und Parasitenkunde, Vol. XVIII, 1895, page 374. 3 Ziemann. " Ueber Malaria-und andere Blutparasiten," Jena 1898, page 128. The article referring to the parasites under discussion is entitled Eine neue Parasitenform beim Steinkauz[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027071.tif]
No. 14. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. ON A PARASITE FOUND IN THE WHITE CORPUSCLES OF THE BLOOD OF DOGS. BY CAPTAIN S. P. JAMES, M.B., I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75027086.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING INDIA. 1905. Price Annas 10 or 1s.
