IP/QB, 10 m. 91. b No. 23. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. THE ANATOMY AND HISTOLOGY OF TICKS. BY CAPTAIN S. R. CHRISTOPHERS, M.B., I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE. AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028493.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1906. Price Rs. 3 or 4s. 6d.
No. 23. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. THE ANATOMY AND HISTOLOGY OF TICKS. BY CAPTAIN S. R. CHRISTOPHERS, M.B., I.MS. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028505.tif] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028505.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1906.
Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. H. S. KING & CO., 65, Cornhill, & 9, Pall Mall, London. E. A. ARNOLD, 41 & 43, Maddox Street, Bond Street, London, W. CONSTABLE & CO., 16, James Street, Hay Market, London, W. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & CO., Charing Cross Road, London, W.C. BERNARD QUARITCH, 15, Piccadilly, London, W. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 & 51, Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & CO., Cambridge. GRINDLAY & CO., 54, Parliament Street, London, S.W. ON THE CONTINENT. R. FRIEDLÄNDER & SOHN, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin, N.W. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. RUDOLF HAUPT, Halle A. S., Germany. IN INDIA. THACKER, SPINK & CO., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & CO., Calcutta. S. K. LAHIRI & CO., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & CO., Calcutta. HIGGINBOTHAM & CO., Madras. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & CO., Madras. G. A. NATESAN & CO., Madras. S. MURTHY & CO., Madras. THOMPSON & CO., Madras. TEMPLE & CO., Madras. THACKER & CO., LD., Bombay. A. J. COMBRIDGE & CO., Bombay. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & CO., Bombay. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazair Kanun  Hind Press, Allahabad. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-Am Press, Lahore. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission Press, Rangoon. SUNDER PANDURANG, Bombay. A. M. & J. FERGUSON, Ceylon.
List of Numbers of Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India (New Series) published previous to the present issue. No.1. Standardisation of Calmette's anti-venomous serum with pure cobra venom: the deterioration of this serum through keeping in India, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 3 or 4d. No.2. Malaria in India, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No.3. Some observations on the poison of Russell's Viper (Daboia Russellii), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 5 or 6d. No.4. On the action of the venoms of the Cobra and of the Daboia on the red blood cor- puscles and on the blood plasma, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No.5. Specificity of anti-venomous sera, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 3 or 4d. No.6. First report on the anti-malarial operations in Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No.7. Some observations on the poison of the Banded Krait (Bungarus Fasciatus), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No.8. A preliminary report on a parasite found in patients suffering from enlargement of the spleen in India, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No.9. Second report of the anti-malarial operations at Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 10. Specificity of anti-venomous sera (second communication), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 11. On a parasite found in persons suffering from enlargement of the spleen in IndiaTHE ANATOMY AND HISTOLOGY OF TICKS. INTRODUCTION. WHILE the external characters of ticks have, especially of late, received a good deal of attention from observers, the memoirs of Neumann 23 forming, for example, a complete systematic work on the subject, it is otherwise in the case of the internal structure. This has been scarcely touched upon by most authors, and, so far as I am aware, no full or systematic account of the anatomy of the tick exists. Even isolated observations upon the subject are curiously meagre and very difficult of access. Yet the existence, almost proved, of a developmental cycle of Piroplasma in the tick, and the probability that some spirochætes of the blood of man and animals also undergo developmental changes in the tick, have made it most desirable that we should have at least a general knowledge of the tissues of these blood-suckers. The following account of the anatomy and histology of Ornithodoros savignyi (Audouin) has been written, therefore, with the hope that, by supplying the want already alluded to, it will assist future research upon the development in the tick of the spirochaætes of " tick fever " and of other spirilloses. At the same time I have endeavoured to make the work applicable to the investigation of Piroplasma by studying a species of Rhipicephalus (R. annulatus) and one of Hyalomma (H. ægyptium), examples of the Rhipicephalinæ and Ixodinæ respectively. A close study of these two species and a more general investigation of a num- ber of species of different genera, viz. Hæmaphysalis, Ixodes, and Aponomma, has demonstrated in the different scutum-bearing ticks a very close similarity in the structure and arrangement of the organs. Even the differences between the Ixodidæ and the Argasidæ, are by no means great. I have found it sufficient therefore to describe a single type only, i.e. Rhipicephalus to represent the Ixodidæ, whilst Ornithodoros has been taken as representing the Argasidæ. The two types will subserve our present purpose of elucidating the structure of ticks, and one or other type will probably be found applicable, with but few modifications, to any species investigated. In addition to observations relating to the structure of ticks, I have also added some others upon the life processes, regarding many of which there is This paper was received on September 12th, 1905. B
2 scope for investigation, and upon the embryology of ticks, a matter of obvious importance, where the production of disease involves hereditary transmission of the virus. For the opportunity of studying Ornithodoros I am entirely indebted to Dr. Oliver of the South Indian Railway, who first drew my attention to the presence of this tick in Southern India, and has kept me supplied with material.
3 I. TICKS AS TRANSMITTERS OF DISEASE. ON account of its great economic importance and also from its intrinsi interest, the reaction of ticks to the piroplasmoses of cattle has been the subject of much work, and has led to the accumulation of a large literature. Smith and Kilborne 1 demonstrated the transmission by ticks of the disease known as Texas Fever of cattle so long ago as 1893. The researches of Koch 2, Theiler 3, and others have since shown that it is possible to distinguish several, apparently distinct, piroplasmoses in cattle, all of which, it would appear, are conveyed by some or other species of tick. Donitz 4, in a résumé of the subject gives twelve species of Rhipicephalus, which are at present known, or suspected, to be concerned in the spread of these cattle diseases in various parts of the world. It will be sufficient for our present purpose to note that, from the first, it has been recognised, that transmission occurs, not by ticks, which have themselves fed on an infective animal, but by their progeny. Ticks (Rhipicephalus bursa) have been shewn by Motas 5, to convey piroplasmosis in sheep, and Bowhill 6 remarks, that it is more than probable, that piroplasmosis in horses (P. equi) is also spread in this way. Recently Lounsbury 7 has shown that ticks (Hæmaphysalis leachi), are in- strumental in the transmission of a piroplasmosis in dogs (Malignant Jaundice of the Dog). Nuttall8 confirms Lounsbury in this respect, and gives some very con- vincing results, since he succeeded in producing the disease in dogs in England, by means of ticks infected in South Africa. According to Lounsbury, the method of transmission in the case of the dog disease differs from that in Texas fever, in that neither the larvæ, nor the nymphs, from an infected mother are patho- genic. In malignant jaundice of the dog, only the adult ticks derived from an infected mother are capable of giving rise to the disease. Nuttall's results confirm this, inasmuch as his successful cases were obtained with adult ticks, whose mothers alone had fed on infected dogs. There is, therefore, at present a good deal of diversity in the evidence, as to when ticks are infective. The very definite results in the case of the dog disease seems to show clearly, that adults of the second generation may transmit infection, though as larvæ and nymphs they only harbour it. What mechanism is involved in a process apparently so complex cannot at present even be guessed at. Whilst ticks have been known for some time as carriers of the Piroplasmata, it has only recently been ascertained that they are agents in the transmission of certain spirochætæ. The first indication that this is the case was given by the researches of Marchoux and Salimbeni9, who found a tick, Argas miniatus, B 2
4 concerned in the spread of an epidemic spirillosis among domestic fowls in Brazil. This important discovery had the immediate result of focussing attention upon the subject of tick-borne disease in man, which had, up to this time, been mainly conjectural. That ticks will at times attack man has been noted by several observers. Anderson 10 and Wilson and Chowning 11 even attribute the transmission of a human piroplasmosis (P. hominis) to a species of Dermacentor, though Stiles 12 throws grave doubts upon the accuracy of these observations. It would appear that in most cases these ticks are species, whose usual host is some other animal and the only species which at present are actually known to attack man habitually, are certain ticks, which have been made known to us in the first place by travellers. Such ticks have been described as occurring in Persia, and in parts of Africa, but they are also reported from Mexico and elsewhere. Their habits resemble those of the common bed bug, and they appear to be veritable human parasites. Quite recently our knowledge of these ticks has become more precise, though it is still far from being complete. The differentiation and nomenclature of the species is in some confusion, but they all belong to the Argasidæ, and have up to the present been included in two genera, Argas and Ornithodoros. The species so far known are :5 Kirk. Daniels14 has given a description of a case seen by him at Tete and considered the evidence for such a disease convincing. Ross and Milne 15, whilst drawing attention to a so-called "Tick fever" in Uganda, state that, in eight out of eight cases, they have found spirochætes in the blood. Dutton and Todd 16, who had been working independently and in ignorance of the results of the last-mentioned observers, shortly afterwards announced that "tick fever" on the Congo was due to infection with a spirochæte resembling, but not identical with, the S. obermeieri, and that it could be transmitted to monkeys by means of the bite of infected ticks. Wellman 20 describing a case of relapsing fever in Angola, considers it probable that "tick fever" is merely infection with S. obermeieri, and doubts whether it is conveyed only by ticks. The results of Dutton and Todd, who succeeded in infecting monkeys with young ticks* of the second generation, certainly suggest that the parasite passes through some developmental cycle in the tick, in which case it is probable that the tick acts as the specific agent in its dissemination. At any rate there would appear to be no reason to doubt that such a disease as "tick fever" exists, and it can serve no useful purpose to discuss here the relationship of the spirochæte of tick fever, since at present practically nothing is known concerning human spirillosis. "Tick fever," as described by the African observers, has a somewhat ob- scure symptomatology. It has a tendency to relapse, as in the disease due to the S. obermeieri. There is extreme constitutional depression, though apparently not, as a rule, high fever. A characteristic symptom is diarrh6 Dr. Oliver, who has been, so far as I am aware, the first to note their existence. After telling me of a tick known to him as the Tiripati tick, which appeared to be of this nature, he forwarded a number of specimens, which have been identified by Mr. Pocock as 0. savignyi (Audouin). Afterwards Major Donovan, I.M.S., through one of his students was able to get many specimens from Kalahasti, whilst I have also received several hundreds sent by Dr. Oliver's Assistant, M. P. Vera- swamy Naidu, from Tiripati West, Yerfed, Gekakur, and Vendod. I have since received specimens sent by Dr. Chandra Sekar of the Madras Medical College from Tanjore and Conjeeveram. Human ticks are therefore widely distributed in the Madras Presidency and probably elsewhere in India. Dr. Oliver obtained his specimens from the gravelly floor of the third class passenger sheds, a situation in which many natives are accustomed to spend the night. I have been informed, from another source, that the ticks are also common in Tiripati town, some miles away from the railway station. Dr. Oliver informs me that "ulcers" and severe fever are popularly supposed to result from the bite of the ticks. So far, I have not succeeded in infecting monkeys by means of ticks sent from Tiripati. Most of these were large specimens, and it is possible that younger ticks are necessary for the purpose. Even though the species has not yet been found to transmit the spirochæte of tropical spirillosis, the possible significance of such a blood-sucking parasite of man cannot be overlooked, and it is very desirable that its distribution and comparative pre- valence in India should be ascertained. It is of interest that specimens of the camel tick of Aden sent to me by Captain Patton, I.M.S., are a species of Ornithodoros, probably O. savignyi. Captain Patton tells me that these ticks are very common and attack man freely.
7 II. THE BIONOMICS OF TICKS. THE life processes of ticks have been observed chiefly in the case of species infesting domestic animals. Hart30, Hassal26, Lounsbury31 and others have also made observations upon the Argasidæ. It is evident that considerable scope for investigation, especially in regard to the natural history of the latter family, still exists. The habits of the Ixodidæ and of the Argasidæ are by no means similar. The Ixodidæ.8 tubules with their products, which at this time accumulate rapidly. At this time also, ticks pass large quantities of a dead white material, which is derived from the malpighian tubules, and cannot be regarded as fæces in the true sense of the term. Coincidently with these changes ova are passed from the genital pore. In ticks at this time, the anterior portion of the body, lying between the first pair of legs, is usually depressed, so as to form a more or less cup-shaped hollow. The lateral edges are accentuated in some instances (Hyalomma ægyptium) by a thickening of the chitin. Within the hollow are situated the head and the genital orifice. As the ova are laid, the tick moves slightly back- wards, so that the eggs are deposited in a heap in front of it. After the process, which takes several days at least to complete, is over, the tick gradually shrivels up and dies. On hatching from the ovum, the young larval ticks are minute hexapod creatures. They differ considerably in general appearance from the adult tick, and are without sexual organs. The newly-hatched larvæ attach themselves, as soon as possible, to some vertebrate and suck blood. The larva then gorges itself and after a few days casts its skin. It emerges as an octopod nymph which differs from the mature form mainly in the absence of any sexual opening. The nymph, again becomes engorged, moults, and emerges as the adult tick. The habits at these times vary greatly in the case of different species. R. annulatus remains attached to the same host throughout all the changes (Nuttall8). According to Theiler3the same occurs in the case of R. decoloratus (Koch). Ixodes reduvius, according to Kossel and Weber27, leaves its host before becoming adult, as also does R. evertsi and Hyalomma ægyptium (Theiler). Finally some species leave their host at each change, namely, H. leachi (Lounsbury), R. appendiculatus, R. simus and Amblyomma hebraeum (Theiler). Donitz4 proposes to revive the genus Boophilus, founded in 1890 by Curtice, for those Rhipicephali which go through development on the same animal, without detaching themselves at any time, since he finds that such habits are accom- panied by certain anatomical characters. Thus, according to this writer, the two first mentioned species R. annulatus and R. decoloratus would be contained in the genus Boophilus. After casting the nymphal skin, pairing takes place. The males and females may at this time often be found attached close together, and the male is often covered by the more bulky female. The males, according to Lounsbury, move about and may fertilise several females. Donitz4 has observed the act of copulation in Ixodes ricinus, R. appendiculatus, and R. evertsi. The proboscis of the male, with the exception of the palps, is inserted into the vulva of the female. The legs of the male, which are used as clasping organs, lie behind the corresponding legs of the female. Donitz was unable to ascertain how the
9 seminal fluid reached the palps which, judging from their analogy with those of spiders, should be accessory organs of copulation. From anatomical considerations which are discussed later, there can be no doubt that the male passes into the vulva of the female one or more spermatophores, or sacs containing a large number of spermatozoa (see Sect. V, p. 24). The female, after finally attaching herself, steadily distends with blood. The time during which she remains on the host varies with the species. In the case of some species it may be as short as twenty-four hours. During this time the tick increases enormously in size, the body becoming enlarged out of all proportion to the rostrum and legs. If an attempt be made to remove a tick at this time, considerable force is necessary and the mouth parts are practically torn from their situation in the tissues. When fully gorged the female tick drops to the ground and shortly deposits her ova. After or during this act the female dies. The males do not become gorged in the same manner as the female and are therefore less conspicuous. The Argasidæ.10 Even during the day, but especially after dark, the ticks feed readily on monkeys. Major Donovan, I.M.S., informs me that they feed with great readi- ness on the human subject if merely placed upon the skin. Specimens fed upon monkeys become fully gorged within fifteen minutes. If removed during the process, they offer but little resistance and, indeed, often fall off at a touch. After a full meal most of the sulci, except the more important ones, are obliterated and there is a marked bulging of the ventral surface between the origin of the legs. The head is retracted, and the legs are applied to the body, whilst the animal evinces a tendency, if not disturbed, to lie without movement in the earth upon which it has fallen. A curious feature in regard to the act of feeding was first noticed by Donovan, when feeding some of the ticks in his wards. As the tick distends, fluid is seen to accumulate between the ventral surface and the skin of the host. At first this was thought to be serum which had been voided by the tick. Further investigation makes it probable that, in the main at least, the fluid is not serum, but the secretion of the large coxal glands described later. When handling the larger specimens, one occasionally sees a drop of perfectly clear fluid well up from between the coxæ of the first two pairs of legs. This secretion is very abundant, and several large drops may form in quick succession. Specimens in an unfed condition rarely exhibit this pheno- menon, but it is readily observed if the tick is allowed to feed. The fluid is alkaline to litmus, and has a marked effect in preventing the coagulation of blood. After complete engorgement the animal drops to the ground and, being wet with secretion, becomes so covered with adherent particles of soil that it may readily be overlooked. The local effect of the puncture in monkeys is considerable, and, as the tick distends, a zone of ecchymosis is seen extending around the puncture. This area often reaches the size of a shilling or more. The appearance of extreme rotundity, which is seen immediately after feeding, is lost even in a few days, but the ticks remain distended for several weeks or more. During this time the body gradually regains its flat and sulcate appearance. A short time after feeding the animal casts its skin. After moulting, the ticks are very active and run about as if searching for their prey. The habit of raising the first pair of legs in the air is particularly noticeable at this time. After moulting the ticks feed readily. Fecundation occurs at various times, and it is not uncommon to find large and fully-grown females, which already contained abundant spermatozoa in the oviducts and spermatheca, in the act of coitus with males. Not only do the males fertilise several females, but females undoubtedly receive sperm sacs from more than one male. During copulation the male, which is usually smaller than the female, hangs ventral surface upwards beneath the female by means of all four legs, which are hooked over the lateral margin of the body of
11 the latter. The legs of the male are arranged alternately with those of the female, the first pair of the male lying internal to the first pairs of the female. The act is completed by the passage of a large sperm sac into the genital orifice of the female. I have never observed the proboscis of the male within the vulva of the female. In the main the act of oviposition is carried out similarly in the Argasidæ and Ixodidæ. The female, prior to laying ova, becomes torpid and remains without moving at one spot. Ova are then passed out and remain beneath the body. The whole process takes a week or more. When a female is examined during ovipo- sition, it is seen that the head is forcibly flexed on the body, so that the two pedipalps lie on each side of the genital opening, which at this time gapes widely. Above the head is a curious protuberant mass, not seen in the female at other times. It appears to be the prolapsed duct of the cephalic gland, a structure described later. From the appearance of this body it would seem to serve some very definite purpose during oviposition. The ova of O. savignyi are comparatively few, numbering hundreds in place of thousands as in the cattle ticks. Each ovum is of large size, about one millimetre in diameter. They are globular or very slightly oval, and of a shiny black colour. In captivity they are often scattered over the surface of the gravel, but normally they are laid in a loosely adherent mass, which lies beneath the body of the female. The larvæ hatch very quickly, often in less than a week, and the change to the nymph occurs before another week has elapsed. On hatching, the larvæ are black in colour and globular in shape. The rostrum and the three pairs of short legs are soft and imperfectly developed. The larvæ lie quiescent, often upon their backs, and make no attempt whatever to crawl or to seek food. After three or four days the larval skin is cast, and the octopod nymph escapes. From the first the nymphs are very active, and at once proceed to bury themselves in the sand. They are broad and flat, of a light brown colour, and resemble exactly, in all except size and the absence of a genital opening, the adult tick. They remain alive and active for many weeks without food and exhibit great excitement when the gravel in which they lie is breathed upon or disturbed. They feed readily. Salmon and Stiles 28 describe the larvæ and nymphs of Argas miniatus and Ornithodoros megnini. In A. miniatus the larva has long and well developed legs with fully formed mouth parts. They are found feeding on the chicken. In O. megnini the larva has a very large capitellum and long legs. During the change from the larva to the nymph a quiescent stage (pupa-like stage) supervenes. The nymph differs markedly from the adult in appearance, being covered with spines which are not present in the mature tick. The larval and nymphal stages of the Argasidæ therefore present great C 2
12 differences in the case of different species and the working out of the details of these stages in O. moubata Murray and O. savignyi var. caeca (Neumann) is required.* Since in O. savignyi (Audouin), the larva does not suck blood, and indeed appears quite incapable of doing so, the transmission of disease by this species can take place only after the first moult, and by the agency of the nymph. In the Ixodidæ two changes only of the skin take place, namely, at the larval and nymphal ecdysis. In Ornithodoros changes of the skin are many, and occur as the increased growth of the tick demands. In the process of moulting the legs and the rostrum are visible beneath the outer skin, before any rupture of this occurs. Eventually the cuticle is ruptured anteriorly, and separates as a dorsal and ventral sheet. It has been stated by some observers, that in ticks, a quantity of blood is included in the shell of the ovum to act as reserve material. I have been unable to obtain any evidence that this is so, and, as neither in the ova of Ornithodoros nor in those of Rhipicephalus is blood to be detected, it is probable that an error has in some way crept in. (Sect. VI, p. 48.) * NOTE.13 III. GENERAL ZOOLOGICAL CHARACTERS OF TICKS. THE Arachnoidea, in which class ticks naturally fall, differ from the Insecta, among other important points, in the absence of antennæ, and in the posses- sion of four, instead of three, pairs of walking legs. The Arachnoidea include, besides certain marine forms, mainly extinct, a large number of terrestrial species of the following orders: Scorpiones (scorpions); Pedipalpi (scorpion-spiders, whip scorpions); Araneæ (spiders); Solifugaæ (Galeodes, Pseudoscorpiones (book- scorpions) Opiliones (harvest-men); Acarinæ (mites and ticks); the Tardigrada (water bears); and the pentastomidæ. Typical arachnids possess six pairs of appendages, the first or cheliceres, the second or pedipalpi and the third to the six which form the four pairs of walking legs. The first pair in ticks are converted into piercing mandibles, the second function as labial palps, whilst the four pairs of legs are the third to sixth append- ages respectively. In this order also the second pair of appendages (pedipalps) are united at their bases behind the mouth, whilst the third, fourth, fifth and sixth pairs are widely separated. The most recent classification of the order is that given by Lankester,21 who recognises seven sub-orders as follows:14 The order contains the families Trombidiidæ, Hydrachnidæ, Halacaridæ, Bdellidæ. Some of the Trombidiidæ (harvest-mites), attack man, and others are well known objects, notably the scarlet plush species so commonly seen in the tropics after rain. The Hydrachnidæ are water-mites. During their larval stages they may be attached to various aquatic animals. Dye 22 has noted three species attached to adult mosquitoes in Madagascar (Anopheles, Mansonia and Culex). The Halacaridæ are marine forms. Sub-order e. Astigmata. Minute species without tracheæ. The order contains the families Tyroglyphidæ, cheese-mites, etc. Sarcoptidæ, Itch-mites. Sub-order f. Vermiformia. The order contains the family : Demodicidæ. Sub-order g. Tetrapoda. The order contains the family : Eriophidæ, or water-bears. The sub-order Metastigmata includes nearly all the tracheate forms parasi- tic on terrestrial vertebrates, and is practically synonymous with the term "tick." The Gamasidæ are small forms found very commonly on beetles, but by no means confined to this order. They have free, filiform palpi and chelate mandibles. The distinction between the Ixodidæ and the Argasidæ is based upon the presence, or absence, of a dorsal schlerite or scutum. There are also other and considerable differences between the two families, which are detailed later. The Ixodidæ are sub-divided by Neumann23 into the Rhipicephalinæ and the Ixodinæ, the former division containing the genera Rhipicephalus, Hæmal- physalis and Dermacentor, whilst the latter includes the genera Ixodes, Hæma- astor, Hyalomma, Amblyomma and Aponoma. The following are the chief characters of the genera mentioned, as given by Salmon and Stiles : Rhipicephalinæ. Palpi not longer than broad, rostrum short. Anterior portion of body emarginate. Rhipicephalus.15 marked lateral conical projection. Stigmata comma-shaped or circular. Anal shields absent in the male. The first coxa not bifid. The fourth coxa in the male has a well-marked spur. Dermacentor.16 Hyalomma. 17 IV. THE EXTERNAL ANATOMY OF TICKS. THE exo-skeleton of ticks has been very thoroughly studied by a number of observers, notably by Neumann.23 It will be necessary only to point out the chief structural features and to indicate the variations which may occur in the different species. Technique.18 the slides are removed and flooded in water. The rubber bands are then removed, and the slips carefully separated under water by sliding one from the other. The now decolourised tick is quite flat, and resembles a section. The limbs and mouth parts are almost always in perfect position and well displayed. It remains only to soak the skins in water and to pass through alcohol, and oil of cloves, to balsam. If desired, the decolourised tick may be stained in weak fuchsin, a procedure which shows up certain details very clearly, e.g., the teeth of the hypostome. For exact descriptions of such structures as the cheliceres, it may be necessary to dissect up the mouth parts, after boiling in caustic, and to examine them in glycerine. For Ornithodoros, prolonged boiling may be necessary, and for the display of the mouth parts, it is very advisable to remove the dorsal integument prepara- tory to treating with the caustic. Very good specimens can often be obtained by utilising the cast skins of young and medium-sized specimens. The only difficulty is that of removing air bubbles. Heating in a large quantity of balsam before mounting will generally get rid of these. The Ixodidæ.19 The Rostrum or Capitellum.20 The Pedipalpi (Figs. 1 and 2).21 in the male of Rhipicephalus. The shape of the plates varies in different species as, for instance, in the case of R. annulatus and R. decoloratus. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028610.tif] FIG. 3. Dorsal and ventral views of a male tick (Hyalomma). The ventral shields (Fig. 3).22 The stigmata.23 The Argasidæ.24 450 µ by 400 µ. Four eyes, two on each side, are situated upon the supra- coxal fold, one above the bases of the front pair of legs, the other in the interval between the 2nd and third pairs. They consist of a circular smooth convex prominence 250 µ to 300 µ in diameter. "The integument is thick, covered with granulations, measuring in the case of large individuals 100 µ to 200 µ. They consist of irregular hemispherical prominences, pointed at their summit, and thickened in the rest of their extent, puckered and crenelated at their base. Between them narrow depressions form a polygonal network. In the large sulci of the dorsal and ventral surfaces the granulations are replaced by oval dimples 50 to 75 µ in diameter, each divided into a large number of small contiguous polygonal areas. "The rostrum powerful, more or less covered about its base in an infundi- buliform camerostome. From the base of the palps to the extremity of the gypostome, about 800 µ in large individuals. Cheliceres 2.4 mm. of which 200 µ is taken up by the digit and 900 by the shank, 1.3 mm. is occupied by the base. The internal apophysis of the digit is in the form of a simple claw, inserted a little behind the middle of the apophysis, external to the basal tooth. The upper tooth is thickened and has a short point. There is no middle apophysis apparent. The sheath is a little thickened in its anterior part, simply striated in the rest of its extent. The hypostome is short, large at the base rounded or pointed at its extremity. The teeth form three longitudinal parallel series on the outer part of the hypostome, of 12 to 13 teeth each, of which the external ones are the strongest. Internally, two or three more or less short series, commencing only in the middle, or posterior third, of the base of the hypostome end behind at the same level. They consist each of 5 to 8 small teeth. There are two spines at the base of the hypostome. The palps measure 1.36 mm. 400, 400, 250, and 310 µ, from first to last joint, respectively. The segments are cylindrical, of rapidly decreasing thickness from the first to the fourth. Upon all sides of each segment there are some thick hairs of unequal size having blunt points. Especially upon the first and not upon the last are some blunt spines. The last segment is rounded at its extremity and is bare without cirri. "Legs strong, the fourth pair one and one-half times as long as the first. Bases contiguous, decreasing in size from the first to the fourth pair. Striated on the ventral surface. Granular on the dorsal and posterior aspects, with a transversely ribbed pad at the distal extremity. The second segment broader than long in the case of the first two pairs of legs, longer than broad in the others. A little swollen with a distal pad. The third segment very thick at the distal extremity. The fourth segment short in the first three legs, twice as long in the fourth. The fifth segment carries on its dorsal surface, in the first three pairs,
25 three successive teeth, the two proximal quadrangular, the distal conical. On the fourth pair two conical teeth only. The tarsi carry on their dorsal surface three proximal teeth, a basal one upon the proximal pseudo-segment of the three last pairs, the other close to this. Both are quadrangular. The third is conical and situated near the distal extremity. Thick and rough hairs and small spines are present on all the segments, except on the bases." In addition to the above minute description, it will be necessary to draw attention only to certain points of special moment. Of the sulci, those of greatest importance, and the only ones which are not obliterated when the animal is fully gorged, are:26 V. THE INTERNAL STRUCTURE OF TICKS. Technique.27 To dissect a tick, it is taken lightly between the finger and thumb of the left hand. With a sharp scissors, very fine tangential slices are snipped from the sides. The dorsal and ventral surfaces, by this man28 Lying upon the origin of the first and second legs is the large racimose gland which functions as the salivary gland in ticks. Lifting this gland by its poste- rior extremity, which lies on the anterior ventral trachea, and tracing it forward, the short salivary duct will be apparent entering the ring-like fold of chitin, already mentioned, immediately beneath the cheliceres. Lying partly under the salivary gland, and partly internal to this structure is a large saccular organ, the coxal gland, conspicuous from the number of tracheæ which supply it. By careful examination the delicate, colourless 29 either side is a malpighian tubule. The rectum has some diverticula and terminates in the anus. The mouth.30 cavity of the tick bears a close resemblance to the salivary receptacle described and figured by Dutton25 in the mosquito. In both the tick and the mosquito the pharynx opens at an angle into the buccal cavity; in the tick on the ventral, and in the mosquito on the dorsal surface. In both there is a short cul-de-sac, lying behind the point of entry of the pharynx, and in both this direct conti- nuation backwards of the mouth receives the salivary ducts or duct. The Cheliceres.31 endoschlerite. The remaining two have a lateral position. Each edge is formed by a double fold, extending the whole length of the structure, and thus allowing a concertina-like expansion to take place, when traction is made by the surrounding muscles. The whole organ is broadly fusiform in shape, narrow at its insertion into the mouth and at its junction with the 32 33 branches divide terminally into two or more, usually three, cul-de-sacs. The posterior branch divides into two branches, which, after passing down in the neighbourhood of the stigma, curve in on to the ventral surface. The more anterior of the branches ends by the side of the common genital duct. The most posterior surrounds, on either side, the anus and ends a short distance in front of this structure. In Ornithodoros irregularities in the arrangement of the diverticula are sometimes seen. Thus, the median lateral diverticulum may be of large size and give rise to the anterior of the two ventral branches (Pl. III, fig. 7). The posterior series consist of four lateral and one median, rather short, diverticula. They all arise close together immediately beyond the atrophied connection with the rectum. The median diverticulum is unrepresented in the Ixodidæ which I have dissected. The various sulci and prominences seen on the surface of Ornithodoros have relation to these alimentary diverticula. On the dorsum, the transverse sulcus limits posteriorly the central alimentary sac. Ventrally, the region lying between the coxæ of the four pairs of legs supports upon its inner surface, with which the viscus is in actual contact, the cæcal ends of the posterior lateral diverticula. The lesser prominences correspond in nearly every case with a particular diver- ticulum and the sulci with the intervals between two diverticula. The structure of the alimentary sac.34 condition. Scattered through the fluid, however, are numbers of intensely black granules of a globular shape and measuring from 5µ to .5µ or less in diameter. In sections these granules are seen collected especially at the periphery of the newly taken in blood, but they are also present in large numbers scattered throughout the mass. The black granules are derived from a previous meal, and there is therefore a considerable degree of mixture between the new blood and the contents of the diverticula prior to the meal. If the diverticula be examined at some considerable time after digestion has been in progress, some further changes will be observed. On cutting open a diverticulum under normal saline a number of reddish granules, not unlike grains of cayenne pepper, will be seen lying in the still partially fluid blood. These appear quite loose and free from attachments and when washed out fall to the bottom of the dish or among the viscera. On examination they are seen to be globular masses composed of an aggregation of a large number of yellow, red or black granules of large size. Such bodies are especially large, and contain very coarse granules; in Rhipicephalus and Hyalomma and in ticks of these genera the contents of the tube which appear at first sight to be soft coagulum may be found to be composed almost entirely of these bodies. It was at first conjectured that the bodies were the inner swollen portions of the cells of the lining epithelium, which had taken up material and become detached. Further investigation, however, has shown that each is an entire cell containing a well- marked nucleus. If films are made of the contents of the sac twenty-four hours after a meal of blood, there will be seen, in addition to the leucocytes of the host, cells derived from the epithelium of the sac. Many of these are evidently the smaller undistended cells, previously noted as lying near to the basement membrane, now detached in the preparation of the specimen. They contain a large circular or oval nucleus, and finely reticular or partially vacuolated protoplasm. Other cells are seen of a similar nature, but larger and with portions of the protoplasm marked by vacuolated and stored with black granules. In addition to such cells, which are those of the epithelium of the sac, there are others which appear to be of a different nature. They are large circular cells with a darkly staining and not very large nucleus. Their substance is markedly vacuolated and crowded with matter which they have evidently engulfed, blood corpuscles, black granules, fragments of chromatin, etc. In sections they are seen, even in specimens made so soon as six hours after the ingestion of blood, apparently lying in isolated positions far removed from the walls of the sac. There appears reason to believe that these cells have a function to perform as wandering digestive cells. Their relation to the epithelium of the sac is not clear. As digestion advances, they become more and more replete with material
35 and increase in size until they are readily visible to the naked eye as the red granules already noted. In the early stages of digestion, cells packed with chromatin bodies, and resembling superficially macrophages containing the Leishman-Donovan parasite are seen. The nature of these cells which are seen both in Ornithodoros and in Rhipicephalus is not clear. Although a prominent part in digestion is taken by the free cells just alluded to, there can be no doubt that the epithelium lining the diverticula also takes an active part in the process. The swollen and vacuolated portion of the large projecting cells is crowded with products of digestion very much as is that of the free cells. The smaller cells lying nearer the basement membrane are also, as a rule, packed with fine black granules, though they rarely contain the large granules seen in the other cells. The intensely black and opaque globules which have been described, are highly characteristic of digestion in the tick, and undoubtedly represent the ultimate condition to which blood remaining in the gut is reduced by the digestive process. It probably represents only the portion of food not assimilable, for in Ornithodoros, ticks of which genus may be kept alive for long periods without food, the diverticula, after some weeks, contain an inky black material consisting entirely of the granules under discussion. In ticks of the Ixodidæ family the digestion is not, as a rule, carried to such an extent as to allow of the whole contents being so reduced, and the female usually dies whilst the diverticula still contain much red blood. As the contents of the diverticula are digested, the muscle fibres, which in the fully distended organ slightly indent the surface, sink more and more into the body of the viscus. The result is that the wall between the fibres becomes ballooned and forms, eventually, flask-like pockets with only a narrow opening connecting with the lumen. This tendency to the formation of pockets is seen in Rhipicephalus, but it proceeds to an extraordinary degree in Ornithodoros, in which genus the most puzzling appearances may arise both in dissection of the fresh tick, where the whole gut is seen studded with cyst-like bodies, and in sections where without a clue to the condition it is almost impossible to make out the relations of the parts. The epithelium is, as a rule, present in the pockets, though it is generally more noticeable on the ridges formed by the contracted muscular fibres. The remains of ingested blood, in the form of black granules, is present both in the pockets and in the lumen. Ticks (Ornithodoros) examined months after a meal still have the diverticula loaded with the black material. As has been previously noted, waste matter is not passed into the rectum and any remnant of food not absorbed must remain in the diverticula until the death of the tick. The method by which absorption takes place has not been ascertained. In no case have I ever detected the black pigment in cells in the tissues or body cavity. F 2
36 In the case of parasites, these could (by passing through the thin-walled diverticula) at once gain access to the body cavity, and so reach at once many important tissues, including the naked ova, with great ease. It is interesting to note that the system of diverticula is directly derived from the yelk of the ovum. In the nymph the remains of this substance can still be detected (see Section IV), lying in the canal. The salivary glands and ducts.37 The duct is surrounded by small clear cells with small nuclei. Where the duct enters the acinus, there is a large cell with finely reticular protoplasm, which appears never to contain granules, and is probably of a different character from the other cells of the acinus (Pl. IV, fig. 3 a). It has a distinct and large vescicular nucleus. The glands in the larva and nymph.38 many muscular bundles and the posterior diverticula. They then pass to the dorsum and form a number of convolutions in the posterior portions of the body. From this situation they pass forwards over the dorsum in close relation with the ovary and dorsal vessel and are abundantly supplied by the dorsal tracheal branches. Whilst passing over the dorsum they are visible during the period of oviposition as white or yellow streaks. Dipping down by the oviducts they come in close relation with the posterior lateral diverticula. They then pass outwards beneath the free end of the salivary gland, cross the anterior ventral trachea, and lie among the anterior and middle diverticula of the lateral series. After making several convolutions they end blindly, generally over the anterior lateral diverticulum. It will therefore be seen that during their course the tubules come in relation with almost every important organ in the body and drain every quarter of the body cavity. The tubes in young ticks are of an even calibre throughout, and contain small quantities only of secretion, but they are often seen, specially in aged ticks, swollen here and there so as to form sacs similar to, but smaller than, the rectum. When oviposition is complete, the tubes and the rectum may be greatly distended with the characteristic white fluid, and may, especially the latter, be evident externally as patches of lighter colour. It is possible that the appear- ance is that described as a " fungus " in these ticks by Wellman20. Structure of the malpighian tubules.39 of the posterior series of diverticula. It lies directly beneath the expansion of fat tissue and tracheal branches, which cover the viscera dorsally, and in close relation with the dilated posterior portion of the heart, and the malpighian tubules. The oviducts are long coiled tubes, very delicate where they arise from the ovary, but becoming denser and stouter as they near their termination. A short distance from the ovary there is an enlargement, the significance of which is not clear. On reaching the root of the spermatheca, the oviducts become very thick, and after forming a loop on either side, they enter the substance of this organ, and give to it the characteristic bicornuate appearance. The spermatheca is a large sac possessing thick walls. If it be opened up, transparent cystic bodies (spermatophores) will be found free in its cavity. Anteriorly the combined duct of the spermatheca and oviducts passes forwards, lying close to the ventral surface, towards the genital opening. Just before its termination, it becomes thicker and of an opaque white colour. In this portion of its extent it receives some muscular bundles from the endoster- num; upon this portion also lies the central ganglion and a plexus of tracheæ. The ovary differs in structure entirely from those of insects, and there are no follicular tubes as in this class. The ovary in Ornithodoros is essentially a fusiform thin-walled sac, continued at either end into the oviducts. The wall of the sac shows a differentiation into two areas40 staining masses, which show a varying arrangement. The nucleus, as a rule, lies close to the attached end of the cell. The ova, as they increase in size, project boldly from the surface of the ovary. After reaching a certain size, they become provided with a funicle, composed of altered cells of the ovarian wall. These cells are cubical or columnar, and merge at the base of the funicle with the ordinary, rather flat, cells of the ovarian wall. In the distended ovary, the funnel-shaped funicle is flattened out. The funicular cells then form a flat plate, upon which the now tightly bound down ovum lies. When the ova become mature, they are found lying free and unattached in the lumen of the ovary. Quite how the change is effected, by which the large ova at the end of a funicle come to be within the lumen of the ovary, is not known, as intermediate stages are not often seen. The process would appear to depend on a flattening of the funicle by the pressure and growth of the large ovum, and the eventual forcing open of the ring of cells by the same means. It is not uncommon to see, in the protoplasm of ova of a certain size, the remains of one of the huge spermatozoa, which characterise Ornithodoros. Spermatozoa are present in the ovarian sac, and it appears likely that fertilisation often takes place in this situation. The fully mature ova, as they are seen after passage into the cavity of the ovary, are globular, of a rich brown colour, and a millimetre in diameter. Their protoplasm is densely packed with droplets of an albuminoid matter and with fine granules. The nucleus is no longer visible. Attached to the ovum at this time there is a curious structure the origin of which is doubtful (Pl. IV, fig. 7). The oviducts (Pl. IV, fig. II) are lined with long columnar cells, having clear protoplasm and rather large nuclei, situated near the basal portion of the cell. The outline of these cells is irregular, and they resemble in general appearance the cells lining the 41 taken by the ovary in the female there is, in the male, a delicate, thin and trans- parent tubule, ending upon either side in a coiled duct, which much resembles the oviduct in the female. The tubule referred to is from its anatomical relations evidently the testis. It is usually, however, in much of its extent devoid of reproductive tissue. The ducts at either side are, on the other hand, packed with cells in all stages of spermatogenesis. The youngest spermatogenetic tissue is situated in the upper and narrow parts of the lateral ducts, whilst later stages are seen in their lower portions. There is not, however, a regular gradation of development from the upper to the lower parts of the tube, and tissue in an advanced stage may be situated higher than other less mature tissue. In the other parts of the duct very young spermatogenetic tissue is seen consisting of a stroma of small branched cells enclosing in its meshes from four to six comparatively large cells. These cells have deeply staining protoplasm and large conspicuous nuclei. The stroma cells, which are branched attenuated cells with small nuclei, are attached externally to the wall of the duct. Inter- nally they are arranged so as to leave a central lumen. Between the lumen and the wall, they form loculi, in which the nests of spermatogenetic cells lie. The cells lying in the loculi, which are at first comparatively small, increase in size until the cells of a single nest occupy the whole lumen of the duct. The stroma cells then disappear, whilst the spermatogenetic cells arrange themselves around the wall of the duct and become attached to it. The cells at this stage are very large and conspicuous, having deeply staining reticular protoplasm and conspicuous nuclei. They soon begin to show further changes. At the outer margin, a curious clear area appears, and rapidly increases in extent. This area appears to be due to a dropsical degeneration of this part of the cell. As the condition progresses, the protoplasm of the cell is pushed inwards, being connected with the outer wall only by strands of its sub- stance. About this time, a cap of very dark staining material appears over the inner surface of the cell, and eventually extends all around it. The nucleus which was at first conspicuous, becomes during these changes difficult to trace. It appears wholly, or in part, to pass to the surface, for a small very dense mass is now seen surrounded by a clear area lying in this position. The appearance of this nuclear mass on the surface determines the formation of one, or possibly more, buds, which, after a complicated development, become spermatozoa. The original cells, whose history we have briefly sketched, would appear to be homo- logous with the mother cells of the spermatozoa of the earth worm. An interest- ing fact is the small number, usually only one, of spermatozoa which these cells eventually give rise to. The Spermatozoa.42 they are seen as relatively immense club-shaped bodies, and are visible as minute rods to the naked eye (Pl. V, fig. 1). Examined fresh they are very transparent. They may be motionless, or may exhibit a steady gliding movement, together with marked vermicular contortions of the anterior portion of their substance. Anteriorly there is a thick bulbous portion, which occupies about one quarter of the total length of the structure. Posteriorly there is a thick tubular tail. Around the extreme anterior tip there is a lip, such as is seen in some filarial embryos. Still further back there is, embedded in the substance of the spermatozoön, a basket-like arrangement, consisting of fine longitudinal lines arranged in the form of a truncated cone (Pl. V, fig. 2). Posteriorly there can usually be seen in the tail two fine filaments. At the extremity there is a tag containing a refractile mass. This tag may be included in the tail or exposed. The spermatozoa stain with difficulty. Stained with hæmatein they show a large, somewhat lightly staining, mass in the situation of the cone of lines already described. Posteriorly there is darkly staining body, which is that already described in the tag attached to the posterior extremity. The two filaments in the tail also stain (Pl. V, fig. 1). The spermatozoa in the oviducts are free in the lumen. In the spermatheca they are for the most part included in the cyst-like spermatophores. In both these situations the majority of the spermatozoa show the characters described above. In the males the spermatozoa are rarely seen in the above condition, but are invaginated upon themselves, so that they are spindle-shaped and about half the length of the extended structure. This curious condition arises from the method in which the spermatozoa develop (Pl. V, fig. 4). The buds which arise from the mother cells, are anchored by a short stalk at the base of which is the dark granule already mentioned as probably derived wholly or in part, from the nucleus of the mother cell. At the time when the bud has fully formed, this body has passed out of the substance of the mother cell to be in the stalk as noted. The spermatoblast, which consists of finely granular protoplasm, contains a clear vescicular area of the nature of a nucleus. On the side corresponding to the unattached surface of the spermatoblast, the vescicular area gives rise to a flat prominence. At the opposite pole a conical papilla arises. The sper- matoblast and the vescicular area both elongate, whilst the latter shows some fine spiral lines. The originally flat prominence grows out so as to form a long tail. The conical outgrowth of the vescicular area becomes shaped as the head of the adult spermatozoon, and shows a lip as in this structure. Around this end the remains of the protoplasm of the spermatoblast is gathered. The head then invaginates into itself and carries with it the residual protoplasm and
43 even the nuclear mass in the stalk, which becomes eventually the dark staining body in the tag of the posterior extremity. Spermatozoa are sometimes seen which have become so invaginated and plicated as to form globular structures. The various steps in the invaginations are rather difficult to follow. The white glands of the male.44 The entosternum is densely clothed in muscles which pass in almost every direction to be inserted into the integument and viscera. Specially strong bundles pass out laterally. The visceral muscle fibres are of a curious type. They show no striations but differ widely from the unstriated muscle of mammals. The tracheal system is well developed. From the spiracle a leash of tracheæ pass inwards. The tracheæ may be divided into dorsal and ventral branches. The dorsal branches are small. An anterior dorsal branch passes inwards to help in the formation of the dorsal tracheal meshwork, a posterior dorsal branch supplies especially the malpighian tubule and ovary. The ventral branches are much larger, a very large trachea [anterior ventral] passes outside the base of the legs to the anterior portion of the body, where it joins its fellow of the opposite side above the rostrum. At its origin it gives off a large branch which passes in to supply the structures about the entosternum, and to help to form the tracheal ganglion. Just before reaching the salivary gland, it sends a large branch to supply the head and other structures. Besides supplying the salivary gland, it sends branches to the first two pairs of legs. In connection with the branches of this trachea there is a plexus, or tracheal ganglion, beneath the central nerve ganglion and lying over the genital opening. Another large trachea of the ventral series passes directly inwards to supply the muscles and viscera in the neighbourhood of the spermatheca. A third branch of smaller size supplies the muscles and other structures behind the rectum. A single nervous ganglion only is visible in dissection. This lies upon the final portion of the common genital canal, and is pierced by the 45 The fat body.46 The anterior diverticulum is not present. The lateral series arise from the anterior extremity of the central sac on either side as a single trunk from which arises an anterior middle and posterior branch. The anterior branch passes forwards to the anterior portion of the body. It is often supplemented by one or two small accessory branches (Pl. VI, fig. 4 a, b). The middle branch occupies most of the lateral regions of the body lying in front of the stigmata. The posterior branch passes down in the neighbour- hood of the stigma, and then forwards and inwards to end in front of the genital opening, almost touching the base of the rostrum, and close to, if not in contact with, its fellow of the opposite side. From the origin of two anterior common trunks the central sac passes backward as a straight cylindrical organ to the level of the anus. At this point two diverticula arise on either side. The inner pair are comparatively short and after passing backwards bend forwards on the ventral surface to reach the neighbourhood of the anus. The outer pair are longer and continue onwards almost as far as the genital opening. From the origin of the posterior series the central sac bends sharply downwards to end in the rectum. The chief differences between Ornithodoros and the present genus lie in a greater complexity of arrangement in the former and in the possession of an anterior and posterior median diverticulum, which are not represented in the latter. The existence of at least an anterior (lateral of the above description) and pos- terior series of diverticula in ticks appears clear. Whether both are homologous with the so-called "liver" of the Arachnidæ I am not at present able to say. As they both lie in the post somatic region it would rather seem that this is the case. The salivary gland in Rhipicephalus occupies a similar position and is essentially of the same nature as in the Ornithodoros. The acini are, however, much more loosely held together, and the whole organ is less compact than in this genus (Pl. VI, fig. 7). The structure of the acinus is also much simpler, and shows more clearly the real relation of the acinar cells. Sections show the acini to be lined with a single layer of large cubical cells having clear protoplasm and large vescicular nuclei. About six to eight cells are shewn in cross section (Pl. VI, fig. 8). Some of the cells are larger than others and possess granules. The malpighian tubules resemble those of Ornithodoros and have similar relations to the organs. The importance of the tubules as excretory organs is well shown by the changes which occur at the period of oviposition in Rhipice- phalus. In a recently removed gorged tick the two long tubules can be seen to have scattered throughout their length, a certain number of crystalline bodies, whilst the rectum is moderately distended. A few days after removal of the fed tick from its host, the malpighian tubules will be found much more opaque
47 from contained secretion, and they may be dilated here and there into little white sacs. As oviposition advances the tubules and rectum become extremely voluminous, and vie with the blood sacs in size. Eventually the body of the tick consists mainly of these organs. The immense amount of waste matter accumulated by the malpighian tubules in a comparatively short time points to a very rapid and active metabolism during this period. The generative organs of Rhipicephalus, though in general arrangement like those of Ornithodoros, differ somewhat in detail. The ovary is much more elongated and lies in the form of a long U in the body cavity (P1. VI, fig. 11). The oviducts are less conspicuous, except at the period of oviposition than those of Ornithodoros. The spermatheca is small and of simple construc- tion (Pl. VI, fig. 13). It forms a simple globular sac opening at the junction of the oviducts into the common genital canal. It contains several spermatophores, which can be seen with their tubes lying directed towards the opening of the sac. In Rhipicephalus there is a tubular gland, opening on either side of the opening of the spermatheca, which appears to be absent in Ornithodoros. The structure of this gland calls to mind the mucus glands found in connection with the genital apparatus of many insects. At the time of oviposition, the oviducts become enormously elongated and form convoluted masses lying upon either side of the anterior portion of the body. Ova are placed at regular and close intervals along their lumen. The spermatozoa of both Rhipicephalus and Hyalomma are similar in shape to those of Ornithodoros, but they are much smaller being only about one-third the length (Pl. VI, fig. 12). There are also some small differences in the shape and in the movements of the head. Whilst the head of the spermatozoan of Ornithodoros exhibits writhing movements those of Rhipicephalus show an extraordinary buckling up movement, alternating with a sudden and violent straightening action. Mention has been made in the case of Ornithodoros of a curious gland, the cephalic gland. A similar organ is present in Rhipicephalus and is of even larger size. It consists, however, instead of a plicated bag, of a number of long finger-like diverticula which are conspicuous both in careful dissections and in sections (Pl. VI, fig. 5, e.g.). In structure the gland is similar to that of the plicated bag of Ornithodoros. The presence of so large a gland has led me to examine ticks for the external opening. In Ornithodoros this is readily found, in the Ixodinæ it is less conspicuous but can in some cases be detected. If the rostrum of Hyalomma, which is large, be forcibly bent downwards, so as to lie upon the venter, the floor of the fold between the rostrum and the scutum will be exposed. By means of a lens it is possible to make out in this situation an
48 inverted V-shaped mark, which appears to be a pore with slightly thickened edges, but I have not succeeded in passing even the finest hair into this opening. The homology and function of this gland, which has not, so far as I am aware, been hitherto described, are obscure. Its large size would lead one to suppose that it served some important functions. In addition to this organ, there are in ticks a number of small glands undoubtedly of dermal origin lying in the fat tissue. These are small globular bodies, readily seen with a lens. They consist of two gigantic cells lying in a capsule. Fatty degeneration commences at one or more spots and may eventually convert the whole into a mass of minute oil globules (Pl. VI, fig. 2 c). These structures, which appear to be oil glands, have not been detected in Ornithodoros. In hyalomma they are particularly prominent and one may be led to suppose that they are parasitic in nature. Opening upon the surface in the neighbourhood of the rostrum there are also some simple acinar glands containing cells of remarkable histological character. Examined in the fresh state they are seen to be composed of enormous cells containing a large vescicular nucleus and a vacuole with a double contour. In section they show a reticular protoplasm and extremely large darkly staining nuclei. The border of the vacuole stains faintly with hæmatein (Pl. VI, fig. 3). These glands lie just beneath the integument of the rostrum and are rather prominent in sections through this organ (Pl. VI, fig. 10 d, g). They have not been detected in Ornithodoros. The fat body in the gorged female of the Ixodidæ is an important tissue. It is specially prominent over the dorsum and in the neighbourhood of the tracheal leashes. The main bulk of the fat body is composed of trabeculæ, formed from polygonal or cubical cells arranged in rows. In certain of these cells the protoplasm is drawn out so as to end in a fine filament, and these act as sustentacular cells by mooring the trabecula to the body wall or other structure. The trabeculæ may be of considerable length, and yet consist of a single row of cells only. In some cases more solid lobular masses are formed, but pads and lobules of the tissue are not characteristic of the tissue in ticks. The cells which compose the trabeculæ may show finely granular protoplasm, or they may be more or less replete with oil globules. As a rule the tissue is not so charged with fat as is the fat body in insects. The sustentacular cells are similar in all respects except in the possession of a filament and in their elongate shape. Attached to the trabeculæ are cells of an entirely different nature. These are large oval or round cells containing as a rule yellow droplets (Pl. VI, fig. 1 d). In addition to the typical fat body substance which is normally composed of the two varieties of cells, just mentioned, there is in ticks a good deal of cellular
49 tissue, the exact nature of which it is difficult to determine. Accompanying the branches of the tracheæ are certain free, comparatively small, oval cells. In the same situation are very large cells with deeply stained granular protoplasm. In connection with muscle there are masses of small cells, having processes somewhat like the prickle cells of the human epidermis. In among the trabeculæ of the fat body dermal glands may be encountered. H
50 VI. THE STRUCTURE OF THE OVUM AND THE EMBRYOLOGY OF TICKS. THE ovum of Ornithodoros, when laid, possesses a structureless shell very resistant to the penetration of fluids and even of alcohol. Within the shell is an extremely delicate membrane, which can sometimes be made out in dissec- tions. This membrane encloses a mass of yelk. The yelk is mainly composed of globules of a substance which in sections stains faintly and uniformly with hæmatein, and which appears to be albumenoid in nature. The globules are separated from each other by a trace of more darkly staining granular material. A few days after oviposition the upper surface of the ovum may shew, under a lens, certain pale translucent spots. These increase in size, whilst others appear, until an opalescent patch, clearly visible to the naked eye, is formed, covering about half the area of one hemisphere. Shortly afterwards the egg shell ruptures, and the globular larva emerges. Examined in detail, the changes at this time are as follows :51 arranged as in the figure (Fig. 7). The paired spots increase in size, elongate, and approach each other in the middle line. They represent the rudiments of the first three pairs of legs. Other translucent spots make their appearance, a central and two lateral spots showing the future position of the rostrum. A pair of spots. anterior to the rudiments of the first legs, and a pair posterior to the third legs, possibly represent the pedipalps and the fourth pair of legs. The last mentioned spots become obscured and are not visible in later stages. A large pale area, the rudiment of the ganglion, appears in the middle line, just behind the rostrum, and between the rudiments of the legs. Some characteristic crystals are already deposited in the region of the rectum, and give rise to a white spot. The large median spot, which forms the point of the V in the arrangement first seen, take up a more and more dorsal position, whilst another median spot rather broad and diffuse appears in front of this and apparently represents a tail, which is not sub- sequently developed. At the time of hatching the condition of the young tick is [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028700.tif] FIG. 8. I. Dorsal aspect of larva immediately after hatching. II. Ventral aspect of the same. R =rostrum; B=the remains of the large polar spot ; G =rudiment of ganglion; Re=rectum. still markedly embryonic. The rudiments of the three legs are distinct, and form conical, rather elongate, projections. The rostrum though imperfectly formed is clearly indicated. The oval rudiment of the ganglion forms a very conspicu- ous object, as does the collection of excretory crystals in the neighbourhood of the future rectum. Dorsally there is a pale area, the shrunken primitive unpaired spot. From this, as a centre, lines pass out in a radiating manner, which form constrictions of, and divide up, the yelk into lobules. The constrictions already distinctly mark out an anterior, three lateral, and two posterior areas. Ven- trally the lobules of the yelk come into distinct relation with the bases of the rudimentary legs. Thus a lobule is present on either side of the rostrum, another lies opposite the base of each of the legs, whilst behind the third leg a pair of lobules on each side curve round towards the midventral line. Posteriorly H2 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028700.tif]
52 four lobules curve round from the dorsal surface and approach the rectum and lateral lobules. Thus the yelk of the ovum represents, in a direct manner, the alimentary sacs of the adult. The remains of the pale spot on the dorsum, from which, as a centre, the constrictions of the yelk take place, represent very exactly the future position of the dilated portion of the heart. The spot is very possibly the blastopore and as such may be connected with the formation of hypoblastic tissue. In sections, the embryo is seen as a disk of very small cells, which stain intensely with hæmatein. The rudiments of the legs and rostrum are hollow outgrowths of this layer. The rudiment of the ganglion is early seen as a con- spicuous mass of cells, and in the larva this organ is relatively of immense size. Muscular fibres, lying especially around the circumference of the yelk, and passing from the dorsal to the ventral surface, are early seen, as also are the crystals of excretory matter. These lie in the yelk in the neighbourhood of the future anus. Short malpighian tubules are seen lying along the ventral surface. At the hatching of the larva the pharynx is seen as a tube, lined by a single row of cubical cells surrounded by radiating cells of a filiform shape, evidently rudimentary muscle fibres. The salivary glands are also present at this time, and consist of some darkly staining cells arranged in groups around a fine central duct. A short straight 53 cesses have not yet been followed. It is probable that the relation of the yelk to the alimentary sacs of the larva is similar to that described in Ornithodoros. A curious feature of the ova of Rhipicephalus is the frequency with which ova contain, or are filled with, what appear to be crystals of fatty acids. I have never found a trace of blood within the shells of eggs deposited by ticks of any of the genera described in this paper, and it is probable that the statements upon this subject which are to be found in several text-books require revision.
54 PAPERS REFERRED TO IN THE TEXT. 1. Smith and Kilborne. Texas Fever. Washington Bulletin No. 1, 1893. 2. Koch. Reiseberichte über Rinderpest, etc. J. Springer, Berlin. 3. Theiler. East Coast Fever. Journ. Royal Army Medical Corps, December 1904. 4. Donitz. Die Zecken des Rindes als Krankheitsüberträger. Sitzungs- berichten des Gesellschaft naturforschender Freunde. Jahrg. 1905, No. 4. 5. Motas. Sur le rôle des tiques dans le developpment de la piroplasmose ovine (Carceag). Comptes rend. soc. de biol., t. LV., pp. 501-504. 6. Bowhill. Equine piroplasmosis or biliary fever. Journal of Hygiene, Vol. IV, 10 January 1905. 7. Lounsbury. Transmission of Malignant Jaundice of the Dog. Report of the Govt. Entomologist (Cape Colony) for 1903. Reprint in Journal of Comp. Pathology and Therapeutics, June 1904, Vol. XVII, part 2. 8. Nuttall. Canine Piroplasmosis. Journal of Hygiene, Vol. IV, No. 2. April 1904. 9. Marchoux and Salimbeni. La spirillosis des poules. Annales de l'Institut Pasteur, t. XVII, p. 569-580. 10. Anderson. Spotted fever of the Rocky Mountains. Treasury Depart- ment, Pub. Health and Marine Hospital Service of the U. S. Hygienic Laboratory Bulletin No. 14. 11. Wilson and Chowning. Report on the investigation of so-called "Spotted Fever." 1st Biennial Report of the Montana State Board of Health, 15th March 1901 to 30th November 1902. 12. Stiles. Proceedings of the New York Pathological Society. 30th November 1904. Abstract in Bull. de l'Inst. Pasteur. Revues et Analyses 30th April 1905. 13. Christy. British Medical Journal, 19th September 1903. 14. Daniels. Reports to the Malaria Committee of the Royal Society 3rd Series. 15. Ross and Milne. Tick Fever. British Medical Journal, 26th Novem- ber 1904. 16. Dutton and Todd. Mode of Infection in Human Tick Fever. Com- municated by R. Ross. British Medical Journal, 4th February 1905, p. 280. 17. Browse. A case showing spirilla in the blood simulating Malaria fever. B. M. J. 11th March 1905. 18. Gibert. L'argas reflexus et son parasitisme chez l'homme. Thèse Bordeaux, 8vo, 1 plate.
55 19. Hassall. Note on the Chicken Tick, Argas Americanus. Rep. U. S. Depart. of Agric. Animal Industries, XVI, p. 496. 20. Wellman. Case of relapsing fever with remarks on its occurrence in the tropics and its relations to Tick Fever. Jour. of Trop. Medicine, 1 April 1905. 21. Lankester. Quarterly Journal of Microscopical Science, September 1904. 22. Dyé. Les parasites des culicides. Arch. Parasitologie, t. IX, 1905. 23. Neumann. Revision de la famille des Ixodidés. Mémoires Soc. Zool. France, IX, p. 1-44, X, P. 324-420, XII, p. 107-294. 24. Dutton. Report of the Malaria Expedition to Nigeria, 1900. Memoir IV. Thompson Yate's Reports. 25. Hassel. Note on the Chicken Tick (A. Americanus) Sixteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of Animal Industries U. S. Depart. of Agriculture, Washington. 26. Salmon and Stiles. Cattle Ticks of the United States. Seventeenth Annual Report of the Bureau of Animal Industries, 1900. Washington. Gov- ernment Printing Office. 27. Lounsbury. The Blue Tick (R. decoloratus. Koch). Report of the Government Entomologist for the year 1899. Cape of Good Hope. 28. Hart. The tick of the domestic fowl and fowl fever. Bulletin of Miscellaneous Information. Trinidad III, part 2, April 1899. 29. Lounsbury. Fowl Ticks. Agriculture Journal, Cape Town. Also Pig Lice, alias Tampans. Agric. Journal. Cape Town, XIV (4).
Explanation of the lettering on Plate I. Fig. 1. Lateral view of Ornithodoros savignyi (Audouin) (female). Fig. 2. Dorsal view of same (female). Fig. 3. Ventral view of same (female).
PLATE I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028724.tif] Fig. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028724.tif] Fig. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028724.tif] Fig. 3. Photogravure. Survey of India Offices , Culcutta, June 1905.
Explanation of the lettering on Plate II. Ornithodoros. Fig. 1. Lateral view of rostrum. a=mandible; b=mandibular sheath; c=dorsal aspect of head; e=hypostome. Fig. 2. 1st, 2nd, 3rd, etc. =segments of palp; e=hypostome. Fig. 3. Rostrum and neighbouring parts. Caustic potash preparation. a=mandible; b=mandibular sheath; e=hypostome; m.=mouth; o. s.=opening of salivary duct into mouth; ch.=strong bar of chitin; t.=tendons working the mandibular apophyses; s.=salivary duct; chp=chitinous expansion lying over the pumping-organ; f.=fold; g.=genital orifice; Trg.= tracheal ganglion; v. t.=Branch of the anterior ventral trachea; f. b. =position of fold at base of head; t. h.=tracheæ going to head; o. p.= opening of pharynx into mouth; p=palps. Fig. 4. d.=digit, ap.=apophyses; i. ap.=internal apophysis. Fig. 5. T. S. anterior portion of mouth. m.=mouth; ph.=commencement of pharynx; p.=palp; at.=mandibles with tendons of apophyses; ds.= dorsal surface. Fig. 6. T. S. posterior portion of mouth. aph.=anterior portion of pharynx; m.= mouth; o. s.=opening of one salivary duct. Fig. 7. Transverse section of pharynx (pumping-organ). l.=lateral plate; d.= dorsal plate. Fig. 8. chp.=chitinous expansion; s=salivary duct; ph.=pharynx. Fig. 9. Lateral view of rostrum and neighbouring parts. Semi-diagramatic. p.= palp, the basal joint forming part of the lateral border of the mouth; b=mandibular sheath; chb.=chitinous bar continued back from the base of the palp; ch.=chitinous bar; ms.=muscle working mandibles; st.= stomach; pr.=proventriculus; gl.=ganglion; PLATE II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028736.tif] Fig. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028736.tif] Fig. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028736.tif] Fig. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028736.tif] Fig. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028736.tif] Fig. 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028736.tif] Fig. 6. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028736.tif] Fig. 7. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028736.tif] Fig. 8. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028736.tif] Fig. 9. Photogravure. Survey of India. Offices, Calcutta, June, 1905.
Explanation of the lettering on Plate III. Ornithodoros. Fig. 1. ph. =termination of pharynx; PLATE III. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028748.tif] Fig. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028748.tif] Fig. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028748.tif] Fig. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028748.tif] Fig. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028748.tif] Fig. 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028748.tif] Fig. 6. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028748.tif] Fig. 7. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028748.tif] Fig. 8. Photogravure. Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, June 1905.
Explanation of the lettering on Plate IV. Ornithodoros. Fig. 1. Salivary gland of Ornithodoros. Fresh preparation. Fig. 2. Salivary acini. Fresh preparation. a=salivary cell; b=globules of secretion. Fig. 3. Salivary acini. Haematein. a=cell at entrance of duct; b =deeply staining granules of type; c=more lightly staining granules of type 2; d=coarsely reticular protoplasm. Fig. 4. Malpighian tubule. Transverse section. Haematein. a=crystals. Fig. 5. Portion of ovary. Fresh preparation. a=oviduct; b=ventral portion of the ovarian sac, devoid of ova; c=dorsal or ovigerous portion of ovarian sac; d= young ovum; e=fully mature ovum lying free in the cavity of the ovary. Fig. 6. Section of a portion of ovary. a=ovum; b=ovarian wall; c=funicle. Fig. 7. Mature ovum from cavity of ovary. Fig. 8. Ovum and funicle. Haematein. Fig. 9. Very young ovum on ovarian wall. Haematein. Fig. 10. Maturing ovum with flattened funicle. a=nucleus of ovum; b=the remains of a spermatozoan; c.= cells of the funicle; d=ovarian wall. Fig. 11. Section of portion of wall of oviduct. a= internal layer of columnar cells; b= muscular tissue; c=layer of polygonal cells. Fig. 12. Spores of a "nosema" from ovum.
PLATE IV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028760.tif] Fig. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028760.tif] Fig. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028760.tif] Fig. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028760.tif] Fig. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028760.tif] Fig. 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028760.tif] Fig. 6. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028760.tif] Fig. 7. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028760.tif] Fig. 8. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028760.tif] Fig. 9. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028760.tif] Fig. 10. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028760.tif] Fig. 11. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028760.tif] Fig. 12. Photogravure. Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, June, 1905.
Explanation of the lettering on Plate V. Ornithodoros. Fig. 1. Spermatozoan of ornithodoros. Haematein. Fig. 2. Head of spermatozoan. Fresh preparation. Fig. 3. Head of spermatozoan exhibiting characteristic movements. Fig. 4. Spermatozoan as seen in male. Fig. 5. Spermatophore from spermatheca of female. a=spermatozoa; b=cyst-like capsule. Fig. 6. Male reproductive organs. Fig. 7. Section of undeveloped testis. Haematein. a=nests of mother cells of spermatozoa; b=stroma cells; c=lumen. Fig. 8. Section of developing spermatozoa. Haematein. a= Fully-grown mother cell of spermatozoan lying with the remaining cells of the nest in the enlarged loculus; b= mother cell immediately prior to budding of the spermatoblasts; c= passage of altered nuclear matter to surface of cell; d=basal portion of swollen mother cell; e=developing spermatoblast; f=nuclear body derived from mother cell. Figs. 9-14. Development of spermatozoan from spermatoblast. Fresh preparations. Figs. 15 and 16. ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, Haematein. Fig. 17. Section of "white gland." Haematein. a = portion with unaltered epithelium; b=portion exhibiting altered epithelium; c=terminal portion of vas deferens. Fig. 18. Epithelium from the portion " a " in figure 17. Fig. 19. Epithelium from the portion " b" in figure 17. Fig. 20. Spermatophore containing the bodies shown in figure 21. Fig. 21. Curious bodies sometimes seen in spermatophores.
PLATE V. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028772.tif] Fig. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028772.tif] Fig. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028772.tif] Fig. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028772.tif] Fig. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028772.tif] Fig. 5 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028772.tif] Fig. 6. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028772.tif] Fig. 7. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028772.tif] Fig. 8. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028772.tif] Fig. 9. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028772.tif] Fig. 10. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028772.tif] Fig. 11. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028772.tif] Fig. 12. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028772.tif] Fig. 13. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028772.tif] Fig. 14. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028772.tif] Fig. 15. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028772.tif] Fig. 16. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028772.tif] Fig. 17. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028772.tif] Fig. 18. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028772.tif] Fig. 19. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028772.tif] Fig. 20. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028772.tif] Fig. 21. Photogravure. Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, June, 1905.
Explanation of the lettering on Plate VI. Rhipicephalus and Hyalomma. Fig. 1. Fat body. Fresh preparation. a=sustentacular cell ;b=fat body cell with little or no fat in its substance; c=fat body cell containing fat droplets; d= cell of unknown nature, the adventitious cells of the fat body ; e=large granular cells. Fig. 2. Section through cuticle and interstitial tissue. a=oval cells lying near trachea; b =large darkly staining cells; c=dermal gland (Hyalomma). Fig. 3. Dermal gland occurring about the rostrum. (Rhipicephalus) v.=vacuole with double outline. Fig. 4. Fully gorged female rhipicephalus. g. o.=genital orifice; a. =anus; r.= rostrum. Fig. 5. Alimentary canal of rhipicephalus. a.s.=alimentary sac; c. l. t.=common lateral trunk; l=anterior middle and posterior lateral diverticula; p= posterior diverticula ; a. l. =small accessory lateral diverticula ; p. l. d.= position of post. lat. diverticulum on ventral surface; r.=rectum ; s. gl.=salivary gland ; c. g.=cephalic gland. Fig. 6. Epithelium of alimentary sac of rhipicephalus. p. c.=large projecting cell ; b. c. =basal cell. Fig. 7. Portion of salivary gland showing loose arrangement of acini (Rhipicephalus). Fig. 8. Single acinus of salivary gland of rhipicephalus. Haematein. Fig. 9. Ditto. Fresh preparation in hypotonic saline solution. Fig. 10. Section through rostrum of rhipicephalus. m=cheliceris ;p. o.=pumping- organ; s. d.=salivary duct; d. g.=dermal glands. Fig. 11. Female reproductive organs of rhipicephalus. o.=ovary; ov.=oviduct ; sp.=spermatheca. Fig. 12. Spermatozoa of rhipicephalus. Fig. 13. Spermatheca of rhipicephalus. sp=spermatheca; ov.=oviduct; t. gl.= tibular gland; sph.PLATE VI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028784.tif] PhotoNo. 23. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. THE ANATOMY AND HISTOLOGY OF TICKS. BY CAPTAIN S. R. CHRISTOPHERS, M.B., I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75028802.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1906. Price Rs. 3 or 4s. 6d.
