IP/QB.10 m. 91. b (NEW SERIES) No. 42. SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PART I. The Cultivation of the Bacillus of Leprosy and the Treatment of cases by means of a Vaccine prepared from the Cultivations BY MAJOR, E. R. ROST, I. M. S. PART II. The Cultivation of the Leprosy Bacillus BY CAPTAIN T. S. B. WILLIAMS, M. B., I. M. S. (EDITED BY THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL SERVICE.) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75034375.tif] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1911 Price As. 8 or 9d.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75034399.tif] 3943096
(NEW SERIES) No. 42. SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PART I. The Cultivation of the Bacillus of Leprosy and the Treatment of cases by means of a Vaccine prepared from the Cultivations BY MAJOR E. R. ROST, I. M. S. PART II. The Cultivation of the Leprosy Bacillus BY CAPTAIN T. S. B. WILLIAMS, M. B., I. M. S. (EDITED BY THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL SERVICE.) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75034405.tif] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1911 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75034405.tif] B
Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. Mr. E. A. ARNOLD, 41 and 43, Maddox Street, Bond Street, London, W. Messrs. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, W. C. Messrs. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., 43, Gerrard Street, Soho, London, W. Mr. BERNARD QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, W. Messrs. P. S. KING & SON, 2 and 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster. Messrs. H. S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, and 9, Pall Mall, London. Messrs. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, London, S.W. Mr. T. FISHER UNWIN, 1, ADELPHI TERRACE, London, W. C. Messrs. W. TRACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E. C. Mr. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 51, Broad Street, Oxford. Messrs. DEIGHTON BELL & Co., Cambridge. Messrs. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W. C. ON THE CONTINENT. Mr. RUDOLF HAUPT, 1, Dorrienstrasse, Leipzig, Germany. Mr. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ Leipzig. Mr. KARL HIERSEMANN Messrs. R. FRIEDLANDER & SOHN, Berlin, W. N., Carlstrasse, 11. Mr. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. Mr. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. IN INDIA. Messrs. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. Messrs. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. Messrs. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. Messrs. S. K. LAHRI & Co., Calcutta. Messrs. B. BANERJEE & Co., Calcutta. Messrs. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras. Messrs. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & Co., Madras. Messrs. G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. Messrs. S. MURTHY & Co., Madras. Messrs. THOMPSON & Co., Madras. Messrs. TEMPLE & Co., Madras. Messrs. COMBRIDGE & Co., Madras. Messrs. P. R. RAMA IYER & Co., Madras. Messrs. A. R. PILLAI & Co., Trivandrum. Messrs. THACKER & Co., LD., Bombay. Messrs. A. J. COMBRIDGE & Co., Bombay. Messrs. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & Co., Bombay. Mrs. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay. Mr. SUNDER PANDURANG, Bombay. Messrs. GOPAL NARAYAN & Co., Bombay. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission Press, Rangoon. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-Am Press, Lahore and Calcutta. Mr. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazair Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. Messrs. A. CHAND & Co., Punjab. Messrs. A. M. & J. FERGUSON, Ceylon. Babu S. C. TALUKDAR, Proprietor, Students and Company, Cooch Behar.
List of numbers of Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India (New Series) published previous to the present issue. No. 1. Standardisation of Calmette's Anti-Venomous Serum with Pure Cobra Venom: the Deterioration of this Serum through keeping in India, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 2. Malaria in India, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No. 3. Some Observations on the Poison of Russell's Viper (Daboia Russellii), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M. B. Price As. 5 or 6d. No. 4. On the Action of the Venoms of the Cobra and of the Daboia on the ReD Blood corpuscles and on the blood plasma, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 5. Specificity of Anti-Venomous Sera, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price. As. 3 or 4d. No. 6. First Report on the Anti-Malarial Operations in Mian Mir, 19012 No. 21. On the Standardisation of Anti-Typhoid Vaccine, by Captain George Lamb, M.D., I.M.S. (Director, Pasteur Institute of India), and Captain W. B. C. Forster, M. B., D. P. H., I.M.S. Price As. 6 or 7d. No. 22. Mediterranean Fever in India: Isolation of the Micrococcus Melitensis, by Captain George Lamb, M.D., I.M.S., and Assistant Surgeon M. Kesava Pai, M. B., C.M. (Madras). Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 23. The Anatomy and Histology of Ticks, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M. B., I.M.S. Price Rs. 3 or 4s. 6d. No. 24. On a Parasite found in the White Corpuscles of the blood of Palm Squirrels, by Captain W. S. Patton, M. B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 25. On the importance of Larval Characters in the Classification of Mosquitoes, by Captain S.R. Christophers, M. B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 26. Leucocytozoon Canis, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M. B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 27. Preliminary Report on the Development of the Leishman-Donovan Body in the Bed Bug, by Captain W. S. Patton, M. B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 28. The Sexual Cycle of Leucocytozoon Canis in the Tick, by Captain S.R. Christophers, M. B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 29. Piroplasma Canis and its Cycle in the Tick, by Captain, S.R. Christophers, M. B., I.M.S. Price Rs. 2 or 3s. No. 30. The Theory and Practice of Anti-Rabic Immunisation, by Captain W. F. Harvey, M. B., I .M. S., and Captain Anderson McKendrich, M. B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 31. The Development of the Leishman-Donovan Parasite in Cimex Rotundatus-Second Report, by Captain, W. S. Patton, M. B., I. M. S., Price Re. 1 or 1s. 6d. No. 32. An Enquiry on Enteric Fever in India carried out at the Central Research Institute, Kasauli, under the direction of Lieutenant-Colonel D. Semple, M.D., and Captain E. D. W. Greig, M.D. Price Re. 1-2 or 1s. 9d. No. 33. The Production of Alkali in Liquid Media by the Bacillus Pestis, by Lieutenant- Colonel W. B. Bannerman, M.D., B.Sc., I.M.S. Price As. 5 or 6d. No. 34. Standards of the Constituents of the Urine and Blood and the bearing of the Metabolism of Bengalis on the Problems of Nutrition, by Captain D. McCay, M. B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 35. Black-water Fever, by Captain S.R. Christophers, M. B., I .M. S., and Dr. C. A. Bentley. No. 36. Observations on Rabies: with special reference to an Atrophic form of the disease occurring in animals, by Major G. Lamb, M. D., I. M. S., and Captain A. G. McKendrick, M. B., I. M. S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 37. Investigations on Bengal Jail Dietaries with some Observations on the Influence of Dietary on the Physical Development and Well-being of the People of Bengal, by Captain D. McCay, M .B., B. Ch., B .A. O., I. M. S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 38. Preliminary Report on the Killing of Rats and Rat Fleas by Hydrocyanic Acid Gas, by Captain W. D. H. Stevenson, M. B., I. M. S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 39. The Applicability to Medico-Legal Practice in India of the biochemical tests for the origin of blood-stains, by Lieutenant-Colonel W. D. Sutherland, M.D., I.M.S. No. 40. The Sun as a Flea-killing Agent, by Captain J. Cunningham, M.D., I.M.S. No. 41. Quinine and its salts: their Solubility and Absorbability, by Captain A. C. MacGilchrist, M.A., M.D., M. R. C. P., I.M.S. Price As. 9 or 10d. Published by and on sale at the Office of the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. Copies are also available from all Agents for the sale of Government publications.
INTRODUCTION. In 1904 Captain Rost announced that he had succeeded in cultivating the Bacillus Lepr2 2. Before doing so, however, I would invite attention to a series of papers published in the "Lancet" of 26th February and 5th and 19th March of this year on the subject of "The Streptotrichoses and Tuberculosis." These form the Milroy lectures delivered before the Royal College of Physicians of London this year by Alexander G. R. Foulerton, F.R.C.S. The publication of these lectures occurred at a very opportune moment, for they focus in a convenient manner our present knowledge of the streptotriceæ. From these lectures we learn that in all probability Koch's tubercle "bacillus" is not a bacillus at all, but a streptothrix and that many other diseases having an affinity to tuberculosis are certainly caused by streptotriceæ. In the first Milroy lecture it is laid down that the streptotriceæ belong to a higher group of organisms than the bacilli ( fission fungi) and should be included with the hyphomycetes or mould fungi. Their life-history is as follows:3 On attempting to cultivate one often finds the growth to be very slow and scanty on solid media, the result being "small, whitish, dry-looking, heaped-up colonies after six or seven days' incubation or not until after a longer period." In peptone broth "after a few days' incubation small speck-like colonies appear, either cohering in a filmy mass at the bottom of the medium or adher- ing, isolated, to the sides of the tube." The spore formation of mould-fungi differs from that of bacilli or yeast in the following respects. The bacilli produce single endogenous spores, One bacillus producing one spore. The yeasts produce multiple endogenous spores, two, three or four. The mould-fungi possess special spore-bearing organs of various types, and do not produce spores in every part of the organism. Further, these spores of the mould-fungi do not stain by Moeller's method, as bacillary spores do, but, on the contrary, they stain deeply by Gram's method. They are much more easily affected by a high temperature than bacillary spores, a rise of 15°C. above the thermal death-point of the mycelial form being sufficient to kill them. It is probable, Foulerton says, that in the parasitic condition of life, the development of spherical spores may not take place, but that the bacillary bodies into which the mycelium breaks up under these conditions, may act like spores as the transporters of the disease from one part of the body to another. This would account for the localised manifestation in many cases of tubercular leprosy and the sudden exacerbations that take place accompanied by fever. It is believed that these bacillary bodies are "probably spore-bodies of some kind" and capable of reproducing themselves directly. Additional biological characteristics of the streptotriceæ are, pigment- formation, efflorescence on the surface of solid media, and a heaped-up appear- ance. Many develop acid-fast properties. In peptone broth they often grow in filmy masses at the bottom of the tubes. 3. Having obtained a general view of the life-history of the streptotriceæ, we may now turn to the organisms isolated. by Major Rost and Captain Williams. In accordance with your instructions Major Rost supplied me with cultures of the organism separated by him from the nodules of lepers in Rangoon. These have been carefully examined in this Laboratory by Captain Williams and myself. Further, all the work done by Captain Williams in the cultivation of an organism from lepers at Matunga, has been done in my room, under my direct supervision. I am, therefore, in a position to discuss the reports submitted by Major Rost and Captain Williams in the light of the above experience. It appears certain that by using Major Rost's salt-free medium it is possible to obtain a growth from a certain proportion of
4 leper nodules. Both in our results obtained here and also in those obtained by Major Rost in Rangoon, the growth appears in about three days, at the bottom of the tube. Smears made from the growth at the bottom of the tube show acid-fast bacilli, similar morphologically to those seen in smears made from leprous nodules. Whether these are the actual bacilli of leprosy or not, it is a noteworthy fact that no growth is obtained under similar conditions in the controls on ordinary media. The organism is highly pleomorphic and likewise varies in its staining reactions, all stages between complete acid-fast- ness and the reverse being seen in a single preparation. These variations in form and staining reaction are quite compatible with the life-history of the streptotriceæ as given by Foulerton, and with its being a pure cultivation. The above remarks have reference especially to the bacillary form of growth as isolated in Rangoon and here. As will be seen by a reference to Williams' paper a very definite streptothrix has been grown by him in ordinary media from two cases in Persia and Bombay. In our examination of Rost's organism, we also convinced ourselves that one species at least produced at one stage a definite mycelial growth and even those, where a mycelial stage has not been seen, are certainly streptotriceæ. Further Deycke has grown a streptothrix from cases of leprosy which is very similar to that produced by Williams. A consideration of all these points together with the evidence produced in Williams' paper as to the streptothrix and bacillary form being but phases of the same organism, gives one ground for seriously considering anew the whole question of leprosy, and it seems to me that there is now a considerable amount of weight to be attached to the view that leprosy is very probably after all a streptothrix disease. 4. From a study of the papers of Rost and Williams and from a knowledge of the work done in this Laboratory, I am of opinion that the organisms found by Rost and Williams are probably identical. It will be seen from a perusal of their papers that in Rost's special medium their results are similar and the ultimate result has been the production of acid-fast organisms by both which are similar in their pleomorphism, acid-fastness, being streptotriceæ, and in their power to produce marked reaction in lepers. The only difference at present is that Williams' growth is sticky, while Rost's growth is dry. From Major Rost's paper, it would seem that his growth was originally sticky, but has altered by prolonged sub-culture.* It is also very interesting to note that Williams has grown several times a streptothrix which is very like that of Deycke, as recorded in his published results, and its growth on milk is * Since the above was written, Captain Williams has been to Rangoon and has demonstrated that, under certain conditions, Major Rost's organism loses its wrinkled character and becomes sticky; whilst the organism isolated by himself is capable of growing as a wrinkled membrane.5 strikingly similar to the growth of Professor Deycke's organism. Williams is of opinion, and. I am somewhat inclined to agree with him, that his work links up that of Deycke and Major Rost, and that his two organisms are, really, one and the same organism, which has been very decidedly altered by its environment, and by the original medium in which it was grown. The details given in Williams' paper, and the fact that both his organisms produce an apparently specific reaction in lepers, such as is produced by Deycke's and Rost's organisms, would seem to be strong evidence in favour of this view. 5. In conclusion, I would like shortly to discuss the possibilities of success- ful treatment of lepers by a vaccine from these organisms. Major Rost describes in his paper very satisfactory results, some of which, I understand, you have yourself seen when you were in Rangoon. We have here for the last few months been using a vaccine made first of all from the streptothrix grown on milk, and later from the bacillary form of the organism grown from Rost's medium. Our results are most encouraging and, in our opinion, tend to confirm Major Rost's work. C
37 PART I. THE CULTIVATION OF THE BACILLUS OF LEPROSY AND THE TREATMENT OF CASES BY MEANS OF A VACCINE PREPARED FROM THE CULTIVATIONS. BY MAJOR E. R. ROST, I.M.S. AFTER research into the Bacteriology of Leprosy extending over a period of seven years, I succeeded in 1909, with the assistance of my Clinical Assistant, Mr. Bansi Lal, in isolating from three cases of Leprosy an acid-fast bacillus, which I was able to subculture in pure growths through successive generations, and which possessed certain peculiar characteristics, resemblnig morphologically the bacillus of Leprosy. The first case from which I succeeded in isolating the bacillus was one of long standing nodular Leprosy in a Chinaman, who periodically developed large blisters, which appeared spontaneously on anæsthetic areas without being caused by burns or irritants. Microscopic examination of the blister fluid showed in some instances a few acid-fast bacteria. The blister fluid drawn off into pipettes and incubated at room temperature for five days showed a marked increase in the number of acid-fast bacteria, and controls taken from the pipettes in ordinary media remained sterile. The pipettes showed white flakes, and, on microscopic examination, acid-fast bacteria were found massed together in parallel arrangement. The medium used consisted of 250 c.c. of distilled volatile alkaloid of rotten fish, 250 c.c. of weak Lemco broth without salt or peptone and 50 c.c. of milk and was prepared in the following way :8 Steam generated in the autoclave passes over the heated fish (which has a little caustic soda added in order to bring out the volatile alkaloids more readily) and passes out of the autoclave into the condenser and is collected in a flask. The medium is then mixed with previously prepared and autoclaved. Lemco broth and milk in the above proportions, placed in tubes and auto- claved. The medium was controlled on ordinary agar and broth at the time of the experiments. Tubes of this medium were inoculated from the blister fluid which had been previously left in pipettes at room temperature for five days. These pipettes now contained large masses of acid-fast bacteria, resembling morphologically that of Leprosy, whereas previously only a few were found in the blister fluid. Three days later a slight stringy growth was visible at the bottom of the tube and films showed a fairly large number of acid-fast bacteria, massed to- gether in parallel arrangement. It was then found that a feebly acid-fast bacillus grew on nutrient agar and broth (without salt or peptone) in subcultures, and that the acid-fastness of the bacillus was regained by growing in milk, and that the degree of acid- fastness could be varied according to the fatty nature of the medium. Plating experiments were then carried out and in these five loopfuls of the culture were stirred in the nutrient agar (without salt or peptone) cooled down to 40°C. Three loopfuls were taken from this tube and removed to a second tube of agar medium which was poured into a Petri dish. Three days later the plates showed discrete colonies about the size of a pin's head, opaque, orange-red, raised with the centre, humped and moist to the naked eye. Examined with a lens these colonies were circular, opaque, warm orange- red coloured, with regular unbroken margins. One of these colonies was inoculated into a tube of the primary medium and this formed the basis of experiments with this first cultivation. By continuing the sub-culture and by occasional plating a slight variation was obtained; two slightly differing cultures being secured, which by successive subculture again became identical in appearance. The second successful isolation, producing a bacillus the cultural charac- teristics of which are practically identical with the first and differ very slightly only in rate of growth and moisture of colonies, was obtained from a European* suffering from nodular Leprosy. The fluid exudation from a cut nodule was used in this case, inoculation into the special medium being direct. Incu- bation at room temperature 30°C. in this case took longer than in the former case, a visible growth appearing after three weeks. * This case is now practically cured by the use of a vaccine prepared from these cultivations.
9 This appeared as a slightly yellowish red growth on the surface of the medium. Subculture on ordinary media without fat showed the same loss of acid-fastness, which could be varied according to the fatty nature of the medium. This culture appeared to grow more slowly and to be slightly more sticky than the first isolation. It has gradually altered in characteristics, and, after 18 months of successive subculture has become more like the culture first isolated. In two other cases the same organism was isolated; but the cultures being found on plating to be impure, these cultivations were discontinued. In November 1909, by adopting a medium similar to that used with the first pure culture, a growth was obtained from a nodular case of Leprosy. This was a Burman lad, aged 18, Kone Sein, who showed on his phalanges and face, a number of hard spotty nodules not larger than a pea, pyramidal shaped, glazed and shining. The method employed was to reflect the skin with aseptic precautions, over one of these recent nodules and squeeze out the fluid; inoculate it into the special medium and control also in ordinary media. The tubes were incubated at 30ºC. The controls remained sterile. The special media tubes showed a number of acid-fast clumps similar to those found in the leper juice after fourteen days. Later on, these acid-fast masses began to diminish and after the third week required a prolonged search to find them. During the fourth week a steady increase was observed in these acid-fast clumps and several acid-fast bacilli were found to occur singly as though the organism was multiplying, but it was only at the end of the fourth week that the whole culture medium was observed to be impregnated with acid-fast bacteria. After the fifth week a thin pellicle was found on the surface, this con- sisted of small, greyish, coarse granular flakes of a crumbling consistence. From the original culture, plates were inoculated and in these the colonies appeared after a week and showed similar characteristics to those previously isolated, with the exception that the rate of growth was in the first instance slower, the colour a lighter yellow and the acid-fastness constant whether grown on fatty media or not: otherwise the subcultures from this case, in appearance and peculiarities of growth as detailed below, are identical with the other previously isolated cultures. First and second successful Isolation O. L. O. and T. L. O.10 First and second successful Isolation O. L. O. and T. L. O.11 13. Films are best prepared by filtering a culture through filter paper; thus removing fatty masses and better specimens are thus obtained. 14. The characters of the cultures have slightly changed over a period of eighteen months, the different isolations from the three different cases tending to become more exactly alike, except the Kone Sein culture which does not vary its acid-fastness. 15. The following test media showed in each case:12 Acid-fast bacilli in parallel arrangement were found situated inside cells in smears prepared from the pus. The injections were then stopped. In February 1910, the nodules on the superciliary ridges were examined microscopically, the monkey being chloroformed and a nodule being excised partly for the purpose of obtaining a cultivation and partly for microscopic examination. The microscopic smears from this nodule showed numerous masses of acid-fast bacillary groups in parallel arrangements, resembling exactly specimens obtained from the human subject. Cultivation gave negative results. The monkey being a small animal the nodular lesions were of course small and photography failed to reproduce what was more easily visible to the naked eye. The superciliary ridges were raised and thickened and had a glisten- ing red appearance. The nodules on the cheeks appeared to subside in February as did the nodules on the superciliary ridge, but the fever continued, the monkey gradually wasting away. Examination of the blood showed nothing. In April 1910, the monkey died apparently from inanition, and post- mortem examination revealed no abnormality of the internal organs. Smears taken from the sub-nodular area of the eye-brows showed some small groups of acid-fast bacteria in parallel arrangement resembling Lepra bacilli. Cultivation from these failed, owing to contamination by skin bacteria, although great care was taken to sterilize the superficial skin. Eight other monkeys have been injected with cultures of varying days' growth, but so far no clinical sign of the disease has been observed. The Preparation of a Vaccine.13 In May 1910 the vaccine was prepared from the Kone Sein culture, and since this date this culture has been used in the preparation of the vaccine. Several modifications of preparation of this vaccine were tried previous to this, but the above mentioned method appeared to produce a vaccine having a greater clinical value. Lately, the fatty substance of the bacteria has been extracted by shaking in ether over a period of several weeks, occasionally drawing off the ether and adding fresh, filtering and centrifugalizing the deposit and evaporating down the ether extract until it became of a sticky subsistence, then adding olive oil to a weighed amount to make up as far as possible a percentage strength. The therapeutic use of this has been, as far as one can tell, rather more useful, though at present it is too early to compare the two methods clinically. The Clinical Use of the Vaccine.15 PART II. THE CULTIVATION OF THE LEPROSY BACILLUS. BY CAPTAIN T. S. B. WILLIAMS, M.B., I.M.S. During the last six years I have devoted special attention to the leprosy problem, and this paper contains a résumé of my results up to the present time. Prior to the beginning of 1909 my results were of an indefinite nature, and although useful to me, in helping me to judge the value of my later work, they would be out of place in this paper. Up to the end of 1908 I had regarded the Bacillus of Leprosy as a true fission fungus, and had looked for it always as an acid-fast bacillus. My own and other people's negative results, combined at this time to cause in my mind a reconsideration of the problem. As a result of my work since the beginning of 1909, I have grown from five cases of leprosy, under circum- stances which to my mind preclude contamination, two apparently different organisms. Two cases were in Persia and three in Bombay. Later work has tended to the belief that they are really the same organism, altered by environ- ment. Shortly, I may say that in ordinary broth, I have grown a streptothrix, somewhat similar to that described by Professor Deycke, while in other special media, I have grown a "bacillus" very similar to that grown by Major Rost in Rangoon. (A) BACTERIOLOGICAL RESULTS. In all our experiments, it goes without saying, that every attempt has been made to avoid contamination, and ordinary media have always been used to control the technique employed, both at the initial transference of material and subsequently. As stated above, I have grown two types of organisms: (a) a streptothrix, and (b) a "bacillus", which is almost certainly the bacillary form of a streptothrix. It will be more convenient to describe them separately. (a) 16 I.17 at the bottom of the tube. One removed for examination showed it to be similar microscopically to those described above. This growth, while similar microscopically to those grown in ordinary broth, and Potato broth, differed for a long time, in that it would only grow with the greatest difficulty. After much perseverance however it has gradually approximated culturally to the growth obtained in ordinary broth and Potato broth. While growing with great difficulty on agar media, it was of an orange-red tint. As its growth became more exuberant it has gradually lost this colouring, and now it shows the whitish yellow of the other growths, sub-cultured from the broth strepto- triceæ. III.18 above, there are reasons for considering it as an altered form of the previously mentioned streptothrix. For this series of experiments, I used either Major Rost's original medium, or an imitation prepared for me at Parel Laboratory. The medium prepared at Parel was as follows:19 media which showed the best growth, it was noticed that, in addition to the acid-fast organisms, a non-acid-fast organism, similar in shape to the acid-fasts, began to appear. This non-acid-fast form is essentially a " diphtheroid " organism, and, whenever growth has taken a definite move forward, this non- acid-fast diphtheroid organism has appeared. This non-acid-fast form appeared too frequently in the liquid cultures for us to consider it as an accidental contamination, and when we succeeded in obtaining a growth on solid media we were confirmed in this opinion. After 2½ months' incubation in Rost's medium from some of the strongest growths, we obtained with difficulty a growth on Lemco glucose agar (without the addition of NaCl or peptone). After 8-10 days' incubation on the agar, it was thought that there were signs of some growth; this was subcultured and a more definite growth was obtained. The growth was very weak and consisted of small separate dew drop colonies. Microscopically these consisted of the same acid-fast and non-acid-fast bacilli as were seen in the liquid culture.* By subsequent sub-culture in solid and liquid media the growth has been gradually strengthened until now we have obtained on solid media a strong growth of a yellow sticky character, which is similar to Major Rost's most typical growth in its strong acid-fastness; its pleomorphism, its yellow colour on solid media and in its power of producing a severe reaction in leper patients on whom it was tried. It differs in one important point20 manner in which the streptothrix happens to be dividing at the moment. One may see acid-fast bacilli or acid-fast cocci, and in the groundwork one can make out at times parts of the non-acid fast streptothrix forms, which are the basis of the whole growth and in which the acid-fast forms develop. (c) Are the two organisms identical ?21 To meet criticism of our work, based on this assumption, it will be we to clear the ground at once, and to point out that, although we find the lepra organism parasitically as an acid-fast bacillus, it is not therefore necessarily a fission fungus. It is, indeed, quite possible that it belongs to the mould fungi It is impossible for me here to go into a general discussion of the Streptotriceæ and their varying forms. I would especially refer those interested to the Milroy lectures of 1910 by Foulerton. It will be seen from a study of these most interesting lectures that it is quite possible for a disease to be caused by a streptothrix, and yet the obvious parasitic form found may be always a bacillus, or some of her broken down streptothrix form. I would also refer to the following remarks of Unna as showing that he evidently has for long been considering possibilities apart from the acid- fast bacillus. In a paper printed in the " Transactions of the Bombay Medical Congress," 1909, he says, " as a matter of fact the leprosy organism includes a large and varied series of forms, which not only include the known bacilli and globi, but also others, different in morphology and staining reactions, and transitional forms, which are inseparable from the growth of the leprosy bacilli in the skin. I will not enter further into the peculiar morphological shapes, coccus-like granules and granular threads (coccothrix) which were found in my laboratory by Lutz (1885) and studied more closely by me and my pupil Spiegel, etc., etc." It is also interesting to note that Hansen himself in his early attempts to grow the organism, succeeded in getting a mycelial growth, which, however, later he admitted had nothing to do with the lepra organism. It is possible that with a knowledge of m ore recent work he may be inclined to change his opinion. Again, is the leprosy bacillus always acid-fast? I quote from Allbutt and Rolleston's " System of Medicine " to show that it is, quite possibly, not always acid-fast. Dr. Abraham, the author of the article, says: " Herman has also shown that in young or recent nodules, similar masses of bacilli exist, which do not retain the red stain after immersion in. weak acid, but are easily, subsequently, coloured with methylene blue. If, as he supposes, it is only the older (fuchsin stained) bacilli, that are resistant to the acid treatment, we may have some explanation of the general failure to recognise leprosy bacilli in the attempted cultivations, as will be shown further on." And, lastly, I would like to draw attention to the fact that many workers, whose technique is beyond question, although they have failed to grow an acid-fast lepra bacillus, have described, all of them, the growth of a non-acid- fast diphtheroid bacillus. Amongst those who describe the growth of a non- E [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75034477.tif]
22 acid-fast diphtheroid bacillus are Babes, E. Levy, Czaplewsky, Spronk, Kedrow- sky and Shiga.* Dean quotes Babes as having grown this non-acid-fast diph- theroid bacillus from twelve cases of leprosy, and a similar non-acid-fast diph- theroid bacillus has been grown from the leprosy-like disease occurring in rats. Babes evidently thought that his organism was very possibly the lepra bacillus. He said that although it was possibly the lepra organism in a non-acid-fast state, one could not consider it seriously unless (1) it was possible to grow it into the acid-fast state ; (2) it would produce a tuberculin-like reaction in lepers; or (3) unless it could produce leprosy in animals. The interest of this question of a "diphtheroid bacillus " and in Babes' re- marks lies in the following facts :23 vaccine suffered a certain amount at the site of injection for about 24 hour and two had slight fever. None of the controls, however, in any way approached the severe reaction which I have obtained in cases of leprosy. In the anæsthetic cases, where one would expect the numbers of bacilli to be less than in pronounced tubercular cases, reaction has been very slight,CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 8, HASTINGS STREET
(NEW SERIES) N0. 42. SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PART I. The Cultivation of the Bacillus of Leprosy and the Treatment of cases by means of a Vaccine prepared from the Cultivations BY MAJOR E. R. ROST, I.M.S. PART II. The Cultivation of the Leprosy Bacillus BY CAPTAIN T. S. B. WILLIAMS, M.B., I.M.S. (EDITED BY THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL SERVICE.) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75034498.tif] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1911 Price As. 8 or 9d.
