IP/QB,10 m. 91. b. No. 32 (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE. GOVERNMENT OF INDIA AN ENQUIRY ON ENTERIC FEVER IN INDIA CARRIED OUT AT THE CENTRAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE, KASAULI UNDER THE DIRECTION OF LIEUTENANT-COLONEL D. SEMPLE, MD, Director of the Institute,. AND CAPTAIN E. D. W GREIG, M.D. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75031693.tif] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1908 Price Re. 1 annas 2 or 1s. 2d.
No. 32 (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. AN ENQUIRY ON ENTERIC FEVER IN INDIA CARRIED OUT AT THE CENTRAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE, KASAULI, UNDER THE DIRECTION OF LIEUTENANTAgents for Me Sale of Books published by Me Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. HENRY S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, & 9, Pall Mall, London. E. A. ARNOLD, 41 & 43, Maddox Street, Bond Street, London, W. CONSTABLE & Co. 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, London, W. C. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. KEGAN, PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., 43, Gerrard Street, Soho, London, W. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, London, S.W. BERNARD QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, W. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 & 51, Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON, BELL & Co., Cambridge. T. FISHER UNWIN, I, Adelphi Terrace, London, W. C. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E. C. ON THE CONTINENT. R. FRIEDLÄNDER & SOHN, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin, N.W. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. RUDOLF HAUPT, Halle A. S., Germany. IN INDIA. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. S. K. LAHIRI & Co., Calcutta. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & Co., Madras. G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. MURTHY & Co., Madras. THOMPSON & Co., Madras. TEMPLE & Co., Madras. COMBRIDGE & Co., Madras. P. R. RAMA IYER & Co., Madras. A. R. PILLAI & Co., Trivandrum. THACKER & Co., LD., Bombay. A. J. COMBRIDGE & Co., Bombay. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & Co., Bombay. SUNDER PANDURANG, Bombay. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay. GOPAL NARAYAN & Co., Bombay. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazair Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-Am Press, Lahore. A. CHAND & Co., Lahore, Punjab. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission Press, Rangoon. A. M. & J. FERGUSON, Ceylon.
List of numbers of Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India (New Series) published previous to the Present issue. No. 1. Standardisation of Calmette's anti-venomous serum with pure cobra venom: the deterioration of this serum through keeping in India, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 2. Malaria in India, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No. 3. Some observations on the poison of Russell's Viper (Daboia Russellii), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 5 or 6d. No. 4. On the action of the venoms of the Cobra and of the Daboia on the red blood corpuscles and on the blood plasma, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 5. Specificity of anti-venomous sera, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 6. First report on the anti-malarial operations in Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 7. Some observations on the poison of the Banded Krait (Bungarus Fasciatus), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 8. A preliminary report on a parasite found in patients suffering from enlargement of the spleen in India, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No. 9. Second report of the anti-malarial operations at Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Lieu- tenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 10. Specificity of anti-venomous sera (second communication), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 11. On a parasite found in persons suffering from enlargement of the spleen in India2 No. 21. On the Standardisation of Anti-Typhoid Vaccine, by Captain George Lamb, M.D., I.M.S. (Director, Pasteur Institute of India), and Captain W. B. C. Forster, M.B., D.P.H., I.M.S. Price As. 6 or 7d. No. 22. Mediterranean Fever in India: Isolation of the Micrococcus Melitensis, by Captain George Lamb, M.D., I.M.S., and Assistant Surgeon M. Kesava Pai, M.B., C.M. (Madras). Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 23. The Anatomy and Histology of Ticks, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price Rs. 3 or 4s. 6d. No. 24. On a parasite found in the white corpuscles of the blood of Palm Squirrels, by Captain W. S. Patton, M.B., I.M,S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 25. On the importance of Larval characters in the classification of mosquitoes, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 26. Leucocytozoon Canis, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 27. Preliminary Report on the Development of the Leishman-Donovan Body in the Bed Bug, by Captain W. S. Patten, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 28. The sexual cycle of Leucocytozoon Canis in the tick, by Captain S. R. Chris- tophers, M.B., I.M.S., As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 29. Piroplasma Canis and its cycle in the tick, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S., Price Rs. 2 or 3s. No. 30. The Theory and practice of Anti-Rabic immunisation, by Captain W F. Harvey, M.B., I.M.S., and Captain Anderson McKendrick, M.B., I.M.S., Price Annas 12 or 1s. 2d No. 31. The development of the Leishman- Donovan parasite in cimex rotundatusENTERIC FEVER IN INDIA. A report of the enquiry carried on at the Central Research Institute. CONTENTS. PART I. PAGE. 1. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 2. General Summary . . . . . . . . . . . 5 3. Observations on cases convalescent from enteric fever . . . . . . 7 4. Evidence in favour of epidemics of enteric fever being caused by "chronic bacilli carriers". 11 5. Evidence showing that enteric fever is contracted by orderlies whilst in attendance on cases. 23 6. Evidence showing that orderlies on enteric fever cases become "bacilli carriers". 23 7. Diagnosis of enteric fever . . . . . . . . . . . 25 8. Paratyphoid infections in India . . . . . . . . . 28 9. Results of the examination of specimens of bile obtained post mortem from cases of enteric fever . . . 38 10. The existence of Bacillus typhosus outside the body . . . 40 11. General conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . 47 PART II. Appendix. 1. Table I.ENTERIC FEVER IN INDIA. A Report of the enquiry carried on at the Central Research Institute. I.2 illustration of the above statements. After the discovery of the causal agent of the disease it was, until very recently, unknown where the virus is stored and how the disease is maintained from year to year. Consequently precautions had to be taken against every possible source of infection; the result being that no appreciable progress was made in eradicating the disease. Finally scientific investigation determined the storehouse of the virus3 These problems were attacked along certain definite lines. We made a number of observations on the duration of the life of the parasite outside the human body in urine and fæces; also in articles of clothing, etc., and we found that under natural Indian conditions the saprophytic existence of the parasite outside the body is remarkably short. To ascertain whether the B. typhosus continues to live for prolonged periods inside the body of the host, we have made observations for several months on men rendered immune by an attack of the disease. We examined the urine and fæces daily. Our investigations. have brought out the important fact that a certain percentage of these immune men harbour the parasite and continue to do so for months and probably years. As a rule the bacilli are not excreted daily, but at intervals, which may be very long, sometimes as long as three months. In urine the bacillus is discharged in enormous numbers, but in the fæces the excretion of the bacillus may persist for a much longer time. These men show no sign of disease, and it is impossible to determine by medical inspection whether they are free from infection or not. In addition to those men who have become immune after a typical attack of the disease (convalescents), we have found men, who have passed through an attack so mild that they have not reported sick, harbouring the parasite such cases have been observed amongst attendants on enteric fever cases (nursing orderlies). These men return to their regiments and become sources of infection. It is obvious, therefore, that there are scattered throughout the various units of the British Army in India a number of men in whose bodies the virus is living. During the course of the investigation evidence is being collected as to what extent the natives of India harbour the parasite. Amongst the Native troops cases have been observed. At present the incidence of enteric fever amongst the civil population is being investigated. However, the number of foci of infec- tion among the British troops in India is considerable and would account for a large number of cases of enteric fever, if not for all. As regards the production of epidemics of enteric fever in India, a scientific study has been made of several of these and the results are fully recorded in this report. We have been able to show conclusively that when individuals harbour- ing the parasite have to deal with food supplies they are capable of infecting the food and so produce epidemics. Kossel* of Giessen has recently shown that an individual harbouring the parasite infected a milk supply and so produced a milk epidemic. He very pertinently remarks at the end of his paper that the most careful inspection of the dairy, its vessels, water supply, etc., will be vain if we fail to detect an individual harbouring the parasite who is employed in the dairy. Hence great care is necessary in selecting the personnel of dairies, cookhouses, etc., in order to eliminate, if possible, individuals harbouring the parasite. * Deutsche Med. Wochenschrift, No. 39, 26th September 1907 .
4 As will be readily understood from the above observations, the recognition of individuals harbouring the parasite is of great importance. This can only be done by a careful bacteriological examination of the blood, fæces, and urine of the individual. The technical methods are fully discussed in a previous report and in the present one. Our investigations suggest the lines for the more effective control of the disease. In the first place segregation of convalescents with careful bacterio- logical control is essential. The bacteriological examination must be prolonged and thorough, both urine and fæces being examined for a considerable period. The necessity for this will be seen from a perusal of our observations recorded in this report. At present the examination is incomplete or not carried out at all; therefore a number of men still harbouring the parasite are returned to duty. This we have learned from observations made on a large number of convales- cents. In the next place the question of attendants on enteric fever cases requires careful consideration. For this purpose a special body of trained men should be employed. The constant change of men from duty as enteric fever orderlies to ordinary regimental duty as at present carried out is, as we shall see, a means of propagating the disease. Lastly, the personnel of cookhouses, dairies, etc., should be subject to careful bacteriological control. As will be seen in the report, the source of two epidemics of enteric fever in India has been scientifically proved, and in both cases the infection originated from a cook harbouring the parasite, who infected the food and so occasioned the epidemic. Food appears to be the most important channel of communication between the harbourer of the parasite and the susceptible individual. This is readily under- stood when we consider that articles of food, e.g., milk, form a favourable medium for the development of the bacillus. It will not be a simple matter to put into practice the measures indicated above, but they are founded on scientific observation, and an effort should be made to overcome the difficulties. These difficulties would be considerably lessened by the concentration of the individuals to be examined at one or two central stations with a laboratory suitable for undertaking the examinations required. By such examinations, if properly carried out, individuals harbour- ing the virus of enteric fever would be detected and the number of foci of infection in the various units of the British Army in India would be diminished, and so, gradually, a reduction in the incidence of the disease would be brought about. The literature of the subject is not dealt with in this report as a very complete summary with references is given in the Annual Reports of the Sanitary Commissioner with the Government of India for 1905 and 1906, to which the reader is referred.
5 II.6 frequently detected by this method than when a more concentrated solution of fæces was used. For the examination of the blood we have used the bile- glycerine-peptone medium (Conradi) and have found it very useful. This method has greatly simplified the technique of blood culture. About 20 c.c. of this medium is placed in a bottle (30 c.c. capacity), which is closed with a rubber cap, sealed with paraffin. Five c.c. of blood is taken, with sterile precautions, from a vein at the bend of elbow and at once transferred to the bile; this is done by simply passing the needle of the syringe through the rubber cap of the bottle and the blood is injected into the bile, the small opening in the cap being closed by heating the paraffin with a match. The bottle is returned to the laboratory, and after incubation a small quantity is plated on Drigalski plates The initial procedure can be very easily carried out in hospital and in the early diagnosis of enteric fever cultivation gives more satisfactory results than the Widal reaction. It may be convenient before entering into details to summarise briefly the results obtained during the course of the enquiry. In elucidating the problems connected with the propagation of enteric lever certain facts connected with the disease process require careful attention. The results of a series of blood cultivations have shown that the typhoid bacillus. is found in the blood stream during the first days of the disease.* In our experience the bacillus is seldom found in the fæces at that stage and there are, as a rule, no intestinal symptoms. It is probable that the bacillus gains an entrance to the blood stream from one point in the alimentary tract and it is only when it enters the blood stream that the clinical signs called enteric fever begin to manifest themselves. The point of entry may be high up, e.g., the tonsil or low down, below the stomach. The bacillus, as a rule, after circulating in the blood for a time begins to deposit in some or all of the following organs ; skin causing the rose spots; kidneys, causing bacilluria; liver producing infec- tion of the bile; the Peyer's patches leading ultimately to ulceration; and in other organs. From the point of view of the propagation of the disease the most important deposits are those in the kidney, liver, and Peyer's patches, and, probably, of these foci those in the kidneys and liver play the most important rôle in the propagation of enteric fever. The urine and the bile become infected from the deposits of bacilli, and as both are excellent culture media for the B. typhosus we find bacilli present in both bile and urine, in a high percentage of cases, in practically pure culture. In a certain number of cases the bacilli persist in the bile or urine for months and in some cases for years after the patients are perfectly well. The patient becomes in fact a reservoir of the parasite, which he sheds in enormous numbers into the external world in the urine and fæces. In *Vide Table II, page 107, Appendix of this report.
7 Germany such an individual is called Bazillenträger. In English the most suitable equivalent is " bacilli carrier." These " bacilli carriers " have at some time previously passed through an attack of enteric fever; it may be an ordinary severe attack or so mild as to have passed unrecognized. The detection of these " bacilli carriers " is most important, as round them, probably, hinges the whole problem of the prevention of enteric fever. Unfortunately their detec- tion is an extremely difficult matter and requires for its successful accomplish- ment specially skilled observers. Experience has shown that it takes several months to train a worker to become really efficient in the detection of B. typhosus in the excreta: for ordinary workers to express an opinion on the presence or absence of B. typhosus in the fæces, particularly, is not only useless but, as a rule, misleading. The difficulties are further increased on account, as we shall see, of the very intermittent discharge of the bacilli in the urine and fæces. In one case in which daily observations were made the urine remained sterile for a month and then there was a sudden output of bacilli. The observations recorded in the present report have been made chiefly amongst British troops, but a certain number of cases of enteric fever amongst Natives have been studied. That the disease occurs in Natives of India is definitely proved. We have examined the urine and fæces of several Natives, and found that they also continue to discharge the bacilli after freedom from fever and all other signs of disease. Such individuals if employed in connection with food supplies would be a source of danger. A question of considerable importance, but one difficult to test by experi- ment, is, whether the European is infecting the Native or vice versa? Certain facts tend to support the former view. The incidence of the disease amongst Natives in jails is low, whilst amongst Natives in contact with large European communities with a large number of British troops it appears to be higher. We are at present endeavouring to collect more precise details on this important subject, and the results will be set forth in a future report. III.8 of the patients still continue to excrete the bacilli, months after freedom from fever. Some of the observations on the urine and fæces were commenced on the admission of the cases into hospital and kept up daily throughout the disease and for several months after freedom from fever. We have thus accumulated a large number of facts on which to base conclusions. In regard to Natives of India we have examined the blood, urine, and fæces of several cases of enteric fever in Natives which came under our observation at Poona and elsewhere. It will be seen that they continue to discharge the B. typhosus in the urine and fæces after all signs of the disease have dis- appeared. The results of the daily observations on the patients convalescent from enteric fever, both Europeans and Natives, are shown in Table No. 1 of the Appen- dix. Particular attention is directed to this table, as it is the record of numerous observations which prove that a certain percentage of immune individuals har- bour the parasite for a very long time. In discussing the results obtained by the above-mentioned observations the points may, for convenience, be considered under the following heads :9 free and discharged. This fallacy is to be carefully borne in mind by those engaged in such investigations. The examination of the faces shows that the discharge of bacilli has the same intermittent character. In case No. 7 the fæces were examined on 12th and 13th August 1907 and the presence of bacilli determined; daily examination showed the absence of bacilli from the fæces until the 29th August 1907, fifteen days after the last occasion on which it was found Again, in case No. 12 the fæces were examined on 31st July 1907, and found to contain bacilli and after that remained negative until 6th September 1907. Also in case No. 3 the faces were found to contain B. typhosus on 6th August 1907 and remained negative till 21st October 1907, an interval of seventy-five days. The most reasonable explanation of the intermittent character of the excretion of bacilli in the urine and faces is that the urine in the urinary tubules becomes infect- ed by a focus of bacilli in the kidney and the bacilli continue to cultivate them- selves in the urine for a time, but are finally washed out by fresh uninfected urine. When another focus again infects the urine the process is repeated. So long as the bacilli in the focus are cut off from the urine a bacilli-free interval results. In a certain number of cases infection of the urine never occurs. As regards the occurrence in the fæces we know that the bile in cases of enteric fever contains practically a pure culture of B. typhosus. The bile is infected by bacilli lying in the deposits in the liver. The bile and its contained bacilli obtain an exit into the external world viâ the intestinal tube in the fæces. All the evidence is in favour of the liver and bile being the reservoir which supplies the intestine with bacilli. So that the two great storehouses of the bacilli in the " chronic carrier " are the urinary and biliary organs. It is noteworthy that the bile and urine are both excellent culture media for B. typhosus and the bacillus finds in these fluids far more favourable conditions for its development than it does outside the body. As we shall see later, the extra-corporeal existence of the parasite under natural Indian conditions is short as compared with that inside the body of the host. (c) The absence of the bacilli from the urine and fæces throughout the whole course of the infection.10 (d) The action of urotropine on bacilluria.11 individual. Hence the great importance of concentrating attention on the- "carrier, " whether he is a sick man or apparently healthy, in all measures for the prevention of enteric fever. We pass to consider next12 A careful sanitary inspection by the Senior Medical Officer was made to determine the origin of the epidemic. As the cases were confined to this detachment the general water and milk supply could be eliminated as factors in the causation. It was considered that the men might have contracted the infec- tion at one of the religious institutes. The evidence supporting this hypothesis, however, was not very satisfactory. The source of the epidemic remained obscure. In order to determine scientifically the origin of the epidemic a systematic examination of the blood, urine, and fæces of all the cooks and " contacts" of this unit was made. The examination of the urine and fæces of each individual was repeated at least twice. The result of this long series of repeated observations proved that a cook of this detachment (Pte. 4805 G. W.) was excreting bacillus typhosus in large numbers in his fæces. This man was in fact a " chronic bacilli carrier. " None of the other contacts were found to be ex- creting B. typhosus in the stools or urine. The distribution of the disease suggested that the source of infection was in the food supply of this unit. The disease did not spread from man to man in one room. Had this been so it would have indicated that the infection was spreading by direct personal contact. On the contrary, with the exception of one room, not more than a single case occurred in each room. Hence the working hypothesis, which agreed best with all the facts, was that some indivi- dual dealing with the food of the unit in the cookhouse was a " chronic carrier. " The detection, therefore, of a " carrier" (Pte. W.) in the cookhouse fully substantiated this hypothesis and satisfactorily explained the origin of the epidemic which would otherwise have remained in complete obscurity. An in- teresting feature in this epidemic was that the Native element could be completely eliminated as no Natives are employed in the cookhouse of the unit. The information of the discovery of this " chronic bacilli carrier " was given to the Senior Medical Officer, who at once segregated him. The result was that no further case of enteric fever occurred in this unit. If this man had continued at duty in the cookhouse it is almost certain he would have infected another series of men. As we have observed in other cases, this man excretes the bacilli very intermittently. If we had been content with one examination of the fæces only, he would not have been. detected. Our previous experience, however, indicated the great importance of making repeated examinations. A careful enquiry was made into the past and present history of this" bacilli carrier." No. 4805 Private G. W., E. Company, Bedfordshires, has a total service of thirteen years and eight months and eleven years eight months in India. An examination of his medical history sheet shows that he has no entry for enteric fever, but at Ferozpore he was in hospital seventy days from
13 31st December 1897 to 10th March 1898 for 24a Ague described as " severe." He was admitted to the Mooltan Hospital for forty-two days for 799 Abscess, described as " severe, " from 23rd May to 3rd July 1899. The next entry is at Dalhousie for 24a Ague for twenty-three days, from 3rd October to 25th October 1900, and is described as " mild. " The only other admis- sion after this is eleven days for 143a Conjunctivitis catarrhal acute at Mooltan from 1st to 11th March 1991. He never acted as a nursing orderly. At present he looks the picture of health and has no sign of disease. In reviewing this case the occurrence of a past enteric infection has to be considered. The entry of seventy days for ague of a severe character raises the question as to whether or not this was an unrecognised typhoid infection. The admission into hospital a year later for severe abscess is noteworthy, as suppurations following typhoid infections are not very uncommon and the pus is often found to contain a pure culture of typhoid bacilli. If the infection was enteric fever, he has been a " bacilli carrier " since 1898, nearly ten years. His Widal reaction to Bacillus typhosus is similar to that found in many convalescents. The following table shows the result of the Widal reaction to Bacillus typhosus and the presence or absence of Bacillus typhosus in the fæces and urine of No. 4805 Private G. W., E. Coy., 1st Bedford Regiment :14 Date. Number, rank, name and Regiment. WIDAL REACTION TO BACILLUS TYPHOSUS. BACILLUS TYPHOSUS IN 20 40 Fæces. Urine. August 1907 29th ...... ... ... 15 The following table shows the result of the examination of the blood, urine, and fæces of the healthy men (cooks, enteric orderlies and contacts) of the 1st Bedfords at Kasauli :16 The result of this investigation has thrown a flood of light on the source of this epidemic. It would have been impossible by ordinary sanitary inspection or enquiry to have arrived at a correct conclusion. It further demonstrates that the "chronic bacilli carrier" can produce an epidemic of enteric fever. (2). Two cases of enteric caused by a " chronic carrier. "17 The following table shows the result of the examination of the blood, urine, and fæces of the healthy individuals :18 The connection between this " carrier " and the cases of enteric could not be so clearly established as in the two above described epidemics, but the fact is nevertheless very significant. The following table shows the result of the examination of the blood, urine, and fæces of Private 6934 R. J., B. Coy., Scottish Rifles, Meerut :19 bacilli in his urine in large numbers. He was, in fact, the reservoir from which the supply of bacilli which infected the children came. None of the children could be shown to have contracted the infection whilst he was at Goa, but following his return a fresh epidemic took place. The after-history of the Goanese cook, B. S., was very interesting. He was. admitted to the Sassoon General Hospital, Poona, in October 1907. He had signs and symptoms pointing to an affection of the gall bladder, Examination of his blood on October 9th showed that the Widal reaction to B. typhosus was nearly complete in 120 About the 17th of July 1907 three of the children, Daisy R., Annie F., and Josephine C., were noticed to be ailing; they refused food and complained of headache. They were admitted to hospital on 21st, 22nd, 22nd July, respectively, with fever. As there had never been a case of enteric in the Convent within the memory of the present nuns, this disease was not at first suspected; two other children who had also been ailing for some days were admitted on 25th and 28th July, respectively. The Staff Surgeon who had been called in to see these five cases, suspected enteric and the serum was sent to the Divisional Laboratory, a positive reaction to enteric being obtained in all these cases. Naturally this result put the nuns on the alert, with the result that the second batch of cases was diagnosed at once. Hence the date of admission to hospital in their case coincided with the date of the onset of fever. This is well shown by the charts, the temperature falling to normal on the 21st day in hospital. This second batch of cases were admitted to hospital on the 16th, 17th 18th, 1 9th, 22nd and 22nd August. On the invitation of Lt.-Col. Bull, I. M. S., Staff Surgeon, I visited the Convent with a view to seeing if we could in any way clear up the origin of this outbreak. The Convent is beautifully clean, there are three dormitories, large, airy, upstairs rooms. Cases No. 1 and 9 came from No. I dormitory. Cases 2, 3, 4, and 5 from No. II. Cases 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, and 12 from No. III. On enquiry the nuns positively stated that all the boarders had been in excellent health since their return from the holidays on 31st May 1907. Nor had there been any sickness among the day scholars or amongst the nuns themselves. On further enquiry I discovered that one of the Goanese cooks had been ill for a few days in the month of June. After some difficulty I obtained the following facts regarding this man :21 They are not all in the same classes and the cases were dotted over the three dormitories. Deducting four days from the date of admission to hospital from the first three cases, i.e., time ailing before detected, gives the 17th July as the day of commencement of the disease and about the 1st of July as the day of infection. The other two cases, 4 and 5, had also been ill for at least five or six days before admission; this would give 20th and 22nd July as the day of commence- ment of disease and the day of infection as 2nd or 3rd of July. The day of infection in Case No. 6 shown as admitted on 11th August is more difficult to discover. The nuns state that on 11th August this child was treated for " fever, " but she was not admitted to hospital till 15th August 1907. She was removed from the Convent on 16th August 1907 by her friends. There are three suppositions possible as regards this case. I. She was removed from the Convent within a day or two of being taken ill, the diagnosis was not confirmed by Tidal test; therefore her disease may not have been enteric. I have made enquiries and find that this child was very seriously ill at her home in khandala for one month after her return. I think, therefore, that this was a true case of enteric. II. Case No. 5 was ill for some days before admission to hospital. She used the same latrine as Case 6, and it is possible that Case 6 was thus infected although they used different messrooms and slept in different dormitories. III. The cook, B. S., returned to duty on 31st July; this child, No. 6, although out of sorts on 11th August, was not admitted to hospital until 15th August. It is quite possible that she was infected by contaminated food on 1st August and developed the fever after a shorter incubation period than the others. The other cases Nos. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,12 all went sick, 17, 18, 19, 20, 23 and 23 days after the return of the Goanese cook. In my opinion, therefore, the Goanese cook passed through a fairly severe attack of enteric fever between June 20th and July l0th; he contaminated the food of the children in the first batch of cases 1 to 5 about July 1st before his departure. Case 6 is a contact case or a case with short incubation period, and the second batch of cases 7 to 12 were due to contamination of the food after the return of the cook on 31st July. The last case of the second batch was admitted to hospital on the 22nd of August; up to the 16th of September there have been no fresh cases. I have examined the fæces and urine of the cook, B. S., daily from the 8th September, but so far without finding any enteric bacilli; he is, therefore, not infective at present. This is shown by the fact that there have been no
22 fresh cases since the last batch which were infected during the first week of August. Statement of Enteric cases at the Convent Girl School, Poona, 11th September 1907. No. Names. Age. Caste. Date of admission. Date of discharge. REMARKS. *1 Daisy, R. 14 European 21st July 1907. *2 Annie, F. 10 Do. 22nd July 1907. *3 Josephine, C. 8 Native Christian Ditto. *4 Filamina, F. 7 European 25th July 1907. *5 Helen, Roberts 7 Eurasian 28th July 1907. 23 V.24 their course and were returning to their regiments. None of these men had ever suffered from a typical attack of enteric fever. The result of this examination showed that two of these men were excreting B. typhosus in their fæces. This observation is of great importance, because the rule is that after six months' duty as orderlies the men return to their regiments and a fresh supply is sent, and as these orderlies are not submitted to a complete bacteriological examination they must on their return to regimental duty increase the number of " bacilli carriers " in the various units of the British troops in India. The following table shows the result of the examination of the urine and fæces of the enteric fever orderlies at Kasauli:25 VII.26 Native Followers. Total examined =111. No reaction 26=23.4 per cent. Incomplete 127 in most cases of enteric fever and the diagnosis is made absolutely certain. This method has been practised at certain hospitals in India with success, e.g., Meerut, Kasauli, Poona, and Jullunder. As the technique becomes better known it will be more universally adopted, because it is simple and certain. In Table II of the Appendix the results obtained by the serum sedimenta- tion test and the blood culture in bile are given, vide page 107, Appendix. From a study of this table it will be seen that the bacilli enter the blood- stream at a very early stage in the disease. The clinical signs called enteric fever begin to develop at the same time as the bacilli enter the blood. The disease is, indeed, a blood-poisoning. The fact that an early invasion of the blood occurs in enteric fever makes blood culture an extremely valuable means of making a prompt diagnosis. It is further demonstrated that it is possible to cultivate the bacillus before the agglutinins have appeared in the blood in sufficient quantity to make a certain diagnosis by the Widal test. Again in this relation the question of group agglutination (between typhoid and paratyphoid) has to be considered. In a certain percentage of cases it is often difficult to say which is the main infection. Cultivation of the bacillus from the blood generally settles this difficulty. The following table shows the result of the examination of blood by the serum agglutination test and the blood culture method in cases in which a marked group agglutination occurred:28 In the case of Private M. a very puzzling reaction occurred. An organism, Bacillus paratyphosus A., was cultivated from the blood-stream and fæces. The agglutination test, however, showed a high reaction with Bacillus typhosus, but practically none with Bacillus paratyphosus A. or B. The reason of this " apparent" group reaction was explained later. A daily examination of the fæces and urine during convalescence was made and in the ninth week a few colonies of B. typhosus were detected in the stools. The case, therefore, was cone of mixed infection. Case of Dr. C. shows that the agglutination titre was the same both for B typhosus and paratyphosus B. Cultivation of the blood proved that the organism was B. typhosus. From a consideration of the above cases it will be readily understood that the universal adoption of the blood culture method for making a diagnosis of enteric fever in hospitals should be aimed at, and if it is combined with a serum sedimentation test, very few cases of enteric should pass unrecognised. Should the case be at an early stage the blood culture will show the presence of B. typhosus; if it is at a later stage a definite agglutination reaction will be got. VIII.29 pains in the head and back, with loss of appetite and nausea. He began to feel ill on May 1st. State on admission.30 bacilli, and the presence or absence of bacilli in the peripheral blood :31. Private B. B. paratyphosus A. Stock B. paratyphosus A. Litmus lactose nutrose No change No clotting, slight red. Litmus glucose nutrose Red Red. Litmus whey Slightly red Slightly red. Neutral red agar Gas and fluorescence pro- duced. Gas and fluorescence produced. Litmus mannite nutrose Red Red. Indol production after 14 days Nil. Nil. Serum reaction (Titre 132 100° F. in the evening, but came to normal next morning; after this date the temperature remained normal. The following table shows the result of the examination of the blood :33 NAME. Date of observation. B. PARATYPHOSUS A. IN Fæces. Urine. September 1907. Private M. 22nd 34 Private M. B. paratyphosus A. Stock B. paratyphosus A. Stock B. typhosus. Litmus maltose nutrose. Gas fluorescence Gas fluorescence Red. Litmus dextrine nutrose. Red Red Red. Indol production after 14 days. Nil Nil Nil. Serum reaction (specific serum for B. paratyphosus A. titre limit I35 The following table shows the characters of organism separated from the fæces of Gr. K.36 remained between 103° and 104° until the 52nd day, when it gradually fell. It became normal on the 56th day, and remained so. The patient had a hæmorrhage from the bowel on the 45th day. He was very much reduced by this long illness. He had two relapses after the original attack. Apart from the pyrexia and the hæmorrhage from the bowel there was nothing noteworthy in his clinical history. The chief interest lay in the re- sults of the bacteriological investigation of his case. The following table shows the result of the examination of the blood of driver Z. A.:37 Driver Z.A. B. paratyphosus A. Stock B. paratyphosus A. Stock B. typhosus. Litmus milk Motile rods; gram nega- tive. Motile rods; gram nega- tive. No clotting, red. Milk No change No change No change. Neutral red agar Gas fluorescence Gas fluorescence No change. Potato Moist transparent growth Moist transparent growth Moist transparent growth. Litmus saccharose nutrose. No change No change No change. Litmus dextrine nutrose. Red Red Red. Indol, after 14 days Nil Nil Nil. Serum reaction B. paratyphosus A. titre 138 The following table shows the result of the examination of the fæces and urine of Pte. Y.:39 poured into the intestinal tube with the bile and so gains an exit in the fæces to the external world. The bacillus typhosus can give rise to cholecystitis. In the case of Corporal W., at Mhow, the medical officer in forwarding the bile sample stated that "the gall bladder was nearly empty and the bile withdrawn looks like thin yellowish-green pus. The gall bladder when subsequently opened was intensely inflamed." The sample had the appearance of pus and was plated as usual on Drigalski Conradi plates. Our examination next day showed an almost pure growth of B. typhosus. In several of the cases of enteric fever which we have observed, both during the acute phase of the disease and during convalescence, signs and symptoms have appeared which clearly pointed to an affection of the gall bladder. The occurrence of this condition during convalescence lends addi- tional support to the view that it is in the biliary channels that the B. typhosus continues to exist. The intermittent discharge of bacilli in fæces is, probably, dependent on infection of the bile stream from time to time by the bacilli deposited in the liver. The results of the examination of the samples received up to date fully confirm the view above stated. We have found in the bile of fatal cases of enteric fever the bacillus typhosus in very large numbers and frequently in pure culture. The following table shows the result of the examination of samples of bile collected from fatal cases of enteric fever:40 Name, number, rank and Regiment. Date of death. Date of examination of bile. Bacillus typhosus in bile. No. 5926 Pte. H., Lincoln. Regiment 8th September 1907 12th September 1907 41 about 60,000,000 bacilli per c.c. was found to be sterile at the end of 72 hours. Also a sample of fæces from a native suffering from enteric fever which contained B.typhosus in practically pure culture was allowed to stand at room temperature protected from the sun, and at the end of 96 hours it was found that the B. typhosus had died out. The general trend of the observations shows that the conditions met with outside the human host are not favourable to the prolonged existence of the B. typhosus and therefore the persistence of the disease cannot be explained by a hypothesis that postulates long extra-corporeal existence of the bacilli. The chief value of these experiments is that they define by exclusion the conditions necessary for the prolonged life of the parasite. It is brought home to us more clearly that conditions outside the human body cannot favour the growth of the parasite; at the best they can act only as channels of communication,and these channels will soon dry up unless fed from the reservoir, the human host. The following table shows the result of allowing urine from a case of enteric fever containing many bacilli to stand at room temperature, 80º F., protected from the sun:42 The following table shows the result of allowing fæces containing many bacilli to stand at room temperature, 85° F., protected from the sun:43 The following experiments were made in order to determine the effect of the Indian sun on the B. typhosus in articles of clothing. A piece of used dirty cotton sheeting and a piece of used dirty coloured blanket of Indian make were soaked with the fresh urine of case No. 645, S., containing 60,000,000 bacilli per c.c. The pieces of material were dried in the air, and each divided into two portions. One piece of each was laid on a wall and exposed to the July sun at Kasauli for two hours. The other halves were put in a dark cupboard in Petri dishes. Immediately after exposure to the sun, about a square inch of cloth and blanket were put in bile medium and incubated for 24 hours. On plating the result was44 Experiment to note the effect of the exposure to the sun of a blanket soiled with fæces from an enteric case. A further experiment was undertaken to test the duration of life of B. typhosus on a blanket soiled with fæces from a case of enteric in a native; the fæces contained enormous numbers of bacilli. The experiments were carried out at Poona. Half a gramme of fæces of Sepoy G. Rao was spread on a blanket, a similar piece of blanket being spread on the top. This was placed in a sterile Petri dish. The dish was placed on the window sill and exposed to the light from dawn to dusk and to direct sunlight from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M. The experiment was con- tinued from 23rd September 1907 to 1st October 1907. A portion of the fæces was removed from the blanket with a portion of the blanket adherent. This was emulsified in 0.5 c.c. normal salt solution with care. The emulsion was drawn up in a pipette and transferred to a Drigalski Conradi plate. The following table shows the result of the experiment:45 in the sun during the experiment varied from 85° Fahr. to 95° Fahr. The ex- periment was conducted at Kasauli in the month of October. The following table shows the details of the experiment:46 The following experiment shows the result of exposing white drill contami- nated with bacillus typhosus to the sun at Kasauli:47 XI.49 PART II. APPENDIX. Table I.* In this table are recorded the results of the daily observations made on a number of convalescent enteric fever cases at Kasauli. The urine and fæces of each of the cases was examined daily. During the investigations of these cases a large number of important facts have been collected. (Vide page 8, Part I, of this Report for discussion of results.) As these observations have an important bearing on the prevention of enteric fever in India, the attention of all those who have to deal with this difficult problem is particularly directed to this table. * In recording the results of the examination, the signs used have the following meaning :50 TABLE I. CONVALESCENT ENTERIC No. 1. RANK51 TABLE 152 TABLE I53 TABLE I54 TABLE I55 cause an epidemic of enteric. The sanitary conditions of the cookhouse or dairy might be perfect and the source of such an epidemic would be very difficult to determine. In November the fæces of this man contained enormous numbers of bacilli in pure culture. There were several hundred colonies on the third Drigalski-Conradi plate. The danger of such a case in a regi- ment requires no comment. This case should be very carefully studied by all those engaged in the preven- tion of enteric fever.
56 TABLE I57 TABLE I58 TABLE I59 TABLE I60 TABLE I61 TABLE I62 TABLE I63 TABLE I64 TABLE I65 TABLE I66 TABLE I67 TABLE I68 TABLE I69 TABLE I 70 TABLE I71 TABLE I72 TABLE I73 TABLE I74 TABLE I75 TABLE I76 TABLE I77 TABLE I78 TABLE I79 TABLE I80 TABLE I81 TABLE I82 TABLE I83 TABLE I84 TABLE I85 TABLE I86 TABLE I87 TABLE I88 TABLE I89 TABLE I90 TABLE I91 TABLE I92 TABLE I93 TABLE I94 TABLE I95 TABLE I96 TABLE I97 TABLE I98 TABLE I99 TABLE I100 TABLE I101 TABLE I102 TABLE I103 TABLE I104 TABLE I105 TABLE I106 PART II. APPENDIX. Table II. In this table are recorded the results of the-examination of a number of cases of enteric fever both by the serum sedimentation test (Widal Reaction) and by the blood culture method. A comparison of the two methods of diagnosis is given. For the early diagnosis of enteric fever the blood culture method is the best. Conradi* has recently shown that the B. typhosus may be cultivated from the blood before any signs of the disease have developed in the incubation stage. For the later stages the agglutination test is valuable, as towards the end of the disease the bacilli leave the blood. (Vide page 27, Part I, of this report for a discussion of the results.) * Deutsche. Med. Wochenschrift No. 41, October 10th, 1907.
107 TABLE II The following table shows the result of the examination of a number of cases of enteric by the serum agglutination test and blood culture in bile :108 TABLE IINo. 32 (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA AN ENQUIRY ON ENTERIC FEVER IN INDIA CARRIED OUT AT THE CENTRAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE, KASAULI UNDER THE DIRECTION OF LIEUTENANT