IP/QB.10 m.91.b. (NEW SERIES.) No. 35. SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. BLACK-WATER FEVER BY CAPTAIN S. R. CHRISTOPHERS, M.B., I.M.S. AND DR. C. A. BENTLEY (Officers on Special duty). BEING THE FIRST REPORT TO THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA TO CONDUCT AN ENQUIRY REGARDING BLACK-WATER AND OTHER FEVERS PREVALENT IN THE DUARS. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75060240.tif] SIMLA: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT MONOTYPE PRESS. 1908.
Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Department of the Government of India, No. 32. ERRATA. Page 30.Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Department of the Government of India, No. 32. ERRATA. Page 30.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75060252.tif] 3942999
(NEW SERIES.) No. 35. SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. BLACK-WATER FEVER BY CAPTAIN S. R. CHRISTOPHERS, M.B., I.M.S. AND DR. C. A. BENTLEY (Officers on Special duty). BEING THE FIRST REPORT TO THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA TO CONDUCT AN ENQUIRY REGARDING BLACK-WATER AND OTHER FEVERS PREVALENT IN THE DUARS. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75060258.tif] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75060258.tif] SIMLA: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT MONOTYPE PRESS. 1908.
Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. H. S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, & 9, Pall Mall, London. E. A. ARNOLD, 41 & 43, Maddox Street, Bond. Street, London, W. CONSTABLE & Co., 16, James Street, Hay Market, London, W. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westmins- ter, London, S. W. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CO., Charing Cross Road, London, W. C. BERNARD QUARITCH,15, Piccadilly, London, W. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 & 51, Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & Co., Cambridge. ON THE CONTINENT. R. FRIEDLANDER & SOHN, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin, N. W. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. EARNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. IN INDIA. THACKER SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla NEWMAN & Co. Calcutta. S. K. LAHIRI & Co., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & Co., Madras. G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. THACKER & Co., LD., Bombay. A. J. COMBRIDGE & Co., Bombay. D. B. TARAPOREVALA SONS & Co., Bombay. RADHABHAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazir Kanun, Hind Press, Allahabad. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-Am Press, Lahore. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission Press, Rangoon.
List of numbers of Scientific. Memoirs by Officers of the Medical, and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India (New Series) published previous to the present issue. No. 1. Standardisation of Calmette's Anti-Venomous Serum with Pure Cobra Venom; the De- terioration of this Serum through keeping in India, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 2. Malaria in India, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S., Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No. 3. Some Observations on the Poison of Russell's Viper (Daboia Russellii), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 5 or 6d. No. 4. On the Action of the Venoms of the Cobra and of the Daboia on the Red. Blood Corpuscles and on the Blood Plasma, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 5. Specificity of Anti-Venomous Sera, by Captain G. Lamb., I.M.S. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 6. First Report on the Anti-Malarial Operations in Mian Mir, 1901( ii ) No. 19. On Kala Azar, Malaria and Malarial Cachexia, by Captain S. P. James, M. B., I.M.S. Price Re. 1-4 or 1s. 11d. No. 20. Serum-Therapy of Plague in India; Reports by Mr. W. M. Haffkine, C.I.E., and various Officers of the Plague Research Laboratory, Bombay, by Lieutenant Colonel W. B. Bannerman, M.D., B.Sc., F.R.C.S., I.M.S. Price As. 14 or 1s. 4d. No. 21. On the Standardisation of Anti-Typhoid Vaccine, by Captain George Lamb, M.D. I.M.S. (Director, Pasteur Institute of India), and Captain W. B. C. Forster, M.B., D.P.H., I.M.S. Price As. 6 or 7d. No. 22. Mediterranean Fever in India; Isolation of the Micrococcus Melitensis, by Captain George Lamb, M.D., I.M.S., and Assistant Surgeon M. Kesava Pai, M.B., C.M., (Madras). Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 23. The Anatomy and Histology of Ticks, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price Rs. 3 or 4s. 6d. No. 24. On a Parasite found in the White Corpuscles of the Blood of Palm Squirrels, by Cap- tain W. S. Patton, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 25. On the importance of Larval Characters in the Classification of Mosquitoes, by Cap- tain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 26. Leucocytozoon Canis, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 27. Preliminary Report on the Development of the Leishman-Donovan Body in the Bed Bug, by Captain W. S. Patton, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 28. The Sexual Cycle of Leucocytozoon Canis in the Tick, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 29. Piroplasma Canis and its Cycle in the Tick, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M. B., I.M.S. Price Rs. 2 or 3s. No. 30. The Theory and Practice of Anti-Rabic Immunisation, by Captain W. F. Harvey, M.B., I.M.S., and Captain Anderson McKendrick, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 31. The Development of the Leishman-Donovan Parasite in Cimex Rotundatus(iii) SYNOPSIS OF CONTENTS. PART I. INTRODUCTORY. PAGE. CHAPTER I.( iv ) PART V. PAGE PROPHYLAXIS AND TREATMENT OF BLACK-WATER FEVER 181PART I. INTRODUCTORY. Chapter I. HISTORICAL AND GENERAL. Discussion of the ætiology and nature of Black-water Fever has occupied a host of authors, and a minute study of all that has been written on the subject would serve no useful purpose. It will be sufficient briefly to marshal all the known facts; to indicate the different views that have been held as to the nature of Black- water Fever; and to see what are the main issues now open for research. Broadly speaking four main theories have been held as to the nature and origin of Black-water Fever; and around these different views can be grouped all the recorded facts. These four theories are:2 of quinine in producing these attacks. Nevertheless it is stated that the phenomenon is seen in malarial subjects, and the belief that malaria is in some way concerned is clearly present; Tomaselli definitely states that he considers a pre- disposition the result of chronic malarial infection to be necessary before quinine can have this action. The later researches of Koch (7) show the same action of quinine in associa- tion with the hæmoglobinuria of East Africa; but Koch is especially concerned that this condition is not malaria. The idea then held was, it should be remembered, that a paroxysm of Black- water Fever is a pernicious form of malarial attack; and even at the present time there is some confusion on this point, writers sometimes pointing out clinical dif- ferences between an attack of malaria and one of Black-water Fever, as an argu- ment against the malarial origin of the latter. Hence, when Koch finding few or no parasites in his cases comes to the con- clusion that it is not malaria, we must interpret him as referring to the disease pro- cess itself, with which he was concerned at the moment, and not with the conditions which may have given rise to it. Koch's researches were the first to show definitely that Black-water Fever is, in no sense, an attack of malaria; though Grawitz and Kohlstoch (20) had as early as 1892 given up the use of quinine in the treatment of their cases, because on examination of the blood they could find no malarial parasites. Since Koch, almost all those who have studied the disease have come to the conclusion that Black-water Fever is a condition quite distinct from, and dependent on, a different morbid process to that concerned in a malarial attack. II. THAT BLACK-WATER FEVER IS QUININE INTOXICATION. That quinine under certain circumstances can induce attacks of Black-water Fever is undoubted. It is usual, however, for Europeans in the tropics to take quinine when they feel the onset of fever; and it is to be expected that in very many cases of Black-water Fever there will be a history of previous quinine adminis- tration; but a large number of cases are recorded in which, time after time, a dose of quinine has been followed with clockwork regularity by the appearance of hæmoglobinuria. Even under ordinary clinical conditions, it is the experience of most observers that attacks of Black-water Fever have in most cases been induced by quinine, the symptoms commencing within four or five hours of its administration. On the other hand, a number of cases have been recorded in which the patient had not taken quinine prior to his attack.
3 A study of recorded cases seem to point to the existence of two different conditions under which this drug may act in the production of hæmoglobinuria. In one class of case the drug may have even been frequently employed with benefit in the treatment of malaria; until perhaps one day, when a dose has been taken for what has been supposed to be an actual or impending attack of malarial fever, its administration is followed in the course of a few hours by the onset of hæmoglobinuria. In these cases it frequently happens that subsequent doses of quinine fail to produce a repetition of the symptoms; this is the condition met with in the majority of Black-water Fever cases. In another category must be placed those much rarer cases where quinine even in minute doses is invariably followed by the onset of hæmoglobinuria. The view that quinine alone is sufficient to bring on attacks of the disease, apart from an acquired predisposition, has been upheld by only a few observers. Without exception, even those who have laid the greatest stress upon the part played by this drug in the production of hæmoglobinuria, have taken care to qualify their statements by pointing out that a special acquired predisposition is necessary. So far as we are aware there is no record of any case in which the administra- tion of quinine to healthy persons has produced hæmoglobinuria. The ordinary effects of this drug upon the organism are well known and easily recognised ; cinchonism or true quinine intoxication is a familiar phenomenon among these who have to make frequent use of the remedy; and its occurrence almost always bears some direct relation to the amount absorbed; hæmoglobinuria is not a symptom of this condition, and has never to our knowledge been recorded as oc- curring in the case of persons in whom the accidental administration of an overdose has produced fatal results. It is true that more or less concentrated solutions of quinine will in vitro pro- duce hæmolysis of human blood corpuscles suspended in salt solution; but as will be seen later, when we give our own observations, it does not excercise this effect upon red cells suspended in human blood serum; and there is no evidence to show that quinine exerts a directly destructive effect upon normal human erythrocytes within the body. Obviously the action of quinine in these cases must be clearly distinguished from that of such a substance as chlorate of potash, which, innocuous in small doses, in larger quantities produces markedly toxic symptoms, prominent among which is red cell destruction and hæmoglobinuria (methæmoglobinuria). Admin- istered in poisonous doses, the action of this substance upon a person can be foretold with certainty, quite apart from any consideration of such questions as special predisposition, place of residence, country, or any other circumstance.
4 But quinine never produces hæmoglobinuria except in the case of. persons who are the subject of predisposition, acquired only after residence under special circumstances, in certain places; and even in such persons . the occurrence of hæmoglobinuria can never be prognosticated with any certainty,. save in a fractional percentage of ,cases. That cases do exist, in which this acquired idiosyncrasy is so marked that even the most minute dose of quinine is followed within a few hours by the passage of hæmoglobinuria urine has been well established; and it is the recognition of this fact which has led to the attempt to distinguish a special form of quinine hæmoglobinuria in contradistinc- tion to the class of case in which the relation of quinine administration to the onset of this symptom is not so evident, or in which quinine can be definitely ex- cluded. Many cases of Black-water Fever occurring without the administration of qui- nine have now been recorded by A. Plehn (4) (twenty-two); Cardamatis (5) (thirty- two); Theophanidis (5) (ten), Korylos (5) (three), Shropshire (8) (fifteen per cent of apparently one hundred and seventy seven cases) and many other observers. III. THAT BLACK-WATER FEVER IS A DISTINCT DISEASE DUE TO SOME SPECIFIC ORGANISM. As a result of the kindling of interest in Tropical Parasitology, which followed upon Manson's and Ross's discovery of the mosquito cycle of the malarial parasite,. protozoal infections in animals (such as the Piroplasmoses) have been brought prominently before the minds of those engaged in tropical research. The import- ance of not overlooking new human parasites was still further accentuated by the discovery of the parasite of Kala-azar, and the danger of confusing diseases of some- what like symptoms rendered very clear by the fact that up to this time infection by the Leishman Donovan Body, had been everywhere classed as malaria. Even in 1898 the apparent resemblance shown by Black-water Fever to the hæmoglobinuria of animals associated with piroplasma infections naturally pre- sented itself to anyone studying the disease. No one has succeeded, however, in- spite of much attention, in finding in the blood or organs or Black-water Fever cases a special parasite of this nature. Such a view of the origin of the disease is there- fore at present not supported by any facts; and it is even made somewhat impro- bable by a study of all that is known of the condition, notably the amount of posi- tive evidence pointing to a malarial origin, and the difficulty of fitting in a special parasite view with what we know of the action of quinine in this disease. The demonstration of the presence or absence of a special parasite is, however, of such fundamental importance, that until absolutely disproved the possibility of its presence must be given every consideration.
5 IV. THAT BLACK-WATER FEVER IS THE RESULT OF AN INDUCED CONDITION BROUGHT ABOUT BY REPEATED MALARIAL INFECTION LASTING OVER A CERTAIN TIME. Most modern observers have accepted this view, first brought forward by Stephens and Christophers (9) and later strongly supported by Panse (10). These observers, while agreeing so far with Koch that the morbid process con- cerned cannot be considered as one bearing any true resemblance to a malarial attack, formed the conclusion that it was exposure to severe and long continued malarial infection which brings about the condition of unstable equilibrium in the blood necessary before quinine, or any other determining factor, can bring about an attack of the disease. Since then much confirmatory evidence has been amassed showing that Black- water Fever is clinically most closely associated with malarial infection. But this view of the origin of the disease is not universally accepted, and certain ob- jections have been raised, more particularly by these who maintain that the .disease is a specific one with no real relation to malaria. This being so it will be necessary to pass in brief review the facts that have been ascertained in regard to the relation of Black-water Fever to malaria, and to consider in detail the objections that have been raised against the theory that it is of malarial origin. GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION. The geographical distribution of Black-water Fever we now know to be very wide. In Europe it is recorded from Italy, Sicily, Sardinia, Greece, and Spain, from Mery in Russia along the banks of the Danube, in the Caucasus and from Turkey. In Italy as Stephens (11) points out it occurs more especially in South Calabria, where the mortality from malaria, according to Celli., reaches 9 to 9.9 per 10,000, a rate double that in the Roman Campagna and more than ten times that in Northern Italy. In Asia the disease has been met with in Cochin China, Tonkin, and Siam, and it occurs also in India, Burmah, the Straits Settlements, Java, Sumatra, New Guinea, and the New Hebrides; it has also been described as occurring among certain communities in the more malarious parts of Palestine. Throughout Tropical Africa it is the chief cause of mortality among Europeans ; and it is found also in Madagascar, Burbon, Mauritius, Reunion, and the Comorro Islands. In the West Indies it was known to the early French observers; and in Nicara- gua, Costa Rica, French, British and Dutch Guiana, Brazil, Central America, and Cuba it has been recognised for a considerable time; while American physicians 227 H.D.
6 from some of the Southern States were among the first observers to describe the disease, which has a wide distribution throughout the more malarious portions of that country. That this distribution of Black-water Fever agrees in the main with that of the greatest intensity of malaria is evident; but it has been objected: (1) That in the case of many of these countries the disease has only recently been introduced. (2) That the coincidence with malaria is not exact; and more specially that there are countries notoriously malarious in which Black-water Fever is very rare, or does not exist. The converse of this latter suggestion, namely, that Black-water Fever occurs in comparatively non-malarious districts has not so far as we are aware been ad- vanced. (1) The belief that Black-water Fever had a peculiar and restricted distri- bution has been emphasised in most text-books until quite recent years. To ex- plain the constantly increasing area from which the disease is now being recorded some writers have advanced the view that in many of these countries, as for ex- ample India, the disease has only recently been introduced. This does not seem to us a conclusion warranted by the facts. In making an examination of the literature of Black-water Fever one cannot help remarking that the recognition of its geographical distribution, as we now know it, has been a very gradual process, in the history of which it is possible to distinguish certain definite periods. The first may be called the French Period, and dates from the time when Le- beau (12), Daullé (13), and Le Roy de Mericourt (14) first described the disease " Fievre Bilious Hæmaturique" as occurring in Madagascar and some of the ad- jacent islands. Almost immediately other French physicians reported finding the same type of fever in Senegambia, Senegal, Gaboon, Guiana, the Antilles, and other parts of the West Indies. Until 1858 nothing' was heard of hæmoglobinuric fever outside French pos- sessions. But in that year Verratas (15) a Greek, described what he termed "Quinine Hæmoglobinuria"; and two years later a similar communication was made by another Greek, Papabasilos (16). The American period commences from about 1860. The disease was first described by Doctor Cummings (17) of Louisiana in 1859, and it was shortly afterwards recognised in Alabama and Texas (1866). From this time onward it was reported with increasing frequency from many parts of the Southern States of North America.
7 The Italian period may be said to date from 1874 when Tomaselli (6) pub- lished his classic monograph upon Quinine Intoxication, describing cases of hæmoglobinuria seen by him in Sicily. Almost immediately, interest being aroused, the disease was shown to occur also in Sardinia and Southern Italy. About this time too the Dutch physicians (Jacobs) (18) in Java, Guinea and New Guiana discovered the presence of the affection in those colonies. From 1890 commences the German period, with Schellong's (19) well known work in Kaiser Wilhelm's Land; and from this time, co-incident possibly with the stimulation of German colonial activity, we find numbers of investigators belonging to that nation recording observations upon the disease from the Kam- eroons, German East Africa, and New Guinea. Prominent among the names of these workers are those of Grawitz and Kohlstock (20), Steudel (21), the two Plehns (3 and 4), Ziemann (22), and Koch (7). Up to comparatively recently little or nothing of the disease had been record- ed from British dependencies although French observers had already reported it from various parts of Africa, Asia, and America; and though Crosse (22a) and Manson (22b) had called attention to the disease in 1892, and from time to time a few isolated papers upon the subject had appeared in English medical journals, no adequate account of the condition had yet found a place in textbooks avail- able to the majority of British physicians practising abroad. But in 1898 as an immediate result of Manson's and Ross's great discovery a sudden and extraordinary awakening of interest in Tropical Disease was arous- ed throughout the British Empire, and within the half dozen or so succeeding years we find Black-water Fever recorded by British observers from British Cen- tral Africa (Moffat) (23), Stephens and Christophers (9), Daniels (24), Hearsey (25), India (Powell) (26), Seal (27), British Honduras (Brown) (28), Rhodesia, Uganda (Moffat) (29), Nigeria (Hanley) (30), British East Africa (Daniels), The Soudan (Ensor) (38), China (Wenyon) (31), British Malaya (Wright) (34), Burmah (Finke) (35), Syria. (Cropper) (36), Masterman (37), and elsewhere. It is obvious that a recent introduction of the disease into these countries is most unlikely. (2) In regard to the objection that the distribution of Black-water Fever is more restricted than that of malaria, Stephens has pointed out that, in many countries where malaria is known to occur, the inhabitants are not exposed to the disease in an intense form; and that if we consider the distribution of intense malaria we shall find that it coincides very closely with that of Black-water Fever. It has been stated that the distribution of Black-water Fever is not that of any of the known varieties of the malarial parasite; but it is difficult to see how
8 such a statement can be upheld for all we can say at present in regard to the dis- tribution of the different varieties of malaria is that, as one approaches the tropics, one finds infection with the malignant tertian form more and more frequent, a statement which applies also to the frequency of Black-water Fever: and that Blackwater Fever can arise from only one variety of the malarial parasite ,we have at present no proof. It is then only with the intensity of malaria that we are concerned, and the only portion of the objection that seems to merit consideration is the statement that there are certain countries which are intensely malarious in which Black- water Fever either does not occur or is very infrequent. Though it is repeatedly averred that this is the case, the basis of fact for such a statement is extremely slight. It has been stated that Black-water Fever is rare in Algeria; but the brothers Sergent (39) have within recent years recorded 31 cases with 22 deaths, and Coste (40) has reported another 25 cases, proving that the condition is far more frequent than has previously been supposed. Black-water Fever is also stated not to occur in Egypt, a very malarious country; but it is significant that it is common in parts of Palestine; and it is being reported from the Soudan north of Fashoda. The greatest stress of all is laid on India. It has been stated that, whilst people in India are much subjected to malaria and are accustomed to take quinine freely, there is no Black-water Fever; and it is the same view which has caused this country to be cited so frequently in the present connection. Manson (42) emphasizing the objection to the malarial origin of the disease says, speaking of Black-water Fever: " It is exceedingly common among the few Europeans who live in Tropical Africa, it is practically unknown amongst the many thousands of Englishmen who live in the fever haunts of India." These views would no doubt be readily echoed by numbers of medical men in India, who affirm, and we believe often quite rightly, that they have never encountered the disease. At first sight therefore it might appear that there were grounds for the asser- tion that in India while severe malaria is common Black-water Fever is gene- rally speaking rare or absent, and should this view prove on enquiry to be correct, it is obvious that it would form a serious objection. to the theory based upon the suggested intimate relations between these diseases. Before giving weight to this objection it is necessary to consider the history of Black-water Fever in India and to note the circumstances in which it has appeared.
9 Maclean (43) in his lectures upon the Diseases of Tropical Climates (1886) states, with reference to the urine in certain cases of remittent fever, that " In some cases recorded by me there was profuse secretion of bloody urine, which last- ed until convalescence set in." But Powell (26) was the first actually to recog- nise the disease, when he recorded the occurrence of a number of cases in Cachar. A little later other cases were reported from Sylhet, the Darjeeling Terai, Cachar, and the Duars. Stephens and Christophers, who described four cases from the Duars, also note in their report to the Royal Society that cases had been met with in other parts of India, including Hazaribagh, Meerut, Roorkee, and Secunderabad, while the disease is common among the Europeans in the Jey- pore Hills. They also mention that cases of the disease have been seen from time to time in the hospitals of Calcutta and Madras, though these may have originated in other places. Since then Christie (32) has recorded three cases from Canara in the Bom- bay Presidency, and DeCruz (33) a further number of cases among both Europeans and natives in the Jeypore district. Nor are these the only places in which Black-water Fever may occur in India. In our list of cases given in the present memoir we are able to record one in a European from Purulia in Chota Nagpore; and Colonel C. J. Bamber, I.M.S., has drawn our attention to the death of a European officer from Black-water Fever in the Lower Godavery district, a reputedly malarious part of Southern India. Doctor Gopal Chatterjee has also told us of two cases in Bengalis living near Calcutta, where he states there are some very malarious villages. The family in which both cases occurred had for some time been suffering from malaria, and he had on several occasions found them to have malarial parasites in their blood. Doctor Bramacheri has given us particulars of a case arising in a native of the Burdwan district. These represent, we feel sure, only a few of the districts in which the disease may be occasionally met with. Many other likely areas probably have no Euro- pean residents; but in others where Europeans and educated natives reside we suspect that careful enquiry would show the disease to exist. A common belief, that a disease having such a striking symptomatology as Black-water Fever can scarcely be overlooked, is not borne out by experience; it is only too frequently entirely unrecognised or confused with other diseases, when it occurs in districts in which it has not previously been diagnosed. As a rule where Black-water Fever occurs, men are for the most part living remote from civilization, and the disease being a sudden one and soon over a case except under special circumstances is often not seen by any medical man. Again in all such 227 H. D.
10 communities " fever" is only too familiar, and., even when a man is seriously ill, he often thinks it unnecessary to call in medical advice though this may be available. It has been supposed that the patient himself must be struck by the extra- ordinary change in his urine; and no doubt he is, if he knows that the disease from which he is suffering is Black-water Fever; but in a district where it is not believed to exist, and among a community who have only heard vaguely of the dread. disease, a man may overlook the condition of his urine and. not suspect that he is suffering from Black-water Fever. All these points are well exemplified in the case we have referred to from Purulia. It was only because he was travelling to Calcutta at the time and was taken to the General Hospital that this man came under observation; also in spite of passing through a typical attack of the disease he did. not know that he had Black-water Fever, and. had. he been in his own district the attack would certain- ly have gone un-recorded, for he and one other European were living alone in a remote part, many miles from the nearest civil station. Black-water Fever therefore does occur in. India; but it is evidently con- fined to certain localized tracts, and there can be no doubt, as has been maintained, that it is rare in the practice of the average Indian physician. In this fact lies one of the most powerful arguments for the view of the malarial origin of Black- water Fever, yet based on the grounds of geographical distribution. The areas we have especially mentioned as centres of Black-water Fever are all tracts at once differentiated from the usual conditions in India by the intensity of their malaria. Assam, the Duars, and the Darjeeling Terai we shall consider in detail later. It is only necessary in. the present connection to say that they are notoriously malarious districts. The Jeypore District is a hilly intensely malarious tract, where the European and native residents alike suffer severely from malaria. Canara, on the west coast of India, is also a hilly district with a heavy rain- fall, and it is interesting to note that before the occurrence of Black-water Fever was actually recorded by Christie, Stephens and. Christophers, judging from physical and other features, had already indicated this district as one likely to yield cases of Black-water Fever. Chota Nagpur is an extensive tract of hill country largely occupied by abori- ginal tribes, mentioned by Hirsch as one of the most malarial parts of India. Later on in this memoir we shall be able to picture what residence in such districts entails to the European and even to the native of India.
11 But these conditions are not general throughout India in spite of an impression to the contrary among those who are unfamiliar with life in this country. Malaria exists as a rule, it is true, but. in a degree in no way comparable to its intensity in the Black-water Fever districts. Europeans also, for reasons into which we need not enter here, are usually but little exposed to such infection as exists. Thus one of us, as a result of experience, found it quite unnecessary to adopt special precautions against malaria while living in the outskirts of Madras; nor did those living in the neighbourhood suffer, though a certain amount of infec- tion, by no means great, was to be found in the bazaars. This condition is expe- rienced in Calcutta, Bombay, and most Indian stations and is met with even in rural districts, for one of us passed two years in a portion of Assam (Cachar) without contracting malaria, although no special care was taken to avoid it ; but on moving to Tezpur, a Black-water Fever district, he suffered severely until from necessity he adopted the practice of taking quinine daily. Again in many large tracts of India malaria may be very rife, but only at certain seasons. Thus at Mian Mir which is one of the most notoriously malarious stations of the Punjab, malaria is only really prevalent for two or three months in the autumn; and this remark applies more or less to the whole north-west, where rainfall is scanty and there is a long period of drought associated with a cold season. Briefly stated then we may assert that the great majority of Europeans in. India are not exposed to Black-water Fever conditions, assuming that these are life in an intensely malarious district. An objection has been raised in regard to the British soldier, who is frequently exposed to malarious conditions and often suffers severely from the effects of residence in a malarious station, but apparently does not suffer from Black-water Fever. The British soldier, however, is under continual medical inspection and is almost certain if he suffers much from malaria to be invalided or drafted to some healthier place long before the necessary condition of pre-disposition has been reached. It is evident therefore, after a full consideration of the facts, that the argu- ments raised against the theory as to the malarial origin of Black-water Fever based upon the geographical distribution of that disease are no longer tenable in so far as they relate to India; for an examination of the real facts shows that where in India there is intense malaria Black-water Fever is also found. ASSOCIATION OF BLACK-WATER FEVER WITH MALARIA. That it is among communities living under constant liability to attacks of malaria that Black-water Fever is found to exist is very generally admitted; but it has been urged that this association of the two diseases is only accidental,
12 due merely to the fact that the conditions favourable for the occurrence and propagation of malaria are also suitable for the existence of the special parasite, which has been suggested as the cause of Black-water Fever. It is a very important matter then to decide whether the association of the two diseaes is mere concurrence or an actual relationship. Stephens, supporting the view of the malarial origin of Black-water Fever, brings forward direct evidence for such real relationship based on the results of the examination of the blood and tissues in Black-water Fever. He tabulates the results obtained by competent observers in ninety-five cases, and shows that in 95 per cent. of those observed the day before the attack malarial parasites were present. He also points out that the failure to find parasites in cases of Black-water Fever seen at a latter stage in no way invalidates the fact that an initial malarial infection is almost always present. Both he and Christophers had previously called attention to the subsidiary signs of malarial infection almost invariably present in Black-water Fever even when parasites were absent. Thus provided the case be seen fairly early although no parasites may be detected careful search will frequently demon- strate the presence of pigmented leucocytes, undeniable evidence of very recent infection: moreover a differential count of the leucocytes will usually show the large mononuclear increase commonly met with in malarial bloods. With few ex- ceptions also examination of the tissues of fatal cases has nearly always shown the presence of parasites or pigmented leucocytes, the latter being so distributed as to point to very recent infection. In accord with such observations are others of a clinical nature, and it is significant that in Italy where the study of malaria has been carried on with great thoroughness and minuteness, h13 In addition to these there are other facts of a more general nature which must be given due consideration. A most noticeable feature of Black-water Fever is that it occurs only in those who have been resident for some considerable time under Black-water Fever conditions; fresh arrivals are never attacked. Berenger Feraud (44), in 185 cases, has seen only one under three months' resident, the remaining 184 occurring as follows :14 non-occurrence of Black-water Fever among these people suggests either an intimate relation of such immunity to malaria, or the assumption of an exact parallel in the course of infection by some other parasite. That a man may develop Black-water Fever, even for the first time, after his return to Europe, is a fact generally recognised; and many cases occur too long after leaving a district to make it likely that the disease has been merely incubating. Of all diseases known to us malaria exemplifies this peculiarity most, and that Black-water Fever also shows it is a point not to be lightly dismissed. Panse's observations previously quoted show that such attacks are invariably preceded by an active malarial infec- tion; and it is of course possible to explain attacks under such circumstances by suggesting that the malaria has lowered the patient's resistance to the latent cause- of Black-water Fever, which then asserts itself: or that the latter has stimulated the malarial parasite into activity. In either case we must allow that Black- water Fever, like malaria, can remain dormant in the system. THE PLACE OF QUININE IN THE MALARIAL HYPOTHESIS OF THE ORIGIN OF BLACK-WATER FEVER. There is no incompatibility between the view which asserts that quinine administration may produce Black-water Fever and the malarial hypothesis, if we admit that the drug is only a determining cause, acting in conjunction with a condition induced by previous intense malaria. The malaria hypothesis certainly explains more readily than any other the undoubted action frequently exerted by quinine in the precipitation of an attack of hæmoglobinuria. Thus far we have summarized the recorded facts relating to the remoter causes which act in the production of Black-water Fever. As to the mechanism and the exact process concerned in the terrific destruc- tion of red cells we have no certain knowledge; but as may be expected this has been the subject of much speculation and conjecture. The earlier writers held that Black-water Fever occurred only when the red cell destruction, usual to a malarial attack, exceeded a certain point. It was thought that the liver, being then unable to cope with the excessive amount of hæmoglobin liberated allowed a portion of this to pass unchanged into the urine. Modifications of this view are that Black-water Fever is the result of a peculiar virulence of the malarial parasite brought about by certain conditions, such for example as their transmission through a particular species of anopheles (Daniels); or that it is due to an excess of toxines liberated by the parasite possibly under stimulation of quinine (Grocco) (45).
15 The view that asserts Black-water Fever to be a specific disease and draws an analogy between it and the piroplasmoses hypothecates that, instead of the red cells being destroyed by the malarial parasites or theirtoxines, the effect is brought about by a special parasite. The action of quinine in liberating hæmoglobin from the red blood corpuscles has been urged, and as Stephens and Christophers pointed out solutions above a certain strength possess the power to hæmolise red cells. Marchoux (46) moreover asserts that quinine is not excreted during the actual period of Black-water Fever; but that its presence may be demonstrated in the urine as that condition subsides. Bensaude (63) believes that quinine has no action on intact red cells; but that on the breaking up of these cells, it may action the liberated hæmoglobin converting it into methæ- moglobin, which is at once excreted by the kidneys as a foreign substance. He suggests that the haemoglobinæmia resulting from an ordinary attack of malaria does not usually produce hæmoglobinuria, normal haemoglobin being readily ab- sorbed, but that with the presence of quinine in the blood the reaction referred to takes place, and met-hæmoglobinur-a results. A theory advanced by Thayer (47) in 1898, and subsequently adopted by many others as a possible explanation of the mechanism of blood destruction, assumed that the red cells became less resistant than normal to changes in the osmotic tension of the plasma, and thus became liable to undergo solution. Stephens and Christophers, investigating the condition of the red cells in regard to their behaviour in different strengths of salt solution (isotonic point), found that during an attack of Black-water Fever they might show an even increased resistance to solution; though the examination of tho red cells of persons living under Black-water Fever conditions frequently show- ed them to possess less than the normal resistance. They conclude, therefore, that the apparent raised resistance observed in Black-water Fever might be due to the destruction of the weaker cells in the course of the disease, with the result that only the most resistent cells remain after an attack. Certain French workers have suggested, as an explanation of the phenomena observed in Black-water Fever, the occurrence of what they termed " demineralisation of the plasma," a condition in which they assume a reduction in the amount of salts normally found in solution in the plasma, the resulting alterations in osmotic conditions giving rise to destruction of the red corpuscles. More recently McCay (48) has brought forward an interesting hypothesis based on the observation that, after the administration of even a single dose of quinine sulphate, he finds a reduc- tion in the salt-contents (hæmosozic value) of the plasma. This he ascribes to the action of the acid radical and not to the alkaloid, as his observations caused him to believe that the administration of quinine hydrochloride does
16 not produce the same effect. In the main his theory regarding Black-water Fever is in agreement with that of the French observers previously alluded to, the process of destruction being supposed to be the result of the " demineralisa- tion of the plasma." But up to the present no observer has given sufficient data to enable an opinion to be formed as to the part played, if any, by osmotic variations in the production of Black-water Fever. Certain other theories have from time to time been put forward, the mention of which serves to indicate the general confusion and uncertainty that has for long existed regarding the process concerned in the blood destruction of Black-water Fever. Thus Pellerin (49) advanced the view that the kidney was involved, the hæmoglobin observed in the urine being derived from hæmorrhages into that organ or from the breaking down of infarcts; and Plan has also cited as a possible explanation a damaged condition of the kidneys in some way altering their relation to the blood which, in the case of certain malarial subjects, might suffer injury and be deprived of its hæmoglobin in its passage through them. Yersin (49a) announc- ing the discovery of a bacillus in the urine suggests its toxic effects upon the blood as a likely cause; and Collet (49b), influenced perhaps by the fact that the filtrate from cultures of the B. Megatherium may excite hæmoglobinuria when injected into guinea-pigs, has mentioned possible infection by that organism as a question to be considered. But of the real mechanism of Black-water Fever we are still ignorant, though certain observers, prominent among whom are the Italians, have definitely formu- lated the view that Black-water Fever is due to the action of a specific hæmolysin, and one of them Casa grandi (50) states that he has succeeded in demonstrating in malarial hæmoglobinuria such a hæmolysin masked by the presence of an anti- hæmolysin. The study of the complex phenomena into which these researches lead us is better discussed in relation to our own later investigation.
CHAPTER II. NATURE OF THE DISEASE. SCOPE OF THE PRESENT ENQUIRY. Black-water Fever is a disease localised to certain parts of the world; it is characterised by hæmoglobinuria. Apart from it hæmoglobinuria in man is rare, being seen only in occasional cases of paroxysmal hæmoglobinuria or as a rare complication in certain other diseases. On its importance as a bar to Colonial expansion we need not comment, beyond saying that it is becoming more and more recognised as a cause of death among Europeans in tropical countries. Few diseases have a more striking symptomatology, and an enormous literature has grown up Features. dealing with the clinical features, diagnosis, and treatment of the condition. Black-water Fever attacks as a rule men who have been more or less affected by the ill health so frequent in tropical malarious countries, but sometimes the disease strikes down a man who to his companions seems strong and robust. Definition Importance. Clinica. Features. There occur also in most cases what have been called prodromata. It is stated by Nothnagel that these prodromata which resemble malaria differ in presenting a more marked cold stage. Our own experience is that the prodromal fever can never be differentiated from an ordinary malarial attack, which patients themselves almost always consider it. Whether it is so in reality we must leave for further discussion. In some Cases an intermission of the prodromal fever is followed by the Black-water which comes on as though it were the fever returning, while in others no definite prodrome has been recognised. Prodromata. Almost invariably a rigor followed shortly afterwards by the passage of hæmo- globinous urine marks the onset of the disease. In the history of some cases it is stated that abnormal urine was the first symptom, and that the rigor followed, but this point we cannot ascertain with certainty. The urine first passed may be light red in colour or quite dark. In an ordinary case it is lighter at first but soon becomes of a deep mahogany red colour or even nearly black, though even then it appears claret coloured by transmitted light. With slight variations these characters of the urine continue until hæmoglobinuria ceases or suppression supervenes. At the onset the temperature generally rises to 104° F. or even 105° F. and remains high during the greater part of the paroxysm. But sometimes, especially in mild cases, the disease runs an almost a febrile course. Throughout the attack there is often extreme thirst, and usually great nausea; and the bilious vomiting with the jaundice has served to give the disease the name of " Bilious hæemoglobinuric Fever." Onset. Urine General. Temperature. General Symptoms. (17) 227 H.D.
18 In severe cases the patient is restless, complaining of want of air and with all the appearance of an acute hæmorrhage case. A symptom which may be per- sistent and distressing is pain over the epigastrium, and tenderness may be present over the spleen, which is nearly always enlarged, and the liver. Jaundice. Urine Examination. At the end of the first twenty-four hours or sometimes earlier an icteric tinge begins to show itself and rapidly increases in intensity though it never equals in degree the profound yellow colouration sometimes seen in obstructive jaundice. Blood. The urine which at the commencement of the attack may be light red, resembling laked and diluted blood, shows on spectroscopic examination the absorption bands of oxy-hæmoglobin. Later it becomes darker and more brownish in colour, appear- ing nearly black when looked at in bulk. After remaining for some time more or less uniform in tint the urine often somewhat suddenly becomes less intensely coloured and finally quite free from hæmoglobin. It is common to see in the course of an attack, especially in those that are severe, one or more periods of exacerba- tion shown by rigors and a deepening in the colour of the urine. Not infrequently the urine may clear up only for the hæmoglobinuria to return with a new accessicn of the symptoms. Along with and after the hæmoglobinuria there is urobilinuria which continues for some days, Albuminuria which during the hæmoglobinuria is often sufficient to cause the urine to become nearly solid on boiling continues in a less degree for many days after. The blood at first not markedly anæmic even- tually becomes in a severe case pale and watery, the red cells being sometimes re- duced to less than a million per c, m19 This then is the disease. It is necessary for us after we have summarized what has been ascertained and surmised by other observers as to its nature to give our own contribution to its study. Our researches upon Black-water Fever have been carried out in the Duars, a district which has gained some notoriety in India as one where Black-water Fever is prevalent. Our first step was to ascertain the conditions under which Black- water Fever occurred and to collect such general information regarding seasonal and local incidence, the relation to race, length of residence, and such other conditions as seemed likely to be of importance in determining the cause and nature of the disease. Having ascertained as far as possible the general causes bringing about Black-water Fever there still remained for consideration the immediate mechanism concerned in the disease process, and the question as to how that mechanism was set in action. Lastly, there is the possibility of suggesting a rational treatment and prophylaxis for the disease. Three main issues therefore were before us :PART II. BLACK-WATER FEVER MALARIAL IN ORIGIN. Chapter I. BLACK-WATER FEVER CONDITIONS. A glance at a rainfall map of India shows at once two areas where the rain- fall far exceeds that over the rest of India. One is a narrow strip along the Western Ghauts and West Coast. The other is situated along the base of the Eastern Himalayas and the Garo and Kassia Hills, where these ranges intercept the moisture-laden monsoon currents from the Bay of Bengal; within its limits are included the small districts of the Darjeeling Terai, the more important tract known as the Duars and the still more important and extensive Province of Assam. It is this latter area with which, we are entirely concerned, since it will be found to correspond to an area from which cases of Black-water Fever have been frequently reported. In 1898 Powell (26) records the occurrence of Black-water Fever in Assam, reporting eleven cases which had come under his observation in North Cachar. Shortly afterwards Seal (27) gave particu- lars of a case seen by him in Sylhet, another district of Assam, and six other cases in the Darjeeling Terai. In 1900 the Rev. G. M. Crozier, M.D. (51), described two other cases from Cachar; and a little later Stephens and Christo- phers noted in their report to the Royal Society that the disease was frequent in the Duars, and also referred to a letter received by them from an Assam planter mentioning that it had been recognised for a number of years in Nowgong. Since then the Duars has gained a notoriety far above Assam as a Black. water Fever country. But cases have come under the personal observation of one of us in the Darrang district (Assam), while particulars of others have been sent to us from various parts of the Province. To what conditions does the district under discussion owe the occurrence of Black-water Fever; and why is the Duars especially the seat of the disease ? OPENING UP OF THE SOIL. The belief that severe malaria is often the result of opening up the soil has long been held. To explain this, it has been customary to note that pools are generally formed suitable for anopheles to breed in, and that malaria is the ( 21 ) 227 H. D.
22 result; yet in reality this is quite an inadequate conception of the true state of affairs. We have been fortunate enough to see in several parts of the Tropics operations involving " Opening up of the soil." Such operations always involve certain conditions. The most important is the formation of enormous camps of coolie labourers and their families, drawn from far and wide throughout the district, or even from distant countries. In such camps of far more importance than mere extra facilities for breeding of anopheles are certain conditions: the mixture of races and classes involving admixture of susceptibles with the infect- ed; the depressing effects of hardship, especially affecting the weaker, who in turn by becoming malarial disseminators take their part in the vicious cycle; crowding of the population into communities larger than occur in ordinary rural conditions and not large enough to derive the benefits to be got from the urban; and many other factors we need not specify. Suffice it is to say that camp conditions play into the hand of malaria more than any others known to us; so that in these huge labour camps we find malaria in its intensest and most pernicious form. Naturally the Europeans and others employed in supervision suffer in the general trouble, since in their ignorance they dwell not apart from but in the midst of the natives. The belief that malaria comes from the opening up of the soil is therefore based upon fact; but it is not the miasmatic exhalations or even the extra facilities for the breeding of anopheles, though this too helps in the general vicious cycle, that is responsible. Its origin is bound up in the general conditions inseparable from the existence of great labour camps in the Tropics. To em- phasize the condition, which is a very real one, we may call it the factor " of Tropical Industrial Aggregation. " Much of the area we are discussing has only been opened up and occupied within the last fifty years and vast tracts are still jungle or virgin forest. It owes its recent importance mainly to the tea industry, of which it is the chief site; and our interest in the district centres in the conditions on the tea gardens, of which alone we have the knowledge necessary to enable us to speak. When we come to discuss the incidence of malaria among tea- garden popula-tions, we find that there are several points relating to the character of such popu- lations which require consideration. The introduction and gradual development of the tea industry has resulted in the necessity of employing large working popu- lations; and the difficulties, encountered in obtaining a supply of labour from among the indigenous local population has led to the introduction of vast numbers of immigrants from various parts of India. Fortunately for Assam immigration in this province has gone on under a system known as " indentured labour " which regulates to some slight degree
23 conditions of life and period of residence. This system results in an immigrant population it is true; but one with a tendency to become more or less perma- nent. The degree of permanency, however, varies under different conditions on different gardens and is closely bound up with the malarial intensity, the two factors forming a vicious cycle. Certain gardens are situated upon grants which are comparatively low-lying and include land suitable for rice cultivation ; as a result there is more inducement for the labourer to become permanently settled either on the garden or in the villages which spring up around it. The fixed character of such populations and their tendency to become spread over a wider area than that allowed by ordinary garden lines, and the fact that the number of labourers being usually more than is required for the garden work allows greater individual freedom and entails less arduous work, are all factors tending to improve the general condition of the population and lower the incidence of malaria among them. In these gardens malaria, although present to some extent among the young children, appears to affect the adult population but little; and those Europeans living on such gardens usually suffer comparatively little from the disease. It is due to preponderance of gardens of this nature that Assam as a whole is looked upon by Europeans as fairly healthy. But in other gardens the yearly influx of new coolies maintains the condi- tion of a temporary labour camp year after year. Owing to the vicious cycles thus introduced the population is invariably of a more shifting nature, the tend- ency to gravitation of its members to more healthy localities being more marked, the mortality higher, and the consequent introduction of new immigrants pro- portionately more frequent and in greater number. In Assam, gardens under this category are almost invariably situated near the foot of the hills, such a situation in Assam being therefore generally associated with intense malaria. If we ascertain the districts from which Black-water Fever has been reported, we shall find that cases have almost all originated in gardens so situated. Classified according to locality the cases of which we have the necessary particulars are:24 Sylhet .. .. 3 cases .. .. One on a garden below Jaintia Hills; one on a garden near Lushai Hills; and one recur- rence of a Duars case in a healthy district. Bishnath .. .. 1 case .. .. On a garden near the foot of the Himalayas. Tezpur .. .. 13 cases .. .. All on gardens near the foot of the Himalayas. North Lakhimpur .. 3 cases .. .. All on gardens near the foot of the Himalayas. Lakhimpur .. .. 7 cases .. .. On places known to be intensely malarious. Jorhat .. .. 1 case ... .. On a garden near the Naga Hills. Nowgong .. .. 5 cases .. .. On gardens under the Mikhir Hills. Garo Hill .. . . 3 cases .. .. Elevation unknown. But from the many gardens situated on the plains of Sibsaugor and Lakhim- pur or other places comparatively healthy as regards malaria not a single case has been recorded. In the Duars we find a system known as " voluntary labour," a system which entails a great influx and efflux of labour far beyond that in the worst gardens on the " indentured labour " system. So marked is the shifting character of the population under these conditions that we have the unique phenomenon of the whole population of a district living under conditions which resemble those seen on any large engineering undertaking in the tropics and involved in the general scheme are the Europeans and babus, who form the subject of our present investigation, since it is they who, whatever one believes to be the reason, demonstrate these conditions of industrial aggregation by the occurrence of Black-water Fever amongst them. As it is in the Duars that Black-water Fever is most prevalent, this district will serve us best for the closer study of the conditions under which Black- water Fever occurs. THE DUARS. The district known as the Duars lies along the foot of the Eastern Himalayas between Nepaul and Assam. To the west, and for all practical purposes a mere extension of the Duars, is the Darjeeling Terai. The rainfall in the Duars is very heavy, averaging about one hundred and fifty inches in the year, and this, together with the configuration of the land, which abuts immediately upon the foot of the mountains, is very favourable
25 to the spread of malaria. When first taken over by the British about thirty years ago, the Duars was mainly unbroken, forest; it owes its recent importance entirely to the tea industry, in connection with which there are in the district some 250 Europeans, a somewhat greater number of babus, and an immigrant popula- tion of about 150,000 coolies. The labour throughout the Duars is obtained under the " voluntary system," a system entailing, as we have seen, a more unsettled population and a more constant influx of immigrants into the district than the contract system; and the constant movements of the population and the contin- ual influx of new-comers has led in the Duars to such widespread prevalence of malaria as probably does not exist over a like area anywhere else in India. The most obvious features in the Duars is then the prevalence and intensity of malaria infection. We shall, therefore, pass briefly in review conditions in res- pect to this disease, and later see if there are any other conditions likely to be the cause of Black-water Fever. An idea of the universal prevalence of malarial infection may be gathered from the following list of garden lines showing the endemic index :26 Gardens. Race. Month. Numbr of children. Spleen rate. Parasite rate. Per cent. Per cent. Low-lying gardens. Bullabari .... October 104 89 86 Moneys Hope .... August 26 92 85 Sissibari .... September 40 93 90 Hati-jungle Barons .... October 44 89 98 Hazodcherra Jamadars .... October 50 90 94 North Grant Coles and Santals October 28 82 93 Hyapathia .... January 25 96 88 Chelsa District. Chalouni a Paharias August 25 72 52 b Chota Nag- puries August 25 72 52 Santals .... 25 .. .. Sam Sing, .... December 40 55 35 Kilcot .... December 44 95 83 Indong .... February 16 87 87 Nagrakata District. Luksan .... August 17 99 82 Dinatorsa District. Biniguri .... November 53 .. 70 Huntapara .... April 33 .. 70 Lankapara .... April .. 50 20 Dulsingpara .... May .. 75 60 Low-lying gardens. Huldabari .... November 34 85 94 Telepara .... November 112 95 89 Gayakuta .... November 96 93 85
27 Gardens. Race. Month. Number of children. c Spleen rate. Parasite rate. Low-lying gardens.28 the whole year they are never free from the soakage of water from springs. In- stances of such gardens are29 they take precautions, altogether escape being bitten; the majority take no adequate precautions and must certainly become the prey of anopheles night after night. When it is realised that the salivary glands of one in every four anopheles may contain sporozoits (56), it becomes evident that the amount of fever suffered from is not a question of a man having received a certain number of infections each resulting in due course in an attack, but one of some interaction between the parasite and the tissues resulting from time to time in the mastery of the former. It is very noticeable that in infection with the malignant tertian parasite there is a period of immunity following an attack so that, however heavily and frequently infected a person may be, he exhibits actual fever only at recurring periods of a week, ten days, or a fortnight. CONSTANT INFESTATION.30. OTHER CONDITIONS LIKELY TO BE THE CAUSE OF BLACK-WATER FEVER.31 the day after developed Black-water Fever. Throughout the attack was given quinine and Tincture of Warburg32 May 1903 to November 1903. England on furlough33 CHAPTER II. BLACK34 RACIAL INCIDENCE. The Europeans in the Dam Dim district are about sixty in number. Among these in the years 188735 SEASONAL INCIDENCE. Arranged in the months in which they occurred the cases of which we have been able to get particulars are36 November 1 5 December 2 January 2 February 1 3 March ... April 2 May 1 6 June 2 July 3 A closer study of these cases shews up the relation to malarial incidence still more strikingly. The thirteen cases in August, September and October were dis- tributed over the gardens Chengmari, Meen Glas, Chalouni, Nagasuri, Bagracot, Ranicherra, Monabari, Pathajora and Nagrakata, all gardens situated on high ground, which at this time of the year having many running streams is very suitable for malaria. The cases in November, December and January occurred, one case at jalpai- guri, the other four in the gardens Baradigi, Bentguri and Hahiapathia, all low- lying gardens noticeable as still having much water when the upper gardens were mainly, and in some cases entirely, dry. Meen Glas, for instance, which gave us 3 cases in August when it was intersected by innumerable small streams was found by us in January to be free from water. Of the three cases in February, March and April two in April occurred in low- lying gardens, Baridighi and Ellenbari notable as gardens where breeding places still existed when over most of the district they had long dried up. The case in May just before the onset of the rains was on a low-lying garden (Huldibari) with perennial streams. Four cases in June and July were on upper gardens (Mateli, Indong and Monabari) and occurred after the onset of the rains, at a time when anopheles on these gardens were in great profusion and the fever season had commenced. The remaining case was in a European who had a slight attack in May, and a recurrence in June, after returning (from a sea trip) to the low-lying garden on which he had contracted the disease. These are remarkable examples of the close association of Malaria and Black-water Fever, showing that the occurrence of attacks of the latter bear a close relation to the incidence of the former.
37 LOCAL INCIDENCE. This may be shown by a table in which the cases have been arranged accord- ing to the gardens on which they have occurred38 CHELSA DISTRICT. Gardens. No. of residents. Cases of Black-water Fever. Figure re- presenting liability to attack among Europeans. European. Babus. European. Babus. Others. Engo 1 2 1 .. .. 1 Nagasuri 3 3 2 4 1 .67 Chelsa 6 4 2 .. .. .3 Sathkaya 3 2 1 .. .. .3 Kilkote 2 2 .. 1 .. .. Mitale 4 3 1 .. .. .25 Baradighi .. 4 .. 2 .. .. Moortee 2 2 .. .. 1 .. Chalouni 3 3 .. 1 2 .. Aibeel 2 3 .. .. .. .. Sam Sing 4 4 .. .. .. .. Yang Tong 2 2 .. .. .. .. Indong 3 3 .. .. .. .. Kumai 3 3 .. .. .. .. Zeranti 2 3 .. .. .. .. Our own cases have occurred as follows:39 Before deducing the relative liability of persons on these different gardens to attack, it is necessary to consider in each case the number of residents concerned and also to separate from among the number of attacks those belonging to Europeans and babus, respectively. The number of Europeans on a garden in any given year varies very little, and we give the number known to us at the present time, which may be taken to represent fairly accurately the numbers exposed to Black-water Fever on those particular gardens. The cases among Europeans probably represent the actual incidence more or less accurately; among the babus, as we have remarked before, the number of cases reported is probably only a portion of those actually occurring, and this can only be relied upon as a very rough indication of the incidence for 189840 extensive coolie lines. In no other bungalow in the Dam Dim or Chelsa districts are the conditions that favour malaria so striking and pronounced. Bullabari.41 14. Girl, 4 years Spleen Nil. 15. Woman, 25 year Nil Nil 16. ,, 25 years Nil Nil 17. Girl, 3 years Nil Quartan Parasites. 18. Woman, 28 years Nil Nil 19. " 50 " Spleen Benign Tertian Parasites 20. Bearer, No. 1,30 years Nil Nil 21. Bearer, No. 2, 28 " Spleen Nil 22. Syce, 35 years Nil Nil 23. " 30 " Nil Nil 24. Grass-cutter, 14 years Spleen Nil 25. " 20 " Spleen Nil In this case all the actual bungalow servants (male adults) were getting 10 grains quinine once a week; but none of the women or children were doing so. One of the two European residents in this bungalow had Malignant Tertian infection with Crescents. Baradighi.42 EFFECT OF RESIDENCE. Of the 160 cases recorded by us, in which we have the necessary information, there is only one which may have occurred under six months' residence, this was in a Bengali child, who contracted Black-water Fever after about three months' residence at Barons, under conditions of the most intense malaria. In Europeans there have been no cases under six months' resident, and considering first attacks in Europeans, where exact data is available, we get the following results:43 Case no. 51.44 COOLIE ANÆMIA. An extremely interesting condition is we think worth recording. Planters in Assam have long recognised that a large proportion of new coolies, especially at the end of their first season, and during the whole of their second and sometimes their third year, are particularly liable to suffer from anæmia of the severest type. This tendency is most marked among certain classes notably North- Westers, Central Province coolies, Ganjamis, and people from the plains of Bengal; coolies from Chota Nagpur, the Santhal Pagannas, and the hill tracts of Madras do not suffer so frequently. The period from the second to the third season is extremely fatal for new arrivals, but once this dangerous time is passed and recovery from anæmia has taken place, acclimatization becomes more or less com- plete, and by the end of the fourth year a coolie is far less liable to suffer from sickness than he was on first arrival. A similar condition may be recognis- ed among coolies coming to the Duars. There is not the least doubt that this condition is due almost entirely to malaria, and the length of the period required for immunisation is very significant in, relation to what we have noted of the occurrence of Black-water Fever in Europeans. SPECIAL SUSCEPTIBITILY AND FAVOURING CONDITIONS, It is our experience that those who have suffered more than usual from malaria in a Black-water Fever country fall victims in a proportionately short period to Black-water Fever. The following are the cases in Dr. Brown's records in which attacks of Black-water Fever occurred one year or under from first arrival. A perusal of the cases in the complete list (vide appendix) will show that Dr. Brown has especially picked these people out as suffering more severely than usual from malaria:45 malarious conditions of which it is possible to conceive. A few months after arrival (September) the daughter was attacked with Black-water Fever, but recovered. In February following, 9 months after arrival, the wife was attacked with Black-water Fever and died. In, June, a year after arrival, the babu was attacked, but recovered. In, Dec- ember the daughter was again, attacked and died. Case 4947 CHAPTER. BLACK-WATER FEVER NOT DUE TO A SPECIAL PARASITE. INFECTIVITY OF BLACK-WATER FEVER.48 Mr. D., attacked October 1899 second attack February 1901. .. .. 2 years' resident. Mr. G., attacked May 1901 .. .. .. 18 months' " (b) Babu's house at North Grant lines. A single babu and his family only resident. Daughter, aged 8 years, attacked September 1903 3 months' resident. Wife attacked February 1904 8 " " Babu attacked June 1904 1 year's " Daughter, second attack, December 1904. Note the sequence of child, woman, and man in the order of their susceptibility to malaria (vide page 44) and early onset under extremely intense malarious conditions. Bullabari.49 of men who went to live at certain bungalows go down eventually with Black-water Fever; but in every case the peculiar feature of a certain length of residence was preserved. What usually happens, when a new-corner comes to a house in which there has been much Black-water Fever, is that he very promptly contracts not Black-water Fever but malaria. Of this we have seen repeated examples. Dr. Emlyn Jones (52) refers to a case where a nurse, who came from Calcutta to the Duars to nurse a Black-water Fever patient, was stated to have contract- ed Black-water Fever ten days later. On making enquiries of Dr. Brown, he in- formed us that the nurse came to the Duars to attend a case of Black-water Fever which was fatal in about ten days; almost immediately after her return to Cal- cutta she had merely a severe attack of ordinary malaria.* A new-comer who came from England direct to Barons in November 1907 contracted, not Black-water Fever, but severe malaria within ten days. Another person who came from Europe about the same time was attacked with- in the first month. It is difficult to believe that Black-water Fever is an ordinary infective dis- ease. If infective it must be present in some latent form; and like malaria this must be endemic. POSSIBLE ORGANISMS CONCERNED.50 East Coast Fever, a disease due to infection with P. parvum, one of the minute forms of piroplasma is characterised by visceral lesions of a marked kind; but hæmoglobinuria is not a symptom: and even, the minutest forms of piroplasma, though their demonstration may require some care in, the preparation, of speci- mens, are, if present, at once evident to critical examination. Heart-water in, sheep has been shown, by Lounsbury (53) to be transmitted by ticks (Amblyomma); and it has on, this account been, suspected to be a piro- plasmosis due to an, ultra-microscopic parasite. But here again hæmoglobinu- ria is not a symptom; and we have too insufficient a knowledge of the disease to base conclusions on, the above mentioned view of its nature. Judging from analogy, we should expect, if Black-water Fever were a piroplasmosis, to find parasites without difficulty in the peripheral blood and organs. Some other parasites (Relapsing Fever, Yellow Fever, etc.), however, give rise to a good deal of blood destruction, and even hæmoglobinæmia. (But vide extra-vascular lysæmia, Part III); we have therefore to bear in mind Spiro- ch51 EXAMINATION OF SPLENIC BLOOD. In all cases where it was possible we obtained splenic blood by puncture during life within a few minutes of first seeing the patient. The particulars of these observations are as follows :52 conditions, or in the natives living around them. In order to fit ourselves for this we studied very closely indeed the younger forms of the malarial parasites, and especially the malignant tertian variety; for the more advanced forms of simple tertian and quartan it was impossible to consider anything but what they seemed. The result of this study we hope to publish later. It is sufficient for the present to state that our own cases of Black-water Fever have shown typical examples of ordinary malarial parasites and in most of our cases recent malarial pigment was present. These observations are in accord with the results obtained by many other workers in whose recorded cases the presence of malarial pigment seems to preclude the idea of the parasite being other than malarial. The study of a large number of blood specimens taken from the adults and young children living in the immediate neighbourhood of the houses in which Black-water Fever cases had just occurred likewise failed to demonstrate the existence of any but undoubted malarial parasites. The results of a number of such examinations are recorded below:53 Children in Santal lines near babus' houses and banya's shop. 2 years .. Simple Tertian and Quartan. 4 months .. Simple Tertian. 8 " .. Malignant Tertian swarming. 6 " .. Simple Tertian. 2 years. .. " " and Quartan. 5 " .. " " 2 " .. " " 7 " .. Nil. 3 months .. Simple Tertian and crescents. 1 year .. Quartan. 2 years .. Simple Tertian. 1 year .. Quartan. 2 years .. Simple Tertian. Woman, 30 years .. Pigmented leucocytes and single small ring. Man, 20 years Nil. Children in Nagpuri lines near bunya's shop. 1 year .. Simple Tertian and crescents. 7 years .. Simple Tertian. 5 " .. Quartan. 6 " .. Simple Tertian. Servants' lines near bunya's shop Boy, 18 years .. Quartan. " 1year .. Simple Tertian. " 2 years .. " " " 8 " .. Nil. BARONS. Lines near assistants' bungalow 5 years .. Simple Tertian. 1 year .. Nil (but enlarged spleen and anæmic). 2 years .. Simple Tertian. 3 " .. Quartan. 6 " .. " 10 " .. Simple Tertian. 2 " .. Quartan. 5 " .. Malignant Tertian rings. 2 " .. Nil (new cooly). 5 " .. Quartan. 11 " .. Crescents. 1 year .. Simple Tertian. 3 years .. " " 3 " .. Nil (mononuclear increase). 4 " .. Quartan. 6 " .. Simple Tertian. 6 " .. Quartan. 227 H. D. O
54 BENTGURI. Manager's bungalow servants .. Mohamedan 30 years, large spleen, no parasites ,, 32 ,, ,, ,, ,, Cooly class 18 ,, no spleen ,, ,, 25 ,, ,, ,, Syce (Bengali) enlarged spleen ,, Assistant's bungalow servants .. Mohamedan 32 years, Black-water Fever. ,, 20 ,, Simple Tertian. Intensely anæmic Syce (Bengali) 18 ,, Simple Tertian. Intensely anæmic. Waterman Malignant Tertian. Fever at times. European. Aged 40. No parasites. Living at manager's bungalow. European. Aged 25. Anæmic. No parasites. Living until recently at assistants' bungalow. The examination, also of a number of babus living under Black-water Fever conditions, the results of which are given a little later;. showed the presence of none but typical malarial parasites. These observations appear to us to exclude the possibility that Black-water. Fever is due to a human piroplasmosis.. They do not, as we are aware, absolutely preclude the existence of a special parasite in Black-water Fever; but they tend to show that the hypothesis which puts this view forward must confine itself to the suggestion that the disease is not an ordinary piroplasmosis, or due to a blood parasite visible to critical microscopical examination. With this modification of the specific disease theory we shall deal later.
55 CHAPTER IV. SPECIFIC RELATION OF BLACK-WATER FEVER TO MALARIA. It is sometimes stated in recorded cases of Black56 Our motive for entering into a somewhat long discussion on this point is to em- phasise the fact that histories of Black-water Fever patients, who profess not to have suffered from malaria, are to be treated with grave caution. In all of our cases we have every reason to believe that, prior to the Black-water Fever, the patient had for some considerable time been suffering from repeated malarial infection. In the great majority there is very strong probability, as shown by the history, that an actual attack of malaria immediately preceded the Black-water Fever. This view was amply confirmed, wherever early examination of the patient was pos- sible, as will be seen from the following tabular abstract of our cases :
57 58 59 Case XVII.60 61 It is impossible to overlook the fact that in the majority of these cases malarial infection has been present, and that this has disappeared in the pro- gress of the attack.* Of ten cases seen on the first day six showed actual parasites and two more showed abundant recent pigment. Of the seven observations on the second day, none showed parasites; but in six there were pigmented leucocytes. On the third day out of five observations three showed a few pigmented leucocytes, none showed parasites. Of five observations on the fourth, fifth and sixth days only one showed evidence of malaria and this on splenic puncture. In both of the cases, where we have been able to study the organs, abundant recent pig- ment was present in the macrophages and leucocytes of the spleen and liver, though parasites had then disappeared. These observations do not stand alone; they reproduce very closely the relation shown by Stephens (55) in his summary of observations upon this point. Stephens' tabulation is as follows :62 DAY BEFORE ONSET. FIRST DAY. SECOND AND THIRD DAY. FOURTH AND SIXTH DAY. Neg. Pos. Neg. Pos. Neg. Pos. Neg. Pos. Percentage positive .... 60 per cent. 0 per cent. 10 per cent. Parasites and pigment Nil 10 8 7 6 10 4 Percentage .... 80 per cent. 85.7 per cent. 40 per cent. Classifying the parasite finds the preponderance of malignant tertain is very noticeable63 As we have already noted, Black-water Fever is frequently seen in babus long resident in the Duars; our cases have been as follows :65 CHAPTER V. CONCLUSIONS IN REGARD TO THE FACTORS ENGAGED IN BRINGING ABOUT BLACK- WATER FEVER. A consideration of the facts presented forces us to the conclusion that in Black- water Fever we are dealing not with a specific disease, but some stage in the progress of malarial infection long continued and constantly repeated. Stephens has already voiced this conception when he says that malarial infection displays its intensity in Black-water Fever, men dying in Africa not from malaria, but from the resulting Black-water Fever. This conception is also in harmony with the ideas suggested by Marchiafava and Bignami (56-a) in their description of malarial hæmoglobinuria. That in Black-water Fever, though induced by malaria, we see a distinct morbid process, and not a mere malarial attack, is shown by the relation of the condition to malarial infection. It is impossible to discard the evidence proving this relation; and once this view, that in Black-water Fever we have a disease, not malaria, but malarial in origin is admitted, every known fact in regard to it is em- braced in the theory: a statement which cannot be made of any other hypothesis. As we have thus unhesitatingly decided in favour of the malarial origin of Black- water Fever, that is of its being the outcome of the malarial conditions pictured in our second chapter, it may be thought that we have done so in face of a certain number of objections. This we do not allow: for a careful consideration of the facts regarding Black-water Fever show no real objections; but, on the contrary, the closer such apparent objections are studied the more obvious does the truth of the malaria view appear. Numberless objections have been raised on the misconception that Black-water Fever is in some way an attack of malaria. Such for example as that differences in the clinical manifestations of the two diseases prove Black-water Fever not to be malarial; or that a disproportion between the number of malarial para- sites and the hæmoglobinuria showed that the presence of the former bore no rela- tion to the latter. These objections are foreign to the point at issue, and apply only to theories of the disease no longer held by any recent worker on the subject. The series of objections that relate to alleged want of coincidence between geo- graphical distribution and seasonal incidence of Black-water Fever and malaria we have shown do not exist. It cannot be suggested that in recent researches too much has been taken for granted in relating Black-water Fever to malaria; the more pleasing solution would undoubtedly be the demonstration of a specific 227 H. D. R
66 organism; but the trend of evidence is steadily in favour of a malarial, as against a specific, origin, so that it seems to us reasonable to recognise the probability of its being after all malarial. Before reaching our final conclusions regarding the remoter causes which bring about Black-water Fever, it is necessary to refer once more to the theory which maintains this disease to be of a specific nature. We have seen that no piroplasma-like organism can be found, either in the peri- pheral, or visceral blood; though in the parasitic hæmoglobinurias of animals large numbers of these organisms are to be found in these situations: that nothing in the peripheral or splenic blood suggests that a minute form of piroplasma is concerned : that the examination of many hundreds of blood films from children and others within the endemic area, and more careful search in the case of numbers of people of the susceptible class, together with children and others living in direct association with Black-water Fever cases or immediately around their neighbourhood, has like- wise failed to disclose the existence of new parasitic forms. In the face of these facts those who still maintain the specific nature of Black- water Fever must do so apart from the analogy of piroplasmoses in animals, an analogy which fails at the critical point. It appears to us idle to discuss in detail the arguments for and against this contention. Those who assert Black- water Fever to be specific must be prepared to assume the existence of an organism distinct from the piroplasmata and a disease endemic like malaria but not directly infectious nor epidemic like Yellow Fever. It must require even under the most favourable conditions many months or several years' exposure to infection for its inception, and possess the seasonal and local incidence of malaria and a geographical distribution confined to countries and areas where intense malaria occurs; its manifestations must be invariably associated with coincident malarial infection, and it must possess the power like malaria of lying dormant in the system and of asserting its presence in subjects who have left the endemic area; its attacks must in the majority of cases bear a specific relation to quinine administration, and their prevention by the systematic use of quinine must be explained (vide pro- phylaxis, Part V); immunity to its action must be acquired not by recovery from attacks, which instead seem to render the subject more susceptible, but be associated with the occurrence of immunity to malaria. It must in fact always exist side by side and be inseparable from malaria and yet be distinct. The probabilities of such an hypothesis being the true explanation appear to us to be extremely remote.
67 PART III. BLACK-WATER FEVER DUE TO THE ACTION OF A SPECIAL HÆMOLYSIN. CHAPTER I. CLINICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL OBSERVATIONS BEARING UPON THE NATURE OF THE PROCESS CONCERNED IN BLACK-WATER FEVER. The features of an attack of Black-water Fever have been broadly outlined in the introduction; but it is necessary to consider the disease in greater detail. I.68 When a relapse occurs the temperature again rises and the history of the first attack is repeated. Splenic enlargement.69 for some time. The condition in Black-water Fever seems therefore to be essentially an oxy-hæmoglobinuria the formation of met-hæmoglobin being to a large degree a secondary process. The amount of urine passed varies greatly; some cases exhibit polyuria, in Others the amount of the urine is normal or diminished; in some suppression occurs very early in the disease. In the most typical condition dark urine is passed at short intervals during the first twenty-four hours, the total amount being in excess of the normal. The amount of hæmoglobin passed, calculated in terms of blood necessary to produce the colouring matter, is less than would at first sight be expected. An estimation of the amount of hæmoglobin passed in two typical cases showing as follows :70 Case XXI. Quantity. Percentage Hæmoglobin in terms of blood. Amount of blood represented. per cent. 3 P.M.71 in quantity as large as that found in Black-water Fever. We do not know enough to state what relation to the Black-water Fever process this condition may bear. Albuminuria.72 cases estimated the hæmosozic value of the urine, the result in terms of sodium chloride being as follows :73 Paying special attention to these points we have been able in several of our cases to obtain blood, both peripheral and splenic, within a few hours of the onset, and to follow out the changes from day to day. Reduction in the number of red blood corpuscles.74 none of our cases have we seen solution of the clot as described by Hayem in a case of Paroxysmal Hæmoglobinuria; it was on the contrary very noticeable in all our cases that however long the clot was left in contact with the serum short of putrefactive changes, no solution of the red cells took place. The amount of hæmoglobinæmia and its relation to hæmoglobinuria in our cases has been as follows :75 Increased coagulability.76 Films of different bloods made with as great uniformity as possible were used, and portions were chosen for observation where the red cells were distributed so as to be a little distance from one another. The cells were then passed slowly across the field of a screw micrometer eye-piece, partially occluded by means of an Ehrlich's stop, and each cell measured carefully. This method though rough gave fairly uni- form results which enabled one to ascertain better than by mere microscopic exami- nation, variations in the size of the different cells. An improvement in the method consisted in the use of a Leitz drawing eye-piece whereby accurate tracings of the outlines of corpuscles in a number of microscopic fields were made, and afterwards measured and compared. Hayem (57) has described cells of three sizes, large, medium and small, measuring 6.5, 7.5, and 8.5 microns, respectively, of which the proportions in normal blood were large and small 12.5 per cent. each, and medium 75 per cent. In our cases it was easy to distinguish three sizes of cell, but the greater number measur- ed about 6.7 microns, only a few being below 6 microns and a somewhat larger number about 8 microns. At times all three measurements were proportionately increased but never diminished. Apart from polychromasia, associated always in our experience with an increase of large forms of red cell, these observations have not shown any obvious variation in the proportions of the different sizes in Black-water Fever, or in those exposed to black-water conditions. But a peculiar phenomenon we have several times observed may be here remarked upon. In comparing the drawings described above it became evident in several instances that in series of films taken at short intervals within the first twenty-four hours of the onset of Black-water Fever, all the elements of the blood, both red cells and leucocytes, were on a larger scale in those taken later on the attack than in the earlier ones. At first it was thought that some accident might account for this condition; but careful scrutiny of the films did not bear out this supposition, for our films from long practice exhibit very little variation in the conditions under which they are made, and the increased anæmia of the later stages would lead us if anything to give less pressure to the needle at the time, so that a reduction, not an enlargement of the elements, should therefore be expected. While at the present moment we do not care to place too great stress upon this phenomenon, which we intend to study more closely, we believe it indicates some definite change, either in the cellular elements or in the plasma. Shadow corpuscles.77 which have evidently become enormously swollen and softened, apparently during the process of dissolution, for they stain very faintly except at the periphery where they become moulded by the normal corpuscles surrounding them. At other times shadows are but little larger than a normal corpuscle; but they almost always appear diffluent and are moulded by surrounding corpuscles. In addition to these large shadows there are even more characteristic quite small fragments, markedly irregular stellate or elongated in form evidently of very soft consistence and staining more feebly than normal red cell substance. That these are not artifects we are convinced, for we do not find them in our films of normal or malarial blood, nor in the blood of Black-water Fever cases except at certain stages. Many of the small shadows also exhibit appearances that we do not find even in carelessly or badly made films, where of course shadows and fragments may be numerous. Spherocytes and other abnormal conditions of the red cell seen early in the dis- ease.78 Among corpuscles stained by adding a few drops of blood to a saturated solu- tion of neutral red in 3 per cent, citrate of soda solution, are some which take on a deep brown as compared with the light yellow tint of the great majority of cells. Most frequently cells which stain in this way appear to be spherocytes; but we cannot definitely state that this peculiar reaction is one confined to spherocytes. Cells of normal size, but showing an irregular, often pear-shaped outline and pale stained centres are also seen. Cells of normal size and shape but with markedly pale staining centres are also occasionally observed. The most distinct feature of the blood in Black-water Fever is the occurrence of the shadows we have referred to. Spherocytes are by no means conspicuous in the peripheral blood; though as we shall see they may form a very important feature in the blood from the spleen. Late changes. Polychromasia and allied conditions.79 spherocytes, there is therefore with presence of polychromasia a general increase in the size of the red cells, very noticeable under the, miscroscope at the first glance. During the early stages of Black-water Fever, polychromasia is rarely seen ; it begins to be apparent after the second or third day and reaches its maximum most often when the patient is convalescent, usually several days after the cessation of the hæmoglobinuria. Nucleated red cells are not usually seen, if at all, until late in the disease ; except that they contain a nucleus they resemble in all respects polychromatic red cells. In certain cells of this nature the usual densely staining circular nucleus is not present, but its place is taken by a pair of small densely staining nuclear masses, one invariably larger than the other, but never measuring more than about 2 microns. These nuclear masses are always associated with the reddish stippling of the cells before alluded to. So called basophilic degeneration has been recorded in Black-water Fever. In our experience it is a late and somewhat rare condition generally associated with polychromasia; and we doubt if it has any relation to susceptibility to destruction of the red cells, a suggestion sometimes made. The extent of these changes will best be gathered from the following case. But the discussion of the significance of the condition is best postponed until we have studied our subject on a basis of experiment80 the sixth day there was an extraordinary degree of polychromasia, large poly- chromatic cells forming a considerable proportion of the total. Basophiles were also present. A comparative count gave. Per cent. Markedly polychromatic cells .. .. .. .. 18 Large sized corpuscles ,, .. .. .. .. 23 Medium ,, ,, .. .. .. .. 53 Small ,, ,, .. .. .. .. 4 Case XXI.81 (2) Films taken on the third day, while hæmoglobinuria was still in active progress show :82 The most striking of these phenomena is undoubtedly the appearance of the large mononuclear cells and macrophages. The disappearance or great reduc- tion of certain of the leucocytes, and the appearance of transitional forms and myelocytes, also requires some further mention. Increase in the large mononuclear elements.83 Case. Day of the disease. Polymorpho- nuclears. Large mono- nuclears. Small mono- nuclears. Eosinophiles. Case no. 18 3 65. 18. .. .. ,, 19 1 83. 9.6 1.3 6. 0. 2 67.5 8. 18. 6.5 ,, 20 1 63.7 23. 9.3 1.82 2 61.7 28.7 9.5. 2.1 3 57.4 22. 14. 1.65 4 49.4 25.5 19.8 3. 7 73. 9. 9. 5.3 21 1 73.6 18. 2.2 6. .2 2 62. 10.2 7.2 20.6 .0 ,, 24 4 75.5 11.7 12.3 .3 ,, 25 3 56.6 13.3 5.5 23.3 .5 Macrophages.84 of this type are frequently vacuolated while many of them contain the debris of what seem to be red cells along with distinct red cell shadows. The smaller cells of this type are evidently markedly phagocytic and may sometimes be found containing engulfed red blood cells, but little altered in appearance. Such cells resemble except in size the small mononuclear leucocytes with hya- line protoplasm. Type (3).85 of the disease followed by the reappearance of these elements, sometimes in considerable numbers at a later stage. Transitional cells and myelocytes.86 Kurloff (59) in the non-granular cells of guinea pig blood, which have been supposed by some to be accessory nuclei. They are certainly not accidental cell inclusions, nor do they resemble the tags of nuclear matter so often seen in polymorphonuclear and eosinophile leucocytes. VI.87 But the compact and vacuolated forms have similar nuclei and may not infrequently be seen as neighbour cells in a detached fragment of endothelium. If our conception of their nature be correct, they are the product of the fixed visceral endothelium. They are extremely active phagocytes, and actively engage themselves in the engulfment of red cells, and more espe- cially of red cell shadows. Cells resembling these but usually of the smaller type are seen in the peripheral blood; they are also very abundant in the capillaries of the liver, where they are seen laden with malaria and blood derived pigment. Type (2).88 phagocytosis, but in proportion negligible, when compared to the extent of the condition present in Black-water Fever. Several distinct conditions are to be seen89 Engulfment of unaltered red cells by phagocytes extremely noticeable (vide case in appendix). The small type phagocyte containing a single red cell very conspicuous. Shadow inclusions less conspicuous though numerous. Case XXII.90 Macrophage inclusions.91 marked in case III, but was also present in case II. In the former almost every macrophage shewed included red cells, whilst smaller mononuclear cells containing one or more were frequently seen lying free in the splenic sinuses. Large cells containing many red corpuscles as well as smaller cells containing one or two of these were also very noticeable in the radicles of the splenic vein. Liver.92 similar substance was seen with very little evidence of epithelial desquamation. As one passed downwards profound changes in the epithelium were to be seen, and the lumen was loaded with cast off cells. Also in addition to the fine granular matter were granules of a peculiar consistence, and these absent in the upper parts became larger as one approached the collecting tubules. In Henle's loops the substance formed a more or less adherent mass lying around the periphery of the lumen. In the straight ducts of Bellini the granules were nearly the size of red blood corpuscles and had somewhat the appearance of red cell substance. In the vessels of the glomeruli and of the rest of the kidney the red cells ap- peared normal and there was little or no granular material in the lumen of the veins, these containing red cells of normal appearance. A great many of the conditions we have described are evidently but the ne- cessary results of blood cell destruction. Thus hæmoglobinæmia of a certain degree is responsible for the hæmoglobinuria and for the icteric tinge. Other changes may, or may not, be necessary conse- quences of blood destruction. It is evident that before we can make use of the data outlined, it is necessary to study the process of blood destruction or hæmolysis, and especially the conditions other than Black-water Fever in which hæmoglobinuria occurs.
93 CHAPTER II. THE RELATION OF BLACK-WATER FEVER TO OTHER HÆMOGLOBINURIAS. I.94 With the condition in the horse and sheep we are not familiar; but parasites are demonstrable in the blood in both cases without difficulty. A resemblance of this disease to Black-water Fever is evident; but closer examination reveals an important difference in that the experience of all observers shows parasites to be easily demonstrated both in the blood and organs. In Black water Fever we have seen that the closest observation fails to show a piroplasma like parasite in the blood and tissues; and that this disease is not due to any direct action of the malarial parasite is shown by considerations already given. There seems then at first sight but little connection between the mechanism of parasitic hæmoglobinuria and that seen in Black-water Fever. II.95 serum was more coloured in the intervals between the attacks than during the attacks themselves. This "rouge cerise" colour is also seen in other affections, notably certain infectious diseases. As previously pointed out we have seen it when the blood received into citrate solution and centrifuged showed no hæmoglobinæmia to the present. Bensaude states that the reason for the phenomenon is the solution of the clot in the serum; this we have seen does not take place in Black-water Fever. In paroxysmal hæmoglobinuria the blood destruction is an indirect effect of the cold which has induced the attack; for blood exposed to cold does not exhibit hæmolysis. Bensaude also points out some difficulties in the way of the ordinarily accepted view of the disease. He shows that the actual red cell destruction and the hæmoglobinæmia is small and yet hæmoglobinuria results; whereas in the dog it is necessary to inject distilled water to the extent of twice the total volume of the blood before hæmoglobinæmia is intense enough to cause hæmoglobinuria. The most recent work on paroxysmal hæmoglobinuria is that of Widal and Rostaine (64), who satisfy themselves that the condition is due to a lack of protective body " antisensibilisatrice" in the blood, a condition which they were able to rectify by the prepared serum of a rabbit containing excess of this substance. The result of this treatment was that after the injection of the rabbit's serum the patient could plunge her hands into ice-cold water, without bringing on an attack; whereas previously such an act was always followed by a crisis. Hæmoglobinuria of the same nature has been observed in connection with Raynaud's disease. Barlow (65) records a case of Raynaud's disease in which there was hæmoglobinuria, epigastric pain, and temporary splenic enlargement; and Dickenson (66) notes a case where an attack of paroxysmal hæmoglobinuria was replaced by local axphyxia of one hand. Jaundice is also recorded following local asphyxial conditions. It is interesting to note that Barlow calls attention to the relation of " ague" to Raynaud's disease, several cases having occurred at short periods after recovery from tertian ague. Another condition in which hæmoglobinuria occurs is after extensive burns. The earlier observations on the blood in such cases, ascribed the distortion, sub- division and granulation of the red cells present in the condition to the effects of trauma. Later observers do not find sufficient changes in the red cell to account for their death and believe toxic substances to be developed in the blood and tissues. Locke (67) shows that an immediate decrease of 1,000,000 to 2,000,000 red cells may take place in severe cases and up to 4,000,000 in fatal cases.
96 A dissolution of the leucocytes has also been recorded. Duodenal ulcer asso- ciated with burns has been suspected by Hunter (68) to be caused by the secretion of toxic substances in the bile as a direct result of the absorption of damaged blood and tissue cells. Hæmoglobinuria following transfusion is a well known condition. Diseases in which hæmoglobinuria occasionally occurs are syphilis, septicæmia, yellow fever, malignant jaundice, enteric fever, scarlet fever, typhus fever, variola, scurvy, epidemic hæmoglobinuria of new born infants; and a few cases have been record- ed as having been met with in association with influenza, leucocythæmia, pernicious anæmia, and Wenkel's disease. Other conditions in which it has been known to occur are sunstroke, exposure to excessive cold, and to the X rays. A condition of considerable interest, of which unfortunately but little is known, is hæmoglobi- nuria of horses. This disease, which is only met with in well bred animals, appears to result largely as the result of rich diet with insufficient excercise. It occurs when horses that have been stabled for some time are exposed somewhat suddenly to fatigue. The hæmoglobinuria is associated with congestion and rigidity of the muscles, especially of those of the hind quarters. Lucet (6) believes the condition to be a kidney lesion, but there seems little ground for this view. Poor conditioned horses fed on low diet do not develop the condition in spite of fatigue or exposure III.97 These experiments, it must be acknowledged, scarcely reproduce the condition of a general lowering of the hæmosozic value of the plasma to such a point as to cause hæmolysis, but they serve to show the comparatively small effect of the injection of water unless in very large amount. IV.98 by Hunter was that excision of the spleen does away to large extent with the poisonous effect of toluylendiamin on rabbits. Chemical investigation, however, did not show that the drug accumulated in the spleen in greater amount than elsewhere; but that on the contrary in three hours the amount in the spleen had become too small to be estimated. From these facts Hunter comes to the conclusion that toluylendiamin acts in rabbits in some indirect manner. Pyrogallic Acid. When injected into rabbits pyrogallic acid leads to intense blood destruction associated with albuminuria and blocking of the renal tubules with hæmo- globin. The blood shows enormous numbers of globules derived from the red cells, and many of the corpuscles are markedly altered. The spleen is swollen, dark in colour, and contains enormous numbers of splenic cells filled with pigment. Red cell phagocytosis is also a prominent feature recorded by Celli and March- iafava (95). The liver cells do not show the pigment seen in toluylendiamin poisoning. The part played by the spleen in the blood destruction by pyrogallic acid is emphasized by Hunter who noted within three minutes after injection a swelling of the organ sometimes to three or four times its normal volume. Also, as early as fifteen minutes after injection, cells enclosing many red blood corpuscles, of- ten only slightly altered in appearance, were seen in the, spleen; but not in the liver or elsewhere. The corpuscles in the peripheral blood in many cases were perfectly normal, showing no crenation, while the plasma was quite free from granules. In the spleen on the contrary many of the corpuscles were crenated, of dark colour and exhibited other changes. Unlike poisoning by toluylendi- amin that by pyrogallic acid was not prevented by excision of the spleen. But following excision globules derived from the red blood corpuscles were more frequently seen in the peripheral blood. These experiments show that pyrogallic acid, which directly affects the red cells, acts by causing these to be held up immediately by the spleen, and that evidence of blood destruction and alteration in the peripheral circulation is very slight. In the case of rabbits poisoned by toluylendiamin the drug does not act directly upon the red cells; but the toxic substances, whatever they may be, are derived apparently from body cells under the stimulation of the drug. To the action of other poisons producing hæmoglobinuria it is necessary to refer only briefly.
99 Most of these substances as a result of direct action upon the blood produce met-hæmoglobinæmia. A certain number act indirectly like toluylendiamin. Others have a resemblance in their action to specific hæmolysins, Saponin Group, Bodies closely related to the glucosides which act upon the lipoids of the blood corpuscles. All cause hæmolysis, some in dilutions of 1 in 100,000, Some produce hæmoglobinuria; others do not. After experimental injection of such substance a latent period has been observed, lasting 24 hours or more, before the onset of symptoms of blood destruction. Snake venom. The snake venoms are related to the bacterial and specific blood toxins. They possess in varying degrees a hæmolytic action and in connection with viperine poisoning in particular, hæmoglobinuria may occur. Post mortem examination shows changes varying with the venom used, In the case of daboia venom there is intense edema and extravasation of blood at the site of the injection, the blood is dark, .and the organs congested, Histol- ogically are found, in addition to other conditions, vessels plugged with thrombi composed of more or less hæmolysed agglutinated red blood corpuscles. Lamb (72) has shown that if an initial small dose of daboia venom is given, coagula- bility is diminished; but that when a fatal dose is rapidly absorbed coagulation is increased. Bacterial Hæmo-toxins.. Fischer and Adler (73) have obtained an intense anæmia in rabbits after injec- tions of cultures of streptococci; and Grawitz (74) has observed a reduction in the red cells to 300,000 in a case of streptococcus septicæmia. Experimental injection of filtrates or cultures of typhoid, cholera, anthrax, and megatherium may produce hæmoglobinuria. Special hæmolytic substances have been isolated from cultures of certain bacteria. Among the best known are tetanolysin, pyocyanolysin, staphylolysin, and typholysin. V.100 The nearest approach to hæmo-toxic conditions likely to arise in the course of a natural morbid process is to be obtained by the use of specific hæmolytic sera. In 1898 Belfanti and Carbone (75) showed that the serum of a horse injected with red cells of the rabbit acquires a special toxicity for rabbits; subsequently many other observers extended these observations. It is now generally recognised that whenever the blood of an animal A is injected into that of another species B, the serum of the latter becomes capable of causing profound intoxication when injected into any animal of the same species as A. Bordet (85), Gruber (85), Ascarelli (85), Landsteiner (85) and Von Dungern (85) have specially investigated this form of toxicity together with Levaditi (76), Celli, Cassagrandi and Carducci (77), while the reactions of the same nature, to be observed in vitro, have occupied a host of workers, prominent among whom are Ehrlich and Morganroth (78). It seemed to us important, in order that we might obtain an insight into the processes concerned in Black-water Fever, to undertake certain experiments of this kind, and to ascertain if possible the mechanism of the hæmoglobinuria that can be produced in animals by the use of these specific hæmolytic toxins. The experiments carried out by us have been made on dogs injected with the serum of a goat immunised by repeated injections of defibrinated dogs blood. The goat received a number of such injections repeated at intervals of a few days, which had the result of producing within a month a serum both hæmolytic in vitro, and markedly toxic in vivo. Our experiments with this serum are as follows :101 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75060583.tif] Liver not obviously enlarged. Dark in colour. Kidneys normal in appearance. Urine in bladder free from hæmoglobin or urobilin. Mediastinal glands are many of them dark red in colour. Blood resembles a weak emulsion of corpuscles. That flowing from the hepatic vein shews to the naked eye an agglutinated appearance. Received into N/8 salt corpuscles are hæmolysed. Hæmoglobinæmia as tested by receiving blood in 1 per cent. salt solution and centrifuging not detectable in any of the following situations:- Peripheral blood. Heart blood. Blood from mesenteric vein. Blood from hepatic vein. Blood from inferior vena cava. But blood separated from clot of peripheral blood was rosy red. Microscopical examination of organs. Spleen.102 Liver.103 Dog. IV.104 Autopsy105 Dog VII.106 4 p.m., 7th March 1908.107 Lungs.108 of 20 or 30. In the spaces between the clumps were many large somewhat polychro - matic cells. The centre of the clumps were mainly composed of small dark cells, and there were frequently seen leucocytes which had formed it would seem a nucleus of agglutination. Ghosts are seen of all sizes, some being slightly larger than red. cells, but they are mainly smaller and often evidently composed of portions of cells only. Polymorphonuclears containing red cells are frequent. Cells are as follows :109 Kidney.110 1 p.m., 14th March 1908.111 (1) Washed blood corpuscles from portal vein + serum of normal dog = no hæmolysis or agglutination. (2) Washed corpuscles from portal, hepatic, and renal veins and from ventricles left in sugar and salt solution at 37° c., no hæmolysis or agglutination. (3) Washed portal blood corpuscles + crushed liver substance = marked agglutination, no hæmolysis. (4) Washed spleen pulp in sugar and salt solution at 37° c. no hæmolysis, doubtful agglutination. Hæmosozic value is about .938 per cent, salt. Centrifugalised renal blood shows tendency to form agglutinated masses with free polychromatic cell. Centrifugalised portal blood showed a good deal of red cell phagocytosis. Dog XII. 112 Engorgement of visceral veins, portal, renal, and inf. vena cava very noticeable. Blood from different sources diluted 5 times with 5 per cent. citrate solution and. centrifugalised showed 113 CHAPTER III. GENERAL CONSIDERATION OF BLOOD DESTRUCTION IN RELATION TO HÆMOGLOBINURIA. Levaditi (76), studying the result of the injection of specific haemolytic sera, concludes that the principal cause of the anæmia in animals so treated is an intense phagocytosis of the red cells in the spleen. The fact that such an intense phagocytosis takes place will be evident from a study of our experi- ments upon dogs. It is even more important in our present connection to note that hæmoglobinæia was not necessarily associated with this form of blood destruction. As soon, however, as hæmoglobinæmia came about hæmoglobinuria fol- lowed. In these experiments then the hæmoglobinuria was no mere measure oft he amount of hæmoglobinæmia, but an indication that such a condition had supervened. This conclusion is supported by our observations upon Black-water Fever, for in this disease hæmoglobin is excreted in the urine even when hæmoglo- binæmia is scarcely to be detected by the spectroscope. Hunter (68) also comes to the conclusion that hæmoglobinæmia in the peripheral circulation however small in amount leads to hæmoglobinuria. On these grounds it appears reason- able to conclude that hæmoglobinuria and hæmoglobinæmia are concomitant phenomena, the former necessarily following the appearance of the latter. Against this view there are the observations of Ponfick (69) who found that on injecting laked horses blood into dogs no hæmoglobin was ex- creted until the amount free in the circulation reached one-sixtieth of the total hæmoglobin of the body. But that these experimental data do not apply in Black-water Fever is certain, since hæmoglobinuria commonly occurs as we have seen with an amount of hæmoglobinæmia much less than would be caused by the presence of one-sixtieth of the total hæmoglobin, and may be present when the amount of hæmoglobin in the plasma is so small as to escape detection. Again in many conditions hæmoglobinæmia has been described as present without the occurrence of hæmoglobinuria; but these observations seem all to refer not to the recognition of hæmoglobin in solution in the plasma, i.e., true hæmoglobinæmia, but to the presence of hæmoglobin in the serum exuded from the blood after this has clotted. Such observations as we have previously pointed out are open to grave error. They may relate, indeed, to quite a distinct condition, the recognition of 227 H. D. 2F
114 which is in itself of great importance, namely, that, on clotting of the blood, solution of a certain number of red cells has occurred. Murri and Justus allowed blood obtained by venesection from thirty syphilitic patients to clot at a high and a low temperature. In the former twenty-eight out of the thirty showed a reddish serum, but in all the latter a clear serum exuded. Here then the reddish serum was not an indication of the existence of true hæmoglobinæmia. Other examples are given in the case of dogs 1 and 2 (vide experiments). Until therefore we have observations specifically noting the presence of hæmoglobinæmia in the plasma as against its presence in the serum after clotting, we are unable to judge whether in such cases true hæmoglobinæmia unassociated with hæmoglobinuria is present. Another very important point emphasized by these experiments is that until hæmoglobinuria supervened, the most severe blood destruction was unassociated with the presence of hæmoglobinæmia. Even very large doses of the hæmolytic serum though they produced a correspondingly more rapid and intense anæmia did not on this account give rise to hæmoglobinæmia, and the anæmia seemed due almost entirely to removal from the circulation of damaged corpuscles and their eventual engulfment by macrophages. Since hæmoglobinæmia does not necessarily result from the most intense blood destruction its appearance must depend upon some new factor or super-added condition. This new condition seems to us to be the solution of the red cells in the plasma, in contra-distinc- tion to their retention in the organs, and their ultimate phagocytosis and intra- cellular digestion. Therefore we have two forms of blood destruction to consider. (1) The holding up and immediate, or ultimate, phagocytosis of red cells, apparently unassociated with any extra-cellular solution. This method of red cell destruction we propose to call for convenience of description " ERYTHROKATALYSIS." (2) That condition, in which the red cells undergo solution in the plasma, and in which results true hæmoglobinæmia followed by hæmoglobinuria. This condition we propose to call " LYSÆMIA," The condition met with where true hæmoglobinæmia is not present; but where the blood after clotting shows the presence of hæmoglobin dissolved in the serum may be appropriately named, " EXTRA-VASCULAR LYSÆMIA. " I.115 The cells in which ingested red blood corpuscles are seen have the same gen- eral characters as those seen in Black-water Fever; they are : (1) Comparatively small cells containing a single red corpuscle, which is generally either normal in appearance or only slightly altered. These cells possess the same crescentic nuclei and scanty protoplasm, just sufficient to surround the engulfed red cell, already noted in those seen in Black-water Fever. (2) Large cells evidently of the same type, but containing many more red cells, exactly resembling those described in the spleen in Black-water Fever. Besides being present in the splenic pulp and liver capillaries, cells of this nature were extremely abundant in the blood from the splenic and hepatic veine, They appear to be actively engaged in transporting engulfed red cells. As large numbers are present in the hepatic blood, but are not seen in the peripheral circulation, it seems probable that many of them are stopped in the capillary system of the lungs. Many cells of this type are found surrounding dense masses of red cell substance. The nucleus is pushed to one side and the protoplasm forms a scarcely perceptible envelope. They more nearly resemble masses of hæmoglobin than cells. (3) Endothelial plaques which often consist of several imperfectly differ- entiated cells. They are almost certainly derived from the visceral (splenic and hepatic) endothelium. Like the last mentioned cells they are common in the splenic and hepatic veins and occur occasionally in the peripheral blood. They contain debris of various kinds, including altered and unaltered red cells, vacuoles and fragmenting masses of nuclear matter or en- gulfed leucocytes. (4) Polymorphonuclear cells.116 But in some case the engulfed red cells takes on a greenish tinge, and gradu- ally becomes converted into a dull greenish mass; this latter change is however not very frequently seen. Engulfment is most active in the spleen, it is somewhat less so in the liver capillaries; and is but little in. evidence in the kidneys and bone marrow. In the lung capillaries it was very conspicuous, and some of them were filled with rows of macrophages and polymorphonuclear cells containing engulfed red cells. Erythrokatalysis in Black-water Fever is not then very noticeably different from that seen in the experimental conditions we have described. II.117 that the blood was acted upon by agglutinins which were present in the speci- fic serum employed. III.118 The following observations will make this apparent:119 Dog 8. 3 c.c. goat's serum injected 11 A. M., 5th March 1908. Percentage salt 1.00 .91 .87 .71 .66 .59 .55 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... 4-30 P.M., 5th March 1908 Nil Nil tr hh inc H inc H .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... 8 A. M., 6th March 1908 tr h inc H inc H .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Hæmoglobinuria dur- ing night of 5th March 1908. 5 P.M., 6th March 1908 Nil tr h inc H .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... 8 A. M., 7th March 1908 Nil tr h inc H inc H .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... In 5 per cent. salt, no trace of tint. Dog 9. 6 c.c. goat's serum injected 11 A.M., 6th March 1908. 1.5 c.c. " " " " 10-30 A.M., 8th March 1908. Percentage salt 1.00 .91 .83 .71 .66 .59 .55 .525 .50 .475 .45 .425 .4 .375 .... 5 P.M., 6th March 1908 Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil h inc H .... 8 A.M., 7th March 1908 Nil Nil Nil h inc H inc H .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... 10-30 A.M., 8th March 1908 .. tr h hh inc H inc H inc H .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... 5 P.M., 8th March 1908 tr h h inc H inc H .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Hæmoglobinuria Hæmoglobinæmia.
120 Dog 10. c. c goat's serum injected 5 P.M., 13th March 1908. Percentage-salt 1.00 .91 .83 .71 .59 .50 .475 .425 .. .. .. .. .. .. .... 7th March 1908 Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil h inc H .. .. .. .. .. .. .... 10 A.M., 14th March 1908 Nil Nil Nil Nil h hh .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Many spherocytes. 9 P.M., 14th March 1908 Nil tr h hh .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. No hæmoglobinuria. 1 P.M., 15th March 1908 Nil tr tr hh inc H .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Ditto. 9 P.M., 15th March 1908 Nil Nil tr h .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Ditto. 16th March 1908 Nil Nil tr h .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Ditto. Dog 11 6 c.c. goat's serum injected 5 P.M., 13th March 1908. Percentage salt 1.00 .91 .83 .77 .71 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... 8 A.M., 14th March 1908 Nil h inc H inc H .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... 121 Dog 12. 3 c. c. goat's serum plus 10 c.c. normal goat's serum injected. 3cc goat's serum injected 5 P.M., 15th March 1908. Percentage salt 1.00 .91 .83 .77 .71 .66 .59 .55 .50 .. .. .. .. .. .... 8 A.M., 14th March 1908 Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil tr h hh .. .. .. .. .. .... 4 P.M., 14th March 1908 Nil Nil tr tr h h h .. .. .. .. .. .. .. No hæmoglobin in urine. 9 P.M., 14th March 1908 Nil Nil tr .. h .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Ditto. 4 P.M., 15th March 1908 .. tr h inc H inc H .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Ditto. 5 P.M., 15th March 1908 Nil Nil tr h .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Ditto. 8 A.M., 15th March 1908 Nil tr hh inc H inc H .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Ditto. 4 P.M., 16th March 1908 tr* hh inc H .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Hæmoglobinuria and hæmoglobinæmia. * Trace also in 5 per cent. salt. 227 H D 2 H
122 In order to see whether this effect, clearly demonstrated upon dogs, was of general application, we used another species of animal, namely, rabbits. As we had not at hand a specific serum hæmolytic for rabbits blood we utilised (1) daboia venom, (2) cobra venom lecithid. The results of these experiments in regard to the isotonic point were as follows :123 ISOTONIC POINT. .82% .71 % .62 % .52 % .45 % .425% .4% 8 A.M. 0 0 0 0 0 tr. nearly com- plete. 4 P.M. 0 tr. nearly com- plete. nearly com- plete. nearly com- plete. .. .. No hæmoglobinuria. Experiments with cobra venom lecithid. Rabbit No. 1.124 An important deduction to be made from these results is that, if a raised isotonic point be shown in Black-water Fever, it would not necessarily show lysæmia to be the result of changes in the osmotic relations of the plasma and corpuscles, but it would be presumptive evidence of the presence of a hæmotoxin. IV.125 No such association of lysæmia with the isotonic point seems to be present in Black-water Fever, in which disease there is as we shall see no obvious change or variation in the isotonic point during hæmoglobinuria. V.127 CHAPTER IV. THE LYSÆMTA OF BLACK-WATER FEVER. The facts we have brought forward throw a good deal of light upon the nature of the Black-water Fever process. It becomes evident that it is not the mere amount of blood destruction but the nature of the process that is the fundamental actor in the causation of the hæmoglobinuria of Black-water Fever. Viewed in this light it is no longer difficult to see why in the severest attacks of malaria, although blood destruction may be very great, hæmoglobinuria does not result. The loss of red cells in an acute initial attack of malaria may amount according to Kelsch (73) to 1,000,000 per c.m. in one day, and Dionisi (73) has observed a fall of 500,000 per c.m. in twelve hours; yet these cases showed no hæmoglobinuria. On the other hand cases of hæmoglobinuria have been observed in which the maxi- mum loss of red cells amounted only to 129,000 per c.m. (Bristowe and Copeman). In malaria we have an example of what we have termed " erythro-katalysis "; in Black-water Fever the process is essentially a lysæmia. In malignant tertian malaria some of the most noticeable features of the condition are128 It still remains for us to ascertain, if possible, the actual nature of the lysæmia of Black-water Fever, whether it is due to change in the osmotic relations, chemico- toxic bodies, or to the production within the body of some specific hæmolysin. BLACK-WATER FEVER NOT DUE TO CHANGES IN OSMOTIC RELATIONS OF THE RED CELLS AND PLASMA. Hamburger (73) , Von Limbeck (80), and others have studied the behaviour of red blood corpuscles in salt solutions of different strengths. If blood corpuscles be placed in salt solutions weaker than the plasma in which they have been bathed they do not necessarily become destroyed; only when the salt solution is consider- ably weaker than the plasma does this happen. Human serum, which for all practical purposes in this connection, may be considered as approximately repre- senting the condition of the plasma, is estimated to have an osmotic tension equal to .9 per cent. sodium chloride solution (Hamburger). But human red cells become hæmolysed only when a salt solution below about .46 per cent. salt solution is so used. Such a percentage which is just above the strength of solution necessary to cause laking has been called the " Isotonic point." It will be obvious that the isotonic point in itself represents no re al quality but measures only one kind of resistance of the red cell, the limit of its power to resist want of osmotic relation between its own substance and the plasma. This resistance is we have just seen so great that for hæmolysis to take place in the body by a reduction in the osmotic tension of the plasma would require, provided the isotonic point remained the same, a reduction of the salt content of the plasma to one-half or more of the normal. This fact explains why under normal circumstances an equal volume of distilled water added to one of blood does not result in marked laking, and also makes it evident that enormous reduc- tions in the salt content of the plasma may take place without any danger of hæmolysis. But if the power of the red cells to resist laking vary, as indicated by the isotonic point, so that they can stand less osmotic strain, then so much the more is reduction in the salt content of the plasma likely to lead to hæmolysis. In investigating the condition of the blood in Black-water Fever It is necessary there- fore to consider both corpuscles and plasma, and to estimate both the isotonic point on the one hand, and the hæmosozic value (osmotic tension of plasma) on the other. Isotonic point,129 moments, and centrifuging. It is well known that all the blood cells are not of equal isotonicity so that a considerably weaker salt solution is required to produce complete or nearly complete hæmolysis than to show a tint due to solution of the few less resistant corpuscles. In our experiments using fused sodium chloride the first trace of laking in normal blood was generally distinctly visible in a N/13 salt solution, equal to .449 per cent. A quite distinct colour was given at N/14 or .417 per cent., and as a rule marked but still incomplete hæmolysis at N/15 or N/16 Estimates of the percentage of hæmoglobin set free at each dilution of the series were made by comparison with standards, prepared with known precentages of the blood in, distilled water. With slight variations they usually showed as follows :130 The isotonic point in Black-water Fever.131 Again in cases of malaria we have sometimes seen small variations which may, or may not, have significance in so far as they demonstrate the action of this disease on the blood. Of large variations at all likely to lead to hæmolysis in a condition of even markedly lowered strength of the plasma we have no evidence. In such persons whom we judge to be possible subjects of Black-water Fever in the near future, again we find only changes of extremely small degree. These facts will be clear from the following list of observations :- Isotonic point of Europeans resident in the Duars. Series 1. Percentage of salt N/12 N/13 N/14 N/15 N/16 N/17 New-comer Has had no malaria for many years.Control I. Nil tr. h inc H inc H .. New-corner Has had no malaria for a long period.Taking quinine 5 grs. daily.Control 2. Nil tr. h inc H inc H .. Old resident 20 years in the Duars Nil Nil tr. hh inc H .. Resident 5 years in the Duars Nil tr. h inc H .. .. " " " " " " Nil Nil h inc H .. .. " " " " " " Nil tr. h inc H .. .. " 2 years in the Duars suffering much from fever. Anæmic. Heterogeneity of corpuscles marked. Nil tr. h inc H .. .. " 1 year.Much fever Nil Nil h h .. .. Series 2. Old resident After fatiguing journey tr. h hh inc H .. .. " " Next morning. 10 grs. quinine the previous night. Nil Nil tr. h hh .. " " Jalpaiguri. Healthy condi- tions. Nil Nil Nil tr. h .. Control 2 .... Nil Nil Nil Nil tr. ..
132 Isotonic point of Europeans resident in the Duars.133 Isotonic point of servant class. Percentage of salt N/12 N/13 N/14 N/15 N/16 Madrassi First attack of fever tr. tr. h inc H .. " Next morning. Fever till 5 A. M. Benign tertian parasites. Had 10 grs. quinine previous night. Nil tr. h inc H .. " 5 days later Nil Nil tr. hh .. Control .... Nil tr. h inc H .. Percentage of salt .525 .5 .475 .45 .425 Marwari 5 years in the Duars. Anæmic. Spleen three inches below costal margin. Nil tr. tr. hh inc H Isotonic point of coolie class. Percentage of salt N/12 N/13 N/14 N/15 N/16 Series Coolie Fever. Benign tertian parasites Nil Nil tr. h .. " Fever. M. T. infection Nil Nil tr. h .. Control I .... Nil tr. h inc H .. Coolie Anæmia Nil Nil tr. .. .. " .... Nil Nil tr. .. .. Native child 8 years old. Anæmia. Fever Nil Nil tr. .. .. Percentage of salt .475 .45 .425 .4 .375 Series 2. Jaundice. Serum bright yellow. Bile in urine. A few M. T. rings. Nil Nil Nil Nil tr. Coolie Anæmia. Enlarged spleen Many nucleated red cells. Nil Nil Nil tr. .. 227 HD 2 L
134 Isotonic point of coolie class. Percentage of salt N/12 N/13 N/14 N/15 N/16 Coolie 1 year resident. Fever. Enlarged spleen. Numerous S. T. rings. Nil Nil Nil Nil tr. " 1 year resident. Quartan parasites Nil tr. h hh .. " Anæmia. Numerous S.T. parasites Nil Nil Nil tr. .. Bhutia .... Nil Nil tr. .. .. Control 2 1 month resident. S. T. parasites Nil Nil tr. hh .. Coolie Next day after 15 grs. quinine Nil Nil tr. hh .. " .... Nil tr. h hh .. Isotonic point after administration of quinine. The following are observations upon the effect of the administration of qui- nine sulphate upon the isotonic point:135 The action of quinine on the isotonic point, if it exists, is a small one that can have no effect in regard to hæmolysis by osmotic variations. H136 cells has supposedly taken place.But this is unsatisfactory owing to the ex- traordinary persistence of the most resistant cells as shown by the following series of observations :137 By the use of a sharp spear-pointed lancet or other suitable pricker it is easy to obtain one, two, or even more cubic centimeters of the blood to be tested. This blood is allowed to clot in a suitable tube under conditions which preclude any drying action and the serum is used in preparing a series of dilutions. Of these dilutions ½ c.c. are arranged in small tubes and 10 c.m. of one's own blood added After centrifugalisation one has a series comparable with another series of one's own blood put up in the ordinary way for the estimation of the isotonic point thus:138 H139 Next morning observations repeated with different blood as an indicator gave exactly the same results with several trials. Therefore the hæmosozic value equals 2 (45 per cent.) or 9 per cent. salt. European. No quinine for several months previously. Blood taken at 10 A. M. Shortly after, quinine sulphate grains 15 with minims 15 dilute sulphuric acid was administered. Blood taken at 12 A.M., 5 p.m. and next morning. .5 c.c. serum dilutions. .5 c. c. salt solutions. S/2.2 S/2.3 S/2.5 .475 .45 .425 .4 10 A.m. Nil trace distinct Nil Nil trace. distinct Hæmosozic value equals 2.2 ( .45 per cent. ) or .99 per cent. salt. At 12 A. M. 5 P. M. Next morning serum gave S/2.2 S/2.2 S/2.2 S/2.3 Nil Nil Nil trace Hæmosozic value therefore equals 2.2 (.45 per cent.) or .99 per cent. salt. We have not therefore been able to find the reduction in the hæmosozic values noted by McCay after the administration of quinine sulphate. These obser- vations are, however, at present few in number, and further work will be required before it can be decided with certainty whether some reduction does not take place. In the meantime there are strong reasons for disbelieving that this sup- posed action of quinine sulphate has the slightest influence in the causation of Black-water Fever. That an attack may follow upon administration of the hydrochloride as well as of the sulphate of quinine is shown by reference to the literature. Vedy (96) gives two cases where Black-water Fever occurred after administration of the hydrochloride and three out of the six cases investigated by Werner (58) were after 1 gramme .4 gramme and .6 gramme respectively of quinine hydrochloride. Again if slight alterations in the salt contents of the plasma are shown some- times to take place as a result of the ingestion of sulphates, we have no reason to
140 believe that the alteration can extend to such a range of osmotic tension as separates the isotonic point and hæmosozic value in Black-water Fever; nor are we justified in concluding that such a reduction bears any causal relationship to an attack. It is of interest to note in this connection that when in one of the experi- ments on dogs the isotonic point as a result of the injection of specific serum had been raised nearly to the hæmosozic value (i.e., an isotonic point of 83 per cent. salt solution and a hæmosozic value of about .9 per cent. salt) a dose of quinine sulphate equivalent in amount to a 30 grain dose in man dissolved in dilute sulphuric acid did not precipitate the onset of hæmoglobinuria (vide deg 7) BLACK-WATER FEVER NOT DUE TO CHEMICO-TOXIC ACTION. The great majority of the chemical hæmolytic bodies give rise to met-hæmo- globinuria. A case of met-hæmoglobinuria in a human subject has been described by Hayem (85). In this instance the substance giving rise to the condition was unknown, but it was some poison exerting a profound effect upon the red cells, causing met- hæmoglobinæmia and the appearance of this substance together with oxy-hæmo- globin in the urine. To microscopical examination the red cells appeared small, deformed and brownish in colour and were collected into groups. Decolourised elements were also to be observed, and leucocytes were very abundant, many of them being of great size. In dried films the alterations in the red cells appeared even more marked. They showed fragmentation and abnormal colouration. Polymorphonuclear cells were relatively diminished, but absolutely increased in number. The pro- portion of mononuclears was notably increased, this increase being principally due to elements of large size with clear protoplasm. At the same time the blood as a whole was greatly diminished in spite of an absence of excretion. This reduction was also associated with anæmia, the red cells being a little over 1,000,000 per c.m The serum showed the spectrum of met-hæmoglobin together with that of exyhæmoglobin. It is evident that, though in Black-water Fever a certain amount of met- hæmoglobin may be present in the urine, the process is one of a liberation of oxy-hæmoglobin. Not only is the serum tinted with oxy-hæmoglobin, as shown by the spectroscope, but, if the urine be examined shortly after it is passed, it is quite common to find only the merest trace of met-hæmoglobin; although oxy-hæmo- globin is present in abundance.
141 We can therefore eliminate from among the possible causes of Black-water Fever most chemico-toxic substances; even did the clinical evidence not enable us to do so. The only substance that it is really necessary to consider in this relation is quinine, which has often been credited as the cause of Black-water Fever. The hæmolytic effect of quinine hydrochloride has been shown by Stephens and Christophers, who found that it extended to four or five dilutions of a saturated aqueous solution. We have repeated and confirmed this Obs rvation, and have made other experiments both with the hydrochloride of quinine and the pure alkaloid. The latter is extremely insoluble but suspensions in .9 per cent. salt solution appear to exert no hæmolytic effect upon canine or human red cells. With regard to the action of saturated solution of quinine hydrochloride the following procedure was adopted. A saturated solution was first prepared containing approximately 3 per cent. (Attfield (86) states that this salt is soluble in 34 parts of water.) This saturated solution was then made up by the addition of sodium chloride until it contained .9 per cent.of the latter salt. On the addition of 200 c.ms. of this solution to suspensions of 10 c.ms, of human blood in ½ c.c. .9 per cent, salt solution nearly complete hæmolysis took place, both in the case of a normal and a Black-water blood. But when in the case of both normal and Black-water blood suspensions, the addition of 150 c.ms. of (a) normal and (b) Black-water serum was made prior to that of the quinine solution, a reaction occurred accompanied with the precipitation of the quinine as a fine white powder. Prolonged centrifuging failed to entirely clear the supernatant fluid which remained slightly clouded but showed no trace of hæmolysis. In what form quinine may exist in the circulating blood we do not know; but Stephens and Christophers found that cinchonised serum taken from a healthy subject shortly after the administration of 2 grms. of quinine when sub- jective symptoms were present, exerted no hæmolytic action upon the blood of a Black-water Fever case. A consideration of these facts, together with those already referred to in Part I, seems to exclude the action of quinine in itself as being the cause of the lysæmia of Black-water Fever. The indirect action exerted by this substance in the production of this con- dition must be left for future consideration. 227 H. D. 2N
142 BLACK-WATER FEVER DUE TO THE CTION OF A SPECIFIC HÆMOLYSIN. The resemblance between the action of specific hæmolytic serum and Black- water Fever is very striking. It is easy to understand that in a crudely prepared serum (containing all the elements of the blood) wherein especially powerful agglutinins existed, the pro- minence of the erythro-katalytic process might be more accentuated than in Black-water Fever. But though lysæmia is the characteristic feature of Black-water Fever our observations show that both processes of blood destruction, which seem charac- teristic of the action of blood destroying toxins acting in different ways, are con- cerned in Black-water Fever. Parasitic, osmotic and chemical actions we have excluded as causes and it seems to us therefore most probable that Black-water Fever is due to some specific hæmolysin arising within the body as a result of the conditions we have pictured in the earlier parts of this memoir.
143 PART IV. NATURE OF THE HÆMOLYSIN IN BLACK-WATER FEVER. CHAPTER I. HÆMOLYSINS. We have previously referred to sera which are able to destroy red cells of a particular animal both in vitro and in vivo. It is necessary before going further to study more closely these specific hæmo- lytic bodies. Bordet (85) was the first to show that the serum of guinea pigs, after they had been injected several times with 3 c.c. to 5 c.c. of defibrinated rabbit's blood, acquired the property of dissolving rapidly and intensely, in a test tube, the red cells of a rabbit; whereas such action by normal guinea pig serum is either absent or very feeble. This acquired property Bordet showed to be a specific one, but based upon a principle of general application. An animal of species A injected with the red cells of an animal of species B developes in, its blood a, greatly increased or entirely new solvent power for red cells of species B. The study of this specific hæmolytic action has since gone on hand in hand with that of the bacteriolysins and other phenomena connected with immunity. Bordet discovered that heating the hæmolytic serum to 55° Cent. for half an hour destroyed its solvent action; but that the addition of normal serum, itself devoid of hæmolytic power, restored this lost property. Since then there has grown up a large body of facts relating to the" immune body," " sensibilisatrice " or amboceptor," the thermostable body in hæ- molytic sera and the " cytase," " alexine " or " complement " the thermolabile substance, which in combination with the immune body or amboceptor forms the complete and active hæmolysin. In a literature so extensive as that relating to hæmolysis it is undesirable to follow the increase in our knowledge step by step. But it is necessary, in order that our own observations may be more easily followed, to give the chief facts known regarding the action of hæmolysins. The principal fact, the existence of two separate substances combining to form the active hæmolysin, has already been, noted. According to Ehrlich's theory, which in its main propositions is now generally accepted, a hæmolysin consisting of an amboceptor plus a suitable complement can only act upon red cells with possess " side-chains " or " recep- tors" which fit the " haptophore group " or cell combining affinity of the ambo ceptor. We have thus to deal with three essential factors in hæmolysis by specific hæmolysins.
144 RECEPTORS. These according to Ehrlich's theory are side-chains in the central protoplasmic molecule of a cell, capable of combining with other free or external groups or receptors.; It is upon these combining affinities that the cell is dependent for its normal metabolism; but their existence also exposes it to the toxic effects we are discussing. The receptors of one species of animal are foreign, matter in, the body of another species ;but, provided the cells of the animal into which foreign blood has been injected possess side-chains or receptors capable of combining with those of the injected blood cells, combination at once takes place. But when the combination between the cell receptors of the injected animal and those of the foreign blood cells has taken place, the former cells are stimulated to produce new receptors to take the place of those already occupied. These receptors are generally produced in excess and may be thrown, off becom- ing free in, the blood, and thus giving rise to an anti-body, specific for cells similar to those that stimulated its production. This anti-body possesses the power of combining with such foreign, cells both in vitro and when, injected in vivo ; and if the necessary complement is present their combination will result in hæmolysis. It is equally evident that upon the presence of suitable receptors wilt depend the effect of the injection of such specific toxins as the hæmolysis. We have seen that the injection into an. animal of foreign .blood cells, with their recep- tors, will cause the cells of the animal injected to produce and throw off an excess of receptors capable of combining with cells similar to these injected. These free receptors are amboceptors specific for similar foreign, bloods, which necessa- rily possess receptors with which they can combine. If then such free amboceptors be injected in. turn into an animal 'whose blood cells possess the suitable recep- tors, combination will ensue under certain, conditions we shall further indicate. If on the contrary the blood cells of an animal into which such an, amboceptor is injected, possess. no receptors with which it can, combine, combination cannot occur and no reaction, will ensue. It mill be necessary to refer more fully to the subject of receptors later on. AMBOCEPTORS. These, as we have already seen, are the free cell receptors that have been cast off in response to stimulation, by foreign receptors. They possess in general certain properties which it is necessary to study145 Usually their cytophile affinity is stronger than their complementophile affi- nity, for they can combine with cells in the cold at a temperature of 0° Cent. at which temperature they will not combine with complement. Amboceptors are as we have seen specific, they can enter into combination with only one kind of cell, that is cells possessing like receptors. But ambo- ceptor alone, although it may enter into combination, cannot effect any definite change in the cell to which it becomes bound by its cytophile affinity Its function then appears to be the linking up of a cell to complement or cytase' in such a way that this latter body which has toxic or ferment-like properties, can act and destroy the cell to which the amboceptor has united it. We have seen therefore that amboceptors are not in themselves toxic, because they possess no " zymotoxic group," and cells plus amboceptor remain apparently undamaged and capable of performing all their normal functions. We have also seen that amboceptor possesses such a strong affinity for cells with suitable receptors that it will enter into combination with them at exceed- ingly low temperatures. Combination of red cells and amboceptor in vitro. (1) To a suspension of red cells in .8 per cent. salt solution, specific hæmolytic serum previously heated for ½ hour at 55° Cent. is added and the mixture is allowed to stand for a time. The red cells remain apparently unaltered, but on the addition of a little normal serum, which can be shown to have no action upon similar red cells without treatment, rapid hæmolysis ensues. (2) To a suspension of red cells, unheated specific serum, capable of producing hæmolysis, is added and the mixture is maintained at a temperature of 0° Cent. for a time. No hæmolysis occurs. The mixture is then centrifuged and the red cells separated from the supernatant liquid. The red cells are apparently un- altered, but, on the addition of a little normal serum, speedy hæmolysis takes place. If the mixture of haemolytic serum with red cells has been made in suitable amounts, the separated supernatant liquid will show, on further examination, that all the amboceptor has combined and been removed with the red cells, but that free complement still remains, its combination with the amboceptor having been prevented by the low temperature, at which therefore no hæmolysis occurred. By a series of experiments such as these Ehrlich was able to show that red cells possess the power of combining with far more specific amboceptor than is sufficient to cause hæmolysis in the presence of complement. The amount taken up 227 H. D. 20
146 by them varies in different cases, but may be even one hundred times in excess of that required in combination with complement for their complete destruction. 2. Combination in the living body.147 substances; thus by digesting a serum with yeast cells, its complement may be entirely removed. In specific absorption a fitting amboceptor must be present; and use is made of this reaction in testing for the presence of an amboceptor fitted to act against any given organism. In certain diseases absence of complement in the serum has been observed. Examples of this condition are syphilis and trypanosomiasis. HÆMOLYSTS IN VITRO AND IN VIVO. Hæmolysis in vitro has been the subject of much study, and has led to clear conceptions regarding the mechanism of the reaction under artificial conditions ; but the factors which regulate hæmolysis within the body are still very obscure. There is often a notable want of relation betweer action in vitro and action in vivo. Celli, Casagrandi and Craducci (77), while investigating experimental Læmoglobinuria, found that a serum, possessing no action in vitro, may on injection into an animal cause intense blood destruction hæmoglobinuria and death. Lamb (72) notes that daboia venom is less hæmolytic in vitro than cobra venom, but more so in vivo. At Major Lamb's suggestion we have tried in vivo the action of cobra-lecithid. This substance has all the components of a complete hæmolysin (amboceptor plus complement) and is in vitro strongly hæmolytic to rabbit's red cells. But when injected into rabbits in doses of from .01 to .3 gramme it causes no observable blood destruction and does not produce the raising in the isotonic point of the corpuscles observed after the injection of daboia venom. Another illustration of want of relation between action in vitro and in vivo is shown by the injection into rabbits of a serum strongly hæmolytic in vitro. This serum we produced by immunising a calf against rabbit's blood. Injected into rabbits in doses of .15 c.c. it appeared to have no action. Possibly the formation of anti-complements produced co-incidently with the amboceptor during the process of immunising the calf with defibrinated rabbit's blood may have prevented action in this case. In the case of the cobra-lecithid it appears possible that its apparent want of action in vivo may be due to its absorption by cells other than red cells possessing perhaps greater affinity and thus switching off the hæmolysin and preventing hmolysis.* * Arrhenius states that " normal rabbit serum is itself a little antitoxic to cobra-leci hid "; a proper- ty which it loses on heating for 30 minutes at 64° C. (Immunochemistry by S. Arrhenius, page 213: New York, Macmillan Company, 1907.)
148 The injection of a specific serum is except in very large doses not immediately followed by symptoms of blood destruction. The following are observations of Celli, Casagrande, and Carduc. Dog of six kilogrammes. 25th August.149 Dog IX. 11 a.m., 6th March 1908.150 What determines this condition we can, as yet only surmise. The most important consideration as a basis for further work is the possible concerning of complement in the process. In the absence of complement from the plasma, whether as a result of non- production (Metchnikoff we have seen denies that it exists free in the plasma) or of absorption, amboceptor specific for the red blood cells if produced within the body, though it might combine with red cells could not bring about their extra- cellular solution. If now under certain circumstances complement is suddenly produced and set free in the plasma whether within an organ, or the general circulation, it will at once combine with the amboceptor laden red cells, producing their rapid dissolution. Whether such a combination of amboceptor with the red cell ever occurs or indeed what exactly happens in the case of a hæmolysin in the body we shall see to be an extremely difficult matter to determine. The condition, which we have turned extra-vascular lysæmia is also of extreme interest. We have already seen, that the condition, generally described as hæmo- globinæmia does not mean the presence of hæmoglobin dissolved in the plasma during life. None the less the auto-solution, of hæmoglobin in the serum during clotting of the blood may be of great significance. It is essentially the hæmolysis of a certain number of corpuscles consequent upon, the act of coagulation; and this process we know to be associated with the formation, of complement, a substance whose existence in the circulating blood is problematical. If we conceive then of the liberation of complement in the presence of ambocep- tor-bound red cells within the body there might result lysæmia or true hæmoglobi- æmia but in the absence of complement from the plasma we may have the state of affairs giving rise to extra-vascular lysæmia. Some support of this view is given by certain, clinical facts. It has been fre- quently noted that in paroxysmal hæmoglobinuria the so-called hæmoglobinærmia was present when no attack was in progress. Bensuade (63) describes one case in, which the serum was more coloured between than during the attacks, an observa- tion which suggests that the red colouration of the serum is due to a condition characteristic of the blood in this disease, rather than to the liberation, of hæmoglobin responsible for hæmoglobinuria. In syphilis Justus (79) has shown that hæmoglobinæmia can be caused by producing stagnation of the blood in the vessels; and that blood removed from the median basilic vein after lightly constricting the arm for a few minutes may yield a reddish serum.
151 CHAPTER II. THE DEMONSTRATION OF AUTOLYSINS. The demonstration of isolysins is not fraught with any particular difficulties. It is essential only that a fitting complement and certain other conditions be present, and that there should be no anti-hæmolysin present. In the demonstra- tion of autolysins on the other hand the greatest difficulty is encountered. In the investigation of certain diseases in which hæmolytic action appears to be concerned, many observations have been made regarding the power supposed to be exerted upon normal red corpuscles by the pathological serum. Evidence of hæ- molytic action has been considered an indication of the presence of the hæmo- toxins which have initiated the blood changes in the patient. Ehrlich (78) endeavouring to gain some insight into the nature of hæmolytic bodies which may arise within the body as a result of morbid processes, injected certain goats with large quantities of the blood of other goats. As a result he was able to produce hæmolysins within the bodies of the inoculated goats, but these hæmolysins had no action upon the corpuscles of the goats in whose bodies they arose; they were isolysins therefore and not autolysins. From these experiments Ehrlich concludes that the demonstration that the serum of a patient possesses the power to dissolve the red cells of another person, does not prove that this action has had any relation in the patient to the occurrence of anæmia or any blood destruction. On the contrary it only demonstrates the presence of what is probably only an isolysin. It is clear then that if we are to ascertain the exact mechanism of the blood destroying process in Black-water Fever, we must especially study autoly- sins. But before approaching the subject of autolysins it will be advantageous to study conditions that have resulted from the introduction of artificially produced hæmolysins in the body, and to see by what means apart from the recognition of its effects we may be enabled to demonstrate the presence of a hæmolysin that has once been introduced and absorbed into the system. THE DEMONSTRATION OF HÆMOLYSINS ARTIFICIALLY INTRODUCED IN THE BODY. Celli, Cassagrandi, and Carlucci (77), using dogs injected with the serum of rabbits previously treated with dogs' blood, were the first to attempt to re-isolate or demonstrate the presence of the hæmolysin under these conditions. At the outset
152 they determined that the serum of a hæmoglobinuric dog has no action either upon a healthy dog's corpuscles or on those of a hæmoglobinuric dog. The serum of a hæmoglobinuric dog plus the spleen of a healthy dog plus the corpuscles of a healthy dog was also negative. But the serum of a hæmoglobinuric dog plus the spleen of a healthy dog plus the corpuscles of a hæmoglobinuric dog, gave marked hæmolysis. Applying these facts to the demonstration of a malarial hæmolysin in man, these observers got no result. Approaching the subject a fresh we sought in our own experiments on dogs to demonstrate the presence of the hæmolysin that we had ourselves injected. The corpuscles of the dog are very fragile, and if left standing for a few hours they are apt even in the case of the normal animal to show a certain amount of laking. This we obviated by the use of the solution of salt and. sugar recommended by Blasi (90). The results of our experiments were as follows153 5. Pulp scraped from the spleen and washed to remove free hæmoglobin, and then left in .9 per cent. salt solution, showed marked hæmolysis, but when placed in the sugar and salt solution no hæmolysis occurred. Some agglutination ap- peared to be present. It is doubtful if even the red cells collected in the spleen were on the point of hæmolysis such as occurs in vitro. 6. Washed red blood cells from the portal circulation plus crushed liver sub- stance from a treated dog, showed very marked agglutination but no hæmolysis. Agglutination of red cells was frequently very marked in the blood from the hepatic veins. There was also a similar tendency observed in blood from the kid- neys, but an agglutinating effect of the injected dog's serum upon normal dog's corpuscles was never obtained. Agglutinins were, however, readily demonstrated in the oedema fluid about the site of the injection. The demonstration of an injected hæmolysin or even the presence of agglutinins is therefore fraught with great difficulty. Nevertheless in spite of the absence of hæmolytic phenomena it is to be noted that the red cells of the treated dog could be shown to be abnormal by their behaviour on examination as regards154 complement were present they would at once combine with the red cells; and hæmolysis would result. But the possibility that in malaria as in trypanosomiasis complement might be so far absorbed, and that thus failing the completion of the hæmolysin, amboceptor might be bound by the red cells suggested to us the idea of searching for the presence of amboceptor bound red cells in malaria. The observations described by Metchnikoff, previously referred to, in which guinea pig spermatozoa became bound with amboceptor within the living body in the absence of complement appeared to indicate the condition which we might possibly find in the red cells of malarial patients. Ehrlich suggests the complements can disappear during certain pathological conditions in consequence perhaps of a more rapid destruction or a slower pro- duction. In the constant blood destruction of malaria the using up of complement appeared an extremely likely phenomenon. Under such circumstances the red cells might become bound with amboceptor though to all appearances normal. If such a condition were present it would only be necessary to add to wash- ed malarial corpuscles a little normal human serum, and hæmolysi would occur. When we came to examine a number of malarial patients we found that as a rule their red cells exhibited a great susceptibility to the action of normal serum so much so that rapid hæmolysis took place in some cases when only 50 c.m. of serum from certain normal subjects was added to ½ c.c. of a 5 per cent suspen- sion of their red cells in .8 per cent salt solution. This hæmolysis was also in- variably associated with a marked agglutination. A reference to the literature showed that a similar susceptibility had been noted in the case of the blood of anæmic subjects in Italy by Ascoli (89). On further testing the action of the serum of the malarial subjects we found that it not only failed to produce any hæmolysis of healthy blood corpuscles, but even in very small quantities inhibited the action of powerfully acting normal serum upon susceptible red cells. OBSERVATION ON THE BLOOD IN BLACK-WATER FEVER. Our results with the blood of Black-water Fever cases have been as follows. Further details of the cases are given in the appendix :155 That is neither alone, nor with the undoubted presence of ccmplemont, had the Black-water Fever serum any action on the normal corpuscles used. (Class A., vide next chapter.) Washed Black-water Fever cor- puscles. + Allowed to stand in .9% Salt at room temp. = No hæmolysis. No agglutination. Washed Black-water Fever cor- puscles. + Black-water Fever serum = No effect. These cells had therefore neither been already acted upon by an active hæmo- lysin, nor did the patient's own serum have any action upon them. Black-water Fever corpuscles + Black-water Fever serum and normal serum (com- plement). = No hæmolysis. Black-water Fever corpuscles + Serum of malarial patient. = No hæmolysis. No agglutination. Black-water Fever serum + Washed corpuscles of malarial patient. = Marked agglutination. Case XX.156 Washed Black-water Fever cor- puscles. + Black-water Fever serum and extract of dog's spleen. = Some hæmolysis. Normal corpuscles + Normal serum and extract of dog's spleen. = Some hæmolysis. Case XXII157 ½ c.c. washed Black-water Fever corpuscles emulsions. + 150 c.m. normal serum 100 c.m. Black-water Fever serum(at 37for 15 min.) = No immediate hæmolysis. Slight after some hours. Agglutination. Case XXVII159 CHAPTER III. HUMAN ISOLYSINS. When we found that the red cells of people anæmie from malarial infection were characterised by a marked susceptibility to hæmolysis on the addition of normal serum we at first considered that this observation pointed to a binding by them of amboceptor, which, on the addition of normal serum containing comple- ment, resulted in their speedy hæmolysis. We have since added to our observations with the result that our original idea has been shown to be untenable. But our observations have served to point to a condition we believe not generally recognised, and of which we can find no indication in the work of Ehrlich and others. Isolysins in man have generally been considered an occasional phenomenon due to some pathological con- dition of the person whose serum was isolytic. That the red cells against which such a serum was tested might be an equally important factor has not gen- erally been taken into account. If therefore in the serum of a Black-water Fever case we were to demon- strate isolysins it might be thought that we had shown a point of pathological im- portance. Again we have seen that in malaria we appeared to have found red cells bound with immune body (amboceptor) since on the addition of normal serum they became rapidly hæmolysed. But the real facts possess quite a different significance and make all work on pathological isolysins undertaken in ignorance of them, open to constant error. And the same may be said of any attempt to demonstrate the presence of autolysins in disease. The following experiments will make this clear. I.160 Washed corps., S. R. C. + Small quantity child's serum = Nil. Washed corps. child in .9 per cent. salt. = Nil. Washed corps. child + child's serum = Nil. Case II.161 Case V.162 II.163 IV 164 Experiment II. Corps., S.R.C. + Pure serum anæmic coolie with susceptible corps. centifugalised and corps. washed. = Nil. Washed treated corps. + 150 c.m. serum, S.R.C. = No hæmolysis. VI.165 IX.166 150 c.m. serum. ½ c.c. emulsion of washed corpuscles in .9 per cent, salt. Bloods 13 to 24. 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 C.A.B. S.R.C. .. h h Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil h H h Nil 13 .. .. Nil Nil .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 14 .. .. .. Nil .. .. .. .. Nil .. .. .. .. 15 h .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Nil .. .. .. .. 16 .. .. Nil .. .. .. .. .. .. .. h Nil .. 17 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Nil .. H H H .. 18 H H Nil Nil .. .. .. .. .. .. H .. .. 19 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. H .. Nil 20 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. H .. .. .. 21 H .. Nil Nil .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Nil 22 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . 23 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . 24 Nil .. .. .. .. .. .. Nil .. .. .. .. .. Action of sera upon washed corpuscles of "C" a Class B, native blood. 167 150 c.m. serum S.R.C. 150 c.m. serum C.A.B 168 Series 3 European sailors. 150 c.m. Serum. ½ c.c. emulsion washed corpuscles. 1 2 3 4 5 6 S. R. C. .. .. Nil h Nil H h h C. A. B. .. Nil h Nil H h H 10 series 4 .. Nil H Nil H .. .. 12 series 4 .. .. .. .. .. H .. I .. .. .. .. h .. .. 2 series 4 .. .. .. .. h .. .. 4 series 4 .. .. .. .. H .. .. 9 series 4 .. .. .. .. h .. .. Action of the Sera upon washed corpuscles of " C. " 150 c.m. serum 1 2 3 4 5 ½ c.c. emuls. corps. "C." h Nil H H Nil Class .. A B A ? B Details of Blood No. 4169 Series 4 :170 Series 4.171 Series 6 :172 Series 7 :173 We have therefore a condition (A) seen in health, characterised by insuscep- tible corpuscles together with the presence of a natural hæmolysin, amboceptor plus complement, in the blood of the same person. This hmolysin acts upon the susceptible red cells of other persons, therefore it is an isolysin. On the other hand we have a condition (B) in which the red blood corpuscles are susceptible to the isolysin referred to above. In this case there is not only an absence of isolysins directed against any of this (B) or the other class A blood, but there also exists in different degrees a powerful antibody, which appears to be of the nature of an anti-complement or anti-amboceptor directed against the complementophile group of the amboceptor. This antibody can neutralise the action of serum of class (A) upon susceptible corpuscles of class (B). The exceptions to this general rule may be mostly embraced under the fol- owing additional generalisations :174 with cytophile and complementophile groups similar to those of the isolysins present in the serum of class A bloods. Our experiments show that the re-actions are not dependent upon race, age, sex, or upon the existence of mere anæmia. They also show that the condition is not a transient one but remains the same in any individual case for long periods. That class A is the normal condition is suggested by the fact that six Euro- opean visitors all had class A blood, and in one case of class B blood we have seen a slowly diminished susceptibility follow quinine treatment and recovery from a condition of marked malarial anæmia. But the number of persons with class B blood seems to preclude any direct relation to malaria. Nevertheless as will be seen from the following observations there is a remark- able preponderance of class B over class A bloods among European residents in the Duars. Table XIV.175 Class A. Class B. English Soldiers, Calcutta 23 26 English Sailors, Calcutta 2 4 Natives, Calcutta Jail 7 28 Europeans, resident in the Duars 9 26 Europeans, non-resident in the Duars 31 30 Natives, resident in the Duars 14 33 Natives, non-resident in the Duars 17 28 In our experiments we have laid stress on the occurrence of hæmolysis, but the observations apply equally to agglutination so that in the vast majority of cases if we know with what class of blood we are dealing we can deduce whether or not, in any given case, agglutination will occur. It is obvious that work such as that of Capograssi's who investigated the agglutinating action of the sera of malarial subjects must be enormously modified by know- ledge of the facts we have set forth. Whether these facts have any relation to the conditions which give rise to Black-water Fever we are unable to say. The change from a state of class A to one of class B blood seems to us to be fraught with possible danger, and residence under Black-water Fever conditions seems associated with the occur- rence of this change. In Europeans also the amount of anti-hæmolysin present under the conditions we have investigated is much less than that usually found in natives, especially those with the most markedly susceptible corpuscles. At present the most important application of these results is that, in at- tempting to demonstrate hæmolysins in disease, it is necessary to give due con- sideration to the conditions we have indicated.
177 CHAPTER IV. THE NATURE OF THE BLACK-WATER FEVER PROCESS. All our researches point to Black-water Fever being simply the effect of poison- ing by a hæmolysin. Nor does it seem to us that this hæmolysin poisoning should be conceived of as some vague process spoken of without recognition of the method of action of these poisons. We have already seen that in Black-water Fever the blood destruction is mainly of that nature to which we have given the name lysæmia. It is not simply the action of a hæmolysin but a hæmolysin acting under special conditions. The fact that in Black-water Fever the hæmolysin has not been demonstrated, is for reasons we have shown not remarkable. For in the case of dogs actually injected with hæmolytic serum it is quite impossible with the knowledge we possess to demonstrate, apart from its effects, the presence of the substance (hæmolysin) that we have injected; though in vitro its presence is easily demonstrable. As regards the hæmoglobinuria in Black-water Fever we have seen that to look upon the presence of hæmoglobin in the urine as an indication of the amount of blood destruction is quite misleading; that hæmoglobinæmia does not neces- sarily result from even the greatest amount of blood destruction; that in malaria although an enormous amount of blood may be destroyed this is mainly due to the corpuscles being retained and broken down in the organs and not to their solution in the plasma; and that for hæmoglobinuria to ensue only a trace of hæmoglobinæmia is necessary. We have seen also that this hæmoglobinæmia is a superimposed condition of blood destruction, characterised by solution of the red cells or lysæmia; that this is not due to osmotic variations in the plasma, to changes in the resistance of the red cells to salt solutions or to invasion of these cells by any parasite. Coming to broader issues we have seen that Black-water Fever results from a condition induced by repeated attacks or infections by malaria; that it is precipitated by an acute attack of malaria, especially when under certain conditions this is associated with the administration of quinine. We have seen that quinine in itself is innocuous and cannot have such an effect on a subject not previously prepared; that the consistent use of the remedy by a community may even diminish the incidence of Black-water Fever by reduc- ing the liability to malarial infection. 227 H.D. 2Y
178 The production of the hæmolysin we have seen is in some way the result of malaria, and it is generally considered by those who take the malarial view that it is in the form of a toxin derived from the malarial parasite. Such a toxin has never been demonstrated and the fever and other symptoms of malaria are explicable without assuming its presence. Also if such a toxin were the cause we should not expect length of residence to play so important a part in the ætiology of the disease, for there seems no reason why the action of quinine in a severe attack of malaria, in a new-comer, should not bring about the liberation of a hæmolysin from the malarial parasite, with resulting Black-water Fever; the length of residence suggests changes produced in the body itself. It is desirable to consider what are the possible changes that long-continued malaria might bring about. In the injection of goat's blood into goats for short periods Ehrlich was once able to demonstrate an, autolysin. It is by no means improbable that malaria which gives rise to periodical destruction of red cells might have the same effect in man. No other patholo- gical condition known to us is so likely as malaria to give rise to an autolysin. It, more than any other disease or experimental condition, demands of the organism the repeated destruction and the absorption of its own red cells. We have seen that there is a close resemblance between. Black-water Fever and paroxysmal hæmoglobinuria; both are conditions of unstable equilibrium, the one apparently natural to the subject the other induced; in both the exciting causes are such as under normal conditions produce no effect. In paroxysmal hæmoglobinuria mere local cold is sufficient to cause hæmo- globinuria. This is an indirect action, for cold acting upon blood has no such effect; and the hæmolysin responsible for the blood destruction must therefore be thrown out by the body cells in response to stimulation. Such considerations suggest reasons why the malignant tertian parasite should be chiefly concerned in Black-water Fever. For it is in infections by the malignant tertian parasite that we find the organs most actively engaged in holding up the infected red cells, the very perniciousness of infections by this parasite being suggestively bound up with such an action. If we conceive of the hæmolysins being derived not from the parasite but thrown out as a result of the constant phagccytosis of red cells, we shall also understand better why it is that the apparently robust should suffer. Able to make good the loss of his red cells the actual infection by the parasites affects the well-fed adult European or better class native but moderately and the very
179 power of reaction which we know to be associated with healthy rather than diseased conditions may be his undoing. If hæmolysins are formed against the blood there seems no agent so likely to effect this as the endothelium which everywhere is the tissue in contact with the blood and is largely concerned in regenerative and phagocytic functions. This view receives support on a consideration of certain conditions associated with paroxysmal hæmolglobinuria, Raynaud's disease in particular, where local vascular spasm is connected with the occurrence of the disease. In this connection malaria again comes prominently to the fore as a factor likely to have a marked effect upon the vascular endothelium. For months and years this tissue has to experience the constant association with altered and broken down red cells and parasites, with consequent stimulation to active phagocytosis of these bodies. Our work shows, however, that whatever the origin of the hæmolysin (hæ- molytic amboceptor) may be we have still to ascertain why the lysæmic condi- tion results. If we consider the possibility of its being due to the sudden libera- tion of complement in the living body many otherwise inexplicable facts become readily understandable, but such an hypothesis at present rests upon no actual data. In few diseases do we know the ultimate working of the morbid process, so that because we do not yet know the whole mechanism of Black-water Fever it does not follow that we are totally ignorant of the nature and origin of the disease. Our researches we think have helped to make this nature of the disease clearer than it has hitherto been. We have as a result of our observations come to a truer conception of the conditions under which the hæmoglobinuria of Black- water Fever occurs, than has previously been possible and this conception of the disease is a strong incentive to further experimental work
181 PART V. PROPHYLAXIS AND TREATMENT OP BLACK-WATER FEVER. We have still to discuss what steps are possible in regard to the prophylaxis of Black-water Fever and in regard to the treatment of the condition when it has once arisen. Prophylaxis. If our conclusions as to the origin of Black-water Fever be correct the prophylaxis of the condition is simply the prevention as far as possible of malarial infection, and the prompt and efficient treatment of this disease, with the view to prevent the occurrence of relapses. It would be foreign to our purpose to enter fully into the large question of anti-malarial sanitation in this memoir, but it will not be without interest to ascertain as far as possible whether in actual practice there are any examples of a reduction in the incidence of Black-water Fever due to the adoption of prophylactic measures directed against malaria, especially to the active pushing of quinine, the very drug which is generally looked upon as largely responsible for the occurrence of Black-water Fever. According to Deaderick (92) such a reduction is reported by Mercier in German East Africa, by Ziemann in the Kameroons, by A. Plehn in Togo and by Kohlbrugger in the Malay Archipelago. Quinine prophylaxis, it is obvious, to be of any use must be effectively pushed. In the Duars already a large proportion of the European population has taken to the systematic use of quinine. The result has so far been not only a much reduced amount of malaria amongst those taking the precaution but a very small number of cases of Black-water Fever in this community. The only three cases which occurred among Europeans during the past twelve months were among those who professed not to believe in quinine and only took it when they felt unwell. Whether the explanation we have given be the correct one will be shown in time. Treatment. It is not our intention to touch upon the ordinary palliative treatment of Black-water Fever. Our object is to show that there are excellent reasons for believing that good results may be expected from serum therapy. We have shown that a toxin derived from the malarial parasite is an unlikely cause of Black-water Fever and that the active agent is probably one derived from auto-immunisation against the organism's own red cells. 227 H.D. 2z
182 The attempt to produce an anti-amboceptor against the cytophile group of a hæmolysin which we are unable to isolate seems to us at present useless. It is otherwise, however, as regards the production of an anti-complement or an anti- amboceptor directed against the complementophile group. Ehrlich in his studies upon complement has come to the conclusion that these exist in any serum in great variety. Observations upon the absorption of complement show, however, that in spite of this multiplicity, the whole of the complement in a serum may be abstracted by a single type of amboceptor, provided that its cytophile group is able to combine with a suitable receptor. The received explanation of these apparently contradictory results has led to a further modification in the conception of the amboceptor and complement. In a recent paper Ehrlich and Sachs (93) conceive of the amboceptor as having a single specific cytophile group but a large number of complementophile groups which, vary considerably in detail but in their entirety represent a uniform complex. This complex is reproduced in all amboceptors of the same serum. Anti-amboceptors directed against the complementophile groups and obtain- ed through immunisation with any particular amboceptor will act against all amboceptors of the same animal species, no matter whether these amboceptors are normally present in the serum or have been produced by immunisation. Immunisation of small animals with human serum should offer no insurmount- able difficulty, but until a considerable number of experiments have been car- ried out it is not possible to say whether by such means we might be enabled to produce an anti-amboceptor or anti-complement suitable for use in the treatment of Black-water Fever. That treatment on these lines is not chimerical is shown by the work of Widal and Rostaine (62) on paroxysmal hæmoglobinuria, who made use of a serum obtained by the immunisation of a rabbit against human serum. The administra- tion of this serum to the subject of the paroxysmal hæmoglobinuria served to counteract the effects of exposure to cold which previous to its use was invari- ably followed by hæmoglobinuria. In Black-water Fever we have a condition often lasting several days during which the blood destruction steadily continues. To be able to check this destruction early in the disease would be no small achievement and enormously increase the chance of a favourable termination. The feasibility of these suggestions, however, can only be shown by further experiment.
183 PART VI. APPENDIX. RECORD OF CASES INVESTIGATED. Case I.184 Autopsy.185 Case V.186 18th August 1907.187 Seen by us on the third day when hæmoglobinuria had ceased. Blood showed pigmented leucocytes. A few red corpuscle shadows in leucocytes. A count of 500 leucocytes gave as follows :188 Condition under which attack occurred.189 Case X.190 Case XII.191 Case XV.192 Associated conditions.193 History.194 Seen by us about 8 P.M. Spleen two finger-breadths below costal margin. Tempera- ture 101. Splenic puncture gave a small quantity of blood very rich in cells. Blood.195 4.Small mononuclear cells with scanty deeply staining protoplasm. Lymphocyte type. 5.Still smaller cells with very deeply staining protoplasm containing a few red granules. 6.Polymorphonuclear leucocytes and transitional cells. Some stromata of red cells are seen resembling those sometimes present when blood is treated with hypotonic salt solutions. H196 Case XX.197 H198 Emulsion of washed corpuscles hæmolysed by Class A. serum. Antibody 20 c.m. not que protective against 150 c.m. S.R.C. serum. Examination of splenic blood taken 4½ hours after passing the first sample of urine. No malarial parasites. Pigment (simple tertian) in endothelial cells and mononuclear leucocytes. Phagocytosis of altered and apparently normal red blood corpuscles a very conspicuous fea- ture. Small cells with crescentic nuclei containing each a single often quite normal looking blood corpuscle are abundant. These cells have but little protoplasm and what there is is extended around the engulfed cell. In some of the cells the protoplasm shews some fine red granules. The cells vary some- what in size, the larger ones approaching in appearance mononuclear leucocytes but the most numerous are small and nearly globular in shape. The included red cells are generally quite unaltered a little paler than the free cells in the eighbourhood; others are pale with a faint yellowish tinge or show a rim of darker staining substance around the periphery. The closest scrutiny failed to show in these cells either malarial parasites or any indication of contained bodies. Cells resembling these are seen, which in spite of the small quantity of protoplasm they possess have engulfed two, three, or even four red cells, and others of the same type are seen packed with a dozen or more red cells in various stages of decolouration. Of macrophages there are two types :199 The condition of the included red cells is shown by the following:200 Time. Special gravity. Albumen grammes per litre. Urine Quantity. Percent- age Hæmo- glbin. Total Hæmo- globin (blood equi- valent). 12 P.M. 17th January 1908 1020 .7 350 c.c. 6.6% 23 c.c. 12 NOON, 18th January 1908 1018 .5 450 c.c. 5% 22.5 c.c. 12-50 P.M. 1020 .3 300 c.c. 2.5% 8 c.c. TOTAL 183.5 c.c. Urobilin slown by zinc test.201 Isotonic point.202 Time. Urine Quantity. percent- age hæmo- globin. Total hæmoglobin (blood equivalent.) 22nd February 1908 10-30 P.M. to 510 c.c. 3% 15.3 c.c. 23rd February 1908 6 A.M. " 7 A.M. 310 c.c. 2% 6.2 c.c. " 9 A.M. 300 c.c. .5% 1 c.c. TOTAL .. .. 133.6 c.c. Case XXII.203 Case XXIII.204 Films of splenic blood showed distinct agglutination and many spherocytes. Some de- colourised included red cells present. Macrophages contain engulfed small mononuclear cells. H205 History.206 Isotonic point207 11th July 1908.208 tea house men and their families. Altogether nearly sixty souls, including over 30 young children. Enquiry showed that quite a number of these people were recent arrivals, having been but two months or so in the Duars. Among some thirty examined all had enlarged spleen and ten had fever, while all but two show- ed malarial parasites in the blood. Alongside this line and within 80 yards of the bungalow was a small drain from the tea house in which many thousand larvæ of Barbirostris and other anopheles were discovered. In the bungalow many specimens of M. Listoni, Barbirostris and other species were seen. On examination patient was found to be sallow and slightly jaundiced, liver not enlarged but spleen nearly 4 fingers breadth below ribs and rather tender. The urine which had remained brackish-red for over four days was commencing to clear but still showed bands of oxy and met-hæmoglobin. Patient was markedly anæmic, hæmoglobin standing at 30%. Temperature was about 100. June 24th.209 At evening it had again fallen to 99, and the urine was quite clear once more. From this time the quinine was stopped again entirely. July 2nd and 3rd.210 April 20th.211 History.212 Case XXXII.213 July 10.215 RECORD OF CASES OF BLACK-WATER FEVER IN THE DUARS. DAM DIM DISTRICT.* 1st attack. 2nd attack. Barons 1 Mr. C.216 Dam Dim District217 Dam Dim District218 Dam Dim District219 Dam Dim District220 Dam Dim District221 Chelsa District222 Chelsa District223 Nagrakata District224 Nagrakata District225 Dino-Torso District. 1st attack. 2nd attack. Telepara 97 Dr. S.226 Dino-Torsa District227 Torsa District. 1st attack. 2nd attack. Chuapara (122) Mr. P.228 Jainti District229 RECORD OF CASES OF BLACK-WATER FEVER IN ASSAM. 1st attack. 2nd attack. Tezpur Dist. (1) Dr. M.230 1st attack. 2nd attack. (9) Madrassee cook .. Dec. 1906 .. .. Had been resident for less than a year on a very malarious garden. Got a lot of fever, but would not take any quinine. Had taken no quinine at all previous to attack of Black-water Fever. Severe case. Recovery. (10) Babu. Garden clerk Dec. 1906 .. .. No particulars known as to length of residence, etc. Severe case with suppression. Death. (11) German Missionary February 1907 .. Had been less than a year resident in a native village. Was very cachectic and weak when found with Black-water Fever. It is very doubtful if any quinine had been taken in this case prior to attack. Severe attack. Death. (12) Mr. T.231 1st attack. 2nd attack. Nowgong Dis- trict (14). Mr. S.232 1st attack. 2nd attack. (20) American child. Aged 4. April-May 1899 .. Child had been a few weeks in Darjeeling, and had two mild attacks Black-water Fever. Sub- sequently he had several other attacks after May 1899. They appeared after small doses of quinine. Temperature sometimes went to 107. Came to Assam when 4 months old. Had no less than 8 at- tacks of Black-water Fever. June 1900233 1st attack. 2nd attack. Took quinine as a preventive, but doses or times not stated. Black-water Fever followed quinine administation. Re- covery. North Lakhim- pur Dist. Assam (25). Mr.235 REFERENCES. PART I. (1) Lebeau (12), Daulle(13), Le Roy de Mericourt (14), Pellarin (49), Barthelemy-Benoit, Berenger-Feraud (44), Corre, Ronard. (2) Cummings (17), Faget (8), Osborne (8), Ghent (8), Quoted by Deaderick. (3) F. Plehn, Die Kamerun Kuste, also Deutch Med. Woch. no. 25, p. 397, no. 26, p. 416, no. 27, p. 434, 1895. (4) A. Plehn, Bertrage zur Kentniss von Verlauf und Behandlung der tropischen malaria in Kamerun, 1896. Also 1903. Aetiologie und Pathogenese des Schwarzwasserfieber. Virchow's Archiv. Bd. 174. And Arch. f. Schiffs u. Tropenhyg. Bd. 3 M. 4. (5) Cardamatis, Theophanidis, Koryllos. Quoted by Laveran, Traite du Paludisme, 1907. (6) Tomaselli, La intossicazione chinica el infezione malaria. Catania, 1897. (7) Koch, Ueber Schwarzwasserfieber. Zeit. f. Hygiene Bd. 42. H. 1. (8) Shropshire and others, quoted by Deaderick (94). (9) Stephens and Christophers. Reports to the Malaria Committee of the Royal Society. Series I to VIII. Harrison and Sons, London. (10) Panse, Schwarzwasserfieber. Zeit. f. Hygiene. Bd. 42. H. 1. (11) Stephens, Thompson, Yates and Johnston Laboratories Reports, Vol. V, Part 1, 1903. (12) Lebeau, These de Paris, 1851. (13) Da-ull? These de Paris, 1857, p. 46. (14) Le Roy de Mericourt, These de Paris, 1853. (15) Varettas, Soc. Med. Grecque de Paris, Nov. 6, 1858. (Stated by Foustanos as the first to observe hæoglobinuria in Greece. La Grece Med., April 1900.) (16) Papabasilos, Asklepios, Athens, 1861. (17) Cummings, New Orleans Med. News and Hosp. Gazette VI, 811, 1859. (Quoted by Deaderick as first to describe Hæoglobinuric Fever in America.) (18) Jacobs, Eringe Beschonwingen over Febris biliosa hæmaturica Genecsk. Tijdschr v. Nederl. Indie. Batav. 1881 N. S. X. 669236 (21) Steudel. Die perniciose Malaria in Deutsch-Ostafrica. Leipsig. (22) Ziemann, Ueber das Schwarzwasserfieber. Dtsch. Med. Woch. M. 40. (22a) Crosse, Notes on the Malarial Fevers met with on the River Niger. (22b) Manson, Trans. of the Epid. Soc. of London. N. S. Vol. XLIII, 1898-99. (23) Moffat, Black-water Fever and Hæmolgobinuria. Brit. Med. Jour., 1896, 2, p. 926. (24) Daniels, Reports to the Malaria Committee of the Royal-Society. 5th Series, 1901. (25) Hearsey, Brit. Med. Jour., Jan. 26, 1899, p. 204. (26) Powell, Hæmoglobinuric Fever in Assam. Jour. Trop. Med., p. 117, Dec. 1898, and Brit. Med. Jour, April 11, 1899, p. 788. (27) Seal, Notes on a few cases of hæmoglobinuria in India. Jour. Trop. Med., 1899, p. 179. (28) Brown, Jour. of Trop. Med., Sept. 15, 1899. (29) Moffat, Brit. Med. Jour., Jan. 25, p. 195. (30) Hanley, Jour. Trop. Med., 1899, p. 85. (31) Wenyon. Quoted by Manson, 234. (32) Christie. (Quoted by Stephens (11).) (33) De Cruz, Black-water Fever in Jeypore. Ind. Med. Gaz., Nov. 1907. (34) Wright, The Malarial Fevers of British Malaya. (Quoted by Stephens (11).) (35) Fink, Ind. Med. Gaz., Sept. 1907. (36) Cropper, Jour. of Hygiene, Vol. II, no. 1, p. 53. (37) Masterman, Hæmoglobinuric Fever in Syria. Brit. Med. Jour., Feb. 10, 1906. (38) Ensor, Jour. R. A. M. C., Vol. VII, 1906. (39) Sergeant, Ed. and Et. (40) Coste. (41) Crombie. Quoted by Laveran p. 279. (42) Manson, Tropical Diseases, 4th Ed., p. 236. (43) McLean, Diseases of Tropical Climates, 1886, p. 63. (44) Berenger-Feiaud. Fievre Bilieuse Melanurique. Paris, 1874. (45) Grocco, Sull 'Emoglobinuria da chinino nei malarici. Arch. ital. di clin. med., 1896. (46) Marchoux, Fievre Hæmoglobinurique et quinine, Le Caducei, 1904, p. 215. (47) Thayer, Malarial Fevers, 1898, p. 157 and p. 265. (48) McCay, Observations on the significance of the hæmosozic value. Bio-chemical Journal, Vol. 3, no. 3. Also Lancet, June 1907.
237 (49) Pellerin De la fievre bilieuse hematurique. Arch. de med. nav., 1865 and 1876. (49a) Yersin, Arch. de Med. Navale, 1895. (49b) Collett, Lancet, Dec. 28, 1904. (50) Casagandi, Att. d. Soc. per gli Stud. d. Malaria, 1906, p. 115. (51) Crozier, Hæmoglobinuric fever in malaria. Indian Med. Gaz., Dec. 1900. (52) Emlyn-Jones, Jour. Trop. Med., Dec. 16, 1907. (53) Lounsbury, Ticks and Heartwater. Report of Govt. Entmlgt., Cape. of Good. Hope, year 1903. (54) Dantec. Pathologie Exotique, 1905, p. 605, 2nd Ed. (55) Stephens. The occurrence of malaria parasites in Black-water Fever. Thomson, Yates and Johnston Lab. Repts., Vol. V, part 1. (56) Stephens and Christophers. Reports to the Malaria Committee of the Roy. Soc., Series 3rd, p. 20. (56a) Marchiafava and Bignami. New Sydenham Society, Vol. CL, 1894. (57) Hayem. Du Sang. Paris, 1889. (58) Werner. Ueber die Meren beim Schwarzwasserfieber. Arch. f. Schiffs u. Tropen- hygiene. Bd. XI, Jan. 1908. (59) Kurloff. Quoted by Ehrlich and Lazarus. Nothnagel's Encyclop238 (72) Lamb. On the action of the venoms of the cobra and of the daboia. Sc. Mem. by Off. of the Med. and San. Departs. of the Govt. of India. New Series, no. 4. (73) Fischer and Adler. and others. (Quoted by Ewing.) (74) Grawitz. Methodik d. kl. Blutuntersuch. Berlin, 1899. (75) Befonti and Carbone. Quoted by Balduan, as first to notice toxic effects of immune serum upon animals. Balduan. Immune Sera. New York, 1907, p. 50. (76) Levaditi. Contribution a l'etude de l'anemie Experimentale. Ann. Inst., Pasteur, 1902. (77) Celli. Casagrandi and Carducci. Primi Tentativi di ricerca emolisina malarica. Att. d. Soc. p. g. St. d. Malaria, 1902; also Vol. iv, 1903. (78) Ehrlich and Morgenroth. Collected Studies on Immunity. Trans. by Balduan. John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1906. (79) Justus. Virchow's Archiv. Bd. 140, p. 91 and Klin. Zeit. v. Streitfrag, Bd. 8. H. 7. (80) Von Limbeck. Pathology of the Blood, 1901. New Sydenham Society's Translation. (81) Hamburger. Quoted by Ewing. (82) Ruffer. Brit. Med. Jour., 1903, 1904. (83) Wright and Kilner. Lancet, April 1904. (84) Wright and Ross. Lancet, Oct. 1905. (85) Bordet and others. Quoted by Balduan. Immune Sera. Wiley and Sons, New York. (86) Attfield. Chemistry, 1898. (87) Metchinkoff. Immunity in infective diseases. Trans. by Binnie. Cambridge Univ. Press, 1905. (88) Barratt. Proc. Royal Society, Oct. 1905. (89) Ascoli. Munich Med. Woch., 1901, p. 1239. (90) Kraus and Clairmont. Wien, kl. Woch. 1901, p. 1016. (91) Blasi. Emolisi nella piroplasmosos degli animali domestici Ann. d'Ig. Sperim. t. xiv, 1906, p. 537. (92) Blasi. Intorno alla presenza di emolisini nella malaria umano. Ann. d'Ig. Sperim. t. vii, 1906, p. 125. (93) Deaderick. Hæmoglobinuric Fever. Memph. Med. Monthly, Dec. 1907, Mar. 1908. (94) Ehrlich and Sacks. The Mechanism of the action of Anti-amhoceptors (79), Berl. klin. Woch., 1905. no. 19. p. 561.
239 (95) Capogrossi. Valore diagnostico del potere agglutinate del siero del sangue de malarici sui globuli rossi. Atti della soc. per gli stud. della malaria, Vol. V. (96) Marchiafava and Celli. New Sydenham Society, Vol. CXXI. (97) Vedy. Fievre Bilieuse Hemoglobinurique dans le Bassin du Congo. Paris, 1907 G. M. Press, Simla.(NEW SERIES) No. 35. SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS By OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. BLACK-WATER FEVER BY CAPTAIN S. R. CHRISTOPHERS, M.B., I.M.S. AND DR. C. A. BENTLEY (Officers on Special duty). BEING THE FIRST REPORT TO THE ADVISORY COMMITTEE APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA TO CONDUCT AN ENQUIRY REGARDING BLACK-WATER AND OTHER FEVERS PREVALENT IN THE DUARS. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75061012.tif] SIMLA: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT MONOTYPE PRESS. 1908.
