IP/QB. 10 m.91.b. (NEW SERIES.) No. 28. SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. THE SEXUAL CYCLE OF LEUCOCYTOZOON CANIS IN THE TICK. BY CAPTAIN S. R. CHRISTOPHERS, M.B., I.M.S. (Superintendent of the King Institute of Preventive Medicine, Madras.) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75057981.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1907 Price annas twelve or 1s. 2d.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75057987.tif]
X (NEW SERIES.) No. 28 SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. THE SEXUAL CYCLE OF LEUCOCYTOZOON CANIS IN THE TICK. BY CAPTAIN S. R. CHRISTOPHERS, M.B., I.M.S. (Superintendent of the King Institute of Preventive Medicine, Madras.) SSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75057993.tif] CALCUTTA : OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1907.
Agents for Me Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. H. S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, & 9, Pall Mall, London. E. A. ARNOLD, 41 & 43, Maddox Street, Bond Street, London, W. CONSTABLE & CO., 16, James Street, Hay Market, London, W. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRList of Numbers of Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India (New Series) published previous to the present issue. No. 1. Standardisation of Calmette's anti-venomous serum with pure cobra venom the deterioration of this serum through keeping in India, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq. M.B. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 2. Malaria in India, by Captain S.P. James, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No, 3. Some observations on the poison of Russell's Viper (Daboia Russellii), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 5 or 6d. No. 4. On the action of the venoms of the Cobra and of the Daboia on the red blood cor- puscles and on the blood plasma, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 5. Specificity of anti-venomous sera, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 6. First report on the anti-malarial operations in Mian Mir, 1901-03, by, Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 7. Some observations on the poison of the Banded Krait (Bungarus Fasciatus), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 8. A preliminary report on a parasite found in patients suffering from enlargement of the spleen in India, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No. 9, Second report of the anti-malarial operations at Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price As. 1o or 1s. No. 10. Specificity of anti-venomous sera (second communication), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 11, On a parasite found in persons suffering from enlargement of the spleen in IndiaTHE SEXUAL CYCLE OF LEUCOCYTOZOON CANIS IN THE TICK. INFECTION of vertebrates by protozoa is known to be commonly brought about by various invertebrate blood-suckers, but it is only the malarial. parasites of man and proteosoma of birds that have as yet been actually followed with certainty through their cycle of development in such an intermediary host.* The H2 vitro all the parasites become free vermicules, but in large quantities of freshly drawn blood fixed with sublimate, Durham was unable to find any free drepanidia, and concludes that the vermicules of his drepanidium are not liberated within the host, but function only in extra corporeal development. He believes that the drepanidium and the dactylosoma are different forms of the same parasite, the former being the schizogonous form, whereas the latter is differentiated for sexual development outside the body. Durham also notes in ticks which had fed on these toads suggestive appearances of conjugation of the parasite, and the presence of cysts up to 6o3 the process of sporogony. The microgametoblasts, the young mother-cells of the microgametes, are thin cells with finely granular protoplasm devoid of inclu- sions. When the microgametoblasts reach a length of 8 to 10µ each of the chromatin bodies of which the nucleus is composed divide into two and scatter themselves through the substance of the microgametoblast. Later, taking a certain amount of protoplasm with them, the chromatin bodies separate off one by one in an irregular manner as microgametes. Unlike the microgametes of proteosoma those of Lankesterella are not whips, but small oval bodies endowed with am4 The females of both R. sanguineus and of R. bursa, when they have dropped from their host, crawl away, and if possible climb upwards to a height of many feet, eventually squeezing themselves into cracks where they lay their ova. Hæmaphysalis fusca on the other hand drops to the ground, and when this happens in a cage the gorged females of this species, unless rescued, are nearly always removed by the attendant with the fæces and urine. Whether from this or from other reasons H. fusca introduced among dogs tends to dis appear, whereas R. sanguineus occurs in ever-increasing numbers wherever dogs are kept together without attention. R. bursa, though it does not spread among dogs like R. sanguineus, persists longer than H. fusca. Neumann11 gives for R. sanguineus a very extended distribution, and I have received specimens described as the ordinary dog tick from different parts of Bombay, Northern India and Burmah. It is an example of a species of tick which restricts it self to a single host, and may aptly be termed the dog tick of India. The question of varieties and further details of the life-history I intend to discuss shortly in a memoir upon Piroplasma canis, which is transmitted by this species of tick; at present it is necessary to refer to the life- history only in so far as it is likely to have relation to the development and transmission of Leucocytozoon canis. Female and male ticks of this species attach themselves to almost any part of the dog, but select especially the ears, the paws and the skin behind the neck. After a variable number of days, dependent apparently upon the vascularity of the part chosen for attachment, the females become fully gorged and drop off. As a rule two days are taken up before the female is half the size it will ultimately become, but the final stages of engorgement are much more rapid, and full repletion may take only twelve or twenty-four hours longer. The males remain behind when the females drop off, but should the dog die they readily detach themselves and at once seek a new host. The eggs are laid in cracks and from these, in about a month, hatch out the larvæ which collect together in swarms and transfer themselves, often in masses of several hundreds, to any dog which happens to come in contact with them. After remaining on the host for three days the larvæ become gorged and drop off, crawling away into cracks where they become quite inert and apparently lifeless. From these in eight or nine days emerge the nymphs which again seek a host, and after remaining on the dog for about five days, drop off in a gorged condition and secret themselves in some crack where they again become inert and apparently dead. The adults, both male and female, emerge from the nymphal skins in about fifteen days and, after a brief rest, once more attach themselves to the dog. Though they belong to different genera, the Cape dog tick (H. leachi), the life-history of which has been studied by Loundsbury 12 and Nuttal,13 and the
5 dog tick of Madras (R. sanguineus) have therefore very similar habits. Oviposition commences as a rule about three days after the female has dropped from the host and is over by about the eighth day or even later, a few eggs often being passed by females which have shrivelled to one-third or one- quarter of their original size. In the young ova the protoplasm is finely granular and transparent, but after the ova have reached a certain size the protoplasm becomes more coarsely granular and more opaque. At a certain point in deve lopment numerous rod-shaped masses of chromatin appear and herald the for mation of the large yelk globules which characterise the mature ovum. By the end of oviposition the ovaries are almost devoid of ova and shew only peculiar crinkled masses, which are the collapsed membranes left after the mature ova have fallen into the lumen of the ovary. The oviducts during oviposition are of great length and contain ova at short intervals along their whole course. On entering the oviduct the ova are devoid of any hard envelope, but a shell is formed as they pass down the duct. When laid, the ova are coated with a thick layer of oil derived most prob ably from the sebaceous gland-like dermal gland and cephalic gland both of which at this time are very large and conspicuous (vide Anatomy and Histology of Ticks, page 48), and this makes the ova adhere loosely together. The method of dissection and the structure of ticks has been described in a previous publication.14 For the study of the developmental stages of Leucocytozoon canis preparations of the gut are made by dragging short lengths of it over the slide by means of needles. Preparations of ova are made by squashing the ovary and spreading in the usual way upon a slide, or by similarly treating eggs, either in the oviducts, or after they have been laid. The examination of fresh preparations is often of use in detecting infection because owing to their movements, the vermicules and sporozoits can be detected with a dry lens of comparatively low power. Male ticks were examined either by dividing them vertically and afterwards dragging out the gut with needles, or by snipping off the posterior end of the body and squeezing out the viscera by pressing a needle over the body of the tick from the head, end backwards. Nymphs were examined by spreading the gut, over the slide as in the case of the adult. The examination of larvæ is difficult. In the present instance they were ruptured with needles and their body juice smeared upon the slide. THE SPOROGONY OF Leucocytozoon Canis (JAMES). In the gut of females of R. sanguineus (Latreille) fed on dogs severely infected with Leucocytozoon canis, development of the parasite in all stages,
6 from the liberation of free vermicules to the formation of sporozoits on the breaking up of the oocyst, can be followed. Development in the tick there- fore represents the sporogony of this parasite. Fortunately no parasite that can be confounded with the developmental forms of Leucocytozoon canis exists normally in this species of tick in Madras, and a large number of observations extending over many months have estab lished the direct relationship of vermicules in the gut of the tick with the presence of the parasite in the dog. In no instance have vermicules been found on ticks fed on uninfected dogs, but in every case where females of R. sanguineus are fed on infected dogs vermicules are present in the gut, and their number bears a close relation to the number of parasites in the blood of the dog upon which the tick has fed. Still more, certain proof is afforded by the fact that it is quite common to see vermicules in the act of leaving their capsule. Since blood is taken in by the female tick throughout a period of from two to four days, it is to be expected that all the parasites will not be in the same stage of development, but this is true only as regards a minority of the parasites for, as already indicated, the final stages of engorgement are very rapid, and at least two-thirds of the blood in the fully fed female tick is, as a rule, taken in during the last twenty-four hours. Development, therefore, in the majority of forms has started, roughly speaking, from the time when the tick left its host, and the majority of parasites are at about the same stage of development. In the gut of ticks examined immediately after removal from the dog, encapsuled parasites, or vermicules in their first stages of development, are seen. At the end of twenty-four hours most of the forms have penetrated the cells of the gut wall and are seen to be undergoing the different stages of fission which precede the formation of the sexual forms. By the third day conjugation bodies and the first stages in the development of the fertilised oocyst are conspicuous. On the fourth day mature oocysts are present, together with a certain number of sporozoits. The latter increase in numbers up to about the sixth day, by which time most of the oocysts have disappeared. The liberation of vermicules.7 (Fig. 1). Leuocytozoon canis may sometimes be bent upon itself, but it is very noticeable that in the majority of cases, when the parasite is first liberated, it is a stumpy form differing from the encapsuled form only in not possessing a capsule. In is only later that the parasite gradually elongates and becomes an active attenuated vermicule. When the gut contents of ticks are examined immediately after they have left their host, many encapsuled forms are seen, but most of these are no longer contained in leucocytes, the persistence of the appearance of a capsule under these conditions being convincing as to the presence of a capsule proper to the parasite itself. In some cases only an indistinct capsule can be made out, in others there is no capsule, though the parasite, except that it stains more freely, is otherwise unchanged the appearances at this time suggesting that the encysted vermicule does not leave its capsule until this has been partly or wholly dissolved by the digestive juices of the tick. When the parasite is free from its capsule changes begin to occur in the arrangement of the chromatin, and a greater amount of protoplasm passes behind the nucleus (Fig. 3), a vermicule being eventually formed possessing transparent protoplasm and an elongated oval nucleus (Figs. 4 to 7), the chromatin of which is arranged in a coarse reticulum. Later the chromatin is often arranged in the form of almost separate rings (Fig. 8), an arrangement which I have already referred to as figured by Patton in the case of a vermicule found in the body cavity of Hæmatopinus (Patton,9 Pl. I, Fig. 16). The formation of the male and female elements.8 are not infrequently seen. These show a pink staining material which lies mainly between the vermicules, but sometimes also surrounds them. The vermicules. that have resulted from fission differ from those already described in that their protoplasm is more granular and contains refractile vacuoles. They frequently show a trace of the pinkish material already mentioned at one or, more rarely, both poles. Such an appearance is almost certain evidence that a vermicule exhibiting it has resulted from fission. In many cases fission appears to be repeated several times, since groups of four and even eight vermicules are often seen lying in a pocket in the protoplasm of a cell (Fig. 13). To ascertain exactly what takes place at this time is difficult, but there is no doubt that the mature sexual forms are the result of at least one act of division of the original vermicules. The sexually mature parasites are large vermicules measuring 13.5µ in length. The commonest type are stout forms with an oval nucleus, but thin forms with chromatin arranged along the length of the body are not infrequent. It is doubtful, however, whether these appearances are constant characters of the female and male elements, for, as will be seen later, in the conjugation forms, differences in the component vermicules are not distinguishable. In addition to the refractile droplets, which are very characteristic of the mature sexual forms, the protoplasm contains also a few small chromatin granules, and a darkly stained portion which is noticeable in the conjugation forms. The chromatin in the stout forms is arranged in an irregular meshwork, but in the narrow forms is more or less broken up and massed irregularly (Figs. 14 and 15). Conjugation and the formation of the oocyst.9 which are at first separate and situated on the periphery of the conjugation body, assume a very homogeneous appearance. In this condition they join together to form a single mass (Fig. 18). The chromatin now opens out in an irregular manner (Fig. 19) and passes towards the surface of the cell, the major portion of it being extruded in the form of two large and very darkly staining masses (Figs. 20 to 23). A portion remains behind and forms the origin of the chromatin of the oocyst. At the same time that the chromatin masses are extruded, the body of one of the vermicules, presumably the microgamete, is thrown off; and in it can still be recognised the refractile vacuoles, the broken up and now diffused granules of chromatin, and the dark area of protoplasm already noted. The mass is always devoid of even a trace of a nucleus (Fig. 21), differing in this respect from certain degenerated vermicules, referred to later, where the nucleus is still seen as a collection of deeply stained droplets. The newly formed body, the oocyst, which enlarges rapidly and quickly, assumes a very characteristic appearance, is a body with a clear central area and an outer rim of very conspicuous dark blue protoplasm, the chromatin, in the form of irregular fragments, being distributed near the periphery (Figs. 20 to 23). As the oocyst increases in size the chromatin becomes more and more broken up, forming as a rule an imperfect and irregular reticulum. In some forms the fragmentation is extreme and very fine particles of chromatin are dusted over the surface, in others the reticulum is much coarser. After the oocyst has reached a diameter of 14µ the central clear area becomes less conspicuous, and the surrounding protoplasm much more voluminous; the chromatin has also collected into a number of defined masses, which are arranged more or less regularly. At this stage the oocyst, either from being endowed with am10 these larger groups have originated from three or four oocysts in close proximity to each other. The sporozoits resemble somewhat the original vermicules, but they differ in being for the most part narrower forms with a very compact almost globular or short oval nucleus. Occasionally very stumpy forms are seen (Fig. 28). The presence of one or two large non-refractite vacuoles in the protoplasm is a characteristic feature. In the fresh state they exhibit a very curious spring-like action, bending slowly into a curve and straightening themselves with a jerk. Sporozoits are most frequent in the lumen of the gut; this is probably due to the fact that, though the vermicules originally embed themselves in the young cells near the basement membrane, they are carried during their develop- ment by the growth of the cell towards the lumen. The large oocysts them- selves, if not actually free in the lumen, are not far removed from this situation, and the sporozoits when liberated for the most part therefore find themselves already in the lumen. The ultimate fate of the sporozoits and the method of re-entry of the parasite into the dog.11 details of conjugation, there are very considerable differences. If one considers the original vermicules to represent the microgametoblasts and macrogametes of Lankesterella, one must in the case of the male element suppose that it is formed by repeated fission of the mother-cells. In the case of the macrogametes division more than once is unlikely, and even the formation of two forms each capable of development is improbable. It is possible that one of the forms degenerates. This view is favoured by the fact that a considerable number of degenerated vermicules, in which the chromatin is in the form of droplets, are seen about the time that conjugation is in progress. The group depicted in Fig. 29, in which a degenerated vermicule is seen separated from a fertilised oocyst by the pink substance characteristic of fission, also supports this view. On the other hand, in the groups of fertilised oocysts, only the cast-off bodies of the males are seen, so that if one of the products of division degenerates the other must move away from its original position. Another view regarding the nature of the changes seen may of course be taken, namely, that the fission in the gut of the tick is a special schizogony resulting eventually in male and female forms. But the first hypothesis seems to be more likely. The characters of the oocysts, and the fact that each of the limited number of sporozoits apparently represents a sporoblast; recall Lankesterella. As the sporozoits represent sporoblasts it is possible that they further sub-divide, but there is no evidence to support such a view, and their formation would appear to complete the sexual life cycle of Leucocytozoon can is, the merogamous cycle of which I have already described elsewhere. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058041.tif]
PAPERS REFERRED TO IN THE TEXT. 1. Hintze, 1902.EXPLANATION OF PLATE. Fig. 1. Two encapsuled parasites in the gut of the tick. x 2,000. Fig. 2. Parasite in which the capsule is no longer to be made out. x 2,000. Figs. 3 and 4. Formation of the vermicule. x 2,000. Figs. 5, 6, and 7. Vermicules of the first stage with clear protoplasm. x 2,000. Fig. 8. Vermicule with chromatin arranged in four separate rings. x 2,000. Fig. 9. Vermicule which has embedded itself in a cell of the gut and is preparing for fission. The cell is a young epithelium cell free from digestion products. x 1,000. Fig. 10. Swollen vermicule embedded in a cell of the gut. x 2,000. Fig. 11. Vermicule in the act of fission within a cell of the gut wall x 2,000. Fig. 12. Two vermicules of the second stage, the result of fission. x 2,000. Fig. 13. A single stout form and a group of four vermicules (microgametes ?) embedded in a cell of the gut. The cell contains a number of black granules, the result of digestion. A stout vermicule in the act of fission is seen lying in among the granules immediately beneath the group of four vermicules, x 1,000. Fig. 14. Thin form of sexual vermicule. x 2,000. Fig. 15. Stout forms of sexual vermicules. x 2,000. Fig. 16. A conjugation body. Early stage. x 2,000. Fig. 17. A conjugation body. Early stage. Shows one vermicule much more loaded with refractile vacuoles than the other. X 2,000. Fig. 18. A conjugation body. Later stage. Shows the blending of the two chromatin masses. x 2,000. Fig. 19. A conjugation body. Late stage. Shows the chromatin opening outwards x 2,000. Fig. 20. A fertilised oocyst with two extruded masses of chromatin and the protoplasm of the cast-off male vermicule. x 2,000. Fig. 21. The same showing the absence of any trace of a nucleus in the cast-off male. x 2,000. Figs. 22 and 23. Nearly mature oocysts. x 2,000. Fig. 24. Formation of sporozoits. x 2,000. Fig, 25. Fully mature oocyst showing irregular form. x 1,000. Fig. 26. A group of sporozoits resulting from the breaking up of an oocyst. x 2,000. Fig. 27. Usual form of sporozoit. x 2,000. Fig, 28. Stumpy form of sporozoit sometimes seen. Fig. 29. Oocyst showing degenerating vermicule still separated by the pink substance characteristic of fission. x 2,000.
THE SEXUAL CYCLE OF LEUCOCYTOZOON CANIS IN THE TICK. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058053.tif] Photogravure. Survey of India Offices , Calcutta, December 1906.
NO. 28. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. THE SEXUAL CYCLE OF LEUCOCYTOZOON CANIS IN THE TICK. BY CAPTAIN S. R. CHRISTOPHERS, M B., I.M.S. (Superintendent of the King Institute of Preventive Medicine, Madras.) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058068.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1907. Price annas twelve or 1s. 2d.
