I P/QB.10 m 91. b No. 38. (NEW SERIES) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRELMINARY REPORT ON THE KILLING OF RATS AND RAT FLEAS BY HYDROCYANIC ACID GAS. BY CAPTAIN W. D. H. STEVENSON, M.B., I.M.S. (Bombay Bacteriological Laboratory.) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75033552.tif] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1910 Price annas 8 or 9d.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75033558.tif] 3943075
No. 38. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PRELIMINARY REPORT ON THE KILLING OF RATS AND RAT FLEAS BY HYDROCYANIC ACID GAS. BY CAPTAIN W. D. H. STEVENSON, M.B., I.M.S. (Bombay Bacteriological Laboratory.) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75033564.tif] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1910 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75033564.tif]
Agents for the sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government;Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. Mr. E. A. ARNOLD, 41 and 43, Maddox Street, Bond Street, London, W. Messrs. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, W.C. Messrs. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., 43, Gerrard Street, Soho, London, W. Mr. BERNARD QUARITCH, II, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, W. Messrs. P. S. KING & SON, 2 and 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster. Messrs. H. S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, and 9, Pall Mall, London. Messrs. GRINDLAY & CO., 54, Parliament Street, London, S.W. Mr. T. FISHER UNWIN, I, ADELPHI TERRACE, London, W.C. Messrs. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E.C. Mr. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 51, Broad Street, Oxford. Messrs. DEIGHTON BELL & CO., Cambridge. Messrs. LUZAC & CO., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W.C. ON THE CONTINENT. Mr. RUDOLF HAUPT I, Dorrienstrasse, Leipzig, Germany. Mr. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ Mr. KARL HIERSE1ANN Leipzig. Messrs. R. FRIEDLANDER & SOHN, Berlin, W. N., Carlstrasse, II Mr. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. Mr. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. IN INDIA. Messrs. THACKER, SPINK & CO., Calcutta and Simla. Messrs. NEWMAN & CO., Calcutta. Messrs. R. CAMBRAY & CO., Calcutta. Messrs. S. K. LAHIRI & CO., Calcutta. Messrs. B. BANERJEE & Co., Calcutta. Messrs. HIGGINBOTHAM & CO., Madras. Messrs. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & CO.; Madras. Messrs. G. A. NATESAN & CO., Madras. Messrs. S. MURTHY & CO., Madras. Messrs. THOMPSON & CO., Madras. Messrs. TEMPLE & CO., Madras. Messrs. COMBRIDGE & CO., Madras. Messrs. P. R. RAMA IYER & Co., Madras. Messrs. A. R. PILLAI & CO., Trivandrum. Messrs. THACKER & Co., LD., Bombay. Messrs. A. J. COMBRIDGE & CO., Bombay. Messrs. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & CO, Bombay. Mrs. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay. Mr. SUNDER PANDURANG, Bombay. Messrs. GOPAL NARAYAN & CO., Bombay. Superintendent, American Raptist Mission Press, Rangoon. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-Am Press, Lahore and Calcutta. Mr. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazair Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. Messrs. A. CHAND & CO., Punjab. Messrs. A. M. & J. FERGUSON, Ceylon. Babu S. C. TALUKDAR, Proprietor, Students and Company, Cooch Behar.
List of numbers of Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India (New Series) published previous to the present issue. No. 1. Standardisation of Calmette's Anti-Venomous Serum with Pure Cobra Venom : the Deterioration of this Serum through keeping in India, by Captain G. Lamb, I. M. S. and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M. B. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 2. Malaria in India, by Captain S. P. James, I. M. S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No. 3. Some Observations on the Poison of Russell's Viper (Daboia Russellii), by Captain G. Lamb, I. M. S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M. B. Price As. 5 or 6d. No. 4. On the Action of the Venoms of the Cobra and of the Daboia on the Red Blood corpuscles and on the blood plasma, by Captain G. Lamb, I. M. S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 5. Specificity of Anti-Venomous Sera, by Captain G. Lamb, I. M. S. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 6. First Report on the Anti-Malarial Operations in Mian Mir, 19012 No. 20. Serum-Therapy of Plague in India; Reports by Mr. W. M. Haffkine, C.I.E., and various Officers of the Plague Research Laboratory, Bombay, by Lieute- nant-Colonel W. B. Bannerman, M. D., B.Sc., F.R.C.S. I.M.S. Price As. 14 or 1s. 4d, No. 21. On the Standardisation of Anti-Typhoid Vaccine, by Captain George Lamb, M.D., I.M.S. (Director, Pasteur Institute of India), and Captain W. B. C. Forster, M.B., D.P.H., I.M.S. Price As. 6. or 7d. No. 22. Mediterranean Fever in India: Isolation of the Micrococcus Melitensis, by Captain George Lamb, M.D., I.M.S., and Assistant Surgeon M. Kesava Pai, M.B., C.M., (Madras). Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 23. The Anatomy and Histology of Ticks, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price Rs. 3 or 4s. 6d. No. 24. On a Parasite found in the White Corpuscles of the blood of Palm Squirrels, by Captain W. S. Patton, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 25. On the importance of Larval Characters in the Classification of Mosquitoes, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 26. Leucocytozoon Canis, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 27. Preliminary Report on the Development of the Leishman-Donovan Body in the Bed Bug, by Captain W. S. Patton, M. B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 28. The Sexual Cycle of Leucocytozoon Canis in the Tick, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 29. Piroplasma Canis and its Cycle in the Tick, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B. I.M.S. Price Rs. 2 or 3s. No. 30. The Theory and Practice of Anti-Rabic Immunisation, by Captain W. F. Harvey, M. B., I.M.S., and Captain Anderson McKendrick, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 31. The Development of the Leishman-Donovan Parasite in Cimex RotundatusPRELIMINARY REPORT ON THE KILLING OF RATS AND RAT FLEAS BY HYDROCYANIC ACID GAS. AT the suggestion of Captain W. Glen Liston, I.M.S., experiments with hydrocyanic acid gas, as a measure to exterminate rats and fleas, were commenced in May 1909. The first experiments were made under his supervision. We were later informed by Mr. Lefroy, the Imperial Entomologist, that large use had been made of this gas by the Agricultural Departments in the United States of America and in South Africa. He kindly sent us some of the literature on the subject along with an account of his own experiments conducted at Pusa, all of which have proved of great help to us. It will be useful to consider briefly some of the previous work done on this subject. Hydrocyanic acid gas was first used in 1886 by Coquillet in California to destroy the " Cottony Cushion Scale" insect on plants; and later, fumigation of nursery stock with this gas has become compulsory throughout certain of the States. It is now used throughout Canada, the United States of America, South Africa, and Australia, not only for the disinfection of nursery stock, but also as a means of ridding orchard trees of their pests. More important for our purpose is the use of the gas for the disinfection of houses, jails, and railway coaches. The application has naturally been very limited on account of the deadly nature of the gas. Most of the information on this point we have obtained from the Reports of the Government Entomologist to the Cape of Good Hope for the years 1898 to 1901. In 1898 he considered the gas too dangerous for house disinfection; but in 1900, at the request of the Colonial Office, he rid the Worcester jail of the bed bug2 time were considered to be possibly the carriers of the plague germ. The experiments were discontinued owing to the decline of the epidemic and the departure of Professor Simpson. In America also fumigation by this gas has been occasionally used to rid buildings of pests. For example, in the "Proceedings of the 17th Annual Meeting of the Association of Economic Entomologists of America" a paper was read on the fumigation of a four-storey building to get rid of the " Clinocoris lectularia." The building was of about 150,000 cubic feet capacity; 80 lbs. of potassium cyanide were used; the building was kept shut up for two days. All the insects and eggs were killed. " No eggs appeared to hatch afterwards though examination was made frequently for a period of several weeks." The production of the gas. The chemicals used3 mixture of both potassium and sodium cyanides, yielding 33.9 per cent. hydro- cyanic acid equivalent to 81.6725 potassium cyanide. One hundred per cent. potassium cyanide would yield 41.5 per cent. of its weight of hydrocyanic acid and 100 per cent. sodium cyanide 55.1 per cent. There were no nitrates; but chlorides were present to the amount 3.778 per cent calculated as hydrochloric acid. The sulphuric acid ought to be commercial concentrated sulphuric acid (specific gravity 1.83). (2) Sulphuric Acid. The proportional amounts of potassium cyanide, sulphuric acid, and water are important. Coquillet in 1889 found that the best results were obtained by using 1 part potassium cyanide, 1 part of sulphuric acid, and 2 of water. But the usage of different workers has varied considerably on this point. However, the majority advocate the 1-2-4. formula, i.e., 1 oz. of 98 per cent. potassium cyanide, 2 fluid ozs. of sulphuric acid, and 4 fluid ozs. of water. The advantage is twofold: (1) There is enough water to dissolve the potassium bisulphate formed and so prevent the deposit of this salt round the potassium cyanide which would reduce the formation of hydrocyanic acid gas. (2) When 2 ozs. of sulphuric acid at 20°C. were mixed with 4 ozs. of water at 20°C. the initial tem- perature became 110°C.; one oz. of potassium cyanide was added and the whole mixture exposed to the outside air having a temperature of 14°C. for 40 minutes. At the end of that period the mixture had a temperature of 32°C. The boiling point of prussic acid is 26½°C., so that throughout the whole period the tempera- ture was sufficient to volatilize the prussic acid. If more water is added the initial temperature is less; if less water is added than 4 ozs. the addition of 1 oz. of potassium cyanide would also diminish the initial temperature. These conclusions were arrived at by Wilmon Newell, as noted in the above- mentioned paper. Some experiments were performed on this point by us. The room temperature was 28°C. The initial temperature of both the sulphuric acid and the water was 28°C., quite sufficient for the volatilization of the gas. I. Three parts of water were added to one part of sulphuric acid. The initial temperature became 88°C.; after forty minutes the temperature was 43°C. II. Two parts of water were added to one part of sulphuric acid. The initial temperature became 105°C.; forty minutes later the temperature was 39°C. III. One part of water to one part acid. The initial temperature was 115°C.; forty minutes later the temperature was 41°C. B 2
4 The end results vary then, not only with the initial temperature developed, but with the bulk of fluid used. In cold climates, as in the Punjab in the Cold weather, it would be advisable to mix the various chemicals in one large vessel rather than distribute them in small charges about a room, as cooling of the mixture in the latter case would occur so much more quickly. Considering every point the use of the 1-2-4 formula is probably the best. A few minor points advocated by various authorities are:5 Sirrine advises 25 grammes of potassium cyanide per too cubic feet; or for orchard trees, owing to the moisture and absorption of the evolved hydro- cyanic acid gas, 30 grammes, i.e., about 1 oz. to 100 cubic feet. The Government Entomologist for the Cape of Good Hope in his Report for the year 1901 states that bugs are more refractory to the gas than any other house insect. One ounce of potassuim cyanide to 155 cubic feet of air space with an exposure of one hour killed 12 out of 15 bugs. The remaining 3 were very feeble. Eggs of the bugs failed to hatch in three tests after exposure for one hour to gas of the above strength. He advises the use of one ounce to too cubic feet of space and an exposure for two hours. "When there are any deep cracks or crevices in any building to be penetrated, one ounce to 65 cubic feet of space may be used." (2) Actual procedure to be adopted as advised in the report of the Government Entomologist for the Cape of Good Hope for the year 1901. The building to be fumigated is made as air-tight as possible. Arrange- ments should be made for opening doors and windows from the outside to. ventilate after fumigation. Each room should be fumigated separately, if possible, but sometimes two connecting spaces may be treated as one. In the latter case crevices and splits in doors connecting the two spaces should be enlarged and burrows opened up. Bedding, clothing, etc., should be spread out to let the gas get full effect on them. The vessels in which the chemicals are to be mixed must be of such a nature that they are not acted on by them. Their size depends on the quantity of chemicals to be used. They must be of such a shape that the depth of combined sulphuric acid and water will cover the cyanide put in. They may be glazed earthenware vessels or china washhand vessels. Lead vessels are good but heavy and soft. Enamelware till cracked acts well. Kerosine oil tins will serve for two or three different charges. One of these tins can take a charge of 3 lbs. of potassium cyanide6 being lighter than air, if there are two storeys begin at the top; and if there are many rooms in a corridor begin at the farthest from the exit. An assistant may go in front mixing the acid and water. Great quickness and care are essential as the gas is so poisonous. Of course if a tenement is to be disinfected all inhabitants must be cleared out first. It is essential to have a clear space round the building to be fumigated. It is recorded in one of the American experiments that persons walking 100 feet from the building could detect the odour of the gas the whole time. The period of exposure should be two hours at least. It is better not to try ventilation till 127 The action on animals, insects, plants, food, and fabrics. Our experiments have been almost entirely on rats and rat fleas, and will be detailed later. With respect to its action on certain insects, arachnoids and mammals, Lounsbury states that flies are much more susceptible to the gas than fleas, and fleas than bed bugs. Argas persicus8 As all the experience of workers in America and South Africa goes to show that even delicate plants are not injured by the gas when present in sufficient concentration to clear them of insects, the answer would be that it is not injurious. An experiment we did confirmed this. Certain amounts of the above grains subjected to the gas were planted, and their growth compared with control grains which had not been fumigated. No difference in the rate of growth could be detected. So during a fumigation, stored dry grain can be left in the house. without fear of rendering it poisonous or of destroying its germinating power. Unlike Sulphur dioxide gas hydrocyanic acid gas has no action on metals or fabrics. The action of the gas on bacteria. About 4.38 cubic feet of diluted gas were introduced into a room of capacity 830 cubic feet and allowed to act for twenty minutes on bacteria. Cultures of streptococci, Bacillus typhosus, Bacillus coli, and Bacillus pestis on agar slopes in test tubes with their cotton-wool stoppers removed were put in the room. After the experiment subcultures on agar showed that the plague was overgrown with a yellow contaminating organism. The other bacteria had not been killed by the action of the gas. This coincides with the experience of the Government Entomologist of the Cape of Good Hope as noted in the Report for 1901: "Cultures of the plague. bacillus were found to be unaffected when exposed by substituting a piece of gauze tied over the top for the plug of cotton-wool ordinarily used for stopping culture tubes by one hour in 1 to 80 gas9 experiments in a specially constructed leaden vessel. The mixture was heated over a Bunsen flame, the whole being placed outside the room to be fumigated, Tubes conducting the undiluted gas were led directly into the room in some cases ; in others the tubes were led into a large iron vessel from which the gas was pumped by a powerful fan into the room through a large delivery pipe. There was a second opening in the iron vessel through which air was pumped and mixed with the hydrocyanic acid gas. It was the largely diluted hydrocyanic acid gas that was introduced. The quantities of hydrocyanic acid gas produced were calculated as follows: about 82 grammes of pure potassium cyanide taken as 100 per cent. will produce I cubic foot of hydrocyanic acid gas. We used for one charge 85 grammes of 98 per cent. potassium cyanide or the equivalent amount of other strengths of the salt. We were at the time unaware of the necessity of using sodium chloride free potassium cyanide stated by Wilmon Newell in his paper and quoted above on page 2. With the 85 grammes of potassium cyanide we mixed 35 c.c. of strong commercial sulphuric acid diluted to 700 c.c. with water (i.e., H2SO4 1 in 20 strength). The room in which these experiments were carried out is comparatively air- tight. It is of the following dimensions: length 12 feet 6 inches; breadth 7 feet 8 inches. The roof slopes upward from a wall 5 feet 8 inches to one of 11 feet 8 inches. The cubic capacity is about 830 cubic feet. The walls are of cement. The floor is of stamped earth. The roof is of corrugated iron made rat-proof by being firmly fastened to the walls. There is a large window 2 feet 7 inches by 3 feet 6 inches and opposite it a large door 3 feet 2 inches by 5 feet 6 inches. The window is capable of being tightly closed by shutters. Through the shutters the delivery pipe was led into the room. The door, which leads into another room, was closed and any cracks or obvious holes sealed over, so that a com- paratively air-tight chamber was produced. In the different experiments varying amounts of gas from 2 to 4.38 cubic feet were introduced into the room for different periods of time. The results giving details of amounts of gas used, the time of exposure, and the effect on fleas in different situations are given in Experiments I to VI. Rats were introduced into the room simply to discover what amount of gas would be necessary to kill them. They require more gas and a longer exposure than fleas. But the effect of the gas on them is of no importance for this investi- gation10 Both objects were attained. Bundles of clothes wrapped fairly tightly up were thoroughly penetrated by the gas. A consideration of the tables will show this. For example, in Experiment I the gas penetrated through four bags, 11 strong sulphuric acid were added evolving heat, and then I oz. of potassium cyanide was finally put in and the door closed. The gas was left in contact with the clothes for forty minutes and then the door was opened. The room was entered fifteen minutes later. The fleas left in different parts of the room were all killed,12 In the following experiments as many of the large ventilating holes as could be filled up were closed with tightly packed paper and the room was made as air-tight as most native huts can be made. In the floor of the room four types of rat burrows were present, each consisted of a small wooden box to contain rats and fleas and one or two passages leading from it to the floor of the room. The boxes measured 21 by 10¾ by 12 inches. They are fitted with hinged lids and are sunk in the ground. Inside each box is a rack to hold test-tubes containing fleas. The cage for the rat can be placed inside the box. The channels consist of a series of short sections of earthenware pipes sunk in the ground. Each section is made up of concave country roofing tiles placed together to form a somewhat tapering pipe, the narrow end of one section fitting into the broad end of the other. The narrow end of the lowest of these sections projects slightly into the box. These "burrows" measured from 5½ to 12 feet. There are four types of burrows :13 the bottom, and in test-tubes in the burrows,14 isolated houses to investigate its action on rats under natural conditions. The investigation should be made by some one familiar with the use of the gas. Cost of Disinfection. I.15 Experiment I.* A. Fleas and rats were placed in the small room described on page 9 of 830 cubic feet capacity. 170 grammes of 98 per cent. potassium cyanide, equivalent to about ¾ oz. of the salt to 100 cubic feet air space, was decomposed outside the room. The resultant gas calculated to be about 2.19 cubic feet at 26° Centi- grade was led into the room by tubes without the use of a fan to drive it in. The generation of gas took 51 minutes. The object of this experiment with fleas was to test the penetration of gas through various layers of cloth stuffs. Details of covering, etc., enclosing the fleas. Results after 51 minutes' exposure to the gas. REMARKS. (a) 15 fleas were put in a white cotton bag and that again enclosed in one bag of coarse red blanket. (a) All fleas were found dead. (b) 9 fleas in a white cotton bag were enclosed in two layers of coarse red blankets. (b) Do. (c) 11 fleas in a white cotton bag were enclosed in three layers of coarse red blankets. (c) 10 dead; 1 alive. (d) 11 fleas were put in a fine flannel bag. (d) All fleas dead. (e) 9 fleas were put in a chintz bag (e) Do. (f) 10 fleas were put in a cashmere bag (f) Do. (g) 20 fleas were put in a single chintz bag and that rolled in a durree, blanket, coat and trousers. (g) 7 escaped; 12 alive; 1 dead. * NOTE.16 Experiment I17 Experiment II. A small room was used18 Experiment III. A small room of 830 cubic feet capacity was used. 340 grammes of 98 per cent. potassium cyanide, equivalent to about 1½ ozs. of the salt to 100 cubic feet air space, was decomposed outside the room. The resultant gas, calculated to be about 4.38 cubic feet at 26° Centigrade was delivered into the room by means of a fan. Exposure for 20 minutes. Details as to conditions under which the fleas were admitted to the action of the gas. Results of fumigation. REMARKS. (1) 10 fleas in a cotton bag wrapped in several layers of blanket and thick sheet. (1) All dead In all these results the fleas were kept for two hours and looked at again19 Experiment IV. In disinfection of boxes do the clothes need to be taken out of boxes and hung up; or can we thoroughly disinfect clothes by leading pipes into the boxes? Two experiments were done on this point. The same amount of hydrocyanic acid gas as in Experiment III was pumped into the small room of 830 cubic feet capacity (about 4.38 cubic feet). The exposure was for 20 minutes. The room was entered in 30 minutes from commencement of operations. By using the test rod a good prussian blue tint showed that a concentrated gas was passed into the room. Nine pipes took the gas into the room from the generating chamber outside. One pipe was led into the bottom of Box I. Two pipes were led into the bottom of Box II. In Box I from above downwards fleas were put in the following positions:20 Experiment V. With Clothes in Boxes. Same period of exposure 20 minutes. The same amount of hydrocyanic acid gas (about 4.38 cubic feet) as in Experiment III was introduced into the room of 830 cubic feet capacity by means of a fan. Box I, from above downwards. PARTICULARS. Result. REMARKS. 1. Rug and chudder, then cotton bag with 10 fleas in it. 10 fleas; all dead. 2. Then durree and 2 blankets with bag of 7 fleas below. 7 fleas; all dead. 3. Then one blanket, with bag of 9 fleas below. 9 fleas; all dead. 4. Then a blanket in several folds and a bag with 7 fleas below it. 7 fleas; all dead. 5. Then another blanket with 9 fleas below in a bag. 9 fleas; all dead. Box II.21 Experiment VI. Does the gas kill cultures of micro-organisms and what effect has it on the germinating power of grains? Does it render dry food-stuff poisonous? The small room of 830 cubic feet capacity was used. About 4.38 cubic feet of hydrocyanic acid gas was introduced by a fan and allowed to act 20 minutes from the start. The test rod showed plenty of gas to be present. The grains tested were: (1) Bajri, (2), Wheat, (3) Jowari, (4) Mula or Radish, and (5) Rice. (1), (2), and (5) were put in kerosine oil tins. A pipe conveying the gas was conducted to the bottom of the mass and one was directed on the surface. Mula and jowari were in small amounts and gas played on their surface from pipes directly placed on them. I. Were the grains poisonous? No. Tested on monkeys, rabbits, guinea-pigs, hens, and pigeons. Fed on it for 24 hours. None dead nor ill. Again chapatis were made of the wheat, jowari, and bajri, and monkeys and hens were fed on them. No ill results. II. The germinating power of the seeds was not affected. Certain quanti- ties of the above grains were planted and seeds not subjected to the gas were planted at the same time to serve as control in the comparison of the rate of growth. Both examples of bajri, jowari, and mula grew well; of wheat grew feebly, because much of it was husked. Cultures of (a) Micrococcus melitensis, (b) Cholera spirillum, and (c) Bacillus anthracis, were placed in the room, but the cotton-wool stoppers were not removed from the test-tubes containing the cultures as it was thought not to be safe to do so. They were after subjection to the gas re-transplanted on agar and showed good growths. Test-tubes containing cultures of (a) Streptococci, (b) Bacillus typhosus, (c) Bacillus coli communis, and (d) Bacillus pestis, were placed in the room with their cotton-wool plugs removed, so that the gas had full action on the germs. After the experiment the germs were recultured on agar. The Bacillus pestis was overgrown with some yellow contaminating organism. The others grew well and seemed to the naked eye to be pure cultures. So probably the above germs are not affected by the gas. Fleas after 5 minutes' exposure to the gas were found dead. They were put into tubes and withdrawn after 5, 10, and 15 minutes' exposure, all dead. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75033636.tif]
22 Experiment VII. The following experiments23 Experiment VIII. Another experiment was tried with the following alterations: (1) the fan was worked; (2) the tubes leading off from the main tube were larger in calibre and their total surface area equal to the surface area of the large tube leading from the generator, so that the full amount of gas was delivered into the room. There were nine pipes altogether: five delivered into the room at different heights and four were inserted into the four burrows, and the mouths of the burrows where the pipes were inserted were choked up. Three hundred and forty grammes of 98 per cent. potassium cyanide was decomposed. The resultant hydrocyanic acid gas calculated to be about 4.38 cubic feet at 26° Centigrade was delivered into the room of about 1,640 cubic feet capacity. The amount of potassium cyanide used would be equivalent to about ¾ oz. to 100 cubic feet air space. There was 35 minutes' exposure to the gas. By means of the observation rods the room was seen to be sufficiently free from the gas five minutes later. Forty minutes, therefore, were taken for the whole experiment. After the fumigation the fleas were examined at once and also three hours later to see whether they had revived. POSITION. RATS. FLEAS. REMARKS. Dead. Sick. Alive. Dead. Alive. On the floor 3 ... 1 28 (all) ... 4 feet from ground 3 ... 1 12 (all) ... 6 do. 2 ... ... ... ... 8 do. 2 ... ... ... ... 12 do. 3 ... ... 10 (all) ... On the rafters ... ... ... 11 (all) ... Burrow A 1 ... ... 15 (all) ... For description of burrows, see page 12. 24 Experiment IX. Into the same room of about 1,640 cubic feet capacity about 6.57 cubic feet of hydrocyanic acid gas were introduced, equivalent to about 1.2 ozs. potassium cyanide to 100 cubic feet air space. The exposure was for 40 minutes. Rats were let loose on the floor and put loose into the burrows to simulate natural conditions. The gas was driven into the room by the fan. The disposition of pipes was similar to that in Experiment VIII. POSITION. RESULTS. REMARKS. Dead. Sick. Alive. 6 on the floor 3 1 2 For description of burrows, see page 12. Burrow A, 3 put in 3 ... ... Blind burrows. Burrow B, 3 put in 3 ... ... Burrow C, 4 put in 1 ... 3 escaped. Burrow D, 3 put in 2 ... 1 escaped.
25 Experiment X. The following experiments26 Experiment X27 The following experiments28 Experiment XII. Same room. 16½ ozs. of potassium cyanide (same salt as in Experiments X and XI), 32 ozs. of sulphuric acid of specific gravity 1.83 and 64 ozs. of waterNo. 38. (NEW SERIES) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRELMINARY REPORT ON THE KILLING OF RATS AND RAT FLEAS BY HYDROCYANIC ACID GAS. BY CAPTA D. H. STEVENSON, M.B., I.M.S. (Homo Bacteriological Laboratory.) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75033708.tif] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1910 Price annas 8 or 9d.
