IP/QB, 10 No. 30. (NEW SERIES) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERMENT OF INDIA. THE THEORY AND PRACTICE OF ANTI-RABIC IMMUNISATION. BY CAPTAIN W. F. HARVEY, M.B., I.M.S. AND CAPTAIN ANDERSON MCKENDRICK, M.B., I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75031264.tif] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1907. Price Annas 12 or 1s. 2d.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75031270.tif] 3942965
No. 30. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. THE THEORY AND PRACTICE OF ANTI-RABIC IMMUNISATION. BY CAPTAIN W. F. HARVEY, M.B., I.M.S. AND CAPTAIN ANDERSON MCKENDRICK, M.B., I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75031276.tif] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75031276.tif] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1907
Agents for the Sale of Books published by The Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. HENRY S. KING & CO., 65, Cornhill, & 9, Pall Mall, London. E. A. ARNOLD, 41 & 43, Maddox Street, Bond Street, London, W. CONSTABLE & CO. 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, London, W.C. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. KEGAN, PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & CO., 43, Gerrard Street, Soho, London, W. GRINDLAY & CO., 54, Parliament Street, London, S.W. BERNARD QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, W. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 & 51, Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON, BELL & CO., Cambridge. T. FISHER UNWIN, 1, Adelphi Terrace, London, W.C. W. THACKER & CO., 2, Creed Lane, London, E.C. ON THE CONTINENT. R. FRIEDLÄNDER & SOHN, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin, N.W. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. RUDOLF HAUPT, Halle A. S., Germany. IN INDIA. THACKER, SPINK & CO., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & CO., Calcutta. S. K. LAHIRI & Co., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & CO., Calcutta. HIGGINBOTHAM & CO., Madras. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & CO., Madras. G. A. NATESAN & CO., Madras. S. MURTHY & CO., Madras. THOMPSON & CO., Madras. TEMPLE & CO., Madras. COMBRIDGE & CO., Madras. P. R. RAMA IYER & CO., Madras. A. R. PILLAI & CO., Trivandrum. THACKER & CO., LD., Bombay. A. J. COMBRIDGE & CO., Bombay. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & CO., Bombay. SUNDER PANDURANG, Bombay. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay. GOPAL NARAYAN & CO., Bombay. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazair Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-Am Press, Lahore. A. CHAND & CO., Lahore, Punjab. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission Press, Rangoon. A. M. & J. FERGUSON, Ceylon.
List of numbers of Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India (New Series) published previous to the present issue: No. 1. Standardisation of Calmette's anti-venomous serum with pure cobra venom: the deterioration of this serum through keeping in India, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B., Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 2. Malaria in India, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No. 3. Some observations on the poison of Russell's Viper (Daboia Russellii), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 5 or 6d. No. 4. On the action of the venoms of the Cobra and of the Daboia on the red blood corpuscles and on the blood plasma, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 5. Specificity of anti-venomous sera, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 6. First report on the anti-malarial operations in Mian Mir, 19012 No. 21. On the Standardisation of Anti-Typhoid Vaccine, by Captain George Lamb, M.D., I.M.S. (Director, Pasteur Institute of India), and Captain W. B. C. Forster, M.B.,D.P.H., I.M.S. Price As. 6 or 7d. No. 22. Mediterranean Fever in India: Isolation of the Micrococcus Melitensis, by Captain George Lamb, M.D., I.M.S., and Assistant Surgeon M. Kesava Pai, M.B., C.M. (Madras). Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 23. The Anatomy and Histology of Ticks, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price Rs. 3 or 4s. 6d. No. 24. On a parasite found in the white corpuscles of the blood of Palm Squirrels, by Captain W. S. Patton, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 25. On the importance of Larval characters in the classification of mosquitoes, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 26. Leucocytozoon Canis, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 27. Preliminary Report on the Development of the Leishman-Donovan Body in the Bed Bug, by Captain W. S. Patten, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 28. The sexual cycle of Leucocytozoon Canis in the tick, by Captain S. R. Chris- tophers, M.B., I.M.S., As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 29. Piroplasma Canis and its cycle in the tick, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S., Rs. 2 or 3s. Published by and on sale at the Office of the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. Copies are also available from all Agents for the sale of Government publications.
THE THEORY AND PRACTICE OF ANTI-RABIC IMMUNISATION. ALMOST every Pasteur Institute has its own method of treatment differing from that of other Institutes and from Pasteur's original scheme. These differences show that immunity can be obtained by the administration of protect- ive material in amounts which may vary within wide limits. In the light which research has thrown upon the problems of immunity in recent years we may ask ourselves which of the various methods of anti-rabic treatment is to be regarded as best combining accuracy of dosage with the establishment of protection. The enquiry may even be pushed further and include a consideration of the advis- ability or otherwise of adopting an entirely new method of procedure2 (3) The nature of the immunity produced by anti-rabic inoculation. We have made an attempt in the following pages to state facts, new and old, which may tend to some extent to simplify opinions on these points. We believe that a great many of the divergencies manifested in the different schemes of different Institutes would be annulled if in each case the total quantity of virus given within a certain period of time were looked upon as the ultimate standard to which all treatment formulæ had to conform. At all events statistics show that the success obtained in treatment by any one Institute does not differ greatly from that obtained by any other, however diverse in appearance the schemes employed. From this fact alone we would infer that the particular scheme employed in any one particular place is not so important as the total quantity of fixed rabies virus which is administered in a given time. Now, whether we agree or not with the view 1 & 2 that slow drying of rabies material simply results in diminution of the quantity of living virus contained in it, it is still unquestionably the case that smaller quantities of less altered rabies virus are the equivalent of larger quantities of more altered virus, however the alter- ation (desiccation, heat, glycerine, etc.) may have been brought about. We shall enter into this question later in all its bearings upon anti-rabic immunisation. As a result of the fact just stated it may be asserted that ample opportunity is afforded3 We should then be able to say that for a light case or a severe case at least so many units must be given within a certain period. We have endeavoured4 TABLE I. HÖYGES' LIGHT SCHEME.1 Day. Dilution. Dose. No. of units. 1st 1/10,000 + 5 But it is obvious that the amounts in units given in this scheme may be made up in a variety of ways. Thus instead of the patient receiving 3 cc. of 1/10,000, 6 doses of fresh rabies virus to various animals with no ill effect. We have also produced immunity to subdural inoculation in dogs by as few as one, two, and four subcutaneous inoculations (separate trials) of fresh rabies virus (vide pp. 23-24). These experiments we refer to later, but in any case we go no further in this paper than to afford our testimony and give our support to those workers who advocate a diminution of the number of anti-rabic inoculations with an increase in their daily strength. Another point of discussion which is suggested by an examination of Höyges' scheme of treatment (and it is equally suggested by other schemes) is the necessity for returning to a weaker dose after having once reached a stronger. Would there, for example, be any serious apprehension of danger or of insufficient protection if Höyges' light scheme were altered as follows? TABLE II. Day of inoculation. Number of units given. 1st 800 2nd 887.5 3rd 1,050 4th 1,050 5th 1,250 6th 1,250 7th 1,250 8th 1,750 9th 1,750 10th 1,750 11th 2,500 12th 2,500 13th 2,500 14th 5,000 TOTAL 25,287.5
7 It is said that it is important that a patient should be introduced as quickly as possible to virulent material. This, however, does not seem to us to be sufficient reason for a return immediately thereafter to less virulent, or, in the case of Höyges' scheme, to smaller amounts of virus. In Höyges' scheme the strongest dose given is 1 cc. of 1/100 dilution (5,000 units). It can scarcely be that a 1/100 dilution is per se more dangerous than a ½000 dilution; for 0.5 cc. of 1/100 dilution (2,500 units) is equal as regards content in virus to 4 cc. of 1/100 dilu- tion. We consider, therefore, that some such alteration of Höyges' scheme as that given above (Table II) would be as satisfactory as the scheme in general use, or, if it were essential to hasten the earlier stages, it might be altered some- what as follows :8 might not suffice for a light form of treatment and so save the patient the neces- sity of waiting longer. Let the patient have 25,000 units in 11 days and then depart. This idea (rapid immunisation) has been referred to by other authors, and has actually been put into practice (Ferrans,1 Nitsch 2). It is one to which we think earnest consideration should be given. We may now sum up our position so far as we have yet discussed it. (1) The variations among different schemes of treatment are probably to a large extent only apparent and do not necessarily imply any great divergence of opinion. Anti-rabic treatment consists in the administration of rabies virus in various amounts with the view of producing what is probably entirely an anti- microbic immunity* as distinguished from an anti-toxic. We have taken as an example one scheme and shown how an infinite number of variations in the method of its application are possible. The same applies to other schemes, only that it is a little more difficult in them to demonstrate the fact owing to the quan- titative relations between the different strengths of vaccine not being so easily estimated. (2) The justification of the administration of small doses frequently repeated possibly lies in this, that by so doing a greater area of anti-body producing cells is brought into action. (3) It is possible and might even be advantageous so to alter the method of anti-rabic treatment as to bring it into line with the prophylactic treatment of plague, typhoid fever, etc. Such a method as this, even though not applied in the case of human beings, might be eminently serviceable in India for the treat- ment of the lower animals. The difficulty here is that delay might occur in obtaining the necessary material of inoculation. In such a case, if available, the brain of the biting animal might serve for the administration of a first subcutaneous injection. In some ten days, when a second injection would be due, the specially prepared fixed virus from a Pasteur Institute would have had time to arrive. Of course it might not always be possible to obtain the brain of the biting animal. In that case if the requisite material arrived late from the nearest Pasteur Institute, it might be necessary to adopt the method of intravenous inoculation of fixed virus which Roux and Nocard,3 Protopoff,4 Moncet5 and others have shown to be of service in the rapid 1 Ferrans using fresh rabies material has reduced the period of treatment in ordinary cases to five days9 production of immunity to rabies. As a purely prophylactic measure, in antici- pation of the possibility of being bitten by a rabid animal, anti-rabic inoculation is not accepted as expedient in the case of human beings. In India, however, where every year numbers of valuable dogs and other animals develop rabies, the question of a yearly inoculation of fresh rabies material as a preventive might commend itself to owners. This would be the more feasible if, say, one inoculation per year should prove to be sufficient to establish and maintain a satisfactory degree of immunity and yet be itself quite safe. The point requires more experimental work (vide pp. 2310 of rabies virus which we have found under certain definite conditions to be capable of producing distinct paresis in a rabbit within six or seven days after sub- dural inoculation. It will be readily understood that very exact numerical results are almost impossible of attainment, where we are dealing11 weighing 0.1079 grm. was then removed From it for the test of infectivity of one-day dried cord. The weight, therefore, of the portion taken would, in its. fresh state, have been 3.8752/1.9986x 0.1079 = 0:2092 grm. and it is on the basis of this latter weight, and not of 0.1079 grm., that the necessary dilutions are made. This calculation is essential to any method of estimation in which more or less dried material is to be compared with fresh moist material. Results.12 Limit reached13 ments with one-day and two-day cords, which, although limits have not been reached in both cases, still go to confirm the results obtained with those other experiments in which limits were obtained. We think certain conclusions may be drawn from these results, These are14 The curve (fig. I) shows the very sharp drop in infectivity which takes place in the first three days and the very gradual diminution thereafter. The inferences which it would seem justifiable to make from a particular study of this curve are15 TABLE IV.16 amount of non-effective water which is present after the 9th day of desiccation. We now proceed to plot the two curves on the same chart, reducing the figures in each case so as to make the graph start from unity. In this way we obtain fig. III. Our figures for the drying curve are averages obtained from four different sets of observations. The two sets of figures to be plotted are here given. It is to be noted that the weight of water remaining in the cord after the 9th day together with that of the solid basis material of the cord has been duly deducted from the actual weights obtained, and the result is shown in column 3 as ' loss of water.' TABLE V. (1) (2) (3) Desiccation. Infectivity. Loss of water. Fresh 1.2 1.2 1st day ... 0.392 2nd day 0.125 0.115 3rd day 0.025 0.049 5th day 0.0125 0.013 9th day 0.0 0.0 These curves (fig. III), we think, show a very marked correspondence, experimental error being allowed for. Both curves show a marked and rapid fall to the third day and both show extremely gradual subsidence after the fifth day of drying. We believe, cæteris paribus, the two curves to be identical and indeed that they represent two parallel effects of the same causal action. If we take this case as proven we may state this proposition:17 If this be so, it follows that a cord which has been drying for nine days or longer has little or no value for immunisation. With regard to less dried cords a greater or smaller quantity will be required to produce a sufficient immunity to rabies infection according to the greater or less degree of desiccation. The ex- periment which we give in detail below gives, by means of a particular instance, support to this view and, by extension, to the view that immunisation against rabies might conveniently be carried out with a cord which had dried for a fixed time only, instead of with a graded series of dried cords. In our experiment we show that whereas nine-day cord has probably little immunising power, five-day cord has considerable power and might probably be used by itself1 as the immunis- ing substance from commencement to termination of a course of treatment, It may be as well to say here that, even if such a method as this were elevated into the position of a system of anti-rabic immunisation, we should still regard it only as a temporary compromise between the use of dried material and of fresh rabies virus. The method suggested by Nitsch amongst recent authors we regard likewise as simply a step towards the more general use of fresh material. Experiment.18 The five-day inoculated dog showed itself entirely immune to the subdural infection. The nine-day dog and the control dog both succumbed to rabies, the former showing paresis nine days after subdural inoculation and the latter eight days after. The nine-day cord inoculations therefore produced no effective immunity, and it would seem that the incubation period of the disease had not been to any degree extended. We have spoken above of "slow desiccation" (p. 16); this is merely in a comparative sense to distinguish it from the rapid desiccation of rabies material in vacuo and over sulphuric acid 1 by means of which, within 24 hours, a powder may be obtained which, although dry, still retains its infectivity. This pheno- menon is not unknown in the case of other organisms, e.g., vaccine virus, Sta- phylococcus pyogenes aureus, B. diphtheriæ. The periods to which such organisms will survive drying vary greatly. We have not made very many experiments to compare the infectivity of rapidly desiccated rabies virus with fresh material, but such as we have made would lead us to the opinion that, although the potency of the former may not be denied, it is yet very greatly less than that of the latter. III.19 Let then the M. I. D. by this calculation be for (1) Fresh rabies material ... 0.2 cc. of 20 TABLE VII. III. HÖYGES' METHOD LIGHT SCHEME.1 Dilution. Dose in cc. Units. 1 m.1/10,000 + 21 TABLE VIII. II. PASTEURIAN TREATMENT. Kasauli scheme. One centimetre of cord is emulsified in 3 cc. sterile physiological salt solution. Weight of rabbits about 1,500 grms. Day of desiccation. Dose. Units. 1 1422 In Paris the rabbits used are 2 to 2½ kilos. weight, whereas those used at the Kasauli Institute weigh on the average about 1½ kilos. In Paris, then, length for length, cords would weigh more and dry less quickly than in Kasauli. The result of this difference in weight probably is that the emulsions used in treat- ment are of a higher concentration than those used in Kasauli and so a larger dose is given. The doses used in Paris represent in all probability a greater number of units than would be given by the assumption that the emulsions used were exactly equivalent to those used in Kasauli. We have not therefore attempted to estimate the Paris scheme. We have to note here that this estimation of systems takes no account of dead vaccinal material separate from living virus as we do not consider this to have any immunising value (vide p. 27 ). Further, we take no account of the fact that a cord such as nine-day cord although non-infective in a dose of 0.2 cc. of 1/5 dilution might be to a small extent infective, and therefore immunising, in a dose of 3 cc. of this dilution. However, we believe that no very great error is introduced by this last omission. To return to our comparison of systems, we might lay down, supposing our original assumptions to be somewhere near the truth, that 25,000 units given in 14 to 20 days or very probably in a considerably shorter period of time would be sufficiently protective for light anti-rabic treatment. This computation has, as we have said, special reference to the Kasauli mode of procedure, taken in con- junction with that of Höyges. In exactly the same way if we compared these systems dose for dose instead of as a whole we should conclude that 3 cc. of a 5 per cent. emulsion (that ordinarily used in Kasauli) of three-day cord was as nearly as possible intermediate in strength between 1 cc. (Höyges' dose) of 1/100 fresh rabies emulsion and 1 cc. of ½00 fresh rabies emulsion. Similarly 3 cc. of a five-day cord emulsion would hold the relation to 1 cc. of ½00 fresh emulsion of 1.5: 2. The relations, therefore, of these different doses mentioned would be 4: 3: 2: 1.5. 4= 1 cc. 1/100 fresh in material. 3-= 3 cc. 5 per cent. three-day cord. 2-= 1 cc. ½00 fresh. 1.5 = 3 cc. 5 per cent. five-day cord. Other systems might be estimated after the same fashion. IV.23 In no single case did rabies result from the procedure. The emulsion of virus was always given in the loose abdominal subcutaneous tissue24 Series. Animal. Weight. No. of - inocula- tions of fixed virus. Total quantity fixed virus injected. Duration of inocula- tions. Subdural inoculation. Remarks. Result. III Dog 3 18½ lbs 1 ½ rabbit brain fixed virus. ... 34 days after last immun- ising dose 0.3 cc. of 3 per cent. fixed virus emul- sion. 26th February 1907. ... Remained well. Dog 4 8 lbs 2 ¾ brain rabbit fixed virus. (1) ¼ brain 24th Jan. 1907, (2) ½ brain, 3rd Feb. 1907. 23 days after last immunis- ing dose 0.3 cc. of 5 per cent, fixed virus. 26th Feb. 1907. ... Ditto. Dog 5 (control) 16 lbs ... ... ... 26th February 1907, 0.3 cc. 5 per cent. fixed virus. ... Developed rabies nine days later. From these experiments it will be seen that we were able to immunise a dog (No. 2) with as small a quantity as 0.46 grm. given in four injections. Dogs 3 and 4 were immunised to subdural inoculations with one and two injections re- spectively. In the first series of experiments it is evident that the amount given to the small brown monkey (No. I) was insufficient to produce immunity, to subdural injection. As this monkey was injected with the same amount and from the same emulsion as dog 2 it serves to some extent as a control in the particular series (Series I) of experiments in which it was used. The doses given subcutaneously may be regarded as massive doses, and in no case was there any evidence of harm resulting in either dogs, monkeys, or goat. We may infer therefore that in this small number of cases massive subcutaneous injections of fixed rabies virus did not produce infection but immunity to subdural inoculations and that this immunity was achieved in one case by one single inoculation. There are also numerous published instances in which massive doses have been given and no harm resulted25 in a sheep without effect. Helman and others have injected intraperitoneally and subcutaneously large doses of rabies virus without producing any signs of intoxication or of rabies. More recently Nitsch1 injected himself subcutaneously with the emulsion made from a fresh piece of rabies cord (858th passage26 from the living virus. He directly incriminates, and we believe justly so, the inoculation material as the active cause of these symptoms. Where we do not follow him is in regard to his assumption that the symptoms must be due to a rabies toxin. The sum and substance of his argument on this point we conceive to be this (1) The existence of a rabies toxin is not to be doubted. (2) In rabies we have an instance of a disease accompanied by paralysis. (3) One of the gravest of the sequelæ of anti-rabic inoculation is a paralysis. Therefore it would seem justifiable that, as undoubtedly the same virus is present in both instances, the symptoms must in both cases be due to the same cause. But as in the second of the two instances it may practically be said that cure is the invariable rule, therefore in this case we can only be dealing with the rabies toxin and not directly with the living rabies virus as cause of the condition. The argument is based on this, that in the case of two occurrences where similar effects are produced and where in both of them the same antecedent condition exists, that condition is probably the cause of the effect. But this argument may be pushed too far, and the conclusion can only be accepted as amounting to a probability, not a certainty. The possibility remains open of there being more than one invariable antecedent, and in that case we have to consider the different claims of each to be regarded as the cause of the condition. Now we believe, in opposition to the opinions hitherto set forth, that there is evidence for the view that the nerve material derived from the rabbit either per se or through its decomposition products (? neurin, cholin, etc.) may be the cause of the symptoms which we are discussing. Sir A. E. Wright has made us familiar with the idea of poisoning effects due to a too rapid succession of inoculations of material, in itself comparatively little toxic, but capable of producing cumulative effects unless recovery and reaction are allowed to take place between successive injections. The condition known as "serum disease'' is also very interesting in this connection. Here "the phenomena of the disease are to be interpreted as events in a process of immunisation by which the organism purges itself from the foreign serum."1 What the exact relationship may be between the state illustrated by the serum disease which is termed anaphylaxia and that "negative phase" condition so much emphasized by Wright, it is difficult to say. It is very probable that they are both manifestations of one and the same cell state. However this may be, we are able to state that some of the symptoms of the "serum disease" are identical with those which we have seen to follow anti-rabic inoculations. In this method of treatment we are compelled to inject large quantities of foreign albuminoids (nerve substance) day after day. May we not be dealing from start to finish here, both as regards 1 Wright, Clin. Journal, May 16th, 1906, p. 72.
27 trivial effects and grave, with a condition of anaphylaxia due to this foreign material and not to a rabies toxin ? We believe this to be so. But what proof is there for the suggestion which we now put forward ? That proof is of an indirect rather than a direct nature, but then so also is the proof of the existence of a rabies toxin. We take up the subject under the following heads :28 sufficient evidence of the existence of a toxin we have no right to invoke its aid in explanation of the immunity brought about. (2) Intracellular Toxin. The non-existence of an endotoxin in fixed virus is more difficult to prove. In the case of a dead bacterial emulsion, say of B. typhosus, inoculated subcutaneously we obtain, if the dose is sufficient, evidence of distinct toxic effects. The symptoms of typhoid fever cannot be explained except upon the basis of a certain amount of intoxication; and as we are unable to obtain a typhoid toxin apart from the bodies of the organism itself, we speak of a typhoid endotoxin as distinguished from an extracellular and separable toxin. Again, we have evidence of the production of a definite immunity to typhoid fever by the inoculation of dead emulsions of the organism. Now how does the case stand with the rabies virus ? (1) We have no convincing evidence to bring forward in favour of the produc- tion of toxic effects by the subcutaneous inoculation of fixed virus. (2) The symptoms of the actual disease together with the fatal issue might quite easily be ascribed to purely mechanical interference with the functions of the cells of the central nervous system29 rabies virus against rabies infection? We venture to put forward the following tentative explanation as a possible one. We conceive that the explanation may lie in a difference between street virus and fixed virus. Many authors, amongst whom are Marx1 and Nitsch,2 are now inclined to support the view that fixed virus is comparatively innocuous for man. May it not be the case then that by continued subpassage through the rabbit the original street virus has been rendered practically harmless for man although more virulent for the rabbit? Man may be "atreptic" 3 towards fixed virus. We have a certain analogy too in the case of the small-pox virus which by continued subpassage through the calf is rendered more and more virulent for this animal but much less so for man. No one has suggested, so far as we know, that the immunity obtained to small-pox by the use of a small-pox vaccine is due in any special way to a preliminary immunisation by small-pox toxin. We imagine then that anti-bodies may be produced to living harmless fixed virus just as they would to any non-infective foreign albuminoid and that these anti-bodies have at the same time the power of counteracting the infective action of street virus. The effectiveness of the method might depend essentially on the innocuousness of living fixed virus, whereby comparatively large quantities can be safely introduced subcutaneously in the human being, with the result that large quantities of rabies anti-bodies are rapidly produced locally, pass into the circulation, and so counteract the infection by street virus. To sum up, then, we see no sufficient grounds for the acceptance of the view of the existence of a rabies toxin, and therefore we reject that theory of immunity which builds upon its presence. We have also incidentally commented upon the fact that there is no case for immunising power in dead rabies virus. We can therefore now more confidently state the corollary already given in a tentative way to the proposition on page 16, viz., that :30 utilise as the medium by which the virus is conveyed foreign nerve material. It follows then that in many animals, foreign nerve material, administered as we administered it, is comparatively non-toxic. This is not so however in all cases. Delezenne,1 Delille,2 and Marie3have drawn attention to the toxic action of foreign nerve material. Marie in a criticism says with regard to normal nerve substance that it is far from being innocuous :31 C.32 Premiss 2.33 three or four were necessary in making an estimation. We give an example of the method. TABLE X. Test serum. N/100 H2SO4. Result. 50 cmm 50 cmm + 75 34 TABLE XI, Patients' names. Day of treatment. Alkalinity of serum. Alkalinity index. Normal alkalinity. Capt. M. 11th N/40 0.94 132.14 cmm. of N/100 H2SO4 are required to neutra- lize 50 cmm. of normal serum =N/37.8. Lt. K ,, N/40 0.94 Nana 12th N/41.66 0.91 Shanker ,, N/41.66 0.91 Miss T. ,, N/42.66 0.91 Moti Khan 11th N/38.4 0.98 Pte. T ,, N/41.66 0.91 Multan Singh 13th N/45.45 0.83 The observations are few in number, but such as they are they indicated that the alkalinity of the blood in these persons was distinctly diminished. Technique of estimation of salinity of small quantities of blood serum. The chlorides of the serum are estimated as sodium chloride with the help of a standard solution of silver nitrate. This standard solution is one of 0.2906 per cent., of which 1 cc=.001 grm. NaCl. The indicator is absorbent paper which has been dipped in 5 per cent. potassium chromate and dried. Paper was used, because it enabled us con- veniently to get indicator in sufficiently small quantities. A small strip of this paper is added to 50 cmm. of the test serum contained in a watch-glass; then successive additions of the standard silver nitrate solution are made to the serum until a permanent faint pink colour is manifest. A Wright's graduated pipette is used here also. We might on the same principle as in the case of the alkalinity give here a salinity index. The normal salinity as determined by this method from nine- observations was 0.819 per cent. The following table gives some of the results obtained by estimation in persons undergoing anti-rabic treatment and who com- plained of some of the symptoms which we have previously detailed :35 TABLE XII. Patients' names. Day of treatment. Salinity. Normal salinity. Nana 12th 0.780 per cent. 0.819 per cent. Shanker 12th 0.770 36 the subject of the causes of the marked differences which exhibit themselves in patients treated by the one or other method, viz., that they are due to the presence of an excessive amount of foreign nerve material in the Pasteurian system of inoculations. That the symptoms following injection are not more frequent or more pronounced may be due to the fact that the inoculations are made daily. Recent work1 on anaphylaxia would seem to support this view. A very interesting further point brought out was that in patients (only three observa- tions) undergoing intensive Pasteurian* treatment the blood pressure did not fall to any great extent but remained more or less level. In one of these cases, however, a very marked fall occurred on the day of the first appearance of symptoms of rabies37. TABLE XIII. Observations on patients undergoing anti-rabic treatment, Pasteurian method. I II III IV V VI No. Caste. Salt content equivalent of blood in NaCl per cent. Salt concentration of serum in NaC1 per cent. Blood pressure. Blood examination. 1 H. N/50 = .1167 1.75 ... " " N/43.75 = .133 1.06 ... Hb. = 68% r. b. c. = 4,800,000. w. b. c. = 7200. " " N/40 = .146 1.02 ... Hb. = 68% r. b. c. = 5,600,000. w. b. c. = 5600. 2 " N/47.5 = .123 1.23 97 mm. " " N/50 = .1169 .935 84 " 3 Sikh N/60 = .097 .974 ... " " N/50 = .1169 .93 100 mm. Hb. = 68% r. b. c. = 5,400,000. w. b. c. = 6900. " " N/50 = .1169 .87 110 " Hb. = 92% r. b. c. = 5,600,000 w. b. c. = 9000. 4 H. N/50 = .1169 .93 ... " " N/50 = .1169 .877 104 mm. Hb. = 78% r. b. c. = 6,200,000. w. b. c. = " " N/45 = .129 1.03 110 " Hb. = 84% r. b. c. = 5,230,000. w. b. c. = 6700. 5 N/57.5 = .1016 .932 ... " " N/50 = .116 .846 ... Hb. = 76% r. b. c. = 4,400,000. w. b. c. = 7500. " " N/47.5 = .123 .861 ... H b. = .78% r. b. c. = 4,300,000. w b. c. = 6800. H = Hindu. M = Mahommedan.
38 Observations on patients undergoing anti-rabic treatment, Pasteurian method39 Observations on patients undergoing anti-rabic treatm ent, Pasteurian method40 Observations an patients undergoing anti-rabic treatment, Hoyges' method41 VI.42 From a state of affairs in which only 24.5 per cent. showed paresis on the 6th day we reach a point in seven months in which 95 per cent. developed paresis on the 6th day. Thus43 4. There is great advantage in using fresh material in anti-rabic immuni- sation (as in Höyges' or Ferrans' methods) over dried or heated material, because the former method involves the introduction of less injurious foreign nerve substance and is more accurate as regards dosage than the latter.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75031420.tif]
FIG. IV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75031426.tif] FIG. V. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75031426.tif] FIG. VI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75031426.tif] FIG. VII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75031426.tif]
No. 30. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. THE THEORY AND PRACTICE OF ANTI-RABIC IMMUNISATION. BY CAPTAIN W. F. HARVEY M.B., I.M.S. AND CAPTAIN ANDERSON MCKENDRICK, M.B., I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75031441.tif] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1907 Price Annas 12 or 1s. 2d.
