IP/QB.10 M. 91. b. No. 27. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PRELIMINARY REPORT ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE LEISHMAN-DONOVAN BODY IN THE BED BUG. BY CAPTAIN W. S. PATTON, M.B., I.M.S. (On special duty.) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75060115.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1907. Price eight annas or 9d.
No. 27. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PRELIMINARY REPORT ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE LEISHMAN-DONOVAN BODY IN THE BED BUG. BY CAPTAIN W. S. PATTON, M.B., I.M.S. (On special duty) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75060127.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1907.
Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. H. S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, & 9, Pall Mall, London. E. A. ARNOLD, 41 & 43, Maddox Street, Bond Street, London, W. CONSTABLE & CO., 16, James Street, Hay Market, London, W. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., 43, Gerrard Street, Soho, London, W. BERNARD QUARITCH, 15, Piccadilly, London, W. B. H. BLACKWELL, 5o & 51, Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & CO., Cambridge. GRINDLAY & CO., 54, Parliament Street, London, S.W. ON THE CONTINENT. R. FRIEDLÄNDER & SOHN, II, Carlstrasse, Berlin, N.W. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. RUDOLF HAUPT, Halle A. S., Germany. IN INDIA. THACKER, SPINK & CO., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. S. K. LAHIRI & CO., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & CO., Calcutta. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & Co., Madras. G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. S.MURTHY & Co., Madras. THOMPSON & CO., Madras. TEMPLE & CO., Madras. THACKER & Co., LD., Bombay. A. J. COMBRIDGE & CO., Bombay. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & Co., Bombay. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay. SUNDER PANDURANG, Bombay. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazair Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-Am Press, Lahore. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission Press, Rangoon. A. M. & J. FERGUSON, Ceylon.
List of Numbers of Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India (Near Series) published previous to the present issue. No. 1. Standardisation of Calmette's anti-venomous serum with pure cobra venom: the deterioration of this serum through keeping in India, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq. M.B. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 2. Malaria in India, by Captain S.P. Fames, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No. 3. Some observations on the poison of Russell's Viper (Daboia Russellii), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 5 or 6d. No. 4. On the action of the venoms of the Cobra and of the Daboia on the red blood cor- puscles and on the blood plasma, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 5. Specificity of anti-venomous sera, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 6. First report on the anti-malarial operations in Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Captain S. P. Fames, I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 7. Some observations on the poison of the Banded Krait (Bungarus Fasciatus), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 8. A preliminary report on a parasite found in patients suffering from enlargement of the spleen in India, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No. 9. Second report of the anti-malarial operations at Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 10. Specificity of anti-venomous sera (second communication), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 11. On a parasite found in persons suffering from enlargement of the spleen in IndiaNLS TO INSERT BLACK AND WHITE IMAGE
PRELIMINARY REPORT OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE LEISHMAN-DONOVAN BODY IN THE BED BUG. AN important contribution to our knowledge of the Leishman-Donovan body was made by Major Rogers,1 I.M.S., when he announced that he had succeeded in observing the development of the parasites into flagellates, in splenic blood taken from a case of Kala Azar, after he had added a small quantity of sterile citrate of sodium solution to the blood and incubated it at a low temperature. In a later communication,2 he describes the development at 22° C. At the end of the first day the parasites had increased considerably in size, the protoplasm staining a bluish colour and appearing finely granular; the macro-nuclei were much enlarged, while the micro-nuclei remained unaltered. By the end of the second day the parasites had further increased in size, particularly the macro-nuclei; and he observed double forms of the large oval parasites in varying degrees of contact up to nearly complete fusion of the two cells, which he concluded represented a process of conjugation. On the third day he observed the conjugating pair of organisms as elong- ating, and noted the first appearance of flagellated forms. In these pyriform bodies the macro-nuclei were seen in the thick ends of the parasites, and the micro-nuclei had passed to the thinner ends from which the flagella arise. On the fourth day numerous double pyriform organisms were seen, only a small, percentage having developed flagella. Soon afterwards, Captain Christophers,3 I.M.S., working in Madras, con- firmed Major Rogers' observations. He saw most of the forms described above and has added considerably to our knowledge of this stage of the parasite. On the fourth day of his cultural experiments, he observed the large forms, resembling those described by Rogers. They occurred in groups and had apparently arisen by a process of fission showing no evidence of conjugation., On the fifth day there appeared in the enlarged parasites a new structure which was as a pink stained vacuole-like area, of the size of the macro- nucleus and lying in close apposition to the micro-nucleus. Further, a peculiar red staining substance was noticeable as a tail-like process projecting from the end of the parasite in which the small chromatin mass is situated; this substance, increasing in volume, surrounded this end of the parasite and fusing with that of adjoining parasites bound the group together. A ragged filament, of nearly the same colour as the pink stained area, was seen protruding from the flagellar end of the parasite; this probably represents the first appearance of B
2 the flagellum. On the sixth day each group of elongated parasites contained one or more flagellate forms in which the flagella could, as a rule, be traced to the micro-nucleus which thus appears to be a blepharoplast. On the seventh and eighth days fission produced both large and elongate forms, and on the ninth day and later fission of the elongate forms proceeded rapidly, resulting in smaller as well as irregular bodies which Christophers terms secondary fission forms. Throughout the earlier stages many of the small oval parasites appeared to be undergoing development whilst included in the altered substance of a cell. Some of the observations of Christophers deserve special attention. He is the first to describe the vacuole-like area which develops in close relation to the micro-nucleus and is associated with the later development of the flagellum. Another important observation made by him is that the parasites undergo development whilst included in cells. Lieutenant-Colonel Leishman,4 R.A.M.C., and Captain Statham, R.A.M.C., who next studied the extracorporeal stage of the parasite, have confirmed in the main the observations of Rogers and Christophers. Describing the earlier changes, Leishman notes that these may take place up to, and even beyond, the formation of the large circular or oval parasites, while embedded in the splenic macrophages. He also describes a process of unequal longitudinal fission in some of the mature flagellated forms, in which the nuclei of the parent do not play any part. They were split off from one side of a mature flagellate and appeared as thin spirillum-like organisms and, in some cases, more than one such form was seen split off from the same parent. These attenuated forms included two or more chromatin dots and the protoplasm contained characteristic vacuoles. At first they were destitute of flagella, which, however, developed later, when these spirilla-like flagellated forms were much more active than the larger parasites. Rogers5 has recently improved his method of cultivating the para- sites by adding a small quantity of citric acid to the citrated splenic blood, and in his latest communication6 describes the developmental changes in splenic blood under these conditions. The development appears to be much more uniform than that obtained by his earlier methods, so that the majority of the parasites can be found in nearly the same stage on a given day; and most of the parasites on the third day had developed flagella. In the acid medium the abundant development of flagellates results in the formation of rosettes, the individual organisms then elongate and the rosette begins to break up, owing to the increasing motility of the flagella, and free swimming forms are produced. Rogers discusses the nature of these parasites, and after examining many of the fully developed free forms, finds that there is no trace of an
3 undulating membrane and that the does not pass from the anterior end towards the macro-nucleus. From this he concludes that the parasite belongs to the order Herpetomonas and is not a true trypanosome, naming it the Herpetomonas of Kala Azar. This conclusion seems to be prema- ture, especially When it is Considered how little is yet known of the life-histories of the different species of this genus (Herpetomonas) of the Flagellata. Before describing the experiments carried out with the various blood- sucking insects, it is important to consider how the human body might be primarily infected by the parasite, and, in order to answer this question, it is necessary to examine the theories which have been advanced to explain the channels by which the parasite leaves the human body. Sir Patrick Manson7 and Dr. Low, studying a case of Kala Azar in the; Seamen's Hospital, London, were unable, after a prolonged search in films of the finger blood, to find any of the parasites, and concluded. that the disease could not be transmitted by means of the peripheral blood. As they found the parasite in the liver as well as in the spleen, they thought it possible that the biliary ducts were the channels by which the parasite escaped into the fæces. They were, however, unable to find any parasites in this situation. On the death of this patient, they8 examined sections of his organs and were able to confirm Christophers' observation as to the presence of the parasites in the ulcers of the large intestine; they suggest that the parasites may escape by the intestinal tract. Captain Statham,9 R.A.M.C., has carried out a large series of examinations. and cultural experiments with the fæces from a case of Kala Azar, and has failed to find the parasite in this situation; and I have on many occasions searched for parasites in the mucus in the fæces of cases of Kala Azar, also, in the sanious discharge from cases with cancrum oris, but in neither case have I ever found parasites. Captain Statham9 has also pointed out that he was unable to recover the parasites from (1) sterile tap water, (2) sterile- pond water and (3) ordinary pond water which were inoculated from splenic cultures. Several observers have noticed that the Leishman-Donovan bodies readily die out in a cultivation of splenic blood if it becomes bacterially contaminated, and fæces of Kala Azar patients suffering from diarrh4 Failure to recover the parasite from, the discharges, and the fact that it requires for its growth, in cultures at least, approximately sterile condi- tions, makes it probable that it does not leave the human body by the means suggested. The other hypothesis, suggested by Christophers and Rogers as the most probable means by which the parasite leaves the human body, is that it is ingested by a blood-sucking insect, Rogers6 mentioning the bed bug as a possible intermediate host. This hypothesis requires the presence of the Leishman-Donovan bodies in the peripheral blood in a suitable condition for further development and in sufficient numbers. Donovan and Christophers appear to be the only observers who have found the parasite in the peripheral circulation. Rogers,6referring to the relationship of the leucocytes to the parasites in cultures, still doubts whether the Leishman-Donovan bodies can be found in the peripheral blood; he, however, notes that Donovan and Christo- phers have found this stage of the parasite within leucocytes during high fever, the latter having on two occasions found a number of them nearly all within the polymorphonuclear cells in a differential count of 500 leucocytes. Early in December 1905 Major Donovan showed me these parasites in the leucocytes in a film made from the finger blood of a case of Kala Azar, and I have since been able to confirm the observation of Christophers that numbers of parasites are occasionally present in the peripheral circulation. In 38 out of 45 cases of Kala Azar examined in the General Hospital, Madras, parasites were present in the peripheral blood. It is true it was necessary in some of the cases to examine more than one film, whilst in one instance as many as eleven films were searched before a parasite was found; but with the technique employed it was as a rule easy to find them. Six of the 38 cases were suffering from severe diarrh5 one. The edges of the film should, if possible, be straight as this facilitates considerably the rapid examination of a large number of leucocytes. Such a filsm stained deeply by Romanowsky's method can be satisfactorily searched in a little over an hour. After some practice I was able to find the parasite with a Leitz 1-6th objective even before the stained film was dry. It may be asked, 'is it necessary to examine a film at some particular hour during the day or night ?' In order to settle this point I have on two separate occasions examined films taken every hour from a patient suffering from Kala Azar in whose peripheral blood I had found the parasites. The record of these observations will be found on the chart appended which also shows the temperature taken hourly. It will be seen on examining this chart that, the number of the parasites in the peripheral blood bears no relation to the temper- ature, and that there is no particular hour when parasites are especially abundant. The observations are of interest in showing that the number of parasites in the peripheral blood is not dependent on any definite periodicity in their discharge into the circulation, but varies from hour to hour throughout the day with each specimen taken. One of the first cases of Kala Azar I studied was, a boy of 14 (Case 1), in Major Donovan's ward, suffering from uncontrollable diarrh6 have the same appearance as those seen in films of splenic blood. The two following blood counts were made from this case on March 19th :7 capable of further development while in the leucocytes, it is not difficult to understand that infection may be acquired by some blood-sucking insect. We may now consider if there is any other evidence in support of the view that some blood-sucking insect acts as the carrier of the parasite. Rogers,12 tracing the spread of the disease from village to village in Assam, found that when a person suffering from Kala Azar went to reside in an uninfected village the next case occurred in the house in which this person had lodged, He12 also records instances of Europeans contracting Kala Azar by coming in contact with natives who subsequently died of the disease ; in two instances there was no other case for miles around. In Madras many of the Kala Azar patients give very clear histories of having lived with or near persons who have either died of, or are still suffering from the disease, and I have often noted that the first case in a house termin- ated with very severe diarrh8 I visited the house occupied by this family, and saw those who are still suffering from the disease. They all had enlarged spleens, were getting fever- regularly, and had 9 the human tick (Ornithodoros savignyi), recently found in Madras. No experi- ments were carried out with the flea, as I was unable to find it in any number in the houses. Pediculus capitis.10 in the mid-gut of the sixth in the series a flagellate was seen in the fresh condition, but on smearing out the film it was lost. At first I was inclined to think that this flagellate represented a fully developed Leishman-Donovan body, as I was not then aware of the common presence of flagellates in mosquitoes bred out from larvæ in the laboratory. I was, however, soon after informed by Christophers that he had found similar flagellates in the mid-guts of the males of this species, and that on examining the gastro-intestinal tract of the larvæ he found the early stages of development of the parasites. I have since been able to examine these flagellates, which are long slender spindles tapering posteriorly possessing a long wavy flagellum. They are probably a species of Herpetomonas. Similar, if not identical, parasites were found by Major Ross 14in 1898 at Ootacamund, and he has recently called attention to these observations on the presence of the parasites in the larva, pupa, and imago of Culex fatigans. Novy, MacNeal and Torrey 15 in a short paper on mosquito trypanosomes, say they have found flagellates in 15 per cent. of caught mosquitoes subsequently fed on clean animals, rats, guinea-pigs and pigeons. These parasites appear to be of several distinct species, the most common being Her- petomonas (probably Herpetomonas subulata) and Crithidia fasiculata. These observers have been able to cultivate the parasites on solidified blood agar, and found that the cultural forms conformed in every respect with the parasites found in the mosquitoes. I have since found similar parasites (Herpetomonas) in the mid-guts of Culex pipiens. One hundred and fifty-seven female mosquitoes (Culex fatigans) which were fed on the patient were dissected between December 18, 1905, and January 17, 1906, but I was unable to find any Leishman-Donovan bodies in their mid-guts. Blood films were taken daily from the patient, and with three exceptions, parasites were always found. Two of the mosquitoes contained normal flagellates (Herpetomonas). In most of the dissections of these mosquitoes, after examining the fresh preparations, the films were smeared out and stained by Romanowsky's method. Besides the flagellates mentioned above, many of the films contained bacteria and a few spirilla. As nothing to suggest the development of the Leishman- Donovan bodies was seen, I decided to abandon any further experiments with this mosquito. Ornithodoros savignyi. 11 lately, in Madras itself. In Madras they are found in the sand under the trees in the People's Park and on the outskirts of the town, but I have not been able to find any evidence of the presence of the tick in the houses in George Town. I have myself searched on the floors of some of the houses and also along the streets, but without success. Boys suffering from Kala Azar have, however, told me that they were bitten by ticks when playing under the trees on the out- skirts of the town. Experiment I; Case 5.12 Experiment I, Case 7.13 folds of the paper. These tubes were then placed in a small dish standing in a basin of water. No corks are necessary if the paper is pushed well down to the bottom as the bugs cannot climb up the glass. On taking the tubes to the bedside, the paper containing the bugs was gently drawn up to, the mouth of each tube with a pair of forceps and the tubes inverted over the patient's skin, shortly after which the bugs came out and began to suck blood, and when fully gorged returned readily to the folds. Bugs fed in this way live and breed as in nature, and can be fed either by day or night. On March 28th, a large number of bugs were obtained from many sources and were placed in a jar containing some crumpled filter paper; the next day suitable specimens were removed with a fine pair of forceps and placed in a tube ready for use. Experiment I, Case 11.14 patient's bed, and I asked the relatives to send me any others they could find, but, owing to the death of the patient, they were never sent. On April 15th I dissected one of the bugs, and on staining the film found a large mononuclear leucocyte containing three parasites (Fig, 4). From the appearance of the mid-gut contents, it was most probable this bug had last fed on the patient on April 13th; the parasites had therefore been in the bug about 40 hours. They stained well with Romanowsky's stain, their outlines being distinct, and in every way they were similar to those found in smears made from splenic blood. Another bug dissected on the same day showed a free parasite (Fig. 5), which also stained well, no leucocyte being found anywhere near it. The remaining four bugs contained no parasites. From April 16th to May 14th I was unable to obtain a good case in hospital. A few bugs, however, were fed on a patient on April 20th, on which day a single parasite was found in a blood film. One of the bugs dissected four hours after the last time it was fed, contained a parasite in a polymorphonuclear leucocyte (Fig. 3) which was lying unchanged in the protoplasm of the cell. On May 16th a suitable case, a boy of 16 with cancrum oris, general 15 its nucleus is represented as a faintly stained mass, and the protoplasm is granular and indistinct. Fig. 7 represents another parasite from the above film at about the same stage of development. Its macro-nucleus, more central, is much enlarged, and the micro-nucleus, somewhat thicker, lies near it. The protoplasm, stained deep blue, contains two large and two small vacuoles, but there are no granules in it. No sign is seen of the commencing formation of the vacuole-like area, or any evidence of the division of the parasite. On June 4th another female bug was dissected, and in the slide a parasite showing further development was found (Fig. 9). This parasite, measuring 3.816 seen lying on each side of the central line. The micro-nuclei are lying on the outer sides of each parasite, adjacent to the macro-nuclei. The two vacuole- like areas are clearly seen, and protruding from them is a small rod, which stains pink, and represents the commencing formation of the flagella. A large vacuole lies between the two parasites, showing that separation is beginning at this point. The protoplasm of both the cells, staining dark pink, contains no vacuoles or granules. Each parasite measures 4.817 They were attached from their posterior poles to about the centre of their bodies; the circular macro-nuclei were granular in appearance and situated about the centre of each parasite. The micro-nuclei were lying close beside the macro- nuclei, touching the periphery of each parasite. There were no vacuole-like areas or flagella. The third parasite was oval in shape containing a large circular macro-nucleus with the micro-nucleus in close apposition to it. There was no distinct vacuole-like area to be seen, but a diffused pink stained mass was situated at some distance from the macro-nucleus; it was difficult to decide from these appearances what change was taking place in the parasite. The remaining bugs taken from the bed were dissected but no parasites were found. On the 11th six bugs were fed on the patient for the first time; shortly before this 30 parasites having been found in a film of finger blood. The bugs were again fed on the 12th and 13th at approximately the same hour as on the 11th and on these days thirty-two and sixteen parasites respectively were found in blood films. The patient died on the 13th. The bugs were fed daily from the 13th to the 17th on a young monkey and were all dissected on the 17th and in two of the films three parasites practically unchanged were found. Assuming that the parasites had been ingested by the bugs on the 13th, they had been in their mid-guts about 96 hours. I was unable to find any parasite showing development. In the bug I could find no large granular blue forms which are so charac- teristic of cultures at 22°C. All the most advanced forms were considerably smaller than those seen in cultures and in each parasite the micro-nucleus lay close up to the macro-nucleus. Further work on the development of the parasites can alone confirm these observations, and it would be unwise to be too dogmatic regarding the precise mode of their development. The discovery of the development of the Leishman-Donovan body in the bed bug has led to my endeavouring to ascertain the distribution of the species of bug used in my experiments. Through the kindness of medical officers, assistant surgeons and hospital assistants I have been able to examine a large number of specimens of bed bugs from various parts of India, Assam and Burma, and I have found, so far, without exception that they are identical with the Madras bed bug. In order to compare this bug with the typical Cimex lectularius, L. I obtained some living specimens of this species from the slums of London and found that the Indian bed bug is Cimex macrocephalus, Fieb. Recently I sent some specimens of Indian bed bugs to Mr. Distant who confirmed my observation that they are Cimex macrocephalus. It is generally believed, as is stated by Mr. Distant, that Cimex lectularius, L. is distributed throughout India, while the presence of Cimex macrocephalus, Fieb. D
18 has only been recorded from Burma (Bhamo). Further investigations regarding the distribution of the two species are in progress. CONCLUSIONS. 1. The Leishman-Donovan body occurs frequently in the peripheral circulation in cases of Kala Azar in Madras, the parasites being seen in the leucocytes but never in the red cells or free in the plasma. 2. In certain cases with extensive ulceration of the large intestine there occurs an increase of the polymorphonuclear leucocytes and many of these cells then contain parasites. 3. Though the Leishman-Donovan body has been recovered from the mid-guts of lice, Pediculus Capin's, it was never found in Pediculus corporis, Culex fatigans, Anopheles stephensi, Stegomyia sugens, or the tick (Ornithodoros savignyi). 4. The parasites can be recovered from the mid-guts of bugs (Cimex macrocephalus), fed on cases of Kala Azar, and kept at room temperature (8019 REFERENCES. 1. Rogers.EXPLANATION OF PLATE. Fig. 1. Large mononuclear leucocyte containing seven parasites, one of which lies superimposed on the nucleus. Stained by Romanowsky's stain. Magni- fication 600 diameters. Fig. 2. Polymorphonuclear leucocyte containing four parasites. Stained by Romanowsky's stain. Magnification 600 diameters. Fig. 3. Polymorphonuclear leucocyte containing one parasite. Stained by Romanowsky's stain. Magnification 600 diameters. Fig. 4. Large mononuclear leucocyte containing three parasites, recovered from the mid-gut of a bug taken from the bed of a case of Kala Azar. Stained by Romanowsky's stain. Magnification 600 diameters. Fig. 5. Free parasite recovered from mid-gut of a bug from bed of case mentioned above. Stained by Romanowsky's stain. Magnification 1,350 diameters. Fig. 6. Two free parasites recovered from a bug last fed on May 31st. What appears to be the remains of a leucocyte is seen lying near them. Stained by Romanowsky's stain. Magnification 1,350 diameters. Fig. 7. Another free parasite from same bug as above. Stained by Romanowsky's stain. Magnification 1,350 diameters. Fig. 8. Two free parasites recovered from bug fed on case 12. The parasites were not in close apposition in the film, only being shown thus for purposes of com- parison. Stained with Romanowsky's stain, Magnification 1,350 dia- meters. Fig. 9. Free parasite showing distinct development, the vacuole-like area is seen as a circular body lying between the micro-nucleus and the periphery of the parasite. The remains of a leucocyte is seen lying near the parasite. Stained by Romanowsky's stain. Magnification 1,350 diameters. Fig. 10. Two elongated forms recovered from bug last fed on May 31st. Stained by Romanowsky's stain. Magnification 1,350 diameters. Fig. 11. Elongated parasite showing partial fission. Stained by Romanowsky's stain. Magnification 1,350 diameters. Fig. 12. Two attenuated forms showing almost complete separation being attached only by their posterior poles. No vacuole-like area or flagella are seen. Stained by Romanowsky's stain. Magnification 1,350 diameters.
FOR PAPER ON DEVELOPMENT OF THE LEISHMAN-DONOVAN BODY IN THE BED BUG. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75060214.tif] Fig: 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75060214.tif] Fig: 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75060214.tif] Fig: 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75060214.tif] Fig: 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75060214.tif] Fig: 6. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75060214.tif] Fig: 4 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75060214.tif] Fig: 7. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75060214.tif] Fig: 8. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75060214.tif] Fig: 9. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75060214.tif] Fig: 10. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75060214.tif] Fig: 11. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75060214.tif] Fig: 12. Photogravure. Survey of India Offices Calcutta July. 1906.
No. 27. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. PRELIMINARY REPORT ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE LEISHMAN-DONOVAN BODY IN THE BED BUG. BY CAPTAIN W. S. PATTON, M.B, I.M.S. (On special duty.) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75060229.tif] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1907 Price eight annas or 9d.
