IP/QB. 10 m. 91. b. No. 39 (NEW SERIES) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA THE APPLICABILITY TO MEDICO-LEGAL PRACTICE IN INDIA OF THE BIOCHEMICAL TESTS FOR THE ORIGIN OF BLOOD-STAINS BY LIEUT.-COLONEL W. D. SUTHERLAND, M.B., I.M.S. (Edited by the Director-General, Indian Medical Service) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75033721.tif] Issued under the Authority of the Government of India by the Sanitary Commissioner with the Government of India CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1910 Price Annas 8 or 9d.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75033727.tif] 3943079
No. 39. (NEW SERIES) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA THE APPLICABILITY TO MEDICO-LEGAL PRACTICE IN INDIA OF THE BIOCHEMICAL TESTS FOR THE ORIGIN OF BLOOD-STAINS BY LIEUT.-COLONEL W. D. SUTHERLAND, M.B., I.M.S. (Edited by the Director-General, Indian Medical Service) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75033733.tif] Issued under the Authority of the Government of India by the Sanitary Commissioner with the Government of India CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1910 B [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75033733.tif]
Agents for the sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. Mr. E. A. ARNOLD, 41 and 43, Maddox Street, Bond Street, London, W. Messrs. CONSTABLE & CO., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, W.C. Messrs. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & CO., 43, Gerrard Street, Soho, London, W. Mr. BERNARD QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, W. Messrs. P. S. KING & SON, 2 and 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster. Messrs. H. S. KING & CO., 65, Cornhill, and 9, Pall Mall, London. Messrs. GRINDLAY & CO., 54, Parliament Street, London, S.W. Mr. T. FISHER UNWIN, 1, ADELPHI TERRACE, London, W.C. Messrs. W. THACKER & CO., 2, Creed Lane, London, E.C. Mr. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 51, Broad Street, Oxford. Messrs. DEIGHTON BELL & CO., Cambridge. Messrs. LUZAC & CO., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W.C. ON THE CONTINENT. Mr. RUDOLF HAUPT 1, Dorrienstrasse, Leipzig, Germany. Mr. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ Mr. KARL HIERSEMANN Leipzig. Messrs. R. FRIEDLANDER & SOHN, Berlin, W. N., Carlstrasse, 11. Mr. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. Mr. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. IN INDIA. Messrs. THACKER, SPINK & CO., Calcutta and Simla. Messrs. NEWMAN & CO., Calcutta. Messrs. R. CAMBRAY & CO., Calcutta. Messrs. S. K. LAHIRI & CO., Calcutta. Messrs. B. BANERJEE & CO., Calcutta. Messrs. HIGGINBOTHAM & CO., Madras. Messrs. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & CO., Madras. Messrs. G. A. NATESAN & CO., Madras. Messrs. S. MURTHY & CO., Madras. Messrs. THOMPSON & CO., Madras. Messrs. TEMPLE & CO., Madras. Messrs. COMBRIDGE & CO., Madras. Messrs. P. R. RAMA IYER & CO., Madras. Messrs. A. R. PILLAI & CO., Trivandrum. Messrs. THACKER & CO., LD., Bombay. Messrs. A. J. COMBRIDGE & CO., Bombay. Messrs. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & CO., Bombay. Mrs. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay. Mr. SUNDER PANDURANG, Bombay. Messrs. GOPAL NARAYAN & CO., Bombay. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission Press, Rangoon. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-Am Press, Lahore and Calcutta. Mr. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazair Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. Messrs. A. CHAND & CO., Punjab. Messrs. A. M. & J. FERGUSON, Ceylon. Babu S. C. TALUKDAR, Proprietor, Students and Company, Cooch Behar.
List of numbers of Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India (New Series) published previous to the present issue. No. 1. Standardisation of Calmette's Anti-Venomous Serum with Pure Cobra Venom : the Deterioration of this Serum through keeping in India, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 2. Malaria in India, by Captain S. P. James. I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No. 3. Some Observations on the Poison of Russell's Viper (Daboia Russellii), by Captain. G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.D. Price As. 5 or 6d. No. 4. On the Action of the Venoms of the Cobra and of the Daboia on the Red Blood corpuscles and on the blood plasma, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 5. Specificity of Anti-Venomous Sera, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 3, or 4d. No. 6. First Report on the Anti-Malarial Operations in Mian Mir, 19012 No. 20. Serum-Therapy of Plague in India; Reports by Mr. W. M. Haffkine, C.I.E., and various Officers of the Plague Research Laboratory, Bombay, by Lieute- nant-Colonel W. B. Bannerman, M. D., B.Sc., F.R.C.S. I.M.S. Price As. 14 or 1s. 4d. No. 21. On the Standardisation of Anti-Typhoid Vaccine, by Captain George Lamb, M.D., I.M.S. (Director, Pasteur Institute of India), and Captain W. B. C. Forster, M.B., D.P.H., I.M.S. Price As. 6. or 7d. No. 22. Mediterranean Fever in India: Isolation of the Micrococcus Melitensis, by Captain George Lamb, M.D., I.M.S., and Assistant Surgeon M. Kesava Pai, M.B., C.M., (Madras). Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 23. The Anatomy and Histology of Ticks, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price Rs. 3 or 4s. 6d. No. 24. On a Parasite found in the White Corpuscles of the blood of Palm Squirrels, by Captain W. S. Patton, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 25. On the importance of Larval Characters in the Classification of Mosquitoes, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 26. Leucocytozoon Canis, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 27. Preliminary Report on the Development of the Leishman-Donovan Body in the Bed Bug, by Captain W. S. Patton, M. B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 28. The Sexual Cycle of Leucocytozoon Canis in the Tick, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 29. Piroplasma Canis and its Cycle in the Tick, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price Rs. 2 or 3s. No. 30. The Theory and Practice of Anti-Rabic Immunisation, by Captain W. F. Harvey, M. B., I.M.S., and Captain Anderson McKendrick, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 31. The Development of the Leishman-Donovan Parasite in Cimex RotundatusTHE APPLICABILITY TO MEDICO-LEGAL PRACTICE IN INDIA OF THE BIOCHEMICAL TESTS FOR THE ORIGIN OF BLOOD-STAINS. AT the instance of the Government of India I worked at the Medical College, Calcutta, for twelve months, with a view to ascertain whether the bio- chemical tests for the origin of blood-stains might be easily applied to medico-legal work in India. Most of what follows is deduced from the results obtained by me in Calcutta. I. 2 merely as a matter of historic interest,1 and now I see that Uhlenhuth and Weidanz 2seem to think that there is really something to be said for it, but that its merits depend on the observer's keen sense of smell, and therefore do not warrant its use in medico-legal practice. So slowly does an erroneous observa- tion die in medico-legal circles, the reason being, I think, that the legal type of mind, as distinguished from the medical type, is prone to accept, unquestioning, the statements of authority. In 1862 Erpenbeck3reported that the mere heating of a blood-stain to near charring point in a test-tube would enable one to fix the source of the blood that had caused it, by the odour evolved; but here, too, careful investigation showed the utter worthlessness of the "test". As it appeared that Chemistry was powerless to aid the medico-legists in their endeavour to fix the source of blood-stains, they had recourse to the micro- scope, technique having become much improved; and at one time it seemed as if careful micrometric measurements were all that one needed to be able to distinguish with certainty between human and other mammalian red blood-corpuscles. Soon, however, doubts were expressed, by so great an authority as Virchow4 as to the possibility of fixing the drying coefficient of the cells. Further observa- tion seemed to set these doubts at rest: Virchow in 1875 published a report by Malinin5of the accuracy of micrometric differentiation of blood-cells. Richardson in 18746was loud in his praise of this method of diagnosis; but he had to admit7 that he "was aware of the impossibility of distinguishing the blood of a man from that of a dog, but refrained from giving prominence to these facts, lest an improper use should be made of them in the defence of criminals". A strange and, I think, almost unique instance of a man of science having his soul vexed by thoughts of the possible effect of his discoveries. 1DRAGENDORFF:3 If the reader will take the trouble to refer to pages 53 and 55 of my mono- graph on blood-stains1 he will see there elaborate tables of the measurements of the various animals' blood-cells, as estimated by the leading authorities, and he will note that, although there measurements are on the whole very near each other, yet they are only average measurements: the highest and the lowest for any given animal showing as great difference as exists between the average for that animal and the average for another species. He will observe, too, that the measurements are fixed for fresh cells. In a blood-stain the cells are dried and shrunken, and one cannot be sure that by treating them with this or that fluid they can be made to regain their original size. Of fresh blood examined by means of the microscope Masson with characteristic candour stated2: "Our experience has shown that, in the case of human blood, its differentiation from the blood of a pig, ox, or cat is easy; from the blood of a dog difficult; from the blood of a rabbit uncertain; and from the blood of a guinea-pig impossible." How much the difficulties are increased by the change of shape and size caused by drying, a little reflexion will show. Micrometry having been tried in the balance and found wanting, endeavours were made to hit upon some other character of blood that might be of service for differentiation. Elaborate studies of the forms of the crystals of hæmoglobin derived from various animals' bloods were made; but the painstaking work of Michelsson3showed that for forensic work these differences cannot be utilised. Cotton4thought that the mere change of form caused by drying was a guide in the differentiation of the red blood cells of one species from those of another; but no one has verified his statement as to the differences produced. Thus, up to the close of the nineteenth century there had not been discovered a sure and certain means of fixing the source of a blood-stain. It was then that the subject of "antisera" and their reactions began to be closely studied. In 1899 Tchistovitch had reported that by carefully treating animals with eel-serum, which is highly poisonous he had managed not only not to kill them, but even to modify their blood-serum so that when brought in contact with eel-serum it caused a precipitate to form in it.5In 1900 Myers reported6that by treating animals with injections of egg- and serum-albumen he had obtained from them antisera for these substances, so that the sera of the treated animals precipitated 1 SUTHERLAND:4 solutions of these albumins. Uhlenhuth reported to the same effect1and then he, and5 Whether their supposed value for this purpose will stand the test of time remains to be seen; I have grave doubts on the subject. II.6 Like all other tests used in forensic medical work the precipitin test has its limitations, but unlike most tests7 Here blood-stains are of necessity exposed to a higher temperature and brighter sunlight than in Europe, but even stains that were exposed for three weeks to the summer air and light, when treated with saline solution, soon yielded satisfactory extracts, and it is not likely that the stains in a criminal case here would be sub- jected to the influence of the weather for so long a period as three weeks. The reader does not need to be told that when blood-stains have been thoroughly washed out of the stained material, no satisfactory extract can then be obtained by treating the material. Later I shall give fuller information as to the process and results. of immuni- sation; here I would mention the animals that I worked with. Rabbits, which are the animals of choice in European and American laboratories, I worked with although they are neither cheap nor easy to get in the Calcutta market; fowls are cheap and plentiful, and, as my previous work had led me to believe that they are good sources of antisera, I used a number of fowls in my experiments; geese I tried, encouraged by the results of my work with fowls, but, probably because I did not push the doses of antigen 8 whose origin was unknown to me, but known to the sender, which is given on pages 18-20, shows this. Weichardt1 had suggested that the "side-action" of an antiserum should be removed, by exhausting its power to cause this, as is done by the absorption-method with such success when allied bacteria are being differentiated. It appears to me that this method of dealing with an antiserum is not suitable for medico-legal work in India: the following experiments go far to show that the modification of the antiserum which is desired cannot always be obtained. An anti-ovine serum reacted well with a 1-1000 dilution of sheep's serum, and faintly with a similar dilution of goat's serum: to 1 c.c. of the anti- serum was added 0,07 c.c. of goat's serum, and the mixture, after being thorough- ly shaken, was left in the ice-chest overnight, and centrifugalised next morning, the supernatant fluid being decanted and tested. It was found that the reaction- power with goat's serum was no longer present, but the power of reacting with sheep's serum in 1-1000 dilution had also been lost9 added to the contents of the test tube some undilute antigen. If then the precipitate cleared up this would show that it was really a dilution of the antigen with which we had to deal in the first instance. I have carried out many experiments on this point, and am of opinion that Dehne's suggestion is of no value for Indian medico-legal work. With a dilution of goat's serum a reaction was obtained with anti-ovine serum AO, and also with anti-hircine serum AH: Into one tube were put (1) dilute goat's serum, (2) AO and, after the reaction had occurred, (3) some sheep's serum; into another tube were put (1) dilute goat's serum, (2) AH, and, after the reaction had occurred (3) some goat's serum. Next morning the two tubes, that had been kept in the ice- chest overnight, presented identical appearances. Again, an antibubaline serum AB reacted well with a high dilution of its antigen, and less markedly with a similar dilution of ox' serum. Into one tube were put (1) AB, (2) dilute buffalo's serum, and, after the reaction had occurred,(3) some buffalo's serum; into another tube were put (1) AB, (2) dilute ox' serum and after the reaction, (3) some ox' serum. The tubes were left in the ice-chest overnight and next morning were found to present identical appearances. No differentia- tion of kindred sera can be made on the results of these experiments. Uhlenhuth has laid it down that ape's blood may be mistaken for human blood, so it was of great importance to investigate this point, although, so far as I am aware, it has not yet been alleged in an Indian murder trial that the blood- stains in question had been caused by blood that had come from an ape, and not from a man, as alleged by the prosecution. Two reasons for this occur to me. One is that the Hindus revere the lungoor (semnopithecus entellus). The other and more generally operative reason is that, even in India, the ape is not a domestic animal, and therefore is not at hand when most needed10 The stains were extracted in the usual way, and the extracts were diluted until they corresponded to 1-1000 dilutions of blood-sera. They were then all tested in a row, with many tubes of 1-1000 dilutions of human sera and stain- extract as controls. The rapidity and degree of reaction obtained in each tube were noted, when to its contents was added some antihuman serum of known specificity and potency. It was found that even in the case of the orang's blood- stain the reaction obtained was not "human", as it was not visible till after the expiry of twenty minutes; the human blood-stain extracts and dilute sera in each case reacted well before five minutes had elapsed. These experiments were repeated over and over again, the results being shown to those who did me the honour of visiting the laboratory, and in no case was a "human" reaction obtained with the extract of a simian blood-stain. Uhlenhuth has had considerable success in the immunisation of monkeys with human blood, and in thus obtaining antihuman simian sera which, he says, react with human, but not with simian blood-dilutions, being thus of considerable value for differentiation.1 I have tried to immunise several monkeys, but with no success, which is somewhat strange, seeing that India is the home of the Rhesus, and that there was no fault in my technique, as I learned from correspon- dence with the distinguished originator of "cross-immunisation ". The tabular statements given hereunder will show what was done with monkeys. I am in a measure consoled for this want of success by the results of the work, described above, on the differentiation of simian from human blood. There remained the interesting question as to whether, by means of the precipitin test, one could differentiate the blood of one race of mankind from that of another. By the kindness of the undermentioned gentlemen I was able to experiment with the blood of the races mentioned:11 Where no racial difference was detected by the precipitin test, it would have been futile to seek for individual or sexual differences. In order to test the medico-legal value of precipitating antisera in Indian practice it was necessary to have at my command antisera for the bloods of the following animals:12 warmth. The frozen portion of the antiserum would be found to be as good as ever after many weeks13 No. Total dose c.c. Injected. Treatment lasted days. Potency of anti-serum obtained. 4 52 Intraperitoneally 32 1-400. 5 104 " 32 1-50 about. 6 ... " ... Died after third injection. 7 ... " ... Died of serum disease after 7th injection. 8 113 " 45 ...... 9 52 " 33 ...... 10 ... " ... Died after second injection. 11 164 " 45 ...... 12 66.5 Subcutaneously 46 ...... 13 79.5 Intraperitoneall 54 ...... 14 60 " 47 ...... 15 71 " (one dose intraven). 37 ...... 16 168 " 35 ...... 17 190 " 43 ...... 18 141 " 32 ...... It might be argued that some of these apes received far too high doses of the antigen for one to hope for any result from the treatment: but here large doses and prolonged treatment are necessary, and the largest doses were given to big old apes. Frequent titration of their sera showed that the majority had not manufactured any antibodies; but the question of the immunisability of monkeys with the human sera obtainable here is scarcely definitely answered by these results, though the prospects of general success do not appear to be bright. That the work of the medico-legist here renders it absolutely necessary to have at one's command a sufficient supply of antihuman simian serum, is not apparent in the light of the results obtained by me when testing simian and human blood-stains. Uhlenhuth is of opinion that one should have antihuman simian sera ready for use in cases in which the possibility of the presence of simian blood cannot be excluded. With diffidence I advance the opinion that such antisera D
14 are not necessary, and that without them one can do all that is needed to further the ends of Justice. Bruck's findings as to the differentiation of the blood of one race from that of another do not agree with mine 1: he used the complement-deviation test as well. However, as my findings agree with those of such able observers as Linossier and Lemoine 2at Home, and Marshall and Teague 3 in the Far East, I think that the question of racial differences may be considered to be answered in the negative for good. I have not found that the tubes which were introduced for precipitin work by Uhlenhuth have any advantages over tapering tubes which are used in Frankfort on Maine. These have the merit of being easy to make from a length of glass- tubing, though sometimes one comes across a bad glass here, which frosts as soon as it is heated and is therefore useless for the work. Tube-stands of various shapes have been devised by ingenious workers, but I have found that the ordinary and time-honoured pattern of test-tube stand is all that is required. The capillary method, devised by Hauser, 4 of carrying out the test I have used several times, and found it easy enough to carry out. Carnwath's modification of it 5 I have not used, but am of opinion that it has advantages where a very small stain has to be tested. It may in the end supersede Hauser's method. Here in India the stains that fall to be examined would usually be of fair size. In Europe they pride themselves on testing pin-point-sized stains, which in my opinion is a work of supererogation, when larger stains are present. In a recent note 6 I have shown how often cutting weapons are used by murderers in this country, and how the murderer is not content with striking one blow, but makes sure of his victim while he is about it. It will easily be understood that in such cases the victim bleeds freely. In order to give the reader a good idea of what is meant by a positive re- action I asked Babu Behari Lal Das to draw the appearances in two tubes which I had used in an experiment. In one of these the reaction was positive, in the other negative, an antihuman fowl serum having been added to a dilution of a stain-extract, made by me from a human blood-stain in the one case, and from an 1 BRUCK. :15 ovine blood-stain in the other. The clear colourless appearance of the extracts in the tubes, to the taper bottoms of which the clear straw-coloured antiserum has [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75033799.tif] B. L. DAS del. THE PRECIPITIN-REACTION. The contrast between the contents of the first tube, in which the antiserum has reacted with the stain- extract dilution, and those of the second, which remain clear at the point of contact of extract and anti- serum, is well brought out in this plate. sunk, is well brought out in the plate. It is not every case that gives such a well- marked reaction as that depicted here, which, however, is fairly typical of what one obtains when using a powerful antiserum and a highly diluted stain-extract. When we know that our extract is at least diluted to the same strength as a thousand-fold dilution of the blood that caused the stain, or16 of unsatisfactory animals is higher, and the disappointments of the observer more frequent. There a high-potency antiserum which will detect the presence of its antigen in a hundred-thousand-fold dilution17 known as the bacillus avisepticus. Dr. G. C. Chatterjee, Assistant Professor of Pathology at the Medical College, kindly treated many of my fowls with a vaccine of killed cultures of the microbe, and in some cases certainly this did good; but there is no doubt in my mind that the plan of campaign against this microbe should be based on rigid quarantine of all fowls bought in the open market in Calcutta, as recommended by Colonel Raymond, who saw and examined many of the fowls. Those fowls that have successfully passed the time-test, isolated from each other in cages, may then be taken to the laboratory and kept there while they undergo treatment with foreign serum. It may be of interest to record my experience of treating goats with a view to obtain from them precipitin-antisera. A black goat weighing 14 kilos. received the following doses of hydrocele fluid at three-day intervals18 It did not appear to me to be at the time expedient to go on with my attempts to immunise geese; but whether these are or are not refractory is a question to which the above data cannot be taken to give a definite answer. All that we can at present say is that here geese are not easily immunisable. Hydrocele fluid was first used by Schütze as antigen; here it is very easily obtainable, and therefore it was of importance to test its capabilities as a source of antiserum. Unfortunately I have nothing good to say of it: its albumin-content is far too low for one to hope to be able to immunise animals with it unless one were to use relatively enormous doses, seeing that here the dose of serum as antigen must be somewhat increased. The intraperitoneal injections were given as described by me elsewhere, as also the intravenous injections in the case of rabbits. For fowls I have found it of service to give four injections, the dose being adapted to the size of the fowl : first the right wing-vein, then the left, then the right cervical vein, and finally the left are the sites of injection. As all who have worked much with fowls are aware, it is not always easy to give an intravenous injection into the wing-vein, and there is much more chance of causing a hæmatoma when doing this than when giving, say, an intravenous injection in a rabbit even if the ear-vein be not chosen as the site. Geese of course are much easier to treat intravenously, but in them too the hæmatoma is almost the rule. I have not found that it entails a bad result, however, in the case of fowls treated with serum. Ever since Uhlenhuth pointed out the importance of starving one's animals for a few hours before taking their blood for testing its titre, all observers have followed his lead. The beautifully clear serum that one obtains from the blood, allowed to clot in the cold19 Stains sent by Opinion expressed by me after examination of the stain. Information subsequently furnished by sender. 3. Dr. C. L. Bose, Rai Bahadur, Assistant Chemical Exami- ner, Calcutta. Human On clothes of murdered woman. 4. Ditto ,, On sari of murdered woman. 5. Ditto Not human* Another stain in case of 4. 6. Ditto ,,* Stain on quilt in case of 4 and 5. 7. Ditto Human Stain on bedding on which corpse was found lying. 8. Ditto ,, Stain on pillow-case, an exhibit in a murder trial. 9. Ditto ,, Stain on a sheet in this case. 10. Ditto ,, Stain on a man's dhoti in this case. 11. Ditto ,, Stain on the woman's clothes in this case. 12. Ditto Not human Stain made by cow's blood, 27 months old. 13. Ditto Human Human blood-stain 14 months old. 14. Ditto Not human Stain made by blood of pig from. Orissa. 15. Ditto ,, Stain caused by blood of pig from Bengal. 16. Ditto ,, Stain of Calcutta pig's blood. 17. Ditto ,, Buffalo's blood-stain. 18. Ditto ,, Sheep's blood-stain. 19. Ditto ,, Pillow-case stained with birds' blood. 20. Ditto Human Stained cloth from a case of rape. 21. Ditto Not human Cow's blood-stain. 22. Ditto Not human, rumi- nant20 No. Stains sent by Opinion expressed by me after examination of the stain. Information subsequently furnished by sender. 33. Dr. C. L. Bose, Rai Bahadur, Assistant Chemical Exami- ner, Calcutta. Not human; cow or buffalo, pro- bably cow. Another stain in this case. 34. Lieut.-Colonel Vaughan, I.M.S., Calcutta. Human; not feline nor ovine. Stain on paper that had been rub- bed on cut muscle of dissected corpse. 35. Ditto Human Cloth soaked in blood of putre- fying corpse. 36. Dr. E. H. Hankin, Chemical Examiner, Agra. Not human; rumi- nant. Stain from case in which a man was accused of having stolen and killed a goat. 37. Dr. C. L. Bose Human Stain on coat of accused man. 38. Ditto " Stain from bludgeon used by this man. 39. Ditto Not human Stains stated by police to be pro- bably of cow's blood. 40. Lieut.-Colonel Nott, I.M.S., Howrah. Not human nor ovine nor equine. Stain of dog's blood. 41. Dr. C. L. Bose Human Stain from a cot on which an in- jured man had lain. 42. Captain F. P. Connor, I.M.S., Calcutta. " Stain from operation case. 43. Ditto Not human Dog's blood-stain. 44. Ditto " Stain of bird's blood. 45. Ditto Human Human blood-stain. 46. Captain H. B. Steen, I.M.S., Calcutta. Not human Stain made by raw beef-juice. 47. Ditto Human Human blood-stain. 48. Ditto Not human Bird's blood-stain. 49. Ditto " " 50. Ditto " Sheep's blood-stain. 51. Ditto Human Human blood-stain. The accuracy of the diagnosis made by me in each case shows that the antisera that I employed were of excellent quality, and that the technique of the examinations left nothing to be desired. In most of the above-detailed cases, which were taken from actual medico- forensic practice, the Court before which the case was being tried would have been aided in coming to a decision by the information afforded by the precipitin test. In no other way could it be put beyond a doubt that the stains in question had, or had not, been caused by human blood. Here, where advocacy knows no limits, it might be alleged that in a labora- tory in which blood-stains of all kinds of animals, including man, are examined, the air might become so vitiated by minute particles of stain that the results obtained by means of the test could not be relied upon.
21 Nuttall long ago pointed out that when blood-stains that have not become completely dried are in close contact one with the other, their extracts may give fallacious reactions, by reason of the contamination induced by close contact. But stains that come up for examination are dry, and such, if left in close contact with other stains for months, do not become in any way modified by contact. It is conceivable 22 The very delicacy of the test, however, is held to be against it by such competent authorities as Muir and Martin, 1and Friedberger. 2 Muir and Martin state that, in their opinion, it is only when one has at one's disposal antisera that are capable of inhibiting hæmolysis when such a small quantity as the one hundred-thousandth of a cubic centimetre of the antigen is present, that one should use the test in medico-forensic practice. Antisera of this very high potency are obtainable with difficulty in Europe. It remained to be seen whether they could be obtained here. The test is based on the following facts:23 been put the serum of the species for which the precipitin-antiserum is specific (the antigen of this antiserum, in other words) there will be no hæmolysis. The complement (fresh guinea-pig's serum) has in this tube been taken up by the mixture of the precipitin-antiserum and its antigen, and therefore has not been able to act with the immune bodies of the heated hæmolytic anti- serum, which without it are inert. The reader who desires further24 between the time of its standardisation and the moment of its being used for the test. Of course, as it is so delicate it would be so used at once when its power had been fixed; but there is always a deterioration to be taken into account. Naturally I endcavoured to find out whether the process of standardisation could be omitted, and the full power of the complement thus utilised for the test itself. I had no great hopes of success, since in Europe the sera of different guinea-pigs have been found to vary so much, but the point was well worthy of investigation here. The results obtained by me after doing numerous experi- ments show that, for the attainment of that accuracy which forensic work demands, one must not neglect to standardise the guinea-pig's serum just before using it for the test. The usual dose is 0.1 c. c. and in one case I found that this quantity was of itself able to cause dissolution of the standard quantity of sheep's red cells, while in several cases as much as 0.3 c. c. was required to reactivate the ascertained minimal dose of the hæmolytic serum: in other words, without ex- periment one cannot say what is the power of any given guinea-pig's serum. With the comparatively weak antisera which I used the results obtained by me when doing the complement-deviation test were interesting, but by no means conclusive from the forensic point of view, and I much doubt the likelihood of this test ever becoming a matter of regular routine in India. For it to become so we should have to be able to obtain in large quantity very highly potent antisera, and this will, in my opinion, be always the crux, even if the problem of satisfac- tory conservation of the complement be solved. For the determination of the fact that a patient is syphilitic the very similar test proposed by Wassermann, Bruck and Neisser is of the greatest value, and can, as I have found, be carried out here as well as in Europe. Clinical tests may lead one into error, but the error is easily rectified; in forensic work error must be absolutely excluded. Even at its best the Neisser-Sachs test is, as its distinguished originators claimed, only confirmatory. I agree with Uhlenhuth in holding that it cannot be held to be corrective of the results yielded by the precipitin test. And that these are accurate here in India the reader will have already gathered. V.25 this end in view. Since then the merits of the anaphylaxis test have attracted much attention, but out here it is hard to come by the literature, so I have had to trust to excerpts in the various journals, instead of to the original reports of the observers mentioned in the following lines. It is now matter of common knowledge that guinea-pigs (and rabbits) are easily supersensitised by an injection of a foreign albumin. The condition does not make its appearance at once, but if after the 12-14th day the animal receives a second injection it will, in the majority of cases, react violently and rapidly. The supersensitive condition, according to Rosenau and Anderson, who have done a large number of experiments, may last for three years, that is to say, during the whole life of the guinea-pig.1 It begins after the 10-12th day, if the first injection have been made into the brain, in so small a dose as 0.001 c. c.; for intraperitoneal injection 0.01 c.c. is enough, even out here. The why of the phenomena caused by the second dose of serum has been much discussed by competent observers. Richet, to whom we owe the term Ana- phylaxis, believes2 that a new substance is formed in the animal's blood. Rosenau and Anderson call this substance anaphylactin, and, since they found that the blood of a supersensitised animal causes a previously-untreated animal to become at once supersensitised, if the blood be drawn after the period of incubation has elapsed, it would appear that their idea has much in its favour. If the blood be drawn before the incubation period has elapsed, the animal into which it is injected does not become immediately supersensitive to an injection of the original substance. On the other hand Friedberger believes that it is because there is produced an antiserum for the substance injected, and this combines with the substance at the second injection, forming a combination of antiserum and antigen, that the anaphylaxis occurs: the real state of affairs being an absorption of the comple- ment of the animal's serum by the combination. This view is supported by the fact that Doerr and Russ found when working with dogs 26 Tsuru1 is of opinion that it is because a foreign serum has been injected that the complement becomes less: he found that when guinea-pigs receive single doses of dog's or rabbit's serum, their complement becomes markedly decreased in amount, and further he found that the lessening of complement in actively- supersensitised animals is always very slight, as also in passively-supersensitised animals who have received a dose of blood from a sensitised animal of like species. On the other hand, if the sensitised animal be of another species, the loss of complement is marked. Richet and Friedemann, and also Doerr and Russ, found that the injection of a serum mixed with its antiserum causes symptoms of anaphylaxis to appear. Friedberger2 desired to remove the interference of the foreign serum, and to attain this end he allowed sheep's serum to react with anti-ovine serum, derived from a treated rabbit, in vitro. The resulting precipitate was most carefully washed, to get rid of the rabbit's and sheep's sera, and digested with fresh guinea-pig's serum, the mixture being then centrifugalised. The clear supernatant liquid was then injected into healthy, untreated, guinea-pigs, who all showed symptoms of anaphy- laxis. If, on the other hand, the washed precipitate was digested with heated guinea-pig's serum, which as a consequence of being heated had lost its comple- ment, and then the mixture, after being centrifugalised, was injected into guinea- pigs, these exhibited no signs of anaphylaxis. If these experiments are confirmed we may conclude that Friedberger's original contention is well-founded. In this case the phenomena of precipitation, complement-deviation, and anaphylaxis are all brought into line, as being primarily dependent on the formation in the serum of the treated animal of precipitins. Doerr and Moldovan, 3 to judge from the short note on their work to which I have access, have found that where the preci- pitinogen is used up by the animal, no supersensitisation occurs. Recently Pfeiffer4has reported that when a guinea-pig has been rendered supersensitive to a given albumin, on receiving the second injection of this it shows, even when all other symptoms of anaphylaxis are absent, a marked lower- ing of the body-temperature27 before it is used. Foreign unheated sera often cause untoward symptoms when injected into guinea-pigs, and thus the anaphylactic reaction might be simulated, especially in a case in which the test-serum was injected intracardially. Three of my guinea-pigs died soon after receiving comparatively small doses of sheep's serum (unheated). All observers insist on the necessity of preliminary heating of the test-serum, which when used should be warmed to near the body- heat of the guinea-pig. Time and again I have seen my rabbits and fowls suffer apparently severely, when they received a dose of unwarmed foreign serum intravenously, even if it had been previously heated to 56°C. for half an hour. In precipitin work this does not matter much; but it might absolutely mislead one when performing the anaphylaxis test. So far as I was able to carry out work on the test I found it to be confirma- tory of the results obtained by means of the precipitin test. Not all guinea-pigs showed signs of anaphylaxis28 symptoms are not elicited in previously sensitised animals is evident. More work requires to be done on this point. The work done by Uhlenhuth and Haendel1 shows that the age of the material makes no difference: they obtained the characteristic reaction in animals that had received doses of extracts made from a cow's placenta that was 30 years old; from a frost-bitten limb 53 years old, and from a collection of blood, 14 years old, that was completely decomposed, and, owing to its long exposure to light, had lost the power of reacting, by its extract, to a precipitin-antiserum. Had one been able to supersensitise one's guinea-pigs with human or other sera, and then, as soon as a stain fell to be tested, to make an extract of the stain and use this as the test-substance, forensic work with the anaphylaxis test would have been rapidly done: a given stain could have been tested by this and the precipitin test on the day of its arrival at the laboratory. Unfortunately we cannot do this. A delay of at least fourteen days is required for the guinea- pigs, that have received injections of the stain-extract, to develop supersensitive- ness. For these injections but a small amount of extract is needed, whereas if it be used for the test-dose we need many cubic centimetres of a strong extract, and for this a large stain is required. The cases in which we can use extract for the test-injections are thus few in number, for it appears to be of the utmost importance to sensitise a number of animals with the same stain-extract, or to test them therewith if they have been sensitised with normal serum: at least five animals would be required in a forensic case29 For extensive work, or work in which sera sealed in capillary tubes are used, the "Frigo" apparatus, made by Lautenschläger of Berlin on the designs of Morgenroth, does not answer well, although by its means a very low temperature can be kept up at comparatively small cost, even in Calcutta. The freezing-chamber in this apparatus is small and must be removed from its bed of insulating material every time that the freezing-mixture of crushed ice and salt is renewed30 In my monograph, and in the foregoing pages, I have described all that one needs to know about the way in which the injections were given, and the blood abstracted. I shall now give some extracts from my notes to show how the animals were treated with antigen, and what results were obtained from the plan of treatment adopted. Fowl 43 received injections of human serum, given intraperitoneally :31 On the 7th June it yielded a serum of 1-4000 over titre. Fowl 91 received human serum in the following doses :32 Rabbit 99 received washed sheep's red blood-corpuscles intravenously as under :33 worth one's while to use this test, which has so much against it as a positive test34 Tube 6, Feline blood-stain extract dilute Antihuman fowl serum No reaction. " 7, Bovine blood-stain extract dilute " " " 8, Saline solution " " " 9, Stain-extract dilute Normal fowl serum " Now if we take some of our stain-extract and inject it into five guinea-pigs and, on the 15th day thereafter, we give to three of these a dose of human serum, to one a dose of, say, equine serum, and to the fifth canine serum; and we take three other untreated guinea-pigs and give them the three kinds of sera mentioned, we shall have a good control of the results of our precipitin test. Supposing that two of the now humanised previously-treated animals show marked symptoms35 apes, even of those very closely related to manCALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 8, HASTINGS STREET
No. 39 (NEW SERIES) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA THE APPLICABILITY TO MEDICO-LEGAL PRACTICE IN INDIA OF THE BIOCHEMICAL TESTS FOR THE ORIGIN OF BLOOD-STAINS BY LIEUT.-COLONEL W. D. SUTHERLAND, M. B., I. M. S. (Edited by the Director-General, Indian Medical Service) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75033874.tif] Issued under the Authority of the Government of India by the Sanitary Commissioner with the Government of India CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1910 Price Annas 8 or 9d.
