IP/QB.10. m 91. b. No 41. (NEW SERIES) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA QUININE AND ITS SALTS: THEIR SOLUBILITY AND ABSORBABILITY BY CAPTAIN A. C. MAcGILCHIRIST, M.A., M.D., M.R.C.P., I.M.S. (Edited by the Director General, Indian Medical Service.) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75034120.tif] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1911 Price annas 9 or 10d.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75034126.tif] 3943090
x No. 41. (NEW SERIES) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA QUININE AND ITS SALTS: THEIR SOLUBILITY AND ABSORBABILITY BY CAPTAIN A. C. MACGILCHRIST, M.A., M.D., M.R.C.P., I.M.S. (Edited by the Director General, Indian Medical Service). ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75034132.tif] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1911 B [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75034132.tif]
Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. Mr. E. A. ARNOLD, 41 and 43, Maddox Street, Bond Street, London, W. Messrs. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, W.C. Messrs. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., 43, Gerrard Street, Soho, London, W. Mr. BERNARD QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, W. Messrs P. S. KING & SON, 2 and 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster. Messrs. H. S. KING & CO., 65, Cornhill, and 9, Pall Mall, London. Messrs. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, London, S.W. Mr. T. FISHER UNWIN, 1, ADELPHI TERRACE, London, W.C. Messrs. W. THACKER & CO., 2, Creed Lane, London, E.C. Mr. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 51, Broad Street, Oxford. Messrs. DEIGHTON BELL & CO., Cambridge. Messrs. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W.C. ON THE CONTINENT. Mr. RUDOLF HAUPT, 1, Dorrienstrasse, Leipzig, Germany. Mr. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ Leipzig. Mr. KARL HIERSEMANN Messrs. R. FRIEDLANDER & SOHN, Berlin, W. N., Carlstrasse, 11. Mr. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. IN INDIA. Messrs. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. Messrs. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. Messrs. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. Messrs. S. K. LAHIRI & Co., Calcutta. Messrs. B. BANERJEE & Co., Calcutta. Messrs. HIGGINBOTHAM & CO., Madras. Messrs. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & Co., Madras. Messrs. G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. Messrs. S. MURTHY & CO., Madras. Messrs. THOMPSON & Co., Madras. Messrs. TEMPLE & Co., Madras. Messrs. COMBRIDGE & CO., Madras. Messrs. P. R. RAMA IYER & Co., Madras. Messrs. A. R. PILLAI & Co., Trivandrum. Messrs. THACKER & CO., LD., Bombay. Messrs. A. J. COMBRIDGE & CO., Bombay. Messrs. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & Co., Bombay. Mrs. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay. Mr. SUNDER PANDURANG, Bombay. Messrs. GOPAL NARAYAN & Co., Bombay. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission Press, Rangoon. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-Am Press, Lahore and Calcutta. Mr. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazair Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. Messrs. A. CHAND & Co., Punjab. Messrs. A. M. & J. FERGUSON, Ceylon. Babu S. C. TALUKDAR, Proprietor, Students and Company, Cooch Behar.
List of numbers of Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India (New Series) published previous to the present issue. No. 1. Standardisation of Calmette's Anti-Venomous Serum with Pure Cobra Venom: the Deterioration of this Serum through keeping in India, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 3 or 4 d. No. 2. Malaria in India, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No. 3. Some Observations on the Poison of Russell's Viper (Daboia Russellii), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 5 or 6d. No. 4. On the Action of the Venoms of the Cobra and of the Daboia on the Red Blood corpuscles and on the blood plasma, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 5. Specificity of Anti-Venomous Sera, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 6. First Report on the Anti-Malarial Operations in Mian Mir, 19012 No. 20. Serum-Therapy of Plague in India; Reports by Mr. W. M. Haffkine, C.I.E., and various Officers of the Plague Research Laboratory, Bombay, by Lieutenant- Colonel W. B. Bannerman, M.D., B.Sc., .F.R.C.S., I.M.S. Price As. 14 or 1s. 4d. No. 21. On the Standardisation of Anti-Typhoid Vaccine, by Captain George Lamb, M.D., I.M.S. (Director, Pasteur Institute of India), and Captain W. B. C. Forster, M.B., D.P.H., I.M.S. Price As. 6 or 7d. No. 22. Mediterranean Fever in India: Isolation of the Micrococcus Melitensis, by Captain George Lamb, M.D., I.M.S., and Assistant Surgeon M. Kesava Pai, M.B., C.M. (Madras). Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 23. The Anatomy and Histology of Ticks, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price Rs. 3 or 4s. 6d. No. 24. On a Parasite found in the White Corpuscles of the blood of Palm Squirrels, by Captain W. S. Patton, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 25. On the importance of Larval Characters in the Classification of Mosquitoes, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 26. Leucocytozoon Canis, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 27. Preliminary Report on the Development of the Leishman-Donovan Body in the Bed Bug, by Captain W. S. Patton, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 28. The Sexual Cycle of Leucocytozoon Canis in the Tick, by Captain S. R. Christopher's, M.B. I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 29. Piroplasma Canis and its Cycle in the Tick, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S., Price Rs. 2 or 3s. No. 30. The Theory and Practice of Anti-Rabic Immunisation, by Captain W. F. Harvey, M.B., I.M.S., and Captain Anderson McKendrick, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 31. The Development of the Leishman-Donovan Parasite in Cimex RotundatusCONTENTS. PAGE. Introduction . . . 1 Peculiarities of Quinine and its salts . . . 3 Their solubility in water. Their deterioration (heat, light, moulds). Compatibility of Quinine salts with blood-serum . . . 6 Solubility of Quinine alkaloid in blood-serum . . . 11 Solubility of Quinine alkaloid in bile . . . 11 Absorption of Quinine . . . 13 Quinine elimination in the urine as a gauge of the amount of Quinine absorbed . . . 13 Lethality as a measure of the amount of Quinine absorbed . . . 15 A. Oral administration . . . 15 Seat of absorption of Quinine . . . 15 Factors influencing absorption from the gastro-intestinal tract . . . 18 (1)Food contents of the gastro-intestinal tract. (2)Affections of the gastro-intestinal tract. (3)Affections of the liver. (4)The solubility of the Quinine salt employed. The value of the lethality gauge as compared with Quinine elimination in the urine as a measure of Quinine absorption. (5)Carbon dioxide. (6)Single large doses of Quinine as opposed to divided or " fractional " doses. The efficacy of Warburg's tincture explained 22 B. Subcutaneous (including intramuscular) administration 22 Miscibility of Quinine salt solutions with blood-serum: coagulum formation if the Quinine salt solution is concentrated 23 Precipitation of Quinine at the seat of injection 24 Variability in amount of Quinine eliminated in the urine. Effect of degree of concentra- tion of the Quinine injection on elimination 25 Quinine hydrochloride solutions containing urethane, antipyrine or sodium chloride 26 Facts, (a) experimental and (b) clinical, casting doubt upon the alleged therapeutic advan- tages of hypodermic injections of Quinine, as regards (1) amount of absorption and (2) promptness of effect 26 Minimum-lethal dose experiments on guinea-pigs to test the relative amount of absorption and promptness of action of Quinine after (1) oral and (2) subcutaneous administration 28 Reasons justifying the application of these results to man 33 Graphic representation (curves) of Quinine absorption after various methods of adminis- tration 33 Local and post-mortem changes in the guinea-pigs used in the minimum-lethal dose experi- ments 34 Quinine fundamentally unsuited for hypodermic injection 35 Dangers peculiar to Quinine when administered hypodermically 35 Intramuscular injections of Quinine 38 Intravenous injections of Quinine 38 Bacelli's solution of Quinine hydrochloride containing sodium chloride 38 Great dilution not only necessary in order to avoid the dangers noted after subcutaneous injections of Quinine but in itself beneficial in malignant malaria by attenuating the toxins and favouring their elimination 33
2 CONTENTSQUININE AND ITS SALTS: THEIR SOLUBILITY AND ABSORBABILITY. THE administration of Quinine, although so old and well tried a remedy, is still beset with many difficulties and feelings of uncertainty on the part of the physician regarding the rapidity and certainty of action of a given dose of the alkaloid, by whichever channel that dose is administered. This is due mainly to our want of knowledge regarding the physical, chemical and, in particular, physiologico-chemical peculiarities of Quinine and its salts. The factors influencing the absorption of Quinine from the gastro-intestinal tract have been neglected; and even the relative therapeutic or prophylactic value of the various methods of administration of Quinine is still unsettled. By many it is assumed that Quinine is absorbed chiefly from the stomach, the intestines taking little or no part in the absorption. Malanin,1 in 1868, pointed out the insolubility of the compound formed by Quinine and bile acids, and took for granted that, when this alkaloid was administered by the mouth, as much of it as was not absorbed from the stomach became inert on coming in contact with bile in the intestines and was thus eliminated in the fæces. A similar action was ascribed to bile acids by Kerner.2 Lauder Brunton,3 on account of the precipitation from a mixture of Quinine and bile acids of this salt, which is sparingly soluble, except in an excess of bile, recommended clear- ing out the liver by administering an emetic and a cholagogue purgative before giving Quinine in the treatment of malaria. According to Sollmann,4 Quinine is fairly readily absorbed from the stomach: Giemsa and Schaumann,5 however, have come to the conclusion that most of the Quinine given by the mouth is absorbed from the small intestine. Marshall6 states that most of the Quinine passes into the duodenum: and Dixon7 is of the opinion that after entering the duodenum Quinine is under ordinary circumstances absorbed rapidly; but, if there is excess of alkali in the duodenum, Quinine is precipitated, forming with the bile acids insoluble salts which are passed unchanged in the fæces. When there is so little agreement regarding the fate of Quinine in the gastro-intestinal tract, it is not surprising to find an explanation of the marked variations in the absorption of Quinine2 exacerbation of remittent fever, much less prevent its recurrence; while no - thing is more common than to see the same quantity of the alkaloid in Warburg's tincture bring about such results." According to Sollmann4 the substances3 urine for many weeks after administration; and that 20 grains injected into the flanks will protect an individual from malaria for the following month at least. According to Megaw15 the temperature of patients suffering from malaria takes about twelve hours longer in coming to normal when treatment is by hypodermic injections (bi-hydrochloride of Quinine in doses of 10 grains) than when Quinine is given by the mouth, and consequently that absorption is slower from the subcutaneous connective tissue than from the mucous membrane of the stomach. Scott16 regards the hypodermic method (intramuscular) as of no special value in the treatment of acute cases of malarial fever, owing to slowness of absorption; but he considers this method particularly useful as a preventive of frequently recurring attacks of ague. The authors of the National Dispensatory10 acknowledge that the tendency of hypodermic injections to produce "pain, inflammation, gangrene and even fatal tetanus more than counterbalances the advantages of facility of adminis- tration and promptness of effect" and recommend that this method of adminis- tration should be restricted to cases in which delay would be dangerous. The importance of determining whether or not this "promptness of effect" is really obtained by the hypodermic method is obvious. In an endeavour to throw some light on these debated points regarding the absorption of Quinine, this work has been undertaken. The alkaloid and its salts employed in the various experiments were obtained direct from Merck (Darmstadt) and therefore in unopened bottles. Peculiarities of Quinine and its Salts. Unfortunately, as the composition of many of the salts of Quinine varies with different manufacturers and as the details (temperature, etc.) regarding the conditions under which the results given by various analytical chemists have been obtained are not alway given, there is much uncertainty regarding the chemical properties, e.g., solubility, of some of these compounds. As those used in my investigations were obtained from Merck, I have, whenever possible, followed his analyses17 in the following table:4 Table I5 to be protected from heat and light. At a low temperature, they keep indefinitely: exposed to heat, they are liable to lose water of crystallisation and to become decomposed. Exposed to sunlight they acquire6 Compatibility of Quinine Salts with Blood=Serum. With the object of obtaining some information as to what actually happens when solutions of Quinine salts are injected subcutaneously or enter the blood stream, the behaviour of such solutions with ox blood-serum was investigated in vitro. If .01 gramme of a Quinine salt, e.g., bi-hydrochloride, bi-sulphate, bi- hydrobromide, urea bi-hydrochloride, lactate, etc., is added direct in the form of a powder to one cubic centimetre of ox blood-serum in a test tube, a coarse curdy precipitate takes place. This precipitate, produced by adding one part of Quinine salt to 100 parts of ox blood-serum is not merely precipitated alkaloid, as it is insoluble in excess of serum. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75034201.tif] Curdy preci- pitate pro- duced by adding a Quinine salt in powder form to ox blood- serum. As no further progress could be made by adding the dry Quinine salts to the serum, solutions of various strengths of the Quinine salts were prepared and the effects produced by adding one cubic centimetre of these solutions to one cubic centimetre of ox blood serum ob- served. The following table gives the results, one cubic centimetre of Quinine salt solution being in each instance mixed with one cubic centimetre of blood-serum. The upper line opposite each salt indicates the results got immediately on mixing Quinine salt solution with serum; the lower line the effects produced after standing 24 hours:7 Table II8 hypodermic or intravenous use, were tested in the same way, but they showed no greater compatibility or miscibility with ox blood-serum than did simple solutions of Quinine hydrochloride itself. Using dilutions of Quinine salts of 1 in 20, the results were the same as under 1 in 50 in above table, only more pronounced, with the exception of Quinine bi-hydrobromide which even in this dilution of 1 in 20 produced a thick semi-solid mass of jelly consistence. This behaviour of the bi-hydro- bromide is the more remarkable as it contains a comparatively low percentage of anhydrous Quinine base. The bi-hydrobromide therefore appears to be the least compatible with ox blood-serum. The above re-actions were carried out at laboratory temperature (12°C.). The effect of incubating the mixture of Quinine salt solution and serum at 37°C. was tested in a few instances and the result was an acceleration of the changes that were seen to occur at laboratory temperature. Giemsa and Schaumann5 having observed the behaviour in vitro of saturated solutions of some of these salts of Quinine with (1) pig blood-serum and (2) human blood-serum have recorded very similar results. A series of tubes was next prepared to compare the relative amount of precipitate and deposit formed by adding solutions of the strength of 1 in 80 of each of these Quinine salts to ox blood-serum. Two tubes showed no deposit, but only a flocculent precipitate in suspension9 It was considered desirable to determine whether the Quinine in these mixtures of blood-serum and Quinine salt solutions was present (1) in solution in the supernatant fluid, (2) in the suspended precipitate, or (3) in the deposit. The tube containing the mixture of blood-serum and Quinine bi-sulphate 1 in 80 was taken and its contents filtered. The clear filtrate gave an intense emerald green colour on the addition of chlorine water and ammonia, so that the filtrate contained Quinine in solution. The deposit was examined next. It was thoroughly washed with water till the washings no longer gave any colour re-action with these reagents, and then treated with weak sulphuric acid. The deposit was not dissolved, but some of the supernatant fluid was placed in a clean test-tube and the reagents, chlorine water and ammonia, added. An intense deep-blue colour resulted. This blue solution was divided between two test-tubes, one of which was heated and the other kept at laboratory temperature. The solution in the tube that was heated turned green in a couple of minutes; the solution in the tube left at laboratory temperature turned green in three days: These results suggest that Quinine was present in the deposit but in an altered form, and probably as an oxidised product. A quantitative estimation of the Quinine in solution and in suspension was carried out as follows:10 anhydrous base corresponds with 0.0536 gramme Quinine hydrochloride. It follows therefore that 0.0536 gramme Quinine hydrochloride was in solution in the mixture. Next a similar mixture11 The action of Quinine salt solutions on blood-serum reminds one strongly of that of alcohol, which in greater concentration than 33 per cent. is quite incompatible with blood-serum but in greater dilution perfectly miscible. Solubility of Quinine Alkaloid in Ox Blood=Serum. With 25 cubic centimetres of ox blood-serum, fresh and centrifuged, .1 gramme crystalline Quinine alkaloid was shaken up in a flask and incubated at 37° C. for two hours, during which time the flask was frequently shaken. After these two hours, the flask and its contents were allowed to cool at laboratory temperature (12° C.), and then the contents were filtered through cotton wool with the aid of a water-suction pump. The amount of alkaloid in solution in the clear filtrate was determined as follows:12 Marshall6 that the precipitate of Quinine glycocholate which is obtained by adding a solution of Quinine to bile, although very insoluble, is easily decom- posed by carbonic acid and alkaline carbonates, and under ordinary circum- stances probably plays little part in the absorption of Quinine. The solubility of crystalline Quinine alkaloid in fresh ox bile was deter- mined by me in the following manner:13 183 cubic centimetres of ox bile can dissolve one gramme crystalline Quinine alkaloid. Crystalline Quinine alkaloid is therefore about nine times as soluble in ox bile as in water. This result differs considerably from that of Giemsa and Schaumann5 who, using amorphous Quinine alkaloid instead of the crystalline form used by me, give the amazing solubility of 1 in 83;14 could not be weighed. So far therefore as elimination by other channels is con- cerned, Quinine excretion in the urine is quite a feasible gauge of absorption. Regarding the rate and amount of elimination of Quinine in the urine there is commendable harmony in the results of recent investigators. After medium doses ( e.g. one gramme) of Quinine administered by the mouth while fasting, the average amount eliminated in the first 24 hours has been given by Kleine22 as 21.9 per cent., by Mariani13 as 24.7 per cent., by Flamini23 as 24.6 per cent., by Schmitz21 as 19.5 per cent., and by Giemsa and Schaumann5 as 25.8 per cent., and under the same conditions the average total elimination (i.e., the amount eliminated during the two or three days Quinine excretion lasted) according to the same authorities is about 40 per cent. It would appear there- fore that under these circumstances about 60 per cent. of Quinine is destroyed in the body. That the amount of Quinine eliminated in the urine should vary, as a rule, between fairly narrow limits when the mode of administration and other conditions are similar is what one would expect. But even, under such conditions, Giemsa and Schaumann,5 who regard the amount of Quinine elimination in the urine as the best practical measure of the amount absorbed, acknowledge that in particular individuals there are considerable variations from the normal, and that even in the same individual there might be striking variations on different days even when examination of the fæces showed that absorption was similar on all the days. Further, even granting that under similar conditions as regards mode of administration, state of gastro-intestinal tract, etc., the amount of Quinine eliminated in the urine is fairly constant, it cannot be assumed that under altered conditions the relative amounts of Quinine eliminated in the urine will be proportional to the corresponding amounts of Quinine absorbed. To show that such an assumption would be wrong it is only necessary to compare the average amounts of Quinine eliminated in the urine after intravenous administration on the one hand and intramuscular or oral on the other. Mariani13 gives the following averages:15 These figures show that after intravenous injection less Quinine (totals) is eliminated in the urine than after either intramuscular injection or oral administration. As with intravenous injection there can be no doubt about the Quinine entering the circulation, it is evident that Quinine elimination in the urine cannot be directly proportional to the amount of Quinine that has entered the blood. Further, on referring to the amounts of Quinine eliminated during the first day, it is quite obvious that there is no direct relationship between the amount of Quinine that has entered the circulation and the amount that has been excreted: if it be said that elimination varies directly with absorption, then more Quinine entered the blood after oral administration than after intravenous; if it be said that elimination varies inversely with absorption, then more Quinine entered the blood after intramuscular injection than after intravenous. In reality, the amount of Quinine absorbed must be equal to the amount of Quinine eliminated in the urine plus the amount that has undergone cleavage in the body. The determination of the amount of Quinine eliminated in the urine cannot possibly give us any idea of the amount absorbed unless we are able to determine at the same time the amount that has undergone cleavage or to satisfy ourselves that the amount that has undergone cleavage is constant. Under different conditions of Quinine administration, each of these three factors varies; and as there is no means of estimating the amount of Quinine that has undergone cleavage in the body the amount of Quinine eliminated in the urine is quite fallacious as a universal gauge of the amount of Quinine that has entered the circulation. There is, however, another method, namely, that of determining the mini- mum-lethal dose16 in the stomach, and almost all the Quinine that passes into the duodenum is immediately and permanently rendered inert by the bile acids and alkaline fluids, the alkaloid precipitated by the alkaline juices being very insoluble in water. For determining the seat of absorption, the following points have to be considered:17 ing to my calculation, Quinine alkaloid is about nine times as soluble in ox bile as in water, and according to that of Giemsa and Schaumann5 about twenty times. Further, the glycocholate of Quinine is soluble in excess of bile and is easily decomposed by carbon dioxide and alkaline carbonates. Lastly, as pointed out by Kerner,2 Quinine salts are much more soluble in ærated than in ordinary water, and carbon dioxide is possibly of importance in the process of absorption of Quinine from the intestine. From the large intestine probably little Quinine is absorbed. The results of recent workers show a great falling off in the amount of Quinine eliminated subsequent to a period of twelve hours after administration. Peristalsis, more- over, being less active and the contents of the bowel having acquired greater consistence, there is less contact between alkaloid and mucous membrane. Lastly, the elimination of Quinine after administration in the form of an enema is relatively small. Kleine12 after administering two grammes of Quinine hydrochloride in 100 cubic centimetres of water as an enema found only 17.55 per cent. eliminated in the urine in the first 24 hours, as compared with 25 per cent. in the same period when the same salt in the same dose was administered by the mouth. Kobert25 relates a case of suicide on the part of a schoolmistress who swallowed four drachms of Quinine followed by the juice of two lemons. Unfortunately, the interval of time between her last meal and her taking the Quinine is not mentioned; but the periods at which the different toxic symptoms appeared are interesting from two points of view. In the first place, the minimum lethal dose for man being about four drachms,25 the correspondence between the periods at which the various symptoms in this case of suicide and in the minimum-lethal dose experiments in guinea-pigs is striking: secondly, if in the case of suicide the stomach was empty at the time of swallowing the Quinine, then absorption was chiefly from the small intestines. The mimimum-lethal dose experiments were carried out for testing the relative absorption after oral and hypodermic administration and not for determining the seat of absorption of Quinine. For the latter purpose such experiments are of limited value until it is known how long food usually remains in the guinea-pig's stomach. But this much can confidently be said18 force it through the catheter into the stomach. The sequence of events is given in the accompanying table alongside that in the case of suicide19 to a catarrhal condition or chronic venous congestion of the gastro-intestinal tract and liver. 3. Affections of the liver.20 B.21 Kerner that carbonic acid probably plays an important part in dissolving Quinine, both in the process of absorption and in the blood. The results of his experiments also seem to show that ærated water, swallowed with Quinine or injected with Quinine as an enema, facilitates the absorption of the alkaloid. Further support is given to Kerner's idea of the importance of carbonic acid as a solvent by the following experiment, reported by Wood.27 The amount of pure Quinine that 1,000 parts of blood defibrinated and deprived of its gases at 36°C. can dissolve is only .398 part, which gives a solubility of about 1 in 25,00. It has been shown above that Quinine alkaloid is soluble 1 part in 625 of ordinary ox blood-serum. 6. Single large doses of Quinine or the same amount in divided doses in the course of the day.22 Quinine in the form of Warburg's tincture has often been found efficient when Quinine administered in the ordinary way has been unavailing. It will be interesting, therefore, to examine its constitution in an attempt to explain the secret of its efficacy. It is composed of Quinine sulphate with aloes, rhubarb, gentian and aromatics digested with proof spirits. It is recommended that the bowels be first evacuated by any convenient purge.31 This preliminary purgation removes any obstacle to the progress of the Quinine along the intestinal canal, prevents dilution of the Quinine by the previous contents of the intestine, permits more ready contact between the Quinine and the mucous membrane of the intestine, and increases the general tone of the whole intestinal tract. It will be observed also that the tincture contains two cholagogue purgatives23 tendency to produce "pain, inflammation, gangrene and even fatal tetanus" more than counterbalances the advantages of facility of administration and promptness of effect, and the use of this method of administration should be restricted to cases in which delay may be dangerous. The behaviour of those Quinine salts that are used for hypodermic injec- tion, in different strengths of solution, when mixed with ox blood-serum, has already been described. It should be noted also that solutions of Quinine hydrochloride prepared with the addition of antipyrine, urethane and sodium chloride, respectively, as recommended by some for hypodermic and intravenous use, were tested in the same way and showed no greater miscibility with ox blood-serum than did simple solutions of Quinine hydrochloride itself. The ordinary Quinine hypodermic injection, as recommended by Squire,32 is not more dilute than 1 in 6; the strength of Burrough's and Wellcome's Quinine bi-hydrochloride Vaporoles is 1 in 5; and the strength of extemporaneous Quinine injections generally borders on 1 in 1½ Solutions of Quinine of such strengths must of necessity result in a coagulum and precipitation of much of the Quinine at the seat of injection. It has already been shown that the addition of a 1 in 20 solution of Quinine hydrochloride to an equal volume of ox blood-serum throws about half the Quinine, temporarily at least, out of solution. An examination of Table II strongly suggests that the more con- centrated the solution of Quinine salt, the more alkaloid will be precipitated in the mixture with serum; and the more dilute the solution of Quinine salt, the less alkaloid will be thrown out of solution. One would expect therefore from these serum experiments that much of the Quinine contained in the ordinary Quinine hypodermic injection would be thrown out of solution at the point of injection, but that, if the Quinine injection is sufficiently dilute (1 in 150), little or no Quinine would be deposited in the tissues. It will be remembered that the substance separated by adding dilute sulphuric acid to the coagulum (formed by adding Quinine hydrochloride 1 in 20 to serum), after the latter had been washed free from all traces of Quinine, gave a blue colour when treated with chlorine water and ammonia, and that this blue colour changed to green rapidly on heating, but after a few days if left at laboratory temperature. This substance is probably an oxidation product of Quinine, and the ease with which it can be re-converted into Quinine sug- gests that, although much Quinine is thrown out of solution at the seat of in- jection apparently as a transformed product in combination with albumen (compare with Rossbach's33 investigations), Quinine may be gradually liberated from the coagulum for two or three days after injection. Reference will again be made to this coagulum in connection with the occurrence of tetanus after Quinine injections.
24 Giemsa and Schaumann5 state that a solution of one part of Quinine urea. bi-hydrochloride in ten of water is particularly suited for subcutaneous use. Table II shows that in this dilution Quinine urea forms a curdy mass only when mixed with serum, and that, in the same dilution, quinine bi-hydrochloride produces a gelatinous mass. The latter salt, however, contains considerably more Quinine base than the former; and, when solutions of both salts each containing 1 in 80 of Quinine base were tested with serum, no difference in, the behaviour of the two salts could be detected. From the small amount of Quinine eliminated in the urine after hypo- dermic injections and from his findings at the point of injection Kleine22 came to the conclusion that Quinine was precipitated largely at the seat of injec- tion, and that Quinine was very slowly absorbed from this depot by the lymph stream. He was of opinion that absorption lasted for weeks, and that such a. prolonged action would be useful in the treatment and prophylaxis of malaria. Mariani,13 however, showed that this Quinine depôt at the point of injection did not persist beyond five or six days, and so rejected the idea that subcutaneous administration was particularly useful for the prophylaxis of malaria. That Quinine was precipitated at the point of injection he settled by experiment. He injected Quinine hi-hydrochloride (about 1 in 5) intramuscularly in the leg of a rabbit and 17 hours thereafter killed the rabbit and recovered from the muscles 66.5 per cent. of the amount injected. Kleine,12 on finding that elimi- nation in the urine was so small in amount and that elimination did not continue so long as he had formerly supposed, concluded that the subcutaneous administration of Quinine was of less therapeutic value than the oral. There is very little harmony in the results of experimenters who have investigated the proportion of Quinine eliminated in the urine after hypoder- mic injection. There is one point, however, on which they are all in agree- ment, namely, that the proportion of Quinine eliminated, when administered subcutaneously, is much less than when given by the mouth. The following gives the proportions eliminated in the first twenty-four hours after adminis- tration (1) by mouth and (2) subcutaneously :25 Kleine22 gave .5 gramme Quinine bi-hydrochloride subcutaneously to each of two patients and found the amount eliminated in the first 24 hours in one case was 11.37 per cent. and in the other 9.70 per cent. To another patient he gave .5 gramme Quinine hydrochloride, and the amount eliminated in the first 24 hours was 15.32 per. cent. The greater excretion in the last case probably accompanied a greater absorption due to the greater dilution in which the hydrochloride was probably given owing to its less solubility. Mariani13 tested the effect of concentration of the Quinine injection on the elimination. In the one case he injected one gramme of Quinine bi-hydrochloride in ten cubic centimetres of water and in the other case the same salt and dose in two cubic centimetres of water: in the former, 13.7 per cent. was eliminated in the first 24 hours; in the latter, 15.791: in the former, elimination was at its height between the sixth and twelfth hours after injection; in the latter, between the ninth and eighteeth hours after injection. It is worthy of note that differences in dilution of 1 in 2 and 1 in 10 had no great influence on the amount of Quinine excreted and probably absorbed. This agrees with the results obtained by me in the minimum-lethal dose experiments. Giemsa and Schaumann,5 however, using Quinine urea have obtained very different results. They carried out two sets of experiments: in one set they adminis- tered one gramme of Quinine urea in ten cubic centimetres of water to each patient daily, and in the other set one gramme of Quinine urea in one cubic centimetre of water daily, with the following tabulated results:26 They report that, in the case of those who received the Quinine in a dilu- tion of 1 in 10, elimination ended within 48 hours after the last injection; and that in the other case elimination was pronounced for four or five days after the last injection. It is difficult to explain the differences in elimination shown in. Tables A and. B. Judging from the in vitro experiments, there is no reason. why Quinine urea should be better absorbed than Quinine hi-hydrochloride: It would appear, moreover, that Quinine urea has not fulfilled the hopes entertained of it; for Giemsa34 has recently recommended the combination of Quinine hydrochloride with urethane for hypodermic injection. Urethane and antipyrine increase the solubility of Quinine hydrochloride, new chemical products being formed from which, it is thought, Quinine is liberated in the body. Gaglio35 recommended the urethane solution as being neutral, non-irri- tating and stable: after its hypodermic injection he recovered from 30 to 50 per cent. in the urine and concluded that it was rapidly and completely absorbed. Schmitz,21 however, has been unable to confirm these results ; giving the urethane solution hypodermically to a patient daily for seven days, he found the daily amount eliminated was only 16.1 per cent. on an average. Recently Giemsa34 seems to have given up the use of Quinine-urea in favour of this urethane solution of Quinine hydrochloride, the advantages he puts forward for the latter being: that it will stand boiling for an hour and is not de- composed by heat like Quinine urea while being sterilized, that it is well absorbed, that it has a similar re-action to that of the tissue fluids and that its intramuscular injection is almost painless. In the antipyrine solution of Quinine hydrochloride, quinopyrin is formed, which according to Santesson is less toxic than Quinine, but according to Stofella is useless.36 Regarding these solutions resulting in the formation of new compounds Marshall36 states that they should be looked upon with suspicion. Moreover, it should be noted that their miscibility with ox blood-serum is no greater than that of solutions of simple Quinine hydrochloride itself. Solubility in water is merely of advan- tage during the process of injecting; it is solubility or miscibility in serum that favours absorption. Clinically, one striking pint about the hypodermic administration of Quinine is the sudden great increase recently in dosage by this method. A few years ago the hypodermic dose of Quinine was usually given as from four to six grains; at present the dose is generally from ten to fifteen grains27 in the flanks give protection from malaria for at least a month. According to Megaw,15the temperature of malarial patients takes about twelve hours longer in coming to normal when treated by the hypodermic method than when Quinine is given by the mouth; from this it is assumed absorption is slower from the subcutaneous tissues than from the mucous membrane of the gastro-intestinal tract. Scott16has come to the conclusion that the hypodermic (intramuscular) mode of administration of Quinine has no special value in the treatment of acute cases of malarial fever owing to slowness of absorption. The results obtained by Cohen37are interesting from two points of view: they show the conclusions arrived at by an advocate of Quinine injections, and they were obtained by the use of Quinine urea which was so strongly recommended by Giemsa and Schaumann. Cohen states that 15 grains of Quinine urea, if injected during or within four hours after a paroxysm of malarial fever, were readily absorbed and procured freedom from fever for a period of from six to thirteen days: he, however, admits that Quinine by the mouth is "equally efficacious". His statements that the Quinine urea was readily absorbed from the point of injection and that freedom from fever was obtained for from six to thirteen days are hardly consistent. The evidence, so far, casting doubt upon the alleged therapeutic value of the subcutaneous administration of Quinine can be summarised as follows:28 the advocates of hypodermic injection, the diminution in Quinine excretion is attributed to greater cleavage of Quinine in the body after absorption from the seat of injection. The results of different experimenters vary considerably,29 Table VII. A.30 C.31 E.32 With the object of getting some idea as to the relative promptness of action attained by the different methods of administration, the time of appearance of the various toxic symptoms in each experiment was carefully noted,33 closely with that given in this table that probably all the results tabulated here hold good approximately for man. Other reasons that justify the applica- tion of this table to man are the following:34 Subcutaneous Quinine infusions being debarred, Quinine by the mouth. with or soon after meals suggests itself as particularly suited for the treatment of malaria in which sporulation is irregular, and also for prophylaxis. Quinine by the mouth while fasting would be serviceable two or three hours before a paroxysm where sporulation recurred regularly. In the curve representing absorption when Quinine is given with meals (absorption in such a case according to Marianil3 is at its height between the sixth and twelfth hours) it will be noticed that absorption from the fifth to the thirteenth hour, i.e., for eight hours, is higher than it ever reaches when an or- dinary Quinine hypodermic injection containing the same dose of Quinine is given. It follows therefore that Quinine given with (or soon after) meals three times a day every eight hours, will keep the amount of Quinine in the body at a higher level than one could ever hope to do by giving similar doses of Quinine hypodermically in the usual concentrated solutions. Local and Post=mortem Changes found in the Guinea=pigs used for the Minimum-Lethal Dose Experiments. A few minutes after injection into the subcutaneous connective tissue, the skin overlying the injection become discoloured and yellow, and soon an area of skin corresponding to the size of the injection had undergone necrosis 35 ing cases both of oral and subcutaneous administration, hæmorrhagic erosions were found in the stomach,36 (2) Thrombosis.37 leucocytes, possibly hours or, as stated by Tarozzi, months after injection. Factors which favour multiplication of tetanus bacilli in the body, according to Vaillard,42 are38 Intramuscular Injections. Intramuscular injections in no way differ essentially from subcutaneous. Possibly absorption is slightly more energetic owing to a more active blood and lymph circulation and less pain is occasioned, but the same destructive and necrotic changes occur as in the subcutaneous proper. Kleine22 reports that the tissues after subcutaneous injection, especially if intramuscular, look severely damaged for a long time after injection; and Mariani 13made the same observations in his rabbit experiments (intramuscular injections). These inju- rious effects are hidden from view: necrosis does not reach the skin, so no ulcera- tion follows. Paralysis, however, whether from thrombosis of blood vessels or from direct destruction of nerve fibres, is more liable to occur after intramuscular injections. Quinine solutions so dilute as 1 in 150 and containing sufficient Quinine to be of any therapeutic value could not possibly be injected intramuscularly. Such solutions would therefore have to be injected into the subcutaneous connective tissue, as a Quinine infusion. The rapid and thorough absorption that would follow such a Quinine infusion is more than counterbalanced by the large ulcer that would infallibly result. Further, we have in the intra- venous injection of Quinine a method which will give still greater Quinine concentration in the blood without any of the special dangers of Quinine infusions. Intravenous Injections of Quinine. The intravenous method of administering Quinine was introduced by Bacelli,49 who used a solution containing Quinine hydrochloride, 1; sodium chloride, .075; distilled water, 10 parts. This solution, however, the strength of which is about 1 in 10, did not find favour, and certainly the serum compati- bility experiments would lead one to expect the introduction of this concen- trated solution intravenously to be attended with grave danger. The addition of sodium chloride does not increase the compatibility of Quinine hydrochloride with ox blood-serum. If a Quinine salt is to be safely introduced intravenously, it must be in a dilution of 1 in 150 at least. Preferably the Quinine salt (e.g . about seven grains of Quinine bi-hydrochloride) should be dissolved in two or three pints of normal saline. In this dilution there is no danger of thrombosis or preci- pitation: the toxins in the blood are also diluted and their elimination favoured 39 should recommend the substitution of Quinine alkaloid for Quinine bi-hydro- chloride; as the alkaloid delays hæmolysis, while the acid salts of Quinine are strong hemolytic agents.50 By this method of administration the special dangers of the subcutaneous injection, of Quinine are avoided. There is no danger of necrosis, paralysis, ulceration or thrombosis. It is also very doubtful if the introduction of tetanus spores with the intravenous Quinine infusion, in a bulk of two or three pints, would produce any harm. Pure tetanus cultures introduced into the blood are soon destroyed unless conditions favouring their multiplication are present.41 Of the five factors already mentioned which would favour their multiplication, only one40 with serum; so that the figures given are well within the actual limits of safety. Quinine alkaloid in doses up to .03 gramme per kilogramme of animal weight, dissolved in 33 per cent. alcohol (in normal saline) was injected intra- venously in rabbits without any ill-effects being observed to follow. A dose of .03 gramme per kilogramme of animal weight would correspond to a close of 2.1 grammes (32½ grains) of Quinine alkaloid to man. The injec- tions, moreover, were not made slowly but as quickly as with any other solution. Quinine alkaloid is no doubt precipitated as it enters the vein, but it is in such a fine state of sub-division that, even if it could reach capillaries. before being re-dissolved in the blood-serum, it could cause no obstruction. In passing, it may be noted that, by first dissolving Quinine alkaloid in a minute amount of absolute alcohol and then adding normal saline to make a dilution of 1 of Quinine alkaloid in 2,000 or 5,000, a rapid and easy solution of the alkaloid is obtained for intravenous infusion. To dissolve Quinine alkaloid directly in water or saline is a very slow and laborious process. Rectal Administration of Quinine. Quinine enemata.41 much smaller still, for peristalsis is poor and the Quinine is merely in sus- pension. These results have been confirmed by Flamini23 who, after an enema containing two grammes of Quinine tannate, found 2.65 per cent. only elimi- nated in the first 24 hours; and also by Giemsa and Schaumann 5 who after giving an enema containing one gramme of Quinine alkaloid with mucilage of acacia and tincture of opium found only 5.177 per cent. eliminated in the urine in the first 24 hours. From these results Giemsa and Schaumann infer that Quinine enemata are little suited for the treatment of malaria, because42 SUMMARY OF CHIEF RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS. Solutions of Quinine Salts and Moulds. The sulphate is not the only salt of Quinine that is liable to infection with moulds, and the moulds which infect solutions of Quinine salts are not limited to the genus Penicillium. Quinine is not so inimical to the higher fungi as to the lower yeast forms. Miscibility of Quinine Salts with Ox Blood=serum. The salts of Quinine most soluble in water, even in a dilution of 1 in 100 are not miscible with ox blood-serum. The three salts, Quinine bi- hydrochloride, Quinine bi-hydrobromide and Quinine urea, most frequently used for subcutaneous injection and in the dilution most frequently employed, mixed with an equal volume of ox blood-serum, in a few minutes at 17°C. result in the formation of a solid gelatinous mass. Quinine bi-hydrobromide even in a dilution of 1 in 20 produces a mass of curdy consistence. Quinine salts in the dilutions usually employed are quite unsuited for hypodermic use. The deposit which forms in vitro on adding a concentrated solution of Quinine salt to blood serum seems to contain Quinine in altered form, oxidised and combined with proteid. Mixing equal volumes of blood-serum and Quinine hydrochloride 1 in 20, it is found that slightly over half the Quinine is in solution and slightly under half is contained in the deposit. The greater the dilution of Quinine salt, the less the deposit that forms on mixing with blood-serum; and therefore presumably the greater the amount of Quinine that remains in solution. Solubility of Quinine Alkaloid in Ox Blood=serum and in Ox Bile. Quinine alkaloid is soluble 1 in 625 of ox blood-serum, i.e., nearly three times as soluble in ox blood-serum as in ordinary water. Quinine alkaloid is soluble 1 in 183 of ox bile, i.e., about nine times as. soluble in ox bile as in ordinary water. Absorption of Quinine. Too much reliance must not be placed on the amount of Quinine elimina- tion in the urine as a gauge of the amount of Quinine absorbed, especially when different modes of Quinine administration are being compared. Lethality varies directly with thoroughness of absorption and is a reliable measure of the amount of absorption when comparing different modes of Quinine administra- tion.
43 Oral Administration.44 As regards guinea-pigs, the lethality (and therefore absorbability) of Quinine by the several modes of administration is in the following order, be- ginning with the most lethal mode of administration: (1) subcutaneous injec- tion in extreme dilution (1 in 150), (2) oral administration during fasting, (3) oral administration with or immediately after food, and (4) subcutaneous injection in the strengths generally used for hypodermic injection (1 in 2 and 1 in 8). The oral administration of Quinine also affords more prompt thera- peutic action of the alkaloid than does the subcutaneous, the subcutaneous injec- tion of Quinine in extreme dilution (1 in 150) being excluded for clinical reasons. Further, subcutaneous injections are followed by various compli- cations and mutilation. Intramuscular injections are attended by the same drawbacks as subcutaneous proper; and although ulceration rarely occurs, they are more liable than the latter to be followed by thrombosis and paralysis. The harmony between the results of various observations on man and those of my experiments on guinea-pigs justify the inference of general applic- ability45 and safely in rabbits, and without any subsequent ill-effects46 32, 1903. 27Wood's Therapeutics, 12th Edition, p. 555. 28Nocht, Quinine Treatment in Malaria, Verhandlungen des Deutsch. KolonialNo 41. (NEW SERIES) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA QUININE AND ITS SALTS: THEIR SOLUBILITY AND ABSORBABILITY BY CAPTAIN A. C. MAOGILCHRIST, M.A., M.D., M. R. C. P., I. M. S. (Edited by the Director General, Indian Medical Service.) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75034339.tif] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1911 Price annas 9 or 10d.
