IP/QB.10 m.91.b No. 36. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. OBSERVATIONS ON RABIES: WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO AN ATROPHIC FORM OF THE DISEASE OCCURRING IN ANIMALS. BY MAJOR G. LAMB, M.D., I.M.S. AND CAPTAIN A. G. MCKENDRICK, M.B., I. M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75032531.tif] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1909 Price Annas 8 or 9d.
No. 36. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. OBSERVATIONS ON RABIES: WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO AN ATROPHIC FORM OF THE DISEASE OCCURRING IN ANIMALS. BY MAJOR G. LAMB, M.D., I.M.S. AND CAPTAIN A. G. MCKENDRICK, M.B., I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75032543.tif] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75032543.tif] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1909
Agents for the Sale of Books Published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. HENRY S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, & 9, Pall Mall, London. E. A. ARNOLD, 41 & 43, Maddox Street, Bond Street, London, W. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, London, W. C. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. KEGAN, PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., 43 Gerrard Street, Soho, London, W. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, London, S. W. BERNARD QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street , W. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 & 51, Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON, BELL & Co., Cambridge. T. FISHER UNWIN, 1, Adelphi Terrace, London, W.C. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E.C. ON THE CONTINENT. R. FRIEDLÄNDER & SOHN,11, Carltrasse, Berlin, N.W. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. RUDOLF HAUPT, Halle A. S. Germany. IN INDIA. TRACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. S. K. LAHIRI & Co., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & Co., Madras. G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. S. MURTHY & Co., Madras. THOMPSON & Co., Madras. TEMPLE & Co., Madras. COMBRIDGE & Co., Madras. P. R. RAMA IYER & Co., Madras. A. R. PILLAI & Co., Trivandrum. THACKER & Co., LD., Bombay. A. J. COMBRIDGE & Co., Bombay. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & Co., Bombay. SUNDER PANDURANG, Bombay. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay. GOPAL NARAYAN & Co., Bombay. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazair Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-Am Press, Lahore. A. CHAND & Co., Lahore, Punjab. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission Press, Rangoon. A. M. & J. FERGUSON, Ceylon.
List of numbers of Scientific Memoirs by Officers of Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India (New Series) published previous to the present issue. No. 1. Standardisation of Calmette's Anti-Venomous Serum with Pure Cobra Venom: the Deterioration of this Serum through keeping in India, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 2. Malaria in India, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No. 3. Some Observations on the Poison of Russell's Viper (Daboia Russellii), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 5 or 6d. No. 4. On the Action of the Venoms of the Cobra and of the Daboia on the Red Blood corpuscles and on the blood plasma, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 5. Specificity of Anti-Venomous Sera, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 6. First Report on the Anti-Malarial Operations in Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 7. Some Observations on the Poison of the Banded Krait (Bungarus Fasciatus), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 8. A Preliminary Report on a Parasite found in Patients suffering from Enlargement of the Spleen in India, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No. 9. Second Report of the Anti-Malarial Operations at Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Lieu- tenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 10. Specificity of Anti-Venomous Sera (Second Communication), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 11. On a Parasite found in persons suffering from Enlargement of the Spleen in India-Second Report, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price Rs. 2 or 3s. No. 12. On the Morphology, Teratology, and Diclinism of the Flowers of Cannabis, by Major D. Prain, I.M.S. Price As. 14 or 1s. 4d. No. 13. Oriental or Delhi Sore, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 14. On a Parasite found in the White Corpuscles of the Blood of Dogs, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 15. On a Parasite found in persons suffering from Enlargement of the Spleen in India-Third Report, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I. M.S. Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 16. The Specificity of Anti-Venomous Sera with special reference to a Serum prepared with the Venom of the Daboia Russellii, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 6 or 7d. No. 17. Snake-Venoms in relation to Hæmolysis, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 6 or 7d. No. 18. Hæmogregarina Gerbilli, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 19. On Kala Azar, Malaria and Malarial Cachexia, by Captain S. P. James, M.B., I.M.S. Price Re. 1-4 or 1s. 11d. No. 20. Serum-Therapy of Plague in India; Reports by Mr. W. M. Haffkine, C.I.E., and various Officers of the Plague Research Laboratory, Bombay, by Lieutenant- Colonel W. B. Bannerman, M.D., B.Sc., F.R.C.S., I.M.S. Price As. 14 or 1s. 4d.
2 No. 21. On the Standardisation of Anti-Typhoid Vaccine, by Captain George Lamb, M.D., I.M.S . (Director, Pasteur Institute of India), and Captain W. B. C. Forster, M.B., D.P.H., I.M.S. Price As. 6 or 7d. No. 22. Mediterranean Fever in India: Isolation of the Micrococcus Melitensis, by Captain George Lamb, M.D., I.M.S., and Assistant Surgeon M. Kesava Pai, M.B., C.M. (Madras). Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 23. The Anatomy and Histology of Ticks, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price Rs.3 or 4s. 6d. No. 24. On a Parasite found in the White Corpuscles of the blood of Palm Squirrels, by Captain W. S. Patton, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 25. On the importance of Larval Characters in the Classification of Mosquitoes, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 26. Leucocytozoon Canis, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 27. Preliminary Report on the Development of the Leishman-Donovan Body in the Bed Bug, by Captain W. S. Patton, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 28. The Sexual Cycle of Leucocytozoon Canis in the Tick, by Captain S. R. Chris- tophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 29. Piroplasma Canis and its Cycle in the Tick, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price Rs. 2 or 3s. No. 30. The Theory and Practice of Anti-Rabic Immunisation, by Captain W. F. Harvey, M.B., I.M.S., and Captain Anderson McKendrick, MB., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d, No. 31. The Development of the Leishman-Donovan Parasite in Cimex RotundatusOBSERVATIONS ON RABIES: WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO AN ATROPHIC FORM OF THE DISEASE OCCURRING IN ANIMALS CONTENTS. Page. I. 2 on rabbits in the laboratory it varies much in virulence according to the animal from which it is obtained. The term "fixed virus" is used to denote a virus which by passage through a series of animals has become of such a strength that the incubation period of the disease after subdural inoculation of the virus is practically always the same and cannot be shortened by further passages. As a rule this term is applied to a virus which has become of definitely short incubation period by passage through rabbits, but, as we shall see, we may also have a fixed dog virus, that is to say, a virus which has become fixed by passage through dogs. Also, it is to be noted that, as the rabies virus is principally found in the central nervous system of animals dead of the disease, it has come about that the term "virus" is sometimes used to denote the central nervous system or portions thereof containing the virus. Thus for the sake of brevity we often talk of an emulsion of virus, when we really mean an emulsion of a portion of the central nervous system containing the virus. No ambiguity, however, has been allowed to occur owing to this use of the word. II.3 a dog which had died of furious rabies in Meerut. When this virus was inocu- lated subdurally into a rabbit the incubation period of the disease was 11 days. Before the first passage was made the virus had been kept in glycerine for three weeks. A reference to Table I of the protocols will show that in all 13 passages were made, the first three by subdural and the remaining ten by intraocular inocula- tions. All the dogs developed furious rabies and died very shortly after the onset of symptoms. The points, worthy of note, which emerge from a study of the table, are as follows4 number and small in size. In the dog of the 6th passage they could not be found nor were they demonstrable in any of the succeeding animals, although careful search was made in every instance through well stained specimens. It would appear, therefore, that the same thing happens when the virus of the street is passed through dogs as occurs when it is passed through rabbits. We have searched for Negri bodies, but without success, in the central nervous system of the passage fixed virus rabbits. Further, Schiffmann has found that by passing the virus of the street through rabbits, Negri bodies soon disappear. He looks upon this disappearance as a means of deciding whether one is dealing with a definitely fixed virus, or not. SUMMARY. A virus originally obtained from a dog in the street was passed through a series of 13 dogs, by subdural inoculation or by intraocular injection. An increase of virulence resulted. The virulence of the virus was also increased for the rabbit. Negri bodies were demonstrable in certain cells of the central nervous system of the dogs of the first few passages, but not in the same cells of the animals of the later passages. III.5 ginal animal, that is to say, becoming emaciated and dying without showing any tremor or paralysis. In Protocol II several examples of this type of rabies have been set forth. The first two observations (Table 2) relate to rabbits which had received sub- cutaneously a dose of fixed rabbit virus. In the first example (a) slow progressive emaciation was observed followed by death 58 days after the inoculation. The passage rabbit from this animal also became gradually thinner without developing paralysis, and died 27 days after infection. The disease, therefore, had run a more rapid course than was the case with the first animal. The second passage rabbit showed typical symptoms of rabies,6 January, 1908, was noted by the middle of March to be very thin and weak. It then gradually got better and by July was plump and well. It is impossible to say whether these were true infections of rabies or not. Neither of the above two rabbits was immune to a subsequent subdural infection of fixed rabbit virus. They were inoculated subdurally each receiving 0.2 c.c. of a thick emulsion of fixed rabbit virus. They developed hydrophobia after an incubation period each of 7 days and died on the 12th day. Finally, the question arises if this form of rabies, characterised chiefly by progressive emaciation, occurs in nature amongst dogs or other animals. We have had reported to us several cases of sickness in dogs, in which the symptoms closely resembled those described above in rabbits. In some of these cases the experimental proof of rabies was obtained after the death of the animal, but only one dog which might be said to have suffered from the type of disease we are now considering, has come under our personal observation. Its history was as follows7 IV.8 230th from the dog, the incubation period in a rabbit after injection subdurally being, as a rule, six days, death taking place on the l0th day. From a portion of the central nervous system of the rabbit an emulsion of definite strength was prepared and from this emulsion various dilutions were made as required. The amount of emulsion injected was always made up to 5 c. c. Great care was taken that the muscles were not penetrated and that the injections were really made into the subcutaneous tissues. The results of these experiments are set forth in Tables 4, 5 and 6 of the- protocols. Table 4 refers to guinea pigs, which, it will be seen, readily develop rabies even when a very small quantity of virus is injected. With large amounts of virus, however, the incubation period is on an average somewhat shorter than with small quantities. Table 5 refers to rabbits, which received the same amounts of virus as were used in the case of the guinea-pig experiments. It is first to be noted that rabbits can be infected fairly easily by subcutane- ous injection of this virus, 14 out of 18 in the present series developing the disease. Secondly, they would appear to be as susceptible to small amounts of virus as to large quantities when the inoculations are made under the skin. Thirdly, it is interesting to observe that the disease which follows subcutaneous injection into rabbits is, as a rule, a more or less chronic one, without any of the usual symptoms of rabies. In some instances, e.g., Rabbits 1, 10, 11 and 18, the animals showed tremor and paresis at the end of a definite incubation period, but, as a rule, the onset of the disease could not be determined and death, preceded by progressive emaciation, followed a considerable time after the infection. We have already referred to this type of the disease and have endeavoured to show that it is true rabies. Finally, a study of the table will show that it cannot be said that the duration of the disease was at all proportional to the amount of virus injected. The last series of experiments refers to monkeys. In Table 6 are put down the details relating to three monkeys which were injected subcutaneously, each with a considerable quantity of fixed rabbit virus. Two of these animals died of rabies, one after 48 days and the other after 76 days, that is to say, in each instance after a prolonged period of latency. It is interesting to note, vide Table 6, that although these monkeys were injected with fixed virus which gave an incubation period of 6 days when injected subdurally into rabbits, two rabbits inoculated subdurally with thick emulsions of the medullas of the monkeys did not develop the disease till after 18 and 31 days respectively. Both these rabbits showed symptoms typical of rabies. Therefore, by a single passage through the monkey, infected subcu-
9 taneously, the incubation period of the fixed rabbit virus had been greatly pro- longed for the rabbit. This observation is of importance in connection with the finding that the virus taken from the central nervous system of men who have died of rabies in spite of anti-rabic treatment has nearly always given on subdural inoculation into rabbits an incubation period considerably longer than that of the fixed rabbit virus. On this evidence it has been concluded that the virus which has caused the death of these persons is the dog virus of the street, inoculated at the time of the bite, and not the fixed rabbit virus used for the preparation of the vaccine. Our present observations in the monkey show that this method of argument is not justifiable. B.10 have now to add to this observation two other series of experiments which have reference to the susceptibility of monkeys towards fixed rabbit virus. In one series (Table 7) three monkeys were inoculated intraperitoneally with 0.5 gramme of fixed virus. Two of these animals developed rabies with a comparatively short incubation period, namely, 15 and 16 days respectively. In the other series (Table 8) three monkeys were inoculated subdurally with 0.003 gramme (0.3 cc. of a 1 per cent. emulsion) of fixed rabbit virus, which gave in the rabbit after subdural inoculation an incubation period of 6 days. It is seen from the table that all these three monkeys developed rabies, with incubation periods of 8 and 9 and 10 days respectively. It would appear, then, that monkeys are susceptible by all ordinary channels to a virus which is separated from the dog by many passages through the rabbit. Dog virus does not, therefore, become modified as regards its infectivity for monkeys, by passage through the rabbit, as tested by these methods. We have already seen, that there are certain facts which suggest that the virus obtained by passage through the rabbit is, at least qualitatively, the same thing as the virus of the dog. We have now brought forward further facts which favour this view. It is necessary, therefore, before quitting this part of our sub- ject, to bring together the evidence which supports this hypothesis. It is stated as follows11 the subcutaneous tissues. In connection with this hypothesis attention may be drawn to the fact that fine emulsions of the medulla containing fixed virus, especially if dilute, may very soon completely lose their infective power when kept at 37º C. (vide Table 12). It would appear as if separation from living nervous tissue was sufficient to bring about the rapid death of the virus when kept at body temperature. SUMMARY. 1. It has been shown that it is comparatively easy to infect guinea-pigs by the subcutaneous injection of fixed rabbit virus even in small quantity. They are equally susceptible to subcutaneous inoculation of virulent dog virus. 2. Rabbits also are susceptible to injections of fixed rabbit virus under the skin. The disease which results is often of a more or less chronic nature, mainly characterised by progressive emaciation without any definite paralysis. 3. Monkeys also can be infected by subcutaneous injection of fixed rabbit virus. The incubation period is much prolonged in these cases. It was found that passage through a single monkey may greatly prolong the incubation period of fixed rabbit virus for rabbits. Monkeys are also susceptible to the subdural and intraperitoneal injection of fixed rabbit virus. The incubation period after subdural infection is only slightly longer than in the case of the rabbit similarly infected. 4. Certain observations are put forward which point to the conclusion that a virus fixed by passage through the rabbit has the same properties and is identical in character with street virus, exalted in virulence by passage through the dog. V.12 difference in the incubation periods between the treated and untreated animals could be made out. In the second series of observations (Table 11) six monkeys each received subcutaneously a different amount of fixed rabbit virus, varying from 0.5 to 0.0015 gramme. Twenty-three days after this inoculation each animal, as well as an untreated control, was injected subdurally with a small amount of fixed rabbit virus. As a result all the monkeys died of rabies and again there was no indication of any one of them having developed even a slight degree of immunity. SUMMARY. In the hope that it might be possible to curtail the lengthy course of treatment now in use, attempts were made to immunise monkeys by means of a single injection of fixed rabbit virus under the skin. In one series of experi- ments the amount of virus injected was varied. The animals were tested twenty-three days after the inoculation by giving subdurally a small amount of fixed rabbit virus. All the monkeys died of rabies and it would seem that no degree of immunity had developed. VI13 his opinion shows that these substances could be demonstrated in the blood of patients, as soon as 2 or 3 days after the completion of treatment. In seeking for a technique which would serve our purpose we were first met with the difficulty which arises from the fact, well known to those who have worked with rabies virus, that emulsions prepared in the same proportions from the nervous systems of different animals injected with fixed virus may vary somewhat in virulence. Further, it has been observed by us that emulsions of rabies virus kept at 37° C soon lose their infective power and that this loss is of a progressive nature. This point is illustrated in the experiments set forth in Table 12. These experiments consisted in keeping two emulsions of rabies virus of different strengths in the incubator at 37° C. and testing their infectivity at varying intervals by subdural inoculation into rabbits. The emulsions of strengths 1 in 200 and 1 in 1,600 were made from the medulla of a rabbit dead in 10 days after the subdural injection of fixed rabbit virus, the test dose being 0.4 c. c. It will be seen from the table that even after having been kept for one hour at 37°C. both emulsions had diminished considerably in infectivity and that the loss was progressive until at the end of 24 hours they were no longer infective. Special precautions had therefore to be taken in order to guard against these two sources of fallacy. These precautions consisted, first, in making each day for each series of experiments a series of control experiments in which normal salt solution was substituted for the sera which were being tested; and secondly, in keeping the mixtures only for either 1 or 2 hours at room temperature. Finally, in order to arrive at a quantitative estimation of the bactericidal power of the sera, if there was any, each was tested against several emulsions of the virus of different strengths. The technique employed was as follows14 various dilutions of the virus with an equal amount of salt solution instead of serum, allowing these mixtures to stand under the same conditions as the serum mixtures and then injecting 0.4 c. c. of each subdurally into a rabbit. It is perhaps necessary to state that the method of anti-rabic treatment which was used for the patients whose blood was tested was that elaborated by Högyes of Budapest. Six series of experiments were made. They are briefly stated as follows15 19, 20 and 21 of the protocols. These observations were made in order to ascertain if any bactericidal action towards rabies virus could be demonstrated in the sera of a few normal animals, namely, guinea-pigs, rabbits and monkeys. As a rule the sera were tested against fixed rabbit virus, but in one series with rabbit and monkey sera, dog virus was used. The same quantitative method as we have already described was employed. A study of the tables will at once show that in no instance could any bacteri- cidal action of the sera be demonstrated. SUMMARY. Experiments were carried out with the object of making a quantitative estimation of the bactericidal action, if such existed, of the sera both of patients undergoing anti-rabic treatment and of others who had completed the treatment. Patients were selected at various stages. The earliest had been under treatment for 9 days, and the latest had completed treatment 20 days previously. Our experiments failed to demonstrate the presence of bactericidal action towards rabies virus in any of the sera. The sera of normal guinea-pigs, rabbits, monkeys and men were tested in the same way. The results were also negative
16 Protocols. NO. I.17 Protocols. No. II.18 Protocols. 2.19 NO. III.20 Protocols. Animal. Amount of virus. * Result. REMARKS. Guinea-pig 9 0.001 gramme 10 days 11 " ,, 10 Ditto 14 " 17 ,, Five out of six guinea-pigs died of rabies. ,, 11 Ditto Remained well Two showed no definite symptoms except loss of weight. ,, 12 Ditto 11 days 15 " Average incubation period in 3 cases =11.6 days ,, 13 Ditto ... Average period between injection and death in 5 cases=13.4 days. l0 days ,, 14 Ditto ... 14 days ,, 15 0.0001 gramme . ... 41 days ,, 16 Ditto Died from an intercurrent disease. ,, 17 Ditto 27 days Five out of six guinea-pigs died of rabies. 29 " ,, 18 Ditto 16 ,, One showed no definite symptoms. 17 ,, Average incubation period in 4 cases= 30 days. ,, 19 Ditto 18 " Average interval between injection and death = 34.6 days. 22 " ,, 20 Ditto 59 ,, 64 " *The upper number= Incubation period. The lower number=Interval between injection and death. B. Table 5.21 Protocols. The same technique was used as has been described for the similar series of experi- ments in guinea-pigs. Animal. Amount of virus. *Result. REMARKS. Rabbit 1 0.01 gramme 13 days 15 " " 2 Ditto ... 68 days Four rabbits out of six died of rabies. Three showed the peculiar emaciating type of the disease. " 3 Ditto ... 22 days The interval between infection and death varied from 15 to 93 days with a mean of 49.5 days. " 4 Ditto ... 93 days " 5 Ditto Recovered " 6 Ditto " " 7 0.001 gramme ... 63 days " 8 Ditto ... 95 days " 9 Ditto ... Five rabbits out of six died of rabies Three developed the emaciating type of the disease. 52 days " 10 Ditto 20 " The interval between infection and death varied from 23 to 95 days, the mean being 54.6 days. 23 " " 11 Ditto 37 " 40 " " 12 Ditto Recovered *The upper number= Incubation period. The lower number= Interval between injection and death.
22 Protocols. Animal. Amount of virus. *Result. REMARKS. Rabbit 13 0.0001 gramme ... 84 days " 14 Ditto Recovered " 15 Ditto ... 58 days Five rabbits out of six died of rabies. Four developed the chronic emaciating form. " 16 Ditto ... 113 days The interval between infection and death varied from 21 to 113 days, the mean being 66.4 days. " 17 Ditto ... 56 days " 18 Ditto 18 " 21 " * The upper number= Incubation period. The lower number= Interval between injection and death C.23 Protocols. 2. Table 7. Intraperitoneal inoculation. The virus used was the same as that which was employed in the previous series of experiments. Each animal received intraperitoneally 5 c.c. of a 10 per cent. emulsion. Animal. Amount of virus. Result. REMARKS. Monkey 1 0.5 gramme Died on 113th day Rabbit inoculated subdurally with emulsion of medulla, remained well. ,, 2 Ditto Developed para- lysis on 15th day died on 17th day. ...... ,, 3 Ditto Developed tremor and para- lysis on 16th day, died on 18th day. ...... 3. Table 8. Subdural inoculation. The virus was the same as that which was employed in the previous series of experi- ments. Each animal received subdurally 0.3 c. c. of a 1 per cent. emulsion. Animal. Amount of virus. Result. Monkey 1 0.003 gramme Paralysis on 8th day, died on 13th day. ,, 2 Ditto Paralysis on 10th day, died on 13th day. ,, 3 Ditto Paralysis on 9th day, died on 11th day. D.24 Protocols. Animal. Amount of virus. * Result. REMARKS. Guinea-pig 1 0.01 gramme 16 days 17 " " 2 Ditto 8 " 11 25 Protocols. Animal. Amount of virus. *Result. REMARKS. Guinea-pig 16 0.00001 gramme 13 days 14 ,, ,, 17 Ditto Died, not rabies Two guinea-pigs out of five died of rabies. ,, 18 Ditto Ditto Average incubation period= 18 days. ,, 19 Ditto 23 days Average interval between injection and death=19.5 days. 25 26 Protocols. Animal. Amount of virus injected subcutaneously. Amount of virus injected subdurally. * Result. Monkey 3 0.5 gramme 0.003 gramme 11 days. 12 ,, ,, 4 Ditto Ditto 8 27 Protocols. Animal. Amount of virus injected subcutaneously. Amount of virus injected subdurally. *Result. Monkey 3 0.05 gramme 0.003 gramme 8 days. 9 28 Protocols. Animal. Strength of dilution. Period of time kept at 37° C. *Result. REMARKS. Rabit 3 1-200 4 hours ... Emaciated; sub-passage gave rabies. 25 days 29 Protocols. The virus used was fixed rabbit virus30 Protocols. 2. TABLE 14. (a) Pooled sera31 Protocols. 4. TABLE 16. (a) Serum of patient taken 5 days after completion of treatment. (b) Serum of patient taken 10 days after completion of treatment. (c) Salt solution. Mixtures were left for two hours at room temperature. Dilution of emulsion. Result of inoculation into rabbit. (a) (b) (c) 1 in 50 10 days Recovered 8 days. 16 32 Protocols. 6. TABLE 18. (a) Serum of patient taken 20 days after completion of treatment. (b) Salt solution. Mixtures were left for two hours at room temperature. Dilution of emulsion. Result of inoculation into rabbit. (a) (b) 1 in 50 9 days 7 days. 14 33 2. TABLE 20. (a) Monkey serum. (b) Salt solution. The mixtures were left for two hours at room temperature. Dilution of emulsion. Result of inoculation into rabbit. (a) (b) 1 in 100 8 days 8 days 10 34 REFERENCES. Babes and Cerchez (1891): Ann. de l' Inst. Pasteur; vol. V, p. 625. Babes and Talasescu (1894): Ann. de l' Inst. Pasteur; vol. VIII, p. 435. Bardach (1888): Ann. de l' Inst. Pasteur; vol. II, p. 9. Blasi and Travali (1894): Ann. de l' Inst. Pasteur; vol. VIII, p. 339. Helman (1889), Ann. de l' Inst. Pasteur; vol. III, p. 15. Krauss and Kreissl (1902): Central. f. Bact. Orig. B. XXXII, p. 810. Marie (1904): Bul. de l' Inst. Pasteur; vol. II, p. 652. " (1905): Ann. de l' Inst. Pasteur; vol. XIX, p. 1. " (1906): Bul. de l' Inst. Pasteur; vol. IV, p. 183. " (1907): Bul. de l' Inst. Pasteur; vol. V, p. 404. " (1907): C. R. Soc. Biol. Vol. LXIII, p. 293. Nitsch (1905): Bul. de l' Inst. Pasteur; vol. III, p. 300. Remlinger (1906), Bul. de l' Inst. Pasteur; vol. IV, p. 183. " (1907): Bul. de l' Inst. Pasteur; vol. V, p. 587. Harvey and McKendrick (1907): Theory and Practice of Anti-rabic Immunisation. Scientific Memoirs, Government of India, No. 30. Semple(1908): The Lancet; vol. CLXXIV, p. 1611.
No. 36. (NEW SERIES.) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA. OBSERVATIONS ON RABIES: WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO AN ATROPHIC FORM OF THE DISEASE OCCURRING IN ANIMALS. BY MAJOR G. LAMB, M.D., I.M.S. AND CAPTAIN A. G. MC KENDRICK, M.B., I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75032687.tif] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1909 Price Annas 8 or 9d.
