IP/QB. 10 M.91.b. (NEW SERIES.) No. 45. SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA Epidemic Dropsy Calcutta BEING THE FIRST REPORT OF AN ENQUIRY CARRIED OUT BY MAJOR E. D. W. GREIG, M.D., D.Sc,, I.M.S., Under the direction of the Director, Central, Research Institute, Kasauli ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058267.tif] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1911 Price Re. 1 and annas 4 or 2s.
S.12. a. M 91b
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058273.tif] 3943135
X (NEW SERIES.) No. 45. SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta BEING THE FIRST REPORT OF AN ENQUIRY CARRIED OUT BY MAJOR E. D. W. GREIG, M.D., D.Sc., I.M.S., Under the direction of the Director, Central Research Institute, Kasauli ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058279.tif] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1911
Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. Mr. E. A. ARNOLD, 41 and 43, Maddox Street, Bond Street, London, W. Messrs. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, W.C. Messrs. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., 43, Gerrard Street, Soho, London, W. Mr. BERNARD QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, W. Messrs. P. S. KING & SON, 2 and 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster. Messrs. H. S. KING & CO., 65, Cornhill, and 9, Pall Mall, London. Messrs. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, London, S.W. Mr. T. FISHER UNWIN, 1, Adelphi Terrace, London, W.C. Messrs. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E.C. Mr. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 51, Broad Street, Oxford. Messrs. DEIGHTON BELL & Co., Cambridge. Messrs. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W.C. ON THE CONTINENT. Mr. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Mr. KARL HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. Messrs. R. FRIEDLÄNDER & SOHN, Berlin, W.N., Carlstrasse, 11. Mr. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. Mr. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. IN INDIA. Messrs. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. Messrs. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. Messrs. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. Messrs. S. K. LAHIRI & Co., Calcutta. Messrs. B. BANERJEE & Co., Calcutta. The Calcutta School Book and Useful Litera- ture Society, 1, Wellington Square, Calcutta. Messrs. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras. Messrs. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & Co., Madras. Messrs. G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. Messrs. S. MURTHY & Co., Madras. Messrs. THOMPSON & Co., Madras. Messrs. TEMPLE & Co., Madras. Messrs. COMBRIDGE & Co., Madras. Messrs. P. R. RAMA IYER & Co., Madras. Messrs. THACKER & Co., LD., Bombay. Messrs. A. J. COMBRIDGE & Co., Bombay. Messrs. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & Co., Bombay. Mrs. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay. Mr. SUNDER PANDURANG, Bombay. Messrs. GOPAL NARAYAN & Co., Bombay. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission Press, Rangoon. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid- i-Am Press, Lahore and Calcutta. Mr. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazair Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. Messrs. A. CHAND & Co., Punjab. Messrs. A. M. & J. FERGUSON, Ceylon. Babu S. C. TALUKDAR, Proprietor, Students and Company, Cooch Behar.
List of numbers of Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India (New Series) published previous to the present issue. No. 1. Standardisation of Calmette's Anti-Venomous Serum with Pure Cobra Venom: the Deterioration of this Serum through keeping in India, by Captain G. Lamb, I. M. S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 2. Malaria in India, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No. 3. Some Observations on the Poison of Russell's Viper (Daboia Russellii), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 5 or 6d. No. 4. On the Action of the Venoms of the Cobra and of the Daboia on the Red Blood corpuscles and on the blood plasma, by Captain G. Lamb, I. M. S . Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 5. Specificity of Anti-Venomous Sera, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 3 or 4d. No: 6. First Report on the Anti-Malarial Operations in Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 7. Some Observations on the Poison of the Banded Krait (Bungarus Fasciatus), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 8. A Preliminary Report on a Parasite found in Patients suffering from Enlargement of the Spleen in India, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No. 9. Second Report of the Anti-Malarial Operations at Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 10. Specificity of Anti-Venomous Sera (Second Communication), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 11. On a Parasite found in persons suffering from Enlargement of the Spleen in India2 No. 21. On the Standardisation of Anti-Typhoid Vaccine, by Captain George Lamb, M.D., I. M. S. (Director, Pasteur Institute of India), and Captain W. B. C. Forster, M.B., D.P.H., I.M.S. Price As. 6 or 7d. No. 22. Mediterranean Fever in India: Isolation of the Micrococcus Melitensis, by Captain George Lamb, M.D., I.M.S., and Assistant Surgeon M. Kesava Pai, M. B., C. M. (Madras). Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 23. The Anatomy and Histology of Ticks, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I. M. S. Price Rs. 3 or 4s. 6d. No. 24. On a Parasite found in the White Corpuscles of the blood of Palm Squirrels, by Captain W. S. Patton, M. B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 25. On the importance of Larval Characters in the Classification of Mosquitoes, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M. B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 26. Leucocytozoon Canis, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I. M. S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 27. Preliminary Report on the Development of the Leishman-Donovan Body in the Bed Bug, by Captain W. S. Patton, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 28. The Sexual Cycle of Leucocytozoon Canis in the Tick, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 29, Piroplasma Canis and its Cycle in the Tick, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I. M. S. Price Rs. 2 or 3s. No. 30. The Theory and Practice of Anti-Rabic Immunisation, by Captain W. F. Harvey, M.B., I.M.S., and Captain Anderson McKendrick, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 31. The Development of the Leishman-Donovan Parasite in Cimex Rotundatus3 No. 42. The Cultivation of the Bacillus of Leprosy and the Treatment of cases by means of a Vaccine prepared from the Cultivations, by Major E. R. Rost, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 43. The Relation of Tetanus to the Hypodermic or Intramuscular Injection of Quinine, by Lieutenant-Colonel Sir D. Semple, KT., M.D. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 44. The Preparation of a Safe and Efficient Antirabic Vaccine, by Lieutenant-Colonel Sir D. Semple, KT., M.D., D.P.H., R. A. M. C. (Retired). Price As. 8 or 9d. Published by and on sale at the office of the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. Copies are also available from all Agents for the sale of Government publications.
CONTENTS. PAGES. CHAPTER I. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 CHAPTER II. Features of Epidemic Dropsy . . . . . . . . . . 5 CHAPTER III. Infectivity of Epidemic Dropsy . . . . . . . . . 12 CHAPTER IV. Geographical Distribution of Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta . . . . . . 17 CHAPTER V. Polishing of Food Grains in relation to Epidemic Dropsy . . . . . . 19 CHAPTER VI. Examination (Chemical and Histological) of samples of Food Grains taken from Affected Families 24 CHAPTER VII. Observations on the effect of Variations in Diet on the mortality from Epidemic Dropsy, (1) Addition of Meat to Rice. (2) Supplementing and replacing Rice by Grain . . . 30 CHAPTER VIII. Experimental Researches to note the effects of Feeding Pigeons on different kinds of Rice and Grain . . . . . . . . . . . . 34 CHAPTER IX. Periodicity of Outbreaks of Epidemic Dropsy . . . . . . . . 39 CHAPTER X. The Prevention and Treatment of Epidemic Dropsy . . . . . . . 42 APPENDIX. Forms used in Epidemic Dropsy Enquiry . . . . . . . . . 45 Illustrations at the end of the Report. 1. Map of Calcutta showing distribution of fatal cases of Epidemic Dropsy during 1909. 2. Chart No. 1 showing Mortality from Epidemic Dropsy in Wards inhabited mainly by Marwaris and in two Wards inhabited by Bengalis, during 1909. 3. Sections of Rice Grains to show effect of Polishing. 4. Chart No. 2 showing effect on the mortality from Epidemic Dropsy of the addition of Meat to staple Rice Diet. Bengali Hindus. (Adults) and (Children).
ii 5. Chart No. 3 (1) showing"result of Feeding Pigeons on Bengal Rice, Khulna (polished). (2) Showing result or Feeding Pigeons on Burmah Rice, unboiled (polished). (3) Showing result of Feeding Pigeons on Burmah Rice, boiled (polished). (4) Showing result of Feeding Pigeons on Wheat and Pulses (controls). 6. Drawing showing the degeneration changes seen in the nerve of a Pigeon fed on ' Polished ' Rice. 7. Chart No. IV showing variation in price of Rice in Bengal (1885First Report on Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta. CHAPTER I. Introduction. IN accordance with instructions received from the Director, Central Research Institute, Kasauli, I proceeded to Calcutta to enquire into the causation of an outbreak of Epidemic Dropsy or beri-beri there. I arrived in Calcutta on December 13th, 1909. Assistant Surgeon Taraknath Sur and Assistant Surgeon Charu Chandra Bose were detailed for duty in connection with the enquiry and joined on 14th and 15th January 1910, respectively. The Government of India appointed Mr. D . Hooper, F.C.S., officiating Reporter on Economic Products to the Government of India, on the 24th May 1910, to con- duct the analytical portion of the enquiry. All the chemical analyses referred to in this Report have been made by Mr. Hooper. When I reached Calcutta the acute phase of the outbreak of Epidemic Dropsy was over. However I took every opportunity of seeing cases of the disorder im- mediately after my arrival: in addition to the various Hospitals, I visited a large number of private houses, schools, etc. In this way I was able to observe and in- vestigate a fair number of cases. After the Assistants arrived and the organiza- tion for the enquiry was complete, the investigations proceeded along the follow- ing lines :2 I have received the Reports of the several outbreaks and have issued instructions for the transmission of food grains from the affected areas, which were investigated experimentally by me and chemically by Mr. D. Hooper. Through the kindness of Lieutenant-Colonel Drury, I.M.S., Principal, and Major L. Rogers, I.M.S., Professor of Pathology, Medical College, Calcutta, accommoda- tion for the enquiry was provided at the Medical College, which, from its proximity to the large hospitals, was very convenient for the purpose. The investigation is still in progress and some months more will be required for its completion. In the meantime, however, certain important results have been obtained, and in this Report it is proposed to deal with these, leaving the other aspects of the investigation for a final Report. It may be well to clear the way for the discussion which follows by explaining one or two points which, if misunderstood, may lead to confusion and miscon- ception of the problems which will be considered in this Report. In the first place it is necessary to bear in mind that the prominent features of epidemic dropsy, viz., swelling of the feet and breathlessness, may be produced by other conditions, which may be confused with it by the ordinary, and even by the skilled observer. These features may be produced by, over-indulgence in alcohol,1 by ankylosto- miasis, which for years Was placed under the heading '' Beri-beri of Ceylon " in Gov- ernment returns, and by other causes. Hence it is necessary to eliminate in the first place these various conditions by a careful examination of each patient, and opinion on cases, cited as "Epidemic Dropsy," must be suspended until the re- quired evidence is forthcoming. In the second place as the narrative of this Re- port proceeds certain questions regarding rice and wheat and their preparation in steam and other mills will be discussed in detail: but it must be remembered that this treatment of grains and the removal of portions containing physiologically important constituents only forms part of a general problem, namely, that of 'one-sidedness' in dietary. In the present outbreak and probably in many others 'polishing' of food grains plays an important part in bringing about such a 'one- sidedness ' in the diet, but it can be brought about also, by the habitual consump- tion of other articles, e.g., meat, which has been exposed to a high temperature, sago, etc., or in other words, deficiency of diet in certain essential constituents necessary for the physiological requirements, is the underlying principle, the mechanism of the production of this 'one-sidedness' of dietary will vary in different races and peoples with the staples of their food, in one case it may be ' polished ' rice, in another a starchy flour, and so on. Indeed if Bengalis replaced entirely the 'polished ' rice by the ' fine ata,' which many of them consume, the ' one-sided- ness ' of their dietary would be more accentuated than at present. I have stressed 1 McGill, Bombay Medical Congress Trans., 1909.
3 these points here as I know from experience that their correct meaning is frequently not clearly understood, and it is a common error to consider that the present special case represents the general problem of defective dietary, whereas it is only one aspect of it. The question is an extensive one, involving as it does the influence of nourishment upon general health. As the subjects discussed in this Report are complex arid highly technical it may be well to pick out the main conclusions arrived at regarding the recent out- break of Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta. The evidence available appears to warrant the following :4 Dropsy had undergone a considerable loss of phosphates in the pre- paration of ata. (8) That pigeons show, when fed on 'polished' rices, both boiled and un- boiled, a progressive loss of weight with characteristic polyneuritis. Chemical analyses of these samples of rice show them to have a low phosphorus content. (9) That control pigeons when fed on a mixture of wheat and pulses show no loss of weight, but rather a gain, and they have remained for months in good health. Chemical analysis of this food shows that it contains double the quantity of phosphorus contained in the sample of rice used for feeding the pigeons. (10) That the two severe outbreaks of Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta and Bengal, namely in 1877-78-79 and 1907-08-09, have been correlated with a sustained high price of food grains during the period and the cessation of these epidemics has synchronised with the fall in price of food.
5 CHAPTER II. Features of Epidemic Dropsy. The various signs and symptoms of this disease will be discussed in full in a later Report after the observations which are being recorded on the subject at present are completed, but it may be well to refer at the present stage to certain broad features of the disease which have a bearing on the problem of etiology. The " symptom complex " of this disorder deviates fairly widely from that observed in Chinese patients in Calcutta suffering from beri-beri. It approximates much more closely to the condition described under the name " Ship Beri-beri." The symptoms of the latter condition consist 1 " In the great majority of cases in weakness and a prominent dropsy of the lower limbs, extending often to other parts of the body. There, also, exists shortness of breath and other symptoms of a weak heart, causing often sudden death from acute paralysis of the heart. But as Nocht 2 in Hamburg and the Norwegian ' Ship Beri-beri ' Committee 3 have shown, symptoms of neuritis of the limbs are comparatively rare. For instance, Nocht was only able to ascertain neuritis in cases from four of his thirty-four beri- beri ships: and though the investigations of the Committee extended to fifty-seven affected ships, the neuritis was only found in men from four of them." " The great majority of patients suffering from the ordinary, i.e., dropsical ship disease, recover as soon as they are able to change their food." These symptoms and signs of " Ship Beri-beri " agree very closely with those of Epidemic Dropsy as seen in Calcutta. Bradon 4 states, " There is not, according to the Report of the Nor- wegian Commission and later of Hoist, who especially investigated both this dis- order and true beri-beri, in pelagic dropsy (Ship Beri-beri), any constant or definite implication of the nervous system any more than there is in Epidemic Dropsy, which it indeed more closely resembles." Munro 5 who investigated Epidemic Dropsy in the Darjeeling District in 1907 states, " There are certain facts in support of a theory that the disease is due to under-feeding on certain of the constituents of a physiological diet." As in "Ship Beri-beri " the records of the occurrence of neuritis in Epidemic Dropsy are variable some authorities 6 consider that it is not a feature in the latter disease ;others hold that it does occur: thus Megaw,7 in a careful study of cases of Epidemic Dropsy in Eurasians and poor Europeans in the European General Hospital, Calcutta, notes that neuritis is invariably a marked 1 Holst, Axel. Experimental studies relating to " Ship Beri-beri and Scurvy.'' Journal of Hygiene, Vol. VII, Part II, 1907. 2 Festschrift zum sechzigsten Geburtstage Von Robert Koch. Jena, 1903. 3 Indstilling fra Beri-beri Komiteen (Report of the Beri-beri Committee). Christiania, 1902. 4 Trans. Bombay Medical Congress, 1909. 5 Munro, Captain, I.M.S., on the prevalence in the Darjeeling District of a disease resembling Beri-beri Report to Government of Bengal, February 1908. 6 Rogers. Fevers in the Tropics, 1910. 7 Megaw, J. W. D., Captain, I.M.S., Volume XLV, No. 4, April 1910. Indian Medical Gazette.
6 feature of the disease. He states, however, " That there is a marked difference in type between Epidemic Dropsy and beri-beri as seen among Chinese patients in Calcutta ;" but he inclines to the opinion that the two diseases are not essentially different. Authorities, who have studied Epidemic Dropsy recently in India, record the fact that alteration of the dietary plays an important part in the cure of this disease; thus Neil Campbell 1 in considering of treatment of Epidemic Dropsy states, " The first thing is absolute rest, knock off every form of labour and permit the patient to be in the recumbent posture as much as possible, the next is good and nourishing diet." Megaw 2 also observes, in the treatment of his cases of Epidemic Dropsy, " That tendency towards recovery within a short time after the patient has been placed on a liberal diet free from rice is strongly in favour of the dietetic theory." These observations are in agreement with those of Axel Holst, Nocht, and others, in regard to the treatment of " Ship Beri-beri." Holst 3 states " That ' Ship beri-beri ' is, in accordance with the opinion of Nocht, a food disease, showing a marked congruence with scurvy." In this connection it is interesting to record that a certain proportion of the patients during the recent Calcutta outbreak of Epidemic Dropsy showed sponginess of the gums, which bled readily, also a certain number had hæmorrhage from the bowel, etc. The following table shows the number of cases of Epidemic Dropsy which presented on examina- tion spongy gums :7 of Rangoon, Waddell 1 in 1826 states, " In all the worst cases the feet became 8 ingredients sometimes die in this manner. In teaching I put aside the name Diarrh9 beri. Schauman 1 recently has published a second paper on the same subject giving the results of animal nutritional experiments. The examination of the blood in cases of Epidemic Dropsy in India by differ- ent observers shows that the most marked feature is a reduction of the red cor- puscles and hæmoglobin during the course of the disease, and as the case progresses towards recovery there is a gradual return to normal of the condition of the blood. This change in the blood picture is significant in relation to the nutritional origin of the disease. Neil Campbell 2 gives the result of the enumeration of the R. B. C. and W. B. C., at the onset, during the course, and in convalescence of five well marked cases of Epidemic Dropsy. The following table gives the average of his results :10 Megaw,1 as a result of his examination of the blood of six of his cases at the European General Hospital, Calcutta, states, " That the red cells were from two and a half to five millions, the hæmoglobin from 45 to 80 per cent., the rule being a moderate reduction in the red cells and a more marked reduction in the hæmo- globin. The leucocyte count showed an increase, both total and relative, in the lymphocytes and an increase in the eosinophiles in most of the cases." The results of the examination of the blood in Epidemic Dropsy, which I have obtained in my investigations in Calcutta, are in general agreement with the above quoted observ- ations. The following table shows the results of the enumeration of the R. B. C. and W. B. C., the percentage of Hb, the total, and the differential counts of the leucocytes in cases of Epidemic Dropsy :11 The following table shows the records of the coagulation time of the blood in cases of Epidemic Dropsy :12 CHAPTER III. Infectivity of Epidemic Dropsy. An important question to determine in the first place was, whether or not an organism exists in the tissues of patients suffering from Epidemic Dropsy. A careful examination of the blood of cases of Epidemic Dropsy, which came under observation, was made, both by cultivation in various media and direct microscopic examination. The following table shows the presence or absence of bacteria in the blood of patients suffering from Epidemic Dropsy :13 Careful microscopic examination of films of blood taken from the cases of Epi- demic Dropsy and stained in various ways gave negative results as regards the presence of parasites. Also 5 c.c. of blood were taken from a vein and mixed with a little sodium citrate to prevent coagulation and then centrifuged the clear plasma was pipetted off and again centrifuged: then the supernatant fluid was poured off and the residue which remained was examined fresh for parasites. The result was negative in each case. In this connection it is interesting to note that Megaw1 drew 3 c.c. of blood from an early typical acute case of Epidemic Dropsy and having allowed the blood to clot he inoculated himself with the serum subcutaneously without ill effects. I have inoculated subcutaneously several monkeys with blood taken from typical cases of Epidemic Dropsy, an interval of a few minutes only elapsing be- tween the time of taking blood from the patient and the injection into the monkey. For the purpose 5 c.c. of blood were removed from the vein at the bend of the elbow of early cases of Epidemic Dropsy, and mixed with a little Sodium Citrate to prevent coagulation. No noteworthy sign or symptom was observed in the monkeys, which remain free from disease after the injection. In several instances the skin of the 14 conditions under which many of them are living are not especially favourable. In Wards 5 and 7, in which they chiefly live, comparatively few fatal cases of Epidemic Dropsy occurred, and a careful investigation of those fatal cases in Wards 5 and 7 showed that all of them were Bengalis, not Marwaris; none of the fatal cases were traced to the latter. Hence we see that in these two Wards in Calcutta two communities, Marwaris and Bengalis, the former largely predo- minating, were living under the same environmental conditions, yet fatal cases are recorded from the one, and not from the other. The reason for this will be evident when the question of geographical distribution of the disease in Calcutta is described; this example indicates the absence of infective power of the disease. Further, no authentic case of Epidemic Dropsy has been recorded amongst the better class European community in Calcutta. The latter have no such immunity from ordinary infectious disease, e.g., cholera, small-pox, etc., or from such diseases as malaria, seven-day fever, etc. The reason for their immunity will be discussed later. During the course of the enquiry I have directed special attention to the study of the movements of persons and households affected by Epidemic Dropsy. Re- cords of persons at all stages of the disease, who came into households in which no disease existed previously, and the subsequent history of these households, have been and are being obtained. In practically all these instances the imported case has recovered or died, but no spread of the disease to healthy members has occurred. The following table shows the number of Epidemic Dropsy free houses into which persons suffering from Epidemic Dropsy at various stages came, and the occurrence or non-occurrence of Epidemic Dropsy in the houses thereafter. No. of Epidemic Dropsy free households into which cases were imported. No. of these households which recorded cases of Epi- demic Dropsy after the importation. 28 2 From this it will be seen that the movement of affected persons was not follow- ed by a spread of the disease. The cases coming to the houses were in all stages of the malady, from the early initial phase to convalescence. In only two examples did the disease occur in households, apparently, after the entry of cases, but on careful enquiry these instances were explainable on other grounds. Evidence was obtained in many cases of one out of several families living in the same house being affected with Epidemic Dropsy, the remaining unattached families keeping free from the disease, although the sick and healthy mixed inti- mately. In the majority of instances the only difference being that the food
15 was not the same, or procured from separate sources. Further, in some of the schools in Calcutta (which I investigated), after cases of Epidemic Dropsy had occurred no attempt was made to isolate the scholars. The children suffering from the disease mixed freely with the healthy ones, and the disease did not spread. The cases of Epidemic Dropsy treated in the Hospitals in Calcutta have not been isolated and no dissemination of the disease has taken place. On this point Neil Campbell1 in dealing with the Dacca Asylum outbreak of Epidemic Dropsy states that, '' Removal of the insanes from the asylum, or segregation of the affected, was considered unnecessary." Megaw2 also observes, " Against the disease (Epidemic Dropsy) being an infection is also the fact that all the cases were treated in the open wards without any attempt at segregation being considered necessary, and that no case of infection occurred among the other patients." Assistant Surgeon Rammay Ray,3 who saw many cases of Epi- demic Dropsy in Madras and Calcutta, during the previous outbreak, 1877-78-79, concludes as follows :16 of the disease, we can to-day regard it as proved that beri-beri is not an infectious disease." Further, Dr. Grijns1 in his observations on polyneuritis gallinarum, a disease closely related to beri-beri of man, and which can be produced experimentally by feeding birds on polished rice, records the following results to show that the injection of the blood and nerves of fowls suffering from polyneuritis into healthy fowls was not followed by the disease :17 CHAPTER IV. Geographical Distribution of Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta. In studying the epidemiology of disease valuable information may be obtained from observing the geographical distribution of the cases. Accordingly the records of all fatal cases of Epidemic Dropsy reported to the Health Officer, Calcutta, during the outbreak of 1909 were obtained and investigated. In the first place a map showing the geographical distribution of fatal cases of Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta was constructed in the following manner: If after enquiry into the case the diagnosis of Epidemic Dropsy was confirmed, a dot was placed on a blank map of Calcutta on the locality where the death occurred. This was done for every fatal cases of Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta and suburbs up to the end of 1909. in this way it was possible to study the distribution of the outbreak of Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta. The skeleton map made from the original shows the geographical distribution of Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta during 1909. A glance at this map shows at once that certain populous Wards in Calcutta have to a large extent escaped the disease. These wards are 5 and 7, and 15, 16, 17. Can the immunity of these wards from Epidemic Dropsy be accounted for, or can it be correlated with any particular feature of these Wards or the inhabitants of them ? On further enquiry into these points several interesting and significant facts emerge. Wards 5 and 7 are very largely inhabited by a community of Hindu merchants, Marwaris, whilst Wards 15, 16, 17 are popu- lated almost entirely by the better class European community, and form the European quarter of Calcutta. Proceeding further with the investigation of this problem it is found that the dietary of the Marwaris is entirely different from their Bengali neighbours in adjoining Wards, who have suffered so severely from the disorder. As is well known the staple article of diet of the Bengali is rice, which they consume in large quantities daily. The Marwaris on the other hand consume much less rice and only a small proportion take it habitually. They replace the rice by coarse ata (wheat), mung dal, and other pulses to a large extent. The chemical analysis of the Marwari and Bengali diet will be discussed shortly. In the map, Wards 5 and 7, the inhabitants of which are chiefly Marwaris, with a sprinkling of Bengalis, have been enclosed in a thick continuous line. When compared with adjoining Wards it will be seen the number of fatal cases of Epidemic Dropsy recorded within this line is small. A most careful and special enquiry was made into each case, and it was ascertained in every instance that the person who had died of Epidemic Dropsy was a Bengali, not a Marwari. This is a very significant fact, because from this it will be seen that the foci of disease existed in these Wards and the sanitary conditions are D
18 certainly no better, possibly not so good as those in adjoining Wards; yet not- withstanding these circumstances no fatal cases of Epidemic Dropsy were recorded from the Marwari population. This fact points strongly to Epidemic Dropsy being a nutritional rather than an infectious disorder. The portion of the map enclosed within the thick continuous line (Marwari Wards, 5 and 7) stands out in m asked contrast to its neighbours (Bengali Wards, 9 and 8) as regards the number of fatal cases of Epidemic Dropsy recorded. These Wards are all under the same environmental conditions, etc., the populations inhabiting them vary only in regard to the dietary habitually consumed. Chart No. 1 shows the number of fatal cases of Epidemic Dropsy in Wards 5 and 7, and Wards 9 and 8, the population of the Wards, and their inhabitants. The better class European quarter of Calcutta has been enclosed within a thick broken. line. Here again it will be seen that the enclosed space is distinguished in a remarkable manner by the complete absence of dots. It is interesting to note that in the outbreak of Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta, 187719 CHAPTER V. Polishing of Food Grains in relation to Epidemic Dropsy. From a study of the foregoing it will be seen that the evidence points to Epidemic Dropsy being a disorder of nutrition. It will now be necessary to enquire into the presence or absence of defects in the dietary habitually consumed by the race attacked by Epidemic Dropsy. The views of the Professor Axel Holst1 on the etiology of ' Ship Beri-beri ' have been discussed already. He regards it as a food disease. In concluding his paper he states, " Several chemical questions arise. For instance, which are, properly speaking, the nutritive constituents, the presence of which prevent, and conversely the absence of which produce the disease ? That such elements exist has been suggested by Grijns, and seems to be proved by Eijkman2 who was able to cure the malady by adding to the injurious food an aqueous extract of rice bran." Whilst the present enquiry was in progress an important paper has been published by Fraser and Stanton on the Etiology of Beri-beri.3 In this investigation they show that the polishing of rice in steam mills removes substances which are essential for the maintenance of the normal nutrition of nervous tissue. These substances exist in adequate amount in the original grain and in superabundant amount in the polishings of white rice. They state further that, " The estimation in terms of phosphorus pentoxide of the total phosphorus present in the given rice may be used as an indicator of the beri-beri producing power of such rice when forming the staple diet in man." At the first biennial meeting of the Far Eastern Association of Tropical Medicine held at Manila, March 5 to 14,4 the question was fully discussed and the results of several important original investigations on the subject were communicated. The views of Fraser and Stanton were confirmed, and further valuable additions to our knowledge of the subject were made; as a result of these far-reaching discoveries the following important resolution was passed by the Association :20 and to determine whether or not they contained certain essential ingredients required to meet the physiological requirements. In the Bengali diet, rice and to a less extent ata (wheat) are the staple articles, and as these are consumed after polishing and milling, obviously it became necessary to determine the effect on the nutritive value of these articles of these processes in the light of recent researches. Accordingly Mr. Hooper made a very careful chemical analysis of the rice and wheat with special reference to the phosphorus content. Samples of rice were obtained from a representative steam mill, viz., the Ram Kristopore Mill, Howrah, at every stage of the process of preparation. The samples were described as follows :21 The weight of a 100 of the rice grains was respectively 2.02, 1.81, 1.74 grammes. They contained the following constituents :22 Experimental observations on pigeons were made, the animals being fed with different kinds of 'polished' rice. The results of these experiments will be des- cribed shortly. It will be seen from a consideration of the above results that valuable nutrient constituents are removed from the rice in the process of polishing: and races who depend on rice, as the main source of these food constituents, which are of high physiological importance, must be in a state of unstable nutritional equili- brium; disturbing factors, which will be discussed later may precipitate the phe- nomena associated with 'starvation' in respect of these constituents. Amongst the obvious signs of such 'starvation' are, swelling of the feet and heart trouble, anæmia, polyneuritis, etc. Alteration of the dietary to meet the physiological needs restores the nutritional balance and brings about a disappearance of the phenomena of the disorder and a return to normal. During the course of the present enquiry a very important fact emerged, namely, that the wheat (ata) consumed by Bengalis is very poor, even poorer than 'polished' rice in its nutritive constituents. During the course of our house to house enquiry in regard to Epidemic Dropsy we have ascertained that it is the custom to consume a particular kind of fine wheat (ata), and an analysis of this by Mr. Hooper showed that it has a remarkably low phosphorus content. Accord- ingly samples of wheat were obtained from a well known representative steam mill in Calcutta at every stage of the process of preparation, and these were analysed by Mr. Hooper with the following results :23 ata (wheat) is deprived of a large amount of phosphates. The flours, which appear to be fairly constant in composition, contain only 1/3 of the phosphoric anhydride present in the entire grain. It is well to bear in mind that the same phenomena may be produced by the habitual consumption of other articles poor in these constituents. Thus Aron and Hocson 1 record their occurrence in a man who was fed on bread and water for 41 and 2/3 days. Schaumann2 has produced the lesions in pigs, cats, and rats by feeding them on horse flesh which had been heated in a 20 per cent. solution of sodium carbonate for three hours. We see, therefore, that the question is an interesting but complex one, and involves difficult problems in metabolism. In the present instance the food, habi- tually consumed by the person presenting the phenomena of the disorder, is 'po- lished' rice and to a less extent ' sifted' wheaten flour, and to these attention has to be directed. It is interesting to note in this connection that the number of steam mills for polishing rice have increased in India, especially in Madras, in recent years. It is difficult to obtain exact figures on this point as no note is taken of mills of less than 20 hands in official records. 1 Philippine Journal of Science, Vol. V, No. 1, February 1910. 2 Arch. f. Schiffs, U. Trop. Hyg. Beiheft (1909), 13, 8224 CHAPTER VI. Chemical and Histological Examination of samples of Food Grains of the kind consumed by patients suffering from Epidemic Dropsy. Having seen that by the process of manufacture (milling) rice and wheat are deprived of certain constituents of high physiological value, it became a matter of importance to determine to what extent the rice and wheat partaken of by families who had been affected by Epidemic Dropsy during the recent outbreak in Calcutta had lost these constituents in the process of milling. It may be mentioned the more it has been polished the more elegant the preparation of the rice appears, and it commands a higher price in the market. A beautifully milled sample of rice prepared in England was examined recently chemically and histologically, and was found to have had all the aleurone layer with its constituents removed. Since Epidemic Dropsy presents the features of a nutritional disorder, at first sight it might be thought that it would not attack well-to-do persons, yet as a matter of fact it has affected this class also during the recent outbreak. The explanation of this largely lies in the fact that in paying a higher price for elegant preparations of rice and wheat, articles containing the essential physiological constituents in sufficient quantity are not obtained, and if this deficiency is not compensated for by an adequate addition of suitable ingredients to the dietary a condition of defective nutrition results. It may be stated in general terms that the higher the polishing of the rice the lower will be its content in the essential constituents. Hence in this respect the high-priced, highly-polished rice is more dangerous than the cheap coarser varieties. During the course of the enquiry houses in which cases of Epidemic Dropsy have occurred are being visited daily to record certain information, and during these visits samples of rice and wheat have been obtained from the inhabitants of the houses. The rice was of the same kind as that used by them during the outbreak of Epidemic Dropsy last year. In this way a number of samples are being collected and submitted to chemical and histological examination. The
25 results of the analysis of some of these samples of rice are given in the following table :26 and fowls experimentally; the results of these experiments are of great importance and will be dealt with later. It is seen, therefore, that the highly-priced, highly- polished and elegant-looking preparations are largely deprived of essential con- stituents of high physiologic importance27 others, have shown that an organic substance containing phosphorus, termed phytin, the calcium magnesium salt of phytic acid, is found therein. Phytic acid or anhydroxymethylendiphosphoric acid was discovered by Postemak 1 as a constituent of green plants. Suzaki, Yoshimura and Takaishi 2 proved that 85 per cent. of the phosphorus in the bran of rice is in the form of phytin. The phos- phorus of phytic acid being readily absorbed is a valuable compound to supply phosphorus in a form which can be readily assimilated. Aron3 has shown that if 100 grams of white rice were extracted with 0.5 per cent. hydrochloric acid a yield of 0.123 grams of soluable P2O5 was obtained, whilst if 100 grams red rice were extracted with 0.5 per cent. hydrochloric acid a yield of 0.330 gram of P2O5 was obtained. This if equal quantities of rice (unpolished) and white rice (polished) be consumed by different persons the former will ingest nearly three times the quantity of soluable phosphorus compounds that the latter does. Aron4 is inclined to consider that the important constituent in bran, the non-consumption of which is liable to produce disease, is an organic compound of phosphorus.* It is important to remember in this connection that the metabolism experiments of Clerk and Cooks 5 and Aron and Hocson6 have shown that the addition of organic phosphorus to the diet increases the retention of nitrogen, showing that there is a close con- nection between nitrogen and phosphorus metabolism in general.7 Hence this important fact emerges that a diet poor in phosphorus is not only detrimental by depriving the human system of this constituent, but it also operates by reducing the power of retaining nitrogen. Aron and Hocson8 have brought out a further very interesting point, namely, that a patient suffering from beri-beri in a fairly advanced stage has his capability of utilizing the nitrogen and phosphorus in his food reduced. He, therefore, demands a higher intake of nitrogen and phosphorus than a normal person to attain nitrogen and phosphorus equilibrium. Hence it will be seen that the non-consumption of rice and wheat bran or its equivalent by a normal individual probably brings about the following events:28 and the starvation of the tissues is still further accentuated, and this prevents the patient from recovering his nutritional equilibrium. The Japanese investigators1 in their study of beri-beri show that nitrogen destruction in that disease is increased. However these problems of metabolism are by no means solved and require further research for their complete elucidation. It must be remembered that although starvation in regard to phosphorus and nitrogen is taking place it may not be sufficient to bring about obvious signs of ill- health, such persons may be merely weak and easily tired. It would be possible to construct a scale, at the one end of which are the slight cases, unrecognisable to the ordinary observer, and at the other, the severe examples of the disorder, with pro- nounced 29 that living for an extended period on a one-sided almost exclusively vegetable diet, which is characterised by its poverty in phosphorus and protein, may result in beri-beri. (2) The process of polishing rice removes a fine skin and the outer layers (bran); this rice bran is rich in phosphorus, especially in its organic, soluble form (phytin); the content of phosphorus of the rice is considerably reduced by the re- moval of the bran. (3) Polished rice, poor in phosphorus, may cause beri-beri in man if it is the main constituent of the food; but it is harmless if sufficient other nourishment, rich in phosphorus and protein is taken. The same polished rice causes a polyneuritis in chickens. White bread, a food of similar chemical com- position as regards phosphorus and protein, cannot sustain monkeys in normal health if it forms the entire diet."
30 CHAPTER VII. Observations on the effect of Variations in Diet on the mortality from Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta. If Epidemic Dropsy has an origin in certain defects in dietary, obviously a very important method of testing the truth of this view would be to place certain groups of individuals on different dietaries, other conditions being constant, the only varying factor being diet. In practice, however, it is almost impossible in a large civil population like that in Calcutta to deliberately arrange such an investigation and enforce its being carried out with the rigor necessary for a scientific, observation. Fortunately a careful analysis of the data showed that the population of Calcutta was divided up in a manner very useful for epidemio- logical observations and provided material for working out the problem; the general conditions approximated closely to the requirements of a definitely planned scientific experiment. The first set of observations to be considered is :31 tween the death rate from Epidemic Dropsy and the quantity of meat consumed. In the case of the Hindu widows attacked by Epidemic Dropsy who do not consume meat at all the mortality is very high. The females (excluding widows) attacked, who consumed only a little meat, stand next, whilst the male Bengalis who con- sumed a larger quantity of meat show the lowest mortality from Epidemic Dropsy. If we turn to the mortality from Epidemic Dropsy in Bengali children under 12 years, male and female, it will be noted that the death rate is approximately the same, and low compared to the death rate amongst females (adult); and this is correlated with the observation made in the course of our investigations that the percentage of meat eaters amongst male and female Bengali children under 12 years is high, and practically equal. This affords further proof of the close re- lationship between the death rate from Epidemic Dropsy and the quantity of meat consumed, and that sex, per se, does not appear to play any part in influencing the mortality. In Chart No. II the mortality from Epidemic Dropsy amongst male and female Bengali children, and the percentage of these male and female Bengali children, under 12 years, who consumed meat in their dietary, are shown. The above records are very instructive and indicate clearly the effect on the mortality from Epidemic Dropsy of the addition of meat to a diet. The more 'one-sided ' the diet, as in the case of the Hindu widows, the more severe is the disease. The consumption of the rice and ata is harmful in the case of the widows, because they are the predominating articles of the dietary, the chief sources of supply from which constituents, required to meet the physiological demands of the human system, can be obtained. As we have seen these particular sources can- not meet the demands and hence 'starvation' with its various manifestations, results. The harmfulness of polished rice is rendered proportionately less, as additional satisfactory sources of supply are added to the dietary. We see, there- fore, that the danger in this connection of polished rice and wheaten flour depends on the extent to which they enter into the dietary. In other words the more "one sided" the dietary, the higher the death rate and, vice versâ. It is this " one sided- ness " of the dietary which plays a very important part in the etiology of Epidemic Dropsy. The problem is a complex one as will be readily understood. It is not easy to say, for example, what precise degree of 'one-sidedness' of dietary will produce recognisable morbid signs in a previously healthy person. Further, the personal factor will come in also; some individuals will be able to live without show- ing very obvious signs of disease on a degree of 'one-sidedness' of dietary, which would cause manifest and perhaps severe symptoms in others: certain factors, e.g., economic conditions, price of food, etc., may expose a larger number of indi- viduals to ' one-sidedness ' in dietary. This problem will be referred to later, in section 9.
32 The second set of observations, which remains to be discussed, is :33 From the quantity of the articles consumed in the diet the amount of phos- phorus taken per day by Marwaris has been calculated as follows :34 CHAPTER VIII. Experimental Researches to note the effect of Feeding Pigeons on various kinds of Rice and Grain. In 1888 Eijkman1 observed the occurrence of an epidemic of polyneuritis in Laboratory fowls which resembled beri-beri in many respects. The clinical signs noted were35 which would be most suitable for my purpose. After testing a number, e.g., rab- bits, guinea pigs, cats, rats, monkeys, pigeons and fowls, I decide to use pigeons and fowls for the experimental investigations. I had large cages constructed con- sisting of a wooden frame closed by wire netting. The floor is of wood. The cages are cleaned out; carefully washed With a solution of Lysol; and fresh, clean sand sprinkled on the floor daily. The cages are placed in an open veranda. The birds have plenty of space and fresh air. Thus during the experiment they are placed under the best hygienic conditions. A measured quantity of the particular grain is given to the birds twice daily. They are supplied with water. Each bird is weighed weekly. The precautions taken are necessary to avoid complicating factors entering into the observations and so rendering the results uncertain. Feeding Experiments (Bengal Rice). The Bengal rice selected for experiment was a sample received from Khulna. It was chosen because it had been sent to the Medical College for examination on account of Epidemic Dropsy being prevalent at the time in the district. This rice was given raw to healthy pigeons, 30 grms. per pigeon daily. No other food was allowed. The weekly weight of the pigeons, the duration of the feeding experiments, and the presence or absence of neuritis are shown in graphic form in Chart No. III. It will be seen from this experiment that all the pigeons fed on this rice lost weight. They developed signs of polyneuritis: when this occurred the animal was killed to obtain the nerves in a fresh condition. Both sciatic nerves were carefully dissected out to their finest terminations and placed in a solution of Osmic acid,36 Feeding Experiments (Rangoon Rice). (1). Unboiled rice.37 The pulses were38 the rice and wheat-pulse diets are very interesting and important. The wheat- pulse diet shows a high phosphorus content, in fact about double that of the rice diets. It will be seen that one of its constituents, Mung dal, is particularly rich in phosphorus, containing 1.17 of phosphoric anhydride, whilst Burma rice con- tained only 0.36. The chemical and experimental results therefore agree. These diets imitate approximately the food consumed by the Bengalis and Marwaris, respectively. In the former rice is the staple, whilst in the latter, as already des- cribed, wheat-pulses largely supplement or entirely replace rice. As we have observed the Marwaris had immunity from Epidemic Dropsy during the outbreak in Calcutta in 1909, and we have an experimental explanation of this immunity from the feeding experiments on pigeons. These feeding experiments prove that an exclusive diet of polished rice, which is poor in essential constituents, is unable to meet the physiological requirements, and signs of starvation result, but that a diet of wheat and pulses, containing these constituents in abundance, is capable of meeting all the physiological demands, and the animals remain well.
39 CHAPTER IX. The Causation of Periodicity in Outbreaks of Epidemic Dropsy. A noteworthy feature in the history of this disease in Bengal and other places has been a certain periodicity. Thus the outbreak of the disease in 1877-78-79 in Calcutta and Bengal was followed by an interval of quiescence and the next severe recurrence was the recent epidemic of 1907-08-09. The disorder is probably never entirely absent during the interval. Rogers1 observed a few cases of Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta in 1901. Delany2 in his Report on Epidemic Dropsy in Eastern Bengal and Assam considers that it is quite probable that the disease has remained in the Sylhet District for 30 years, since the epidemic of 1878-79. In 1902 in. Bombay I observed a limited number of cases of this disease. The problem to settle, however, is the cause of the occurrence of severe out- breaks at particular periods. I am engaged at present in collecting evidence to ascertain the factor or factors likely to bring about this periodicity. I may state that so far as my researches go I have observed that there is a remarkably close relationship between the price of food grains and the prevalence of Epidemic Dropsy. Thus the severe and extensive outbreak of 1877-78-79 was preceded by the great famine of 187640 outbreaks of Epidemic Dropsy affecting wide areas. When taken in conjunction with the fact that all the evidence obtained points to Epidemic Dropsy being a. nutritional disease dependent on defects in dietary, the relationship becomes all the more striking. It would appear, therefore, that economic factors, e.g., price of food grains, play an important part in determining the periodic character of the. severe outbreaks of Epidemic Dropsy. It will be readily understood that such a far-reaching factor as the price of food grains must affect directly or indirectly a very considerable number of people, some more, some less, severely. Chart No. IV at the end of this Report1 shows the variations from the mean of the average retail price of rice in Bengal for each year from 1885 to 1909, and the occurrence or non-occurrence of extensive outbreaks of Epidemic Dropsy from 1885 to 1909 in Bengal. Through the kindness of the Director-General of Commercial Intelligence I have obtained the necessary figures and have prepared a chart showing the fluctuations in the price of rice from 1875 to 1883, that is to say, a period before, during, and after the severe and extensive outbreak of Epidemic Dropsy in 1877-78-79 in Calcutta and Bengal. Chart No. V shows the variations from the mean of the average retail price of rice in Bengal for each year from 1875 to 1883, and the occurrence or non-occur- rence of extensive outbreaks of Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta and Bengal during that period. From a study of Charts Nos. IV and V it will be seen that the two occasions, in a space of thirty years, on which Calcutta and Bengal were affected by severe outbreaks of Epidemic Dropsy, viz., in 1877-78-79, and 1907-08-09., synchronised with a period of high price of food. The fact that this has occurred twice in the history of this disease in Calcutta strengthens the view that the occurrence of exten- sive outbreaks of Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta and Bengal is determined by an increase of the price of food grains. The cessation of the epidemic phase of the malady is observed to be associated with a fall in the price of food grains, and during the period of quiescence the price is at or below the mean. It is interesting to read in an editorial note in the Indian Medical Gazette of May 1st, 1880, that, " Beri-beri has died out in Calcutta as the- hot weather advanced. It is feared that it will re-appear at the close of the next rains as in the three preceding years, most probably extending its area of preval- ence." Fortunately this forecast by the Editor (Colonel McLeod) did not prove correct. The interest of the above statement, however, lies in the fact that in 1880 a marked drop in the price of food grains occurred in Bengal as Chart No. VI shows. 1 Figures obtained for the preparation of this Chart from Prices and Wages compiled in office of Director-General of Commercial Intelligence, India, 20th issue, 1909.
41 Chart No. VI shows the variations from the mean of the average retail prices of rice in Bengal for 1878-79-80 and the occurrence or non-occurrence of extensive outbreaks of Epidemic Dropsy from 1878 to 1881 in Bengal. From the foregoing it will be seen that the probable explanation of the cause of the periodic recurrences in Bengal of Epidemic Dropsy is, that, from the nature of the Bengali dietary, a condition of 'nutritional instability,' if the phrase be permitted, exists in those consuming it, and, in ordinary conditions, no very ob- vious signs are apparent by which it can be recognised; but when a severe strain, e.g., famine prices for food grains, which is far-reaching in its effect, is superadded the ' nutritional balance ' of a varying percentage of the population is upset and this breakdown manifests itself amongst the ' nutritionally unstable,' by various unmistakable signs, which from their severe character, direct attention forcibly to the condition. When the strain is removed by the drop in price of food grains the nutritional balance adjusts itself more or less correctly and the epidemic ceases ; this is illustrated by the course of the two severe outbreaks of Epidemic Dropsy in Bengal. There are many interesting points connected with this question. For example the amount of rise in price of food grains necessary to determine these outbreaks. From a study of the Chart No. IV the character of this rise during the last outbreak is illustrated. It is high and sustained over several years. It is probable that it is the combination of these two conditions, viz., the high level and the maintenance of this elevation for two or more years which is the determining factor in causing the outbreak. It is probable that a rise for a single year is insufficient to produce an epidemic: thus it will be observed that there was a sharp rise in price of food grains in 1897, but in the next year a fall below the mean occurred. It will be noted that the character of the price curve for 1906-07-08-09 is a sustained high level for a considerable period, a similar character of the curve has not been ob- served since the last severe famine of 187742 CHAPTER X. The Prevention and Treatment of Epidemic Dropsy. In the present Report it is proposed only to mention shortly the lines on which preventive measures should proceed. When the work, which is now in progress, is complete, further details may be available. It will be already obvious from the results of the investigation that as the disease is brought about by a ' one-sidedness ' in dietary, the aim of prevention should be to remove this defect. In the Bengali diet the researches have shown that this ' one-sidedness ' is due to the habitual consumption of articles of food, viz., ' polished ' rice and wheaten flour deficient in essential constituents,43 withheld altogether. The sifted rice bran which has been shown to prevent the disease in animals should be given. It is an inexpensive preparation which could be generally used, and would be most valuable both in the treatment and preven- tion of Epidemic Dropsy. The present method of estimating diets will require further investigation and research. It is doubtful whether the determination of the quantity of proteins, fats, carbohydrates and ash gives sufficient information to enable us to distinguish differences in diets which may be of extreme importance for the physiological requirements. A much larger problem in the prevention of Epidemic Dropsy opens out, namely, how to obviate a continued rise in in the price of food grains. If this factor could be eliminated probably the extensive and severe outbreaks of the disease might be prevented. This question is, of course, beyond the scope of my investiga- tion. I understand, however, that a special investigation on the subject of prices is being held at present under the Finance Department of the Government of India, and the Report of this enquiry will be looked forward to with interest in connection with the eradication of Epidemic Dropsy. G 2
45 APPENDIX. Forms on which information obtained in the house to house enquiry is re- corded. Epidemic Dropsy Enquiry Form A./No. GENERAL. Record of examination of inmates and house No.46 SPECIAL. Record of examination of case in No. 47 Result of Examination Date. CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 8, HASTINGS STREET
MAP OF CALCUTTA. SHOWING. DISTRIBUTION OF FATAL CASES OF EPIDEMIC DROPSY IN 1909. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058457.tif] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058457.tif] THICK LINE ENCLOSES WARDS No. 5 AND 7 = MARWARI QUARTER. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058457.tif] INTERRUPTED THICK LINE ENCLOSES WARDS No.15,16, AND 17=EUROPEAN QUARTER. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058457.tif] EACH BLACK DOT REPRESENTS A FATAL CASE OF EPIDEMIC DROPSY.
CHART 1. FATAL CASES OF EPIDEMIC DROPSY, 1909. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058463.tif] Reg No. 3060 E., 10.SECTIONS OF RICE GRAINS. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058469.tif] Fig.I. SECTION OF A RICE GRAIN (CARYOPSIS) BEFORE POLISHING WITH ONLY HUSK REMOVED. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058469.tif] Fig.II. SECTION OF A RICE GRAIN AFTER FIRST POLISHING. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058469.tif] Fig.III. SECTION OF A RICE GRAIN AFTER FINAL POLISHING. A.CHART II. SHOWING THE PERCENTAGE OF MEAT EATERS AMONGST BENGALI ADULTS (MALE AND FEMALE), WIDOWS, CHILDREN (MALE AND FEMALE) AND MORTALITY FROM EPIDEMIC DROPSY IN EACH CASE. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058475.tif]
CHART III. 1 EXPERIMENT II. 2. EXPERIMENT XI AND XXII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058481.tif] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058481.tif] THIN CONTINUOUS LINES SNOW THE WEIGHT OF PIGEONS IN GRAMMES FED ON POLISHED RICE. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058481.tif] ,, DOTTED ,, ,, ,, ,,WHEAT & PULSES (CONTROLS). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058481.tif] THICK COTINUOUS LINES SHOW THE PERIOD THE PIGEONS WERE FED ON POLISHED RICE. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058481.tif] ,, DOTTED ,, ,, ,, WHEAT & PULSES (CONTROLS).
CHART III. CONTINUED. 3. EXPERIMENT, XXII. 4. EXPERIMENT, XXVII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058487.tif] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058487.tif] THIN CONTINUOUS LINES SHOW THE WEIGHT OF PIGEONS IN GRAMMES FED ON POLISHED RICE. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058487.tif] THIN DOTTED ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, WHEAT AND PULSES (CONTROLS). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058487.tif] THICK CONTINUOUS LINES SHOW THE PERIOD THE PIGEONS WERE FED ON POLISHED RICE. ,, DOTTED ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, WHEAT AND PULSES (CONTROLS).
EXPERIMENT XXII. PIGEON FED ON POLISHED RANGOON RICE. SCIATIC NERVE SHOWING DEGENERATIVE CHANGES IN FIBRES. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058493.tif] Photo-Engraved & printed at the Offices of the Survey of Calcutta, 1911
CHART IV. SHOWS THE VARIATIONS FROM THE MEAN OF THE AVERAGE RETAIL PRICE OF RICE IN BENGAL DURING THE PERIOD FROM 1885-1909 AND ITS RELATION TO EPIDEMIC DROPSY IN BENGAL. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058499.tif] MEAN =3-5 RUPEES PER MAUND OF RICE (COMMON). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058499.tif] PERIOD DURING WHICH NO EXTENSIVE OUT-BREAK OF EPIDEMIC DROPSY OCCURRED IN BENGAL. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058499.tif] PERIOD DURING WHICH EXTENSIVE OUT-BREAK OF EPIDEMIC DROPSY OCCURREDIN BENGAL.
CHART V. SHOWS THE VARIATIONS FROM THE MEAN AVERAGE RETAIL PRICE OF RICE IN BENGAL DURING THE PERIOD FROM 1875-1883, AND ITS RELATION TO EPIDEMIC DROPSY IN BENGAL. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058505.tif] MEAN 2.0 RUPEES PER MAUND OF RICE. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058505.tif] PERIOD DURING WHICH NO EXTENSIVE OUT-BREAK OF EPIDEMIC DROPSY OCCURRED IN BENGAL. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058505.tif] PERIOD DURING WHICH EXTENSIVE OUT-BREAK OF EPIDEMIC DROPSY OCCURRED IN BENGAL.
CHART VI. SHOWS THE VARIATIONS FROM THE MEAN AVERAGE RETAIL PRICE OF RICE IN BENGAL DURING THE PERIOD FROM 1878-80, AND ITS RELATION TO EPIDEMIC DROPSY IN BENGAL. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058511.tif] MEAN =2.5 RUPEE PER MAUND OF RICE (COMMON). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058511.tif] PERIOD DURING WHICH EXTENSIVE OUT-BREAK OF EPIDEMIC DROPSY OCCURRED IN BENGAL. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058511.tif] ,, ,, ,, NO ,, ,, ,, ,, ,,
