IP/QB.10 (NEW SERIES.) No. 46. SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA MALARIA IN THE PUNJAB BY MAJOR S. R. CHRISTOPHERS, M.B., I.M.S., Assistant to the Director, Central Research, Institute, Kasauli ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058575.tif] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1911 Price Rs. 2 or 3s.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058581.tif] 3943145
X (NEW SERIES.) No. 46. SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA MALARIA IN THE PUNJAB BY MAJOR S. R. CHRISTOPIIERS, M.B., I.M.S., Assistant to the Director, Central Research institute, Kasauli ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058587.tif] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1911 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75058587.tif]
Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. Mr. E. A. ARNOLD, 41 and 43, Maddox Street, Bond Street, London, W. Messrs. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, W.C. Messrs. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., 43, Gerrard Street, Soho, London, W. Mr. BERNARD QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, W. Messrs. P. S. KING & SON, 2 and 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster. Messrs. H. S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, and 9, Pall Mall, London. Messrs. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, London, S.W. Mr. T. FISHER UNWIN, 1, Adelphi Terrace, London, W.C. Messrs. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E.C. Mr. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 51, Broad Street, Oxford. Messrs. DEIGHTON BELL & Co., Cambridge. Messrs. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W.C. ON THE CONTINENT. Mr. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Mr. KARL HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. Messrs. R. FRIEDLÄNDER & SOHN, Berlin, W.N., Carlstrasse, 11. Mr. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. Mr. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. IN INDIA. Messrs. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. Messrs. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. Messrs. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. Messrs. S. K. LAHIRI & Co., Calcutta. Messrs. B. BANERJEE & Co., Calcutta. The Calcutta School Book and Useful Litera- ture Society, 1, Wellington Square, Calcutta. Messrs. HIGGINBOTHAM & CO., Madras. Messrs. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & CO., Madras. Messrs. G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. Messrs. S. MURTHY & Co., Madras. Messrs. THOMPSON & Co., Madras. Messrs. TEMPLE & Co., Madras. Messrs. COMBRIDGE & Co., Madras. Messrs. P. R. RAMA IYER & Co., Madras. Messrs. THACKER & Co., LD., Bombay. Messrs. A. J. COMBRIDGE & CO., Bombay. Messrs. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & Co., Bombay. Mrs. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay. Mr. SUNDER PANDURANG, Bombay. Messrs. GOPAL NARAYAN & Co., Bombay. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission Press, Rangoon. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid- i-Am Press, Lahore and Calcutta. Mr. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazair Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. Messrs. A. CHAND & Co., Punjab. Messrs. A. M. & J. FERGUSON, Ceylon. Babu S. C. TALUKDAR, Proprietor, Students and Company, Cooch Behar.
List of numbers of Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India (New Series) published previous to the present issue. No. 1. Standardisation of Calmette's Anti-Venomous Serum with Pure Cobra Venom: the Deterioration of this Serum through keeping in India, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 2. Malaria in India, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No, 3. Some Observations on the Poison of Russell's Viper (Daboia Russellii), by Captain. G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 5 or 6d. No. 4. On the Action of the Venoms of the Cobra and of the Daboia on the Red Blood. corpuscles and on the blood plasma, by Captain G. Lamb, I .M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 5. Specificity of Anti-Venomous Sera, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 6. First Report on the Anti-Malarial Operations in Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 7. Some Observations on the Poison of the Banded Krait (Bungarus Fasciatus), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 8. A Preliminary Report on a Parasite found in Patients suffering from Enlargement of the Spleen in India, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No. 9. Second Report of the Anti-Malarial Operations at Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 10. Specificity of Anti-Venomous Sera (Second Communication), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 11. On a Parasite found in persons suffering from Enlargement of the Spleen in India2 No. 21. On the Standardisation of Anti-Typhoid Vaccine, by Captain George Lamb, M.D., I.M.S. (Director, Pasteur Institute of India), and Captain W. B. C. Forster, M.B., D.P.H., I.M.S. Price As. 6 or 7d. No. 22. Mediterranean Fever in India,: Isolation of the Micrococcus Melitensis, by Captain George Lamb, M.D., I.M.S., and Assistant Surgeon M. Kesava Pai, M.B., C.M. (Madras). Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 23. The Anatomy and Histology of Ticks, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price Rs. 3 or 4s. 6d. No. 24. On a Parasite found in the White Corpuscles of the blood of Palm Squirrels, by Captain W. S. Patton, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 25. On the importance of Larval Characters in the Classification of Mosquitoes, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 26. Leucocytozoon Canis, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 27. Preliminary Report on the Development of the Leishman-Donovan Body in the Bed Bug, by Captain W.S. Patton, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 28. The Sexual Cycle of Leucocytozoon Canis in the Tick, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 29. Piroplasma Canis and its Cycle in the Tick, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B.. I.M.S. Price Rs. 2 or 3s. No. 30. The Theory and Practice of Anti-Rabic Immunisation, by Captain W. F. Harvey, M.B., I.M.S., and Captain Anderson McKendrick, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 31. The Development of the Leishman-Donovan Parasite in Cimex Rotundatus3 No. 42. The Cultivation of the Bacillus of Leprosy and the Treatment of cases by means of a Vaccine prepared from the Cultivations, by Major E. R. Rost, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 43. The Relation of Tetanus to the Hypodermic or Intramuscular Injection of Quinine, by Lieutenant-Colonel Sir D. Semple, KT., M.D. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 44. The Preparation of a Safe and Efficient Antirabic Vaccine, by Lieutenant-Colonel Sir D. Semple, KT., M.D., D.P.H., R.A.M.C. (Retired). Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 45. Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta, by Major E. D. W. Greig, M.D., D.Sc., I.M.S. Price Re. 1-4 or 2s. Published by and on sale at the office of the superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. Copies are also available from all Agents for the sale of Government publications.
CONTENTS. PART I. Introduction. PAGE. CHAPTER I.[ ii ] Large Maps. I.Malaria in the.Punjab. PART I. INTRODUCTION. CHAPTER I. Physical Features, Population and Rainfall. THE Punjab, one of the Provinces of India, along with the much smaller North-West Frontier Province, forms the extreme North-west corner of the Empire. Considerable areas within the political boundaries, such as Kangra, are entirely mountainous, but the main portion of the Punjab and the portion we are concerned with, since it is here that malaria assumes so great an importance, is the great alluvial plain, almost equalling in area Great Britain and carrying a population of 20,000,000, which stretches from the foot of the Himalayas until it terminates to the south in the desert of Rajputana. The Province proper, excluding dependent States, consists of twenty-seven. districts with an average area of from 3,0002 large tracts of bare soil lie untouched and liable during the rains to become sheets of standing water. In almost every case, except where land is particularly valuable or sandy, small towns and cities alike, since they are all built of mud or bricks made locally, are surrounded by excavations. Where the village or town is an ancient one the excavated material accumulates until a large mound is formed upon which the modern village or town is built. In such cases the surrounding excavations which have perhaps taken centuries to form are out of all proportion to the buildings now in existence. Some idea of the size and extent to which these excavations may reach can be gathered from the account given later of the city of Amritsar. The soil of the Punjab is for the most part a fine silt deposited by the rivers whose action has actually formed the land. It is peculiarly impervious to water and is rendered more so by a tendency to the formation of a concretionary layer of so-called "Kunker" a few feet beneath the surface. Even where the soil is more sandy, water running over it gathers a fine mud. which when deposited forms a highly impervious layer greatly hindering absorption, so that shallow pools often disappear as much by evaporation as by being absorbed into the soil. The imperviousness of the soil added to the level character of the country results (wherever heavy rain falls) in large surface collections of water and even. of floods temporarily submerging large tracts of country. A curious physical feature characterising the Punjab and important in this connection is the comparative rarity of small streams. Between the Beas and the Ravi, a distance of about 50 miles, it is doubtful if more than one or two such minor streams are crossed, storm water finding its way along shallow depressions only apparent to the expert hydrologist or along artificially cut drains. At Palwal it is necessary to carry the drainage a distance of seven miles before it can be discharged into a nullah. At Amritsar the city drain extends to a distance of twelve miles before it meets a nullah and their discharges not into any deep channel but more or less on to the surface of the country. Passing through the Punjab one might almost say that, with the exception of the rivers, the country as a whole is featureless. It is only by experience that one learns to realise that though apparently so flat there are, winding through the land, great riverains lying at a slightly lower level than the surrounding country. In the more recent of these riverains there still flow, winding in great curves from side to side, one or other or the rivers of the Punjab. Others are now deserted by the rivers which formed them, as in the case of an old riverain in the Montgo- mery District and an old bed of the Beas which runs through Kasur. Still older riverains have lost much of their distinctiveness, but remain nevertheless as depressed areas and retain the physical features which characterise these tracts. All such riverains are peculiarly liable to flooding. This may take place either by rain water collecting and being unable to drain away sufficiently quickly or by
3 the overflow of the river which runs through them. Even deserted riverains are apt to be flooded by their original rivers when the waters in these reach an excessive height. Another important feature of the riverains is the fact that the subsoil water is near the surface. This is equally the case whether the riverains be narrow or wide. In certain places the rivers have reduced very large tracts to their flood plain level, as has happened for example in the Jhelum riverain above Shahpur where a tract more than thirty miles long and on an average more than ten miles broad lies near flood level. Other examples are seen where the Sutlej near Ferozepore has formed a great loop northwards leaving a riverain behind it more than ten miles broad, and north of Lahore city where the thana of Muridke lies in a great depressed area crossed by old channels of the Ravi and other streams carrying the drainage from Sialkot. Everywhere in such areas the level of the subsoil water is high and after heavy rain it may remain for months within three or four feet of the surface. Between the rivers of the Punjab are strips of country known as the Doabs. On the whole the lands of the Doabs are at a comparatively high level and they are much less liable to floods than the riverains. But they are by no means entirely exempt; for the peculiar conformation of the ground lends itself to the formation during heavy rains of extensive collections of water. The conditions as regards subsoil water in the Doabs is stated to depend a great deal upon the amount of irrigation to which they have been subjected. Throughout most of the Rachna Doab between the Ravi and the Chenab and the Zech Doab between the Chenab and the Jhelum the subsoil water is at a considerable depth (40 feet or more). These Doabs are not only subject to a small rainfall but have only comparatively recently been irrigated. Throughout the northern portions of the Bari Doab which lies between the Beas and Ravi and which has been for a long time heavily irrigated the level of the subsoil water on the contrary is high. Over the Doabs rainfall precipitation tends to be diminished as will be seen from the rainfall maps. There is thus a cyclical tendency for a tract like the Zech Doab which we shall study in more detail later to have a small rainfall and a low subsoil water, and to be comparatively free from the liability to floods. West of the Jhelum rainfall does not reach proportions sufficient to cause extensive flooding and such floods as occur arc usually the effects of rivers over- flowing their banks. But in the eastern half of the Punjab it is doubtful whether any large tract however situated can be considered free from the possibility of flooding should an unusually heavy monsoon rain happen to fall there. The chief rain of the Punjab is that which falls during the south-west monsoon. This monsoon breaks as a rule in the Punjab about the middle of June and continues for about two months. The heaviest rain falls along the eastern B 2
4 border and on the districts lying along the foot of the Himalayan Range. Passing westwards the fall becomes progressively less until the regions to the extreme west even in a year of heavy monsoon receive less than 10 inches at this time. Other showers fall during the year but the preponderating effect of the mon- soon will be evident from the fact that nearly three-quarters of the total average rainfall is that which falls during this period. Before concluding our remarks on the physical features of the Punjab it will be necessary to refer briefly to the irrigation systems. As is well known the Punjab is the seat of enormous irrigation works which have brought thousands of square miles of land within the power of the ryot to cultivate. If one looks at a map of the Punjab prepared to show the distribution of the canal system we shall see how extensively irrigation is carried on. But whilst enormous tracts are covered with a net-work of main canals and their distributaries there are other equally large areas devoid of any irrigation whatever beyond what is obtained from wells or other merely local arrangements. These great blanks, as it were, in the irrigation system enable one, as we shall see later, to judge of the effects produced by irrigation upon malaria.
5 CHAPTER II. Autumnal Epidemic Malaria. The Punjab has always been looked upon as malarious and though it is so dry a tract the recorded death rate from fevers is higher than that for most parts of India. A marked feature of Punjab malaria is its seasonal character. During the cold weather months and the very hot weather following them very little rain falls, and it is not until June when the monsoon sets in that the conditions become favour- able to the breeding of anopheles. Whether or not from this cause malaria remains in abeyance in the Punjab until the autumn when in greater or less degree it becomes prevalent. The admissions for malaria among troops stationed in unhealthy places in the Punjab show very regularly an increase commencing in July or even June and reaching its greatest height in October or November. Investigations at Mian Mir show that this increase in admissions for malaria is associated with a greater prevalence of anopheles and a rise in the spleen rate in the native bazaars of the cantonment. With regard to the infection among troops and the prevalence of anopheles Wilson1 has shown the same thing for Ferozepore. As observations at Mian Mir have now extended over a number of years we are able to say in regard to this station that there occurs a regular fluctuation in the level, so to speak, of malaria as shown by the spleen rate and parasite rate. This level is lowest during the months of June, July and rises highest in Octo- ber, falling again during the winter months. If we examine the mortality records of the Punjab we shall be struck by an almost exact repetition in most years of this curve. Especially before plague appeared and so profoundly modified the seasonal prevalence of deaths we find the number of deaths lowest in June and July, rising in September, highest in October and November and falling again through the early months of the year. In a paper attached to this report2 is given the result of a preliminary study of the mortality statistics with reference to the investigation of epidemic disease. The principle made use of depends upon the fact that if for any given community the number of total weekly or monthly deaths is plotted out in the form of a curve this will maintain an approximately level line except when epidemic disease makes its effects seen in the form of an "epidemic rise." This result of epidemic disease in India is so enormous that we can study records of its effects even should our 1 Wilson: Notes on the fevers prevalent at Ferozepore in the Punjab.6 statistics not be absolutely accurate, the epidemic in such cases causing a mortality out of all proportion to that of non-epidemic times; we can in fact, study a death curve with its periodical epidemic rises as dispassionately as we could the record of a seismograph or other recording instrument. A very remarkable feature of these epidemic rises in the Punjab is the regularity with which those due to a particular disease tend to occupy a certain definite portion of the year. Another feature is that the form of the curve tends to be characteristic of particular diseases, the curve for cholera differing in character from those due to either plague or malaria. In such a study we are not dependent on the diagnosis of the returns of deaths. which obviously are open to grave fallacy, though we use these in helping us to interpret the curve. Studying mortality curves from different areas of the Punjab in this way we shall be greatly struck by their similarity. During March, April and May we may encounter during latter years an enor- mous rise, the effect of epidemic plague. In those year's in which plague is not prevalent we shall find either a normal level maintained or slight rises associated with smallpox and other epidemic disease. About August there often occurs a remarkably sharp and sudden rise. A study of returns shows this to be the effect of cholera. Still later in October and November we come to another rise usually shaped like a truncated cone but rising more abruptly than it falls. This epidemic rise in the autumn is extremely characteristic of death returns. from the Punjab. It is seen in the death curve of almost every town and thana except in those exceptionally situated in desert regions such as the Thal; in charts of most places scarcely a year is seen which does not show it to a greater or less extent (vide Chart 1).1 Examining the records it is rare that any other cause than "fever" can be found to account for it and even if other epidemic diseases are prevalent their incidence is out of all proportion to the immense mass of deaths ascribed to fever. If we examine the curve as shown at different places we shall see that it varies very greatly in height and that it is highest as a rule in those places noted for malaria. Again if year by year in any particular place we follow the variations in the height of the autumnal epidemic rises we shall see that they are highest in the years noted as most malarious. When well developed the autumn epidemic rise exhibits very specific charac- ters, it rises abruptly in September, maintains its greatest height through October and November and sinks rapidly to December and through January to normal. In years in which the rise is small the curve is often more acutely pointed and may be delayed so that the highest point is reached in November or even in December, 1 All the maps and charts illustrating this report will be found in a pocket attached to the back cover.
7 this type of curve being especially seen in the records of the extreme north-west where rainfall is most scanty. As a rule the curve is not interfered with or obscured by those of other epidemic diseases. Sometimes its origin is hidden by a late cholera rise and some- times its fall is merged in the commencement of the effects of plague, (vide Chart 1), but as a rule it stands clear as a very definite and characteristic epidemic rise. It is not a normal constituent of the death curve as in some years it is entirely absent. We can then divide our fever deaths into (a) those returned along with other causes of deaths going to form the ordinary normal mortality and (b) those which are recorded during and which go to form the epidemic rise we have been consi- dering. Normally in the Punjab the former class number about 30, 000 per mensem. What proportion of these deaths returned as fever are really due to malaria cannot at present even be guessed at. The term " fever" being only the diagnosis of the friend of the deceased or of the village chowkidar cannot be taken as at all necessarily indicating "malaria." In fact the term obviously includes not only all febrile diseases but a great host of deaths returned as fever for want of a better name. The latter class which we can ascribe entirely to the direct or indirect effects of some epidemic disease prevalent during the months of October and, November may in an unhealthy year reach a total of 300,000 deaths or a figure about equal to the total annual fever mortality under normal conditions. Popularly the increase of sickness and death at times when this curve is high is attributed without hesitation to malaria. However inaccurate the diagnosis of " fever" may be there is no doubt that excluding plague which has affected the Punjab very severely in recent years, the occurrence of a very healthy or a very unhealthy year as judged by total mortality returns depends almost entirely upon the excess of deaths from " fevers " which has gone to form the autumnal epidemic rise. Whether any of the rises in the early parts of the year are due to malaria we cannot yet say. But if they are it will be clear from the charts given that as a rule these rises are insignificant in comparison with the extraordinary rise occurring almost every year from " fevers " in the autumn. We may content ourselves here by pointing out that in the case of the autumnal epidemic rise malaria, if it be malaria, is exhibiting its effects upon the mortality curve as an epidemic disease.
9 PART II. AUTUMNAL EPIDEMIC (FULMINANT) MALARIA. CHAPTER III. The Epidemic of 1908. The autumn of 1908 in the Punjab was characterised by an epidemic of extraordinary severity. The effects of this epidemic were first prominently brought before the public by a sudden disorganisation of the train service due to "fever" among the employees at the large railway centre, Lahore. With equal suddenness it made its presence felt throughout the whole Punjab. Where the epidemic was severely felt almost the entire population seems to have been prostrated by sick- ness; and the mortality almost invariably rose in such places to a rate of several hundreds per mille. A very peculiar feature of the epidemic was that though it was severely felt in the rural areas (the returns for the Gurgaon district for example showing among a population of 687,199 a death rate during October of 267 per mile), it seemed to reach its greatest intensity in certain of the towns and very severely affected even the larger cities. At Amritsar, a city of 160,000 inhabitants, it is stated that almost the entire population was prostrated and the ordinary business of the city interrupted. For many weeks labour for any purpose was unprocurable and even food vendors ceased to carry on their trade. Thus not only was ordinary food difficult to obtain and the prices excessive, but, owing to malaria among the cowkeeper class, milk, a necessity for the very young and the sick, was practically unprocurable even at the exorbitant rate of 8 to 12 annas per seer. In the two months, October and November, during which the epidemic was at its highest, 307,316 deaths were recorded in the Punjab. In Amritsar the mortality for many weeks was at the rate of over 200 per mille. In Palwal mortality rose to 420 per mille and in Bhera to 493 per mille. Curiously enough in Delhi, a noto- riously malarious town, the death rate rose only to 149 per mille. But a closer examination of the statistics shows that parts of the city were much more seriously affected than one would judge to be the case from the statistics for the whole city; in Ward I, for instance, the mortality rose to over 300 per mille. In the rural returns the mortality rates were not as a rule so high as those given for badly affected towns. This might be taken as showing that the mortality was greater in towns than in rural areas, but a study of returns from individual thanas and villages modifies this conclusion, many villages and even whole thanas showing mortality rates during October and November of 30010 When I first commenced the study of this epidemic I was under the impression that the conditions during this year were quite exceptional. This belief I am inclined to think was general. The severity of the epidemic led many to doubt its malarial nature and even when the probability of its being malaria was allowed the admission was generally held to signify that some special peculiarity was to be expected in the type of malaria present or in the mosquito which transmitted it. In the course of my investigation it will I think be clear why I no longer look upon the outbreak of 1908 as unique or as likely to be due to causes new to the Punjab. (i) Sickness. At Amritsar an examination of the out-patient returns at the hospital showed an increase in total admissions in September from an average of about 400 to 800 and 900 per week. The cause of this increase is entirely due to the extra number of cases entered under malarial fevers, which rose from a number never exceeding one hundred per week to 566 in the 3rd week in October. In the months of February to April there is an increase noted in the numbers of cases attending for disease of the spleen (enlarged spleen). The city dispensary returns for the years 1900 to 1908 are as follows :11 At Bhera dispensary the weekly admissions for malarial fevers rose from a number never exceeding 50 to over 500 (vide Chart 2). Towards the end of the epidemic most of the excess in admissions was due to cases attending for enlarge- ment of the spleen. At Miani the number of admissions for malaria rose from under 50 per week to nearly 700 per week. (ii) Mortality. The nature of the mortality curves for different areas will be apparent from Chart 3.1 They show a sharp rise usually towards the end of September, a high level maintained throughout October and part or the whole of November and rates falling rapidly in December and January to normal. The resemblance of the curve to that of the autumn epidemics previously referred to will be apparent. It is remarkable that with the exception of the extreme south-east, where the characteristic rise from mortality took place about a fortnight earlier than in the northern part of the Punjab, places even hundreds of miles apart were affected simultaneously. A comparison of the mortality curve with the dispensary records shows that the two curves follow one another very closely. In the case of Amritsar the admissions first began to be affected towards the end of August, but were not seriously increased until the second week in September; the deaths were first markedly increased in the fourth week in September. In the case of admissions for sickness the numbers rose to its maximum in the week ending the 3rd October and then declined rather rapidly. The death rate was highest in the week ending 17th October. But the numbers of deaths continued comparatively much higher than the admissions for sickness and did not decline until the end of November, or about a month later than the fall in sickness rates. At Bhera the first indication of an increase of sickness occurred in the fourth week in August; the first indication of an increase of mortality was in the middle of September. The admissions were highest in the first week of October and mortal- ity in the third week. At Miani sickness and mortality appeared almost coincidently, but the admissions rose to their highest point in the last week of September, whilst the greatest mortality was in the second week in October. In the case of Bhera a second rise in the number of admissions occurred in- dependently of in creased mortality reaching its maximum at the end of November. In this town therefore the sickness outlasted the mortality (vide next section). Roughly speaking the increase of mortality followed the increase in sickness by about a fortnight. 1It will be found in a pocket at the end of the Memoir. c2
12 Age composition of mortality. At Amritsar deaths are recorded by the return to a Registrar of the permits given to persons burying relations in the cemeteries. The system, so far as I have been able to judge, is conscientiously carried out; and the fact that the city is so densely populated makes it improbable that many burials take place except in the cemeteries. During the epidemic over 10,000 deaths were recorded of which we may calculate more than 7,000 must have been directly due to the epidemic. With such an opportunity it seemed desirable to make a study of the age inci- dence and distribution of these deaths. Particulars regarding each death were recorded upon a slip and the results of various sortings noted. Results which refer more especially to the distribution of the mortality in different parts of the city will be referred to later when the conditions at Amritsar are discussed. For the present I shall confine myself to the more general features of the epidemic mortality as shown in the analysis of 10,202 deaths in vestigated. Separating the total deaths under their respective recorded ages the general nature of the mortality is evident. Stillbirths 568 Children under one year 1,389 4,528 Children over one year and under two 1,253 " " two years " " three 958 " " three " " " four 576 " " four " " " five 352 " " five " " " ten 795 " " ten " " " fifteen 310 Persons aged 15 to 20 225 " " 20 " 30 518 " " 30 " 40 403 " " 40 " 50 502 " " 50 " 60 605 Persons over 60 1,748 Of the 10,202 deaths at Amritsar during the epidemic 5,273 deaths were there- ore in children under 5 years of age, as against 4,929 for all other ages; 1,748 or another 17 per cent. were in persons 60 years and over. The plotting out of these figures gives the curve shown in Chart 4. Taking into consideration the fact that the recording of ages must be open to many falla- cies the regular nature of the curve is very remarkable and suggests that registra- tion of ages is more accurate than one has suspected. The age composition of the Amritsar population being given in the Census the actuals recorded above were educed to rates per mille for each age, the curve made by these figures being shown by the dotted line on the chart. The epidemic mortality though greater in degree therefore shows the same general incidence as does the normal mortality.
13 In so severe an epidemic mortality it is surprising to find so few distinctive features one can ascribe to the disease, the ratios suggesting only a great exaggera- tion of normal stress. But though at first sight the curve of deaths at Amritsar seems merely an exaggeration of the normal, it will be seen, comparing the epidemic with the normal figures taken from the Census of 1901, that the increase is not really proportionate at all ages. The deaths among children under 1 year for example in the epidemic increased only from the normal 206 to 412, whereas at the age of 5 the increase was from 41 to 356 and at the age of from 5 to 10 years from 13 to 65. Working out the different increases in the form of a percentage increase curve, it is seen that there is a greater relative increase at two years of ago than at any other time and that this effect lasts to about the age of 10. The best demonstration of the differences between the two curves is given by representing in terms of the standard deviations for each series the increase or decrease of the abnormal over the normal mortality at the different ages (vide Chart 4). Or the effect is very remarkably brought out by simply dividing the number of deaths at any age which normally occur into the number recorded during the epi- demic (vide also Chart 2). In each case the sudden drop in the curve which occurs at about the age of 10 is very noticeable. At Palwal 680 out of 1,057 deaths were in children under 10, and 304 of these deaths were in infants one year of age and under. Analysis of the curve showed the same relative increase of effect upon childhood as against infancy as noted above. At Bhera 537 out of 703 deaths were in children under 10, and deaths in infants one year of age and under numbered 260. In 1,014 deaths among villages around Bhera, 832 were in children under 10 and 373 in infants one year and under. As a matter of interest at Bhera and some other affected places the recorded deaths for the first year of life were divided into months; the result is very remarkable. MONTH. 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Bhera villages 49 22 43 38 25 23 31 13 16 15 27 11 Bhera town 29 17 19 11 20 18 16 15 17 11 13 5 Amritsar malarious portions 72 6 64 57 39 26 45 20 31 28 20 19 Amritsar Central portions 54 16 32 9 13 13 14 7 15 10 8 8 Amritsar central non-epidemic por- tions 26 6 6 4 2 3 6 1 6 7 4 5
14 It will thus be seen that the epidemic mortality has very definite characters. Following the weekly deaths at Amritsar for each age separately the curve for children under two years was found to rise almost sheer reaching its maximum in the second and third week of October, but at once falling rapidly. The curve of children under 10 rises more slowly and reaches its maximum in the first week in November. The curve of adult deaths rises still more gradually and reaches its maximum only in the last week in November. The curve of old people resembles that of children under 10. Looking at the curve shown by deaths in Amritsar it will be clear that its con- formation is largely due to the facts we have described. The first rush upwards of the line and the first peak is largely due to the sudden mortality amongst infants and young children, the second peak is due to the increasing deaths amongst adults together with the continuance of high death rate among children under 10. Between the two peaks is a notch which is always shown in the figures for different parts of Amritsar city. A similar notch is seen in the curves for Delhi and Palwal. At Bhera and Miani where adult mortality was low the second peak or hump is not apparent, nor is the same breadth of the curve visible. Both characters are seen, however, in the curves for Sonepat, Mehrauli and Jhelum. At Palwal the second peak due, as at Amritsar to deaths among adults reaching their maximum later than did those among infants, is even higher than the first. Stillbirths. Associated with the increased mortality at Amritsar was an extraordinary increase in deaths returned as "stillborn." The increase was so great, reaching, in the four months September to December, the figure of 568, that it must be con- sidered part of the effect of the epidemic. Since the records come from the ceme- teries the term stillbirth could scarcely have been applied to any condition other than a birth within the last three months of pregnancy or to children dying within the first day or so of birth. We may (in order to see the significance of the figures and allowing a latitude greater than we have indicated) consider that deaths recorded as stillbirths represent deaths in the f15 At Bhera and other places stillbirths were not recorded in such numbers, but it is quite possible the conditions were not so favourable as at Amritsar for the record of such occurrences. (iii) Spleen Rate. In Chapters VI to VII will be considered in detail the conditions at those places actually visited; but a summary of the observations upon splenic enlarge- ment and parasite rate seems desirable whilst discussing the general characters of the epidemic. In order to give more information than is given by merely quoting the total percentage of children with enlarged spleens I have adopted for the record of spleen rate five classes, namely, (1) very large spleens reaching to the umbilicus or beyond ; (2) spleens four fingers' or a hand's breadth below the costal margin or approx- imately 7-10 cm.; (3) spleens two or three fingers' breadth below the costal mar- gin or approximately 2-7 cm.; (4) spleens only palpable or a finger's breadth below the costal margin (2 cm.); (5) spleens not palpable. In this paper are given the percentages of these five classes always in the same order, namely, from left to right, class I, II, III, IV, V. Following these is given the total percentage of children with enlarged spleens, and last of all the numbers of children examined. Immediately after the epidemic (February to April) the spleen rate in per- centages of those places visited was as follows :16 At Delhi a sub-division of the figures into those relating to the badly affected Wards 4, 5, and 11 lying towards the river Jumna and those relating to the com- paratively slightly affected wards on the west of the city gives :17 At other places examined at this time the relations were as below:18 accompanied everywhere by an increase in dispensary admissions for what was clinically malaria; it was also followed in every case where the subject was enquired into by a noticeable increase in the numbers of people attending hospital for splenic enlargement. The greatest incidence of mortality was amongst infants and the study of mor- tality at Amritsar demonstrates a very peculiar coincidence between the greatest relative increase of mortality and the periods of life known to be most subject to malarial infection. Examination shortly after the epidemic of areas especially affected shows in every instance a remarkable condition of almost universal infection with malaria. In Palwal and the affected areas of Amritsar almost every child had splenic enlarge- ment and malarial parasites in the blood. In Bhera and in the villages of the Bhera thana the same condition prevailed. When, as in the thanas of Bhalwal and Kot Momon in the Shahpur District, an area but little affected by the epidemic is examined the spleen rate is low. The same thing holds good for parts of Amritsar and Delhi that were compara- tively little affected. Lastly, the enlargement of spleen found so universally is accompanied by a proportionate prevalence of malaria parasites; and these are of the ordinary well known varieties. Later in the report the malarial nature of the epidemic and its relation to the ordinary malaria of the district will be even more apparent.
19 CHAPTER IV. The Distribution of the Epidemic of 1908. The epidemic affected to greater or less extent almost the whole of the central and eastern Punjab. In the returns for towns a marked rise in deaths in the months of October and November was almost universal. Almost all the districts also show some increase in the death rates, those most seriously affected being Gurgaon and Gujrat. A detailed and very instructive picture of the distribution of the mortality is that obtained by a method which I have described in a paper previously referred to. In this I have explained how it is possible with considerable accuracy to map out both the area affected by an epidemic and the epidemic intensity at different places. The figures which have enabled me to do this in the present instance were very kindly supplied to me by the Sanitary Commissioner of the Punjab. In mapping the conditions I have employed for the epidemic rate the total deaths in October, the epidemic in almost every case being at its highest in this month. The average non-epidemic rate I have obtained by averaging the deaths in June and July for five years, avoiding those years in which plague or cholera disturbed the figures. Throughout I have employed the thanas as units. As an example of the extraordinary increases in the death rate with which we are dealing and to show how comparatively little slight inaccuracy would affect the general results, the reader may refer to Chapter VII where a number of examples are given. The result of mapping out the epidemic of 1908 in this way is shown in Map I.1 In preparing this map I have placed opposite the name of each thana the epidemic figure relating to it and then drawn lines of equi-mortality through these. The figures have been omitted in the final copy of the map for the sake of clearness, colours only being used to express intensity. Mapping out in this way the extreme limit of distribution of the epidemic, its area would be very great, but limiting our attention to those places affected by a death rate over five times the normal we get the picture shown on the accompanying map. Two large epidemic areas are shown, one on the north involving Gujrat, Gujranwala and Shahpur, and one in the south-east involving Gurgaon, Delhi and parts of Rohtak Districts which were evidently the seat of great epidemic intensity. Other smaller epidemic centres are shown, notably one over Ludhiana and part of Jullunder; but in comparison with the two large areas noted these are small in area and low in intensity. 1 It will be found in a pocket at the end of the Memoir. The three shades of red indicate in order of intensity a death rate during October of five, seven and ten times the normal respectively. The three shades of blue indicate in order of intensity a rainfall during June to September of over ten, over twenty, and over thirty inches respectively. D2
20 These areas are clearly not chance effects, for they show not only a clearly defined affected tract but exhibit a regular increase of epidemic intensity as we pass from the periphery to the centre of the area. Had the malaria of 1908 depended on merely local causes, the number of pools about a village and so on, we should have expected to obtain a map covered with confused figures indicating haphazard variations, as the intensity of the disease rose or fell from thana to thana. There would be no reason why numbers of severely affected thanas should form as it were a nucleus to epidemic areas or that the intensity of the disease should show a more or less regular decline as we pass outwards from these foci. I am not aware that these features have ever been demonstrated in regard to malaria; and the map alone is sufficient to show that there was in the epidemic of 1908 some general determining influence over and above merely local conditions which acted much as an area of low or high atmospheric pressure might have acted, supposing this to affect the mortality. Turning to a study of the details shown by the map we cannot fail to be struck by the fact that a very noticeable feature, especially of the northern area, is the occurrence of certain tongues of epidemic, and it will be clear that these tend to be associated with certain of the larger rivers. To the north the northern area is limited by the mountairs and in the east it seems to have avoided Gurdaspur; but on the west it extends in great intensity along the Jhelum river to end somewhere in the neighbourhood of Shahpur. The tract of land between the rivers Jhelum and Chenab is comparatively unaffected, but in the neighbourhood of the Chenab river another great tongue of the epidemic extends in a south-westerly direction. Again passing southwards the inter- riverain tract is unaffected; but we come to a third tongue lying broadly speaking over the Ravi. This tongue is continued by two isolated patches further down the river at Kamalia and Tolumba. To the south of this tongue there is a broad patch of epidemic which would appear from the map not to be associated with any river, but which is in reality associated with a deserted riverain of the Beas, which river formerly ran through Kasur and the Montgomery District. Two spots of epidemic intensity are seen in connection with the Sutlej riverain, but otherwise this tract is unaffected. The southern area does not show in the Punjab any particular epidemic tongues, though as a matter of fact, as we shall find later, this area is only partly represented within the confines of the Punjab. A distinct association of an epidemic area with a river is shown at Ellenabad and Jamal below Sirsa where the river Ghagger ends blindly. Other spots are shown at Mailsi and Mitro, in this case to the side of, but extending away from, the Sutlej and on the banks
21 of the Indus where this river first debouches from the hills in the north of the Mianwali District. A tract occupying part of Ludhiana and extending up between the Hoshiapur and Jullunder Districts, will be observed to lie across, but not to extend along, the Sutlej valley. But though the fringes of the epidemic show a relation to rivers, etc., the main epidemic areas show comparatively little relation to any physical features and affect without exception the thanas over a very wide extent of country. The conditions in such areas are altogether extraordinary. In the northern epidemic area throughout a tract covering a great part of Gujrat, half of Gujran- wala and a part of the Lahore District, there is not a thana in which the death rate for the month of October did not rise over seven times the normal rate, whilst the death rate for the thana of Gujrat itself was eleven times greater than the normal ; and if we can credit the figures there are villages in the Gujrat thana showing in some cases a mortality as much as thirty times the normal. In the special focus at Bhera there are scarcely any villages showing a death rate below 200 per mille, whilst the majority ranged between 200 and 400, and one shows the extraordinary figure of 641 per mille. If it were not for Bhera town itself, which shows an equally high mortality rate, we should hesitate to credit these extraordinary values. Yet if there be errors of registration, one would think they must err on the side of under- estimating rather than overestimating the mortality. In the southern area scarcely a thana south of Delhi had a death rate under seven times the normal, whilst again there are areas in the centre of the epidemic area which have been even more severely affected, the rates varying from ten to seventeen times the normal. In the thana of Nuh for example, where there normally are about 125 deaths in the month, there occurred in October 1908 no less than 1,404 deaths. In the thana of Hodal, which normally has about 100 deaths, there occurred in October 1,083 deaths. In the thana of Ferozepore, with a normal of 130 deaths per month, there occurred 2,346 deaths. In the case of the southern area the nucleus is almost coincident with the Gurgaon District. The population of the Gurgaon District is nearly three-quar- ters of a million. In October the recorded death rate per mille was 267. This being the average of all villages in the district, it is more than probable that many of them must have had rates much higher. As a rule the maximum intensity reached by the mortality in 1908 was about 400 per mille. Such effects are not seen elsewhere than within the circumscribed zone of an epidemic nucleus. In the case of towns if we refer to the figures we shall see that those situated in areas of special intensity suffered most severely in the epidemic of 1908.
22 The following list of towns with the rate per mille for the last week in October is taken from the returns published in the Punjab Gazette. Opposite to them is placed the epidemic figure for the thana in which the town is situated:23 Though no extension northwards of the epidemic is shown beyond the Jhelum District there were areas in Rawalpindi and Attock which were just too low to be included in the line representing the epidemic figure of 5. Had a line representing three times the normal death rate been taken, considerable areas in these districts would have been shown as affected. The most important extension of epidemic conditions beyond the limits of the Punjab was into the United Provinces. I have had no opportunity to study the figures in detail relating to the epidemic distribution in these parts: but an exam- ination of the monthly district figures given in the report of the Provincial Sanitary Commissioner enables me to indicate the main distribution sufficiently in detail for our purpose. The two worst affected districts appear to have been Muttra and Agra which show for the whole district an epidemic figure in each case of about 7. These districts lie to the south-east of Gurgaon and thus the epidemic conditions are continued in great intensity down the valley of the Jumna. The other districts most seriously affected are Bulandshahr, Alighar and Budaon, all of which lie grouped around the first two mentioned districts, thus forming the nucleus of a large epidemic area. Around these again lies a belt of less seriously affected dis- tricts, the epidemic figures of which grow less until they approach unity at a line, roughly speaking, which passes through the centre of the Province from north to south. East of this line most of the districts are unaffected. The epidemic which in 1908 affected the United Provinces was therefore the eastern half of the southern epidemic we have already studied in the Punjab. What the extension of this area to the south in the Central India Agency or what the conditions were in Sindh, I have no information to enable me to say.
24 CHAPTER V. Previous Epidemics in the Punjab. As already stated when I commenced the study of the epidemic of 1908 I was under the impression that I had to deal with some newly introduced condition. But on studying the records I was surprised to find that not only had there been similar epidemics in the past, but that several of these were scarcely inferior in their effects to the epidemic of 1908. Also when these were mapped out they showed very strikingly the localised nature of the epidemic area and the peculiar increase of intensity as the nucleus was approached which enables one to map out these Punjab epidemics as one might do the varying levels of land by contour lines or the differences of atmospheric pressure by isobars. The first epidemic for which we have mortality figures occurred in 1869 (vide Chart 5). As detailed figures are not available I have not been able to map out its distribution. The number of deaths recorded from fever in October and Nov- ember was 116,540; though at this time registration was less accurate than it has been in late years. The years 1870, 1872 and 1875 show rather high fever figures, but the first great rise in mortality occurs in 1876, the recorded deaths from fever in October and Nov- ember in this year being 174,238. The epidemic responsible for this rise in the mortality when mapped out is seen to be a much less diffused area than that of 1908 and large tracts in the Punjab are quite unaffected. The greatest intensity of the epidemic in this case is over Sialkot, Gurdaspur and parts of Hoshiarpur and Jullunder. The tendency to follow rivers is seen at three places (Chenab, Ravi and Sutlej), but there are no such long tongues as in 1908. The death rate over almost the whole of Sialkot, Gurdaspur and Hoshiarpur was over seven times the normal, whilst in the nucleus of the epidemic there are epidemic figures as high as 20. In 1878 there is an epidemic affecting chiefly Ludhiana, Jullunder and Hoshi- arpur. The extreme limits of the epidemic do not extend beyond a line bisecting the Punjab from north to south; and the chief severity is confined to a compara- tively small area. The main epidemic area lay in the neighbourhood of the Sutlej, but the epidemic shewed a peculiar extension along the north of the Amritsar District with a special focus about Batala. A slight degree of increased mortality also formed tongues along the three rivers-the Jhelum, the Chenab and the Ravi-much as happened in the epidemic of 1908. There was also a spot of epidemic intensity at Bhera and some small areas in Gurgaon, Delhi and Rohtak. The number of deaths recorded in the months of October and November in this year was 180,356.
25 The following year, 1879, another epidemic, confined to the extreme south, attacked the Punjab. The main effects of this epidemic were seen over Hissar and parts of the Gurgaon District, the nucleus of the epidemic being very large, though the effects of the epidemic as a whole were circumscribed. A spot of epidemic intensity is seen over Ellenabad, Rania and Sirsa. The thanas Indri, Butana, Nisang are also seen to be affected to some extent. The deaths in this year in the months of October and November, in spite of the circumscribed area affected and the defective registration, numbered 141,996. In 1884 we have an epidemic area over Ludhiana and Umballa with a nucleus characterised by very high figures, the thana of Machiwara showing 30 times the normal death rate, whilst several thanas are 18 and 19 times the normal. There are also three curious small isolated areas of high intensity, one in the low-lying area of Thanda Urmar stretching northwards to Gurdaspur, one near Delhi and one in the Sutlej riverain near Ferozepore. A peculiar tongue of epidemic lies along the Jumna riverain in the Karnal District. Again a spot of epidemic is to be seen at Ellenabad. The extreme limits of the epidemic as shown by an epidemic figure of two or over do not extend as far west as the Montgomery District. In the years 1887 and 1889 there was a raised mortality, but I have not traced out the epidemic distribution. In 1890 we have an extraordinarily compact epidemic with an enormous nu- cleus involving Sialkot, parts of Gujrat and Gujranwala, characterised by terrible mortality rates, Wazirabacl having an epidemic figure of 28, Sialkot of 26 and Gujrat of 24. In this year the deaths numbered 246,487 in spite of the fact that large por- tions of the southern and western Punjab was unaffected. In 1892 there is again an epidemic area of enromous size, vide large map (Map II). This year in fact is one remembered as the great fever year. But in spite of the enormous nucleus extending over several whole districts there was in the southern Punjab no trace of an epidemic. The death rates indeed for most of the thanas in Gurgaon, Karnal and Rohtak were not raised above their non- epidemic rates. The epidemic in this year extended further west than any previous one and involved almost the whole of the Shahpur District as well as seriously affecting Montgomery and Multan. Its effects were also felt northwards in Rawalpindi and even in Peshawar. Several tongues are seen extending to the south-west and there are some isolated spots of epidemic in the Sutlej riverain and near Sirsa. The deaths in this year numbered 283,223 or only slightly less than the number in 1908. In 1894 there is a single epidemic area over Gurdaspur, Amritsar, Jullunder and part of Sialkot and Hoshiapur, with a small nucleus to the north of the E
26 Amritsar District and one over Jullunder. The deaths in this year numbered for October and November 132,767. In 1900 there was a large epidemic over Ludhiana, Umballa and Karnal. To the north over Gurdaspur and Sialkot was another smaller epidemic area with points of special intensity over Gurdaspur and Raya. In the Lahore District is shown a small isolated area of high intensity which lies somewhat north of the Sutlej (old bed of Beas). The deaths in the autumn of this year numbered 254,580 as against 307,316 in 1908. Therefore even so late as 1900 we have a condition very similar to and a mortality not very far short of that in 1908. The conditions in the year 1908 were therefore in no way new to the Punjab. Even as regards gross mortality this epidemic was but slightly more severe than the epidemic of 1892, and the areas of special intensity were neither so extensive nor so severe as those of some previous years. What seems to have made the year 1908 so noticeable was the fact that epidemic conditions were diffused so generally throughout the Punjab. This year was also the first in which two distinct epidemic areas of large size have been present. In years not so tremendously characterised by mortality we find that the autumn fever exhibits the same tendency to localisation, but, being smaller in degree and insignificant in area, such epidemics do not influence the general statis- tics as do the great ones we have just described. In other years there are no epi- demic areas. For want of time I have attempted to trace out a few recent years only; 1906 is an example of a year with small epidemics; 1903 also shows incipient epidemic areas; 1904 was practically free from any epidemic and it is noticeable that the deaths for October and November are not above the normal non-epidemic rate of about 30,000 per mensem. These facts show us that in the Punjab we have malaria normally exhibiting itself in a very peculiar and definite way, one of the characters of which is the formation over some part or other of the Punjab of what might almost be called a malaria cyclone. Later on we shall see that these effects are not due merely to the malaria visiting now and again a population otherwise free from the disease, for, as we shall see later, in years when the mortality is not above normal we still find that ano- pheles are plentiful, that the prevalence of enlarged spleen is very great and that parasites are found freely in the blood of children and others. From the characters I have outlined this type of malarial manifestation might well be called "fulminant" malaria, and I shall in future term areas severely affected in this way "fulminant areas."
27 CHAPTER VI. Conditions at Amritsar and Other Towns. (i) Amritsar. In the epidemic of 1908, Amritsar lost over 10,000 persons or one-sixteenth of its population. Being an important city, a large trade centre and the religious capital of the Sikhs this effect of the epidemic naturally aroused a great deal of attention. That malaria had this effect upon the population of a city (and this a very compactly built one even for the Punjab where the cities as a rule are very compact), and the fact that during the epidemic towns seem to have suffered. even more severely than the rural areas, made the investigation of conditions at Amrit- sar very important. Amritsar, the population of which in 1901 was 161,039, is situated on the Bari Doab, about midway between the two rivers28 since they do not breed anopheles and are surrounded by the least malarious parts of the town. The main roads are lined with shops and off these open narrow "gullies" which correspond to the slums of European towns, and are often so narrow that two people cannot easily pass one another without stepping aside. In parts there are buildings 4 or 5 stories high massed together, so that the gullies between them are quite dark and gloomy. For the purpose of description this portion of the town will be called the central area. Along its western side are the densely crowded quarters known as Katras Moti Ram, Lohgohr, Dulu and Chitta Katra. A small portion near the Hospital garden already referred to known as Sant Singh is occupied by sweepers and cowkeepers, and is perhaps more correctly considered a portion of the outer zone. Towards the centre are the crowded Katras Chauk Pasian, and Chowrasta Atara, Churt Singh and Hari Singh. To the east lying in Division 6 are the grain and salt markets. To the south is Killabangian, partly a comparatively well-to-do quarter and partly occupied by cowkeeper class, this latter portion forming as it were a small bay in which the outer zone penetrates further into the centre of Amritsar than usual. A similar bay occurs on the south-east corner (Bhai Busti Ram), and a small island (K. Khai) of high houses occupied by well-to-do Hindus lies to the south of the central area in the Khazana Division (vide Map III). These points are all of importance in regard to observations later on upon the mortality and spleen rate. As one approaches the periphery the tall many storied buildings of the central area give place rather abruptly to buildings one or at most two stories high, usually built of brick with flat mud, roofs. So soon as this outer zone is reached, open yards, stables and such like conditions are found, and cowsheds which scarcely exist in the central area are here numerous. The Division known as Kunyan is almost composed of the houses of cowkeepers, whilst large communities of the same class live in Mahan Singh and elsewhere. As one approaches the walls open spaces are found encroaching upon the city or what evidently have been gardens, now exist as waste land and lie between crowded collections of mud and brick houses. To the south and west the lands are for the most part cultivated or waste, but to the north-east in Jalewalyan many are still kept up as private gardens. In Division 2 what would elsewhere be land of this kind has been made into a Municipal garden. Though forming what might seem to be the least important portion of the city, this peripheral zone is densely populated and taken collectively its inhabitants equal or exceed the apparently more important central zone. Thus Division 9, which consists wholly of houses such as we have described as forming the outer zone, has a population of 17,206. Division 7, also wholly composed of this class of house, has a population of 12,272, and Division 5 of 10,521.
29 As far as the arrangement of the Municipal Divisions will allow us we may make the following rough calculation of the number of persons living in the central and peripheral zones respectively :30 made out that between the city and the original surface of the land, for the most part cultivated and bearing crops or lying fallow as the case may be, is an excavated zone in some places a mile in width, from which more or less recently or remotely millions of tons of soil have been excavated. In part these excavated lands are dry, in part covered with water. To the north-east of the city the subsoil level is very high and the appearance is that of a sodden marsh, the land when not covered by water showing saline efflorescence and a stunted unhealthy looking growth of grass. Around the city lies a drain evidently intended to cut off to some extent the flow of subsoil water from the north-east. This drain in its upper parts is full to the brim of sluggish water covered with lemna but flows more swiftly as it passes to the south. Nearer the city is a second drain full of rank vegetation and heavily polluted. It rarely contains larvæ. When the pools and sheets of water are examined more closely many of them are seen to be so foul with sewage that as regards mosquito larvæ they are quite sterile. Others less polluted and of a vivid green from the growth of blue green algæ serve as breeding places of chironomus, but are quite unsuitable for "anopheles" or even "culex." Previous Epidemics at Amritsar. The present epidemic is not the first from which the city of Amritsar has suffered, nor even the most severe. The recorded deaths in October 1881 numbered 5,582 or about 1,500 more than they did in October 1908. Epidemic conditions in the Punjab generally were not very severe in this year and even in Amritsar District the mortality bore no relation to that in the city. It seems very probable that the severity of the outbreak was associated with economic conditions affecting the large bodies of Kashmiri workers who about this time were adversely affected by the decay of the shawl trade in Amritsar. Other epidemic years have been 1876 when deaths in October numbered 2,430, 1878 when there were 1,690 deaths, and the years 1890 and 1892 when, however, deaths in October only numbered 1,254 and 1,663, respectively. An epidemic, with 10,000 to 12,000 deaths, is also recorded as having occurred in 1867. Distribution of Epidemic Mortality in Amritsar. In Chapter III the result of an analysis of the Amritsar deaths has been given according to ages and other general conditions. But the material was also made use of to ascertain the distributions of mortality in the city. For this purpose Amritsar was divided into 44 areas which represented very roughly about the same population and, so far as could be seen, were homogeneous within themselves.
31 The slips upon which the locality of the death were recorded were then sorted. so as to obtain information regarding the deaths in each of the chosen areas. In noting the final results certain of these areas were massed together, but only such as were found to exhibit no essential differences in regard to mortality. Unfortunately the only areas in Amritsar for which the population is known (the divisions) lie for the most part radially, so that they include portions of both ceatre and periphery of the town. Three divisions, however, 4, 6 and 8, are wholly central and six divisions, 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7 and 9, are mainly peripheral (vide Map III). For the sake of getting rates per mille I have given the figures as they work out for these wards in the different months of the epidemic. For the sake of comparison the mortality of divisions 10, 11, and 12, which lie along the western portion of the town and compose the western half of the central zone, are also given. August. September. October. November. December. Division 1 37 73 311 235 96 Division 2 40 99 289 204 108 Division 3 52 166 231 142 90 Division 5 67 141 438 277 144 Division 7 81 162 494 289 151 Division 9 70 113 464 434 202 Division 4 15 42 119 116 55 Division 6 9 12 86 75 62 Division 8 71 80 343 315 145 Division 10 37 51 293 192 115 Division 11 54 80 342 250 150 Division 12 76 78 360 290 170 These figures show distinctly that the central parts of the town were less affected than the periphery. But they show also that even the centre was subjected to epidemic conditions. The extent to which the densely populated quarters, Dulu, Lohgarh and so on, which make up Divisions 10 and 11, also suffered is well demonstrated. For a more detailed survey it has been necessary to employ the methods of using epidemic figures. Mapped out according to epidemic figures not only is the general distribution of mortality shown, but by using the figures for the different months, August to December, the history of the invasion of the epidemic can be very clearly traced
32 The results shown are worth some detailed consideration. In August a raised death rate was already apparent throughout most of the outer portion of peripheral zone (vide Map 6). A rate equal to double the normal was also seen in Killabangian cowkeeper quarters already referred to as penetrat- ing like a bay into the southern portion of the central area. In Dulu and the crowded quarters to the west the death rate was not yet raised. The highest epidemic figures are 4 in the squalid and densely crowded Ghumarian quarter and 2.8 in the hamlet zone at Jalewalyan. In September raised mortality had mapped out by default with great precision the boundaries of the central zone, the only part of this zone affected being the cow- keeper quarters in Killabangian and the strangers quarters near the Golden Temple. The whole peripheral zone, however, showed epidemic figures of 2 or over. At this time the extreme outer portions in several instances (Hakiman, Gurba Singh and Mahan Singh) had figures of over 3, and the figures for the two areas, Ghumarian and Jalewalyan, reached 6.5 and 8.8, respectively. The areas Sant Singh and Lohgahr on the west show an epidemic figure of 2, but in Dulu and other parts of the city on this side the death rate is still low. By October a most remarkable invasion of the whole city has taken place; Dulu and quarters to the west have become very badly affected showing epidemic figures of 7.3 to 7.5. Katras Kanhayan, Jamal Singh, the inner portions of Ram- gurian and most of Killabangian similarly exhibit a mortality of from 6 to 8 times the normal. The extreme central area, though comparatively less affected, shows figures representing a death rate of from 3 to 4 times the normal. The condition in November is much the same, but there has been an extension of high mortality into Karam Singh. In December the mortality has fallen everywhere, though comparatively more in the outer zone than in the centre, so that with a few exceptions the whole city shows uniformly an epidemic figure of 3 or 4. Khazana, Ghumarian and Dulu still show comparatively high rates. The rapidity with which the invasion at the beginning of October took place is very remarkable and is well shown in the following table which gives the week in which the first sign of serious increase of death rate and that at which the maximum rate was attained:33 First marked increase. Maximum. Khazana 3rd week September 3rd week October. Jalewalyan 3rd " " 3rd " " Ramgurian 3rd " " 1st " " (Outer portion.) Bagian 4th " " 2nd " " Sher Singh 4th " " 2nd " " Lohgahr 1st " October 4th " " Jamal Singh 1st " " 1st " November. Kanyahan 1st " " 3rd " October. Ramgurian 1st " " 3rd " " (Inner portion.) Bagh Singh 2nd " " 3rd " " Dulu 2nd " " 3rd " " Beli Ram 2nd " " 3rd " " Nimuk Mandi 2nd " " 3rd " " Chittra Katra 2nd " " 3rd " " Sant Singh 2nd " " 3rd " " Mohram 3rd " " 4th " " Killabangian 3rd " " 1st " " November. Chauk Pasian 3rd " " 2nd " " The salient features shown by this study of the mortality are :34 could be obtained was very small. The results were recorded under the system described in Chapter III. The map shows in the first place that around Amritsar there is a broad zone within which the spleen rate is never below about 75%. Commencing at the north-east corner of the city we find this zone including the greater part of Division 1, all the outer portion of Division 2 and the whole of Division 3. Passing down the eastern side of the city it included most of Division 5 and practically the whole of Divisions 7 and 9. Along the western border of the city it becomes narrowed down and disappears opposite Lohgahr and the crowded Division 11. About half of the total area of the city is thus included in this zone. Within the 75% zone lies another zone in which the spleen rate is lower. Tak- ing a limit of 75 to 50% this zone extends inwards on the north as far as the north- ern limit of Division 11. In a broad band it follows roughly the outer edge of the central area until it reaches its eastern border. Here it narrows very remarkably, there being in this neighbourhood an extraordinarily abrupt transition from the high spleen rate of the outer zone to a very low spleen rate. (Vide Map III.) Following the zone southwards it broadens again and sweeps round the south- eastern corner of the central area passing through Killabangian, broadens out over Chitta Katra and Dulu, is evident in Divisions 11 and 12 and so completes the circuit of the town. Inside this zone which practically girdles the central area the spleen rate very rapidly becomes reduced and though one can make out imperfectly a zone of spleen rates between 50 and 20% this is narrow and difficult to follow. It is broadest however where the zone 50 to 75% is broadest and narrow where this zone is narrow. The portion of town within the 20% spleen rate line roughly includes only the extreme centre of the city and does not measure more than a quarter of a mile across. In portions of this the spleen rate has been 0, in others as high as 17%. All the zones mentioned follow fairly closely the same trend, that is they all widen or narrow at the same point, but there are exceptions which will be referred to. Along the north of the town the bands are broad and uninterrupted and follow almost exactly the boundaries of the central area. But at the north-east corner there is a disturbance in the line caused by a block of comparatively high buildings projecting outwards. This encroaches on the 75% zone, but does not affect the 75 to 50% zone. Having passed round this obstruction and another group of high buildings there is a distinct bay formed in which the spleen intensity penetrates more deeply than usual.
35 The conditions at this point will be referred to later. Vide conditions at "Allowalian." After passing in a convex curve immediately behind the Golden Temple and its surrounding buildings and gardens the zones again pass inwards to form a deep bay, corresponding to an extension of low houses into the central zone. The ex- tension however of high spleen rates and mortality during the epidemic was greater than this would seem to account for. (Vide conditions at K. Jamuan.) Again passing round the south end of the central area in a broadly convex manner, the zones bend northwards to cover a broad tract of the city which extends from the south-west corner inwards for a distance of over half a mile. An interest- ing feature at this point is the occurrence of an outstanding island with spleen contours of its own corresponding to the group of high houses about Kucha Khai which had already been alluded to. At this point also there is another deep bay extending into the cowkeeper area of Killabangian in which, though situated deeply within the city, the spleen rate was about 100 %. The conditions in the zones as regards spleen rate differ not only in regard to the total percentage of enlarged spleen but also as to the degree of enlargement (vide Chapter XIV). The rates for the different zones given in extension1 are as follows :36 5037 that observational error tends to lessen as the columns pass from right to left whilst observations of different observers are comparable. (Vide Chapter XIV.) Infects over 100 per 100 fields. Infects over 20 per 100 fields. Infects over 5 per 100 fields. Infects under 5 per 100 fields. Nega- tive. Percent- age in- fected. Spleen rate. Khazana 1 9 6 10 10 76% 93 Mahan Singh .. 1 9 5 8 66% 90 Jamal Singh, 7538 To the north-east are large weedy tanks in which N. fuliginosus breeds in immense numbers during the months of March and April. Similar sheets occur on the west of the city, and one such source of N. fuliginosus is situated to the south- east near Gurba Singh. The sheet of water to the south and west of the city and many of those on the north and west are unsuitable for breeding and no larvæ are found in them. M. culicifacies is found breeding in the subsoil water drain and in a drain to the south of Khazana, but I have never found this species very numerous at Amritsar. N. stephensi breeds especially in April and May in pools around the city especially to the eastern side. During the rains the temporary breeding places are exceedingly numerous as will be evident from the number marked on the map south of Khazana, the only area in which these have been shown. Breeding places on the outskirts of the city.39 In March an examination of the area showed a few N. fuliginosus and even less numerous N. stephensi on the extreme outskirts only. In May a catch was made of N. fuliginosus, N. stephensi and M. culicifacies on the outskirts of the area, but up to June adults were restricted to a narrow fringe of houses on the outskirts of the city. At the end of June after several showers of rain adult specimens of N. fuliginosus, N. stephensi and M. culicifacies were found considerably further in, and as a result of careful search the limit of adults was at this time ascertained to be that shown on the map labelled "end of July." At this time two adult specimens only of M. rossi were caught. Towards the end of August search showed that adults, mainly those of M. rossi, were to be caught all over the area in which search had formally been negative, and that the line of adult anopheles was now that labelled "end of August." This line at which adults ceased to be caught even after long search was very carefully followed. In the dense block of buildings north of Khazana it was not above 100 yards from the city wall; but passing southwards it extended up to the borders of the island of high buildings already alluded to as K. Khai and was traced some distance beyond this to the east. Thus in a month the whole of the south-west corner to a distance of a quarter of a mile had become infiltrated by adult anopheles. At this time such pools as were found on the borders of Khazana swarmed with larvæ, but in the centre of the area many pools, even very suitable ones, dried up without becoming breeding places, showing that the great extension of M. rossi noted had taken place with little or no help from pools within the area. Observations in July upon Mahan Singh showed the presence of adult anopheles throughout the whole area; but with the exception of one or two small pools in a large compound on the boundary no breeding places were found. In March and April 1910, and later in June, observations were made with a view to ascertaining the distribution of adults of the species N. fuliginosus which is found at this time in very large numbers breeding in the weedy tanks outside the city to the north and west. Though at the time intra-mural breeding places were confined to a very few spots chiefly in Jalewalyan, adult N. fuliginosus were caught everywhere within the outer zone of the city. At Mahan Singh they were found as far as the town hall, or in other words to the margin of the central area in this part. In the northern portion of Jalewalyan they were found up to K. Drail on the edge of the central area, and in the southern portion of the same area as far as the buildings at the back of the Golden Temple. In all these areas it was just possible that breeding places existed though careful search had failed to reveal any of sufficient importance to account for the numbers of adults. But in Ghumarian the conditions were peculiar and quite
40 preclude any chance of these insects (here as elsewhere found as far in as the border of the central zone) having been produced locally. Ghumarian is an area closely covered with houses. The only open spaces are the market square, a factory, a garden used as a weavers' compound and some small yards in which buffaloes are kept. Systematic search through the whole area failed to bring to light any source of anopheles. Immediately outside the city at this part however there is a very extensive sheet of water in which, as it was overgrown with weeds, N. fuliginosus and C. pul- cherrima were breeding in large numbers. By searching the houses, sheds, etc., on the outskirts numerous anopheles, mainly N. fuliginosus but also other species, were caught. A sample batch gave as regards N. fuliginosus41 remote from breeding places or existing after these have disappeared. As these conditions lasted unaltered over a month there could be no question of any abnormal or merely temporary condition, it being evident that anopheles found their way somehow in large numbers into the city. Taking the observations as a whole the distribution of adult anopheles (N. fuliginosus) followed with remarkable fidelity the 75 per cent. isosplenic line. Areas in which the Conditions were peculiar. Kucha Ramanand.42 blood was very high. As was frequently observed in centrally situated areas invaded by the epidemic this rate exceeded the spleen rate. Division 11.43 Ward I, for the most part composed of bungalows and office, lies facing north and in part directly overlooks the bed of the Jumna. The rest of the city is almost cut off from this aspect by the broad belt of railway which passes through the north end of Delhi. Ward II, immediately south of the railway, is largely occupied by public gardens. The remaining wards are composed of dense native city. Along the eastern margin are Wards IV, V, XI and X. Wards IV and V are very densely crowded city. Ward XI corresponds in character rather more to the outlying zone in Amritsar. In the centre of the city are Wards VI and IX. Along the eastern margin passing from north to south are the Wards III, VII and VIII. The mortality of the different wards during the epidemic in rates per mille per annum and the periods at which invasion took place are given in the accom- panying table:44 The next most seriously affected wards were Wards IV, V, XI and X which lie along the eastern border. In Ward XI which is most exposed to infiltration and nearest the bed of the Jumna the mortality first rose above 100 per mille in the 2nd week of September. In Ward X, which adjoins Ward XI on the inner side, the invasion occurred in the 3rd week in September. In Wards IV and V the first marked increase in mortality occurred only on the 4th week of September. Ward II, which contains extensive gardens with many opportunities for the for- mation of breeding places, was not very severely affected and the epidemic was rather late in making its appearance felt (3rd week, September). The mortality in the western border of the city was if anything less than that in the central wards. The least affected ward was Ward VII. In spite of the first invasion occurring at slightly different times in the different wards the epidemic reached its greatest development almost simultane- ously throughout the city. Behaviour of Delhi to Former Epidemics. In 1906 the mortality in the different wards was as follows, the figures being approximate only as they have been compiled from a curve:45 In 1903 the mortality was as follows:46 pools made in the sand by the side of the river, in pools left by the river, and in a creek. Such breeding places however were a mile or more from the city proper (vide Map 7). A comparatively small number of larvæ were found in a ravine near the south-east corner of the city; but over the wide area surrounding the city away from the river it was extremely difficult on two occasions to find any breeding places at all. To the north of the city breeding places occurred in drains, and other situations. Within the city there is a canal passing through the northern portion and pools are not infrequently found in connection with irrigation of the gardens. Standing water was also seen in connection with a horse trough and in a few other situations. On the whole there were within the walls exceedingly few breed- ing places of the ordinary kind (vide however "wells"), certainly nothing to account for the malaria of the whole city. In Ward XI a number of large disused wells were found to be swarming with larvæ of N. stephensi, but in the ordinary small wells of the city I did not succeed in finding larvæ. There are one or two large compounds but no breeding places in them at the time of my visits. In Ward IV no local breeding places of an ordi- nary description were found. Want of time and the character of the houses pre- vented any thorough examination of wells, but those examined were negative. Distribution of Adult Anopheles. Examination of houses, sheds, etc., in Ward XI yielded a small number of anopheles including M. culicifacies, N. stephensi and N. fuliginosus. In the centre of Ward IV anopheles were found fairly abundantly and catches have on several occasions been made in this situation. Had the condition of malaria been due entirely or mainly to wells we should have expected to find only N. stephensi. An actual catch however of which a record has been kept was47 distribution of the spleen rate corresponds to that of the epidemic conditions is noteworthy. (iii) Palwal. So far we have considered two of the cities of the Punjab. The towns that follow are such as may be called small towns of the Punjab. The conditions in regard to them are important since collectively their population numbered in 1901 over a million and it was among them that the worst effects of the epidemic were recorded. At Palwal the recorded mortality in October reached 420 per mille, this rate being exceeded only by that at Bhera and Hodal. This town was therefore visited as soon after the epidemic as possible (April). The town had a population in 1901 of 12,830. It is situated in the Gurgaon District, south of Delhi, in a tract which suffered severely during the epidemic, and the physical features of which will be discussed in the chapter on rural malaria. The town itself is built upon a high mound which is entirely artificial; being the result of centuries of accumulation. The country around the town, however, is flat and possesses no natural drainage, the nearest nullah being several miles from the city. Moreover this flat land is excavated in all directions and the soil is very impervious. After rain its suitability for the breeding of anopheles could scarcely be excelled. The condition of water-logging at the time of my visit was very pronounced, the subsoil water at places being within two or three feet of the surface. Large excavations were also full of water and naturally suggested themselves as causes of the malarial epidemic, though it is doubtful from their nature if they could have played any considerable part in this respect. During the rains of 1908 the sur- rounding low land was so flooded that the town could only be approached through water, whilst donkey and cattle owners were much distressed for want of fodder. Like most Punjab towns Palwal is extremely compact. The streets are paved throughout and descend steeply to the various gates. By reason of the slope of the mound, drainage within the city is excellent, and it might seem at first sight very curious that it should have been affected, as it was in 1908, by malaria. The central part of the town, composed for the most part of brick buildings, is situated on the summit of the mound. It is sparsely populated, many of the large houses being unoccupied; and some areas are apparently almost if not quite deserted. Around this central part, especially to the north and west, are qualid suburbs, if we may dignify them by this name, partly situated. on the slope
48 of the mound and partly on the flat ground. Unlike the central area these suburbs, mostly formed of mud-built huts occupied by Chamars and other low castes, are densely populated. The greater part of the population of Palwal therefore live in a zone not above 300 yards wide lying round the foot of and on the slope of the conspicuous but partially deserted central mound. Mortality. The curve of mortality at Palwal is shown in Chart 3. It is noticeable as rising even higher in November than in October, the same notched summit being seen as occurred in the curve of Amritsar. The great majority of deaths were recorded in the crowded quarters already referred to, but information was too scanty to enable a detailed survey to be made. According to age the deaths were as follows:49 An examination of the blood of children for parasites gave50 The curve of mortality is given in Chart III. The first distinct rise in the number of deaths occurred in the last week of September, the onset of the epidemic at Bhera being therefore almost exactly synchronous with its appearance at Amritsar. The mortality was remarkable for the enormous proportion of infants, the number of deaths at different ages being51 Breeding Places of Anopheles. Anopheles were breeding freely in weedy pools just outside the city and in one or two small puddles within the city boundary. It is impossible to say what the conditions as regards breeding places during the rains might have been. (v) Miani. Miani is a town of only 7,220 inhabitants, situated near Bhera, but so situated that a portion of the town lies on slightly higher ground which forms the bank of the riverain at this spot. Though the southern part of the town was on comparatively dry ground the northern portion lay on water-logged ground with much standing water about and the subsoil water level of from 5 to 6 feet from the surface. The mortality rose in the last week of September and reached a figure of 403 per mille in the second week in October. The spleen rate was52 CHAPTER VII. Conditions in Rural Areas. I.53 that roughly speaking, though there are areas which by this method appear to have been less affected than others, the distribution of high mortality is very general. Too implicit reliance on the figures may lead us astray, but there seem to be islands of comparatively unaffected villages and areas of specially intense activity. Conditions found at Villages visited. Atari.54 Kahangahr.55 than usually apt to be flooded and waterlogged. It will be noticed from figures given that all the thanas suffered very heavily. Normal. Figures October 1908. Epidemic figure. Northern tract Gurgaon 170 1,220 7.1 Faraknagar 72 781 10.8 Jatusana 105 837 8.0 Compact high ground Rewari 148 997 6.7 Sohna 52 419 8.0 Faurn 75 687 9.1 Along foot of Alwar nills Nuh 122 1,404 11.5 Ferozepore 131 2,346 17.9 Alluvial plain of Jumna Palwal 142 1,357 9.5 Hodal 112 1,083 9.6 Hosiapur 83 681 8.2 Punahana 127 1,324 10.4 Hattin 134 1,281 9.5 Reaction of the Tract to Epidemic Conditions. The normal average of deaths in the Gurgaon district is about 1,500. In the month of October this usually is raised, showing that the district is consistently malarious. But between the years 1880 and 1907, excluding 1904 in which year the figures were raised by deaths from plague, the usual October rate of about 2,000 56 1908. The behaviour of some of the thanas at this time contrasted with their reaction in 1908 shows as follows:57 III.58 Mapped out in detail the Bhera and Miani thanas appear as shown in Map 10. The villages in the Bhera thana are remarkable for the uniform high mortality. They very rarely show an epidemic figure below 10 or a rate per mille during October less than 250. As a rule the rate is from 30059 death rate of 377 per mille. There were excavations about the village, but there were no special features to differentiate it from many other villages less severely affected. The subsoil water was 10 feet from the surface (July 1909). The spleen rate was60 under different conditions to the other villages, there was a good deal of water lying in excavations near by. The subsoil water was 12 feet from the surface. The spleen rate was61 The behaviour of the different thanas in these years was as follows:62 Shadiwal.63 CHAPTER VIII. Conditions in Non-Epidemic Areas and in Epidemic Areas in Non- Epidemic Times. I.64 comparison with places further up the riverain conspicuously free from standing water. The subsoil water was at a depth of 12 feet. In the centre of the city owing to the accumulation of soil on the site the depth was 28 feet. In October 1908 the death rate was only 52 per mille and the highest weekly rate to which it rose was 177 per mille. It was therefore much less affected than any other town we have yet considered. The spleen rate was65 Dharima.66 Reaction of the area to Epidemic Conditions. As a rule the thanas mentioned show very little, if any, increase of the normal average in October. But in 1903 the rates for Bhalwal, Kot Momon and Miani Gondal were doubled, whilst in Midh the deaths were slightly higher than in 1908. A distinct, though slight, increase is also noticeable in 1892, in 1900 and in 1901. Conditions in the Villages Visited. Bhalwal.67 epidemic figure was 7. But the distribution of mortality (shown in Map 10) shows that this high rate was mainly due to villages around the borders of the thana, espe- cially to villages lying close up against Jaurian thana, which it will be remem- bered was severely affected. Another group of villages with rather high figures lies to the south at the foot of the very peculiar isolated Karana hills which rise here suddenly from the plains to a considerable height. Unfortunately I was unable for want of time to visit any villages in this thana, but passing through in the train I was able to ascertain that the ground sloped rapidly downwards towards the severely affected villages Uttian and Lakh shown in the map; and the fact that these villages are designated by name rather than by numbers shows that they are old established villages, and suggests that as they existed prior to the canals they naturally occupied the lowest lying portions of the thana. IV.68 It is clear therefore that in this autumn there was no increase of mortality beyond that more or less normal in India. And the year as far as Amritsar is con- cerned may safely be considered a non-epidemic year. Though no study of the statistics at Delhi has been made it may be stated that here also there was no serious mortality in 1909. Spleen Rate and Parasite Rate. A community in Khazana, the children of which were examined at intervals, gave in percentages the following results :69 A small community of Dhobies in Ward IV also gave 100 per cent. spleen rate, the size of spleen being equally remarkable. In Ward VI the spleen rate in November 1909 in percentages was70 measuring malaria by spleen rates or the presence or parasites this disease is always very prevalent in the Punjab. But though malaria is always present and in a sense may be extremely intense as for example we have seen in parts of Delhi, the disease is only associated with high epidemic mortality under certain conditions. It is probably quite evident by now that this distinction of epidemic or mor- tality producing malaria from the ordinary endemic condition is very important.
71 CHAPTER IX. Epidemic and Endemic Malaria. I.72 suffered from no less than four great epidemics as well as a number of less severe ones. Still further eastwards over the Central Epidemic Area we again have records of three or four great epidemics. In the Southern Epidemic Area about Delhi there is a falling off in the number of epidemics, only two major epidemics having pre- viously affected this tract. If we continue further eastwards into the United Pro- vinces we find, as we have already noted, that in 1908 this Province suffered severely. But we shall find now that epidemics of great magnitude occur with nothing like the frequency they do in let us say the Northern Epidemic Area in the Punjab. In fact no epidemic of similar magnitude to that of 1908 appears to have been recorded in the United Provinces. We may remember also that even this epidemic affected only the western half of the United Provinces. If we refer to the records of rainfall, we find that here the explanation of the relative infrequency of epidemics cannot be due to lack of rain, and in 1908 the eastern portion which was unaffected received not only more rain than the western portions but an even greater excess over the normal (vide maps comparing rainfall and fever given in the report of the Sanitary Commis- sioner with the Government of India, 1908). Again if we map out roughly, by means of information given in the Gazetteers, the relative areas under cultivation for wheat and rice respectively, we find a very curious relation to epidemic prevalence. The rice land, which one might expect to be the more malarious, marks on the contrary the limit at which epidemic condi- tions cease. If we look for the reason why rice is cultivated instead of wheat, we find that the limit of rice cultivation follows roughly the line of about 30 inches average rainfall and an isotherm of increased average temperature, both condi- tions we might reasonably expect to favour malaria. At this stage we may well ask ourselves whether this liability of the Punjab to epidemic malaria is not simply due to the fact that its inhabitants are less protec- ted by immunity than are those of some other areas. If so we should certainly expect areas in the Punjab normally with a high endemic prevalence to show during epidemic times relatively less effect than more healthy areas. But at Amritsar the portions of the city worst affected by epidemic mortality were those we have reason to believe are permanently most subject to endemic malaria. At Delhi the same relation holds good, Wards most affected in the epidemic are normally the most malarious. These being cities it is possible that this selection by epidemic mala- ria of the localities most affected by endemic malaria is due to the protection enjoyed by the inhabitants of the central portions of the city. But in exactly the same way we find in the Gherinda and Amritsar thanas the epidemic conditions attacking not the least but the most malarious villages. The low-lying swampy villages like Mahawa and Gumtala do not escape, but are the most severely affected.
73 In Bhera thana it is those villages nearest the river which suffer most. In Shahpur thana the villages where the conditions are most suitable for endemic malaria and on the whole the villages which show the highest spleen rate are the most affected by epidemic mortality. In Gujrat the same relation is seen; the affected villages are the most low-lying and have the highest spleen rates. The form of epidemic malaira we are discussing would then appear to be not the antithesis so much as the outcome of endemic intensity. But a closer scrutiny of observations shows that in reality the two conditions are not interdependent, though it would seem that on the whole villages in which the conditions favour endemic malaria are more exposed to epidemic conditions. This want of accurate relation will be evident from the following instances described more in detail in previous chapters74 If we take the total death rate in the whole Punjab from non-epidemic fevers, we shall find that in round figures it is about 30,000 per month. In a year we should get 360,000 deaths from non-epidemic fevers, including such diseases as tuberculosis and many others; in fact this number would practically represent the residue of deaths from all causes after abstracting a certain number of deaths recorded as plague, small-pox, dysentery, etc. In 1908 an equal number of deaths occurred in two months from epidemic malaria alone. In Gurgaon district, which normally loses from non-epidemic diseases about 17,508 persons in the year, there occurred in the month of October 1908 no less than 15,740 deaths or nearly as many people as would have died in a whole year from non-epidemic disease. Sialkot, which normally loses about 3,000 a month from non-epidemic disease, lost in October 1890 33,609 persons and in October 1892 20,972. Gurdaspur, which normally loses about 2,000 a month, lost in October 1890 11,976, in October 1892 18,921 and in October 1894 10,551 persons. Umballa, which normally loses about 1,500 a month, lost in October 1890 17,025 persons. Causes such as famine are usually supposed to exert the greatest influence on increase of population and this may possibly be the case even though the actual deaths do not equal those due to epidemic malaria. But for actual mortality (excepting plague) there is no other cause in the Punjab to approach that of the disease we are discussing. We shall understand this better when we endeavour to explain the causes underlying these epidemics.
75 PART III DETERMINING CAUSES OF EPIDEMIC AUTUMNAL MALARIA. CHAPTER X. Anopheles of the Punjab. In the first volume of Theobald's Manual of the Culicidæ published in 1901, the only species of anopheles mentioned as having been recorded from the Punjab is N. fuliginosus (Giles). In 1902 Stephens, Christophers and James record M. rossi (Giles) and M. culicifacies (Giles) as the two common species at Mian Mir near Lahore, whilst the same observers in the same locality obtained M. barbirostris (Van der Wu1p), C. pulcherrima (Theobald) and N. stephensi (Liston), the latter two species being then new to science. James also records from the neighbour- hood of Lahore N. fuliginosus and N. maculatus (Theobald). A single specimen sent by me from Lahore is recorded by Theobald as M. minutus (Theobald), whilst another single specimen also sent by me still forms the only example of Theobald's species M. leptomeres (Theobald). At Ferozepore, about sixty miles to the south of Lahore, Adie1 records M. rossi, M. culicifacies N. fuliginosus, N. stephensi, C. pulcherrima, M. turkhudi (Liston), M. sinensis (Wied.), M. barbirostris, N. jamesi (Theobald), and N. maculipalpis (Giles). He also calls attention to a variety of N. fuliginosus peculiar to the cold months. Thomson2 from Dehra Dun at the foot of the hills just outside the borders of the Punjab to the east records the common species as M. rossi, M. culicifacies and N. maculatus, whilst the following species also occur, A. lindesayi (Giles), M. nigerrimus (James and Liston), N. fuliginosus, N. theobaldi (Giles), M. christophersi (Theobald), N. maculpalpis (Giles), N. indica (Theobald) and C. pulcherrima. This as we shall see represents both a plains and a hill fauna. In the hills A. lindesayi is recorded by Giles as early as 1900. It occurs as we have seen at Dehra Dun. It is also recorded from Bakloh and Simla 6,000 feet (James and Liston). From Kangra Theobald records as taken by Dudgeon Neocellia dudgeoni (Theo- bald), probably the same species as James's N. willmori (James). From Kashmir are recorded N. willmori and M. turkhudi From Quetta beyond the Suliman range two new species of the genus Pyretophorus, P. nigrifasciatus (Theobald) and P. nursei (Theobald) together with another species of Neocellia, N. intermedia 1Adie, Mosquitoes and Malaria in Ferozepore. Indian Med. Gazette, January 1905. 2 Thomson, Mosquitoes and Malaria in Dehra Dun. Jour. Royal Army Med, Corps, May 1909. L 2
76 (Rothwell) have been taken by Major Nurse who also records from the same district M. rossi and M. culicifacies. M. rossi.77 I.M.S., tells me he has had the same difficulty in finding more than a few isolated specimens at Ferozepore. M. nigerrimus (James and Liston).78 Neocellia willmori occurs in profusion both at Kalka and also near Kasauli at a height of 4,00079 number of adult insects in the houses decrease during November, and that the species M. rossi completely disappear, neither adults nor larva being found after the end of November. In the case of M. fuliginosus and C. pulcherrima on the contrary adults were to be caught in reduced numbers in suitable places through- out the winter and these species continue to lay their eggs and to go through their metamorphoses as usual. M. culicifacies was found to pass the winter in the larval stage in which form it appeared to hibernate, the larvæ being sluggish in their movements and growing very slowly if at all. At Ferozepore Adie notes that N. fuliginosus is found throughout the year and M. culicilacies very nearly so. M. rossi does not appear until July and disappears by December. M. culicifacies is common from about the first of May and disap- pears about the end of December. N.stephensi comes in about May and dis- appears about the middle of November. The common species as a whole are most numerous in September. My own observations on seasonal prevalence have been made chiefly at Amritsar, but they have been supplemented by less complete observations else- where. During the winter months N.fuliginosus was found breeding in large weedy tanks to the north of the city, also in similar positions in the surrounding country. Along with this species but in much smaller numbers was found C.pulcherrima. In a large tract to the south of the city, where there were no large permanent sheets but numerous pits and pools containing little or no weed, no anopheles larvæ were found breeding. The larvæ of M. culicifacies were first found at Amritsar in March, but the species was breeding in profusion in February at Atari, 15 miles away, where there were some very extensive and suitable breeding places. The species was also found breeding at Beas and in the bed of the Ghagger at this time. N. stephensi was first found in small numbers at Amritsar towards the end of February, but this species was breeding in immense numbers in the wells and elsewhere at Delhi at this time and was in fact the commonest species found there. N. stephensi was also found in considerable numbers at Beas. At Atari in February not a single specimen was found after much search. But the species was abund- ant in March both at Amritsar and at Atari. At Ralka in February N. willmori and A. lindesayi were both abundant in pools in the stream beds, and at Chandi- gahr a few specimens of N. maculipalpis and of N. turlehudi were found. By March the weather has become considerably warmer. At this time, adults of N. fuliginosus, C. pulcherrima, M. culicifacies and N. stephensi were found quite commonly and their larvæ occurred in profusion in almost every suitable situation. But open pools free from weeds were still free from larvæ. With the increasing warmth of April a still further increase of the spring species took place and in parts of Amritsar as many as a hundred adult N. fuliginosus could
80 sometimes be caught in a single suitable shed. Along with these there were always a smaller number of C. pulcherrima, M. culicifacies and N. stephensi. In the south portion of Amritsar (Hakiman), though it is one of the most malarious portions of the city, anopheles were not so numerous, the reason evidently being. that there were no suitable sheets of water in the neighbourhood. At Delhi also in this month, though larvæ were found in profusion in the river bed and in parts of the Civil Station, adults were caught with difficulty even in the outlying portions of the city. In the villages the conditions vary. In the drier ones a few anopheles only, usually N.fuliginosus, N. stephensi and M. culicifacies, are to be caught; in those villages which have large sheets of water near them almost all the species mentioned. abound. Up to April the increasing temperature has evidently favoured the propaga- tion of the genus, but its continuation in the absence of rain by causing a progressive. desiccation of breeding places now begins to act in a hostile manner. At this time it is no uncommon thing to find swarms of larvæ, even those of N. fuliginosus, in small almost dried up and very foul pools. During June the few pools left are as a rule very unsuitable for breeding, and not infrequently it may be difficult to find anopheles larvae in any particular neigh- bourhood. Adult anopheles are also reduced in number. At Hakiman, after an unusually dry summer (1910), only three specimens of anopheles were caught after searching for some time. At Gurba Singh, where six weeks previously hundreds- were to be caught, only seven were found in a search at this time. All were ex- tremely small specimens, scarcely half the size of those found at more favourable times. Under such conditions the monsoon breaks and there is thenceforth a remark- able change; for within a few weeks of the first fall of rain anopheles are again found breeding in the utmost profusion everywhere. So long as rain continues at short intervals these conditions are maintained, with the result that there is an enormous and progressive increase in the numbers of anopheles which far exceeds the increase of the spring; and instead of larvæ being chiefly confined to large collections of water, such as tanks and sluggish weed grown channels, they are now found in every situation where water remains any length of time. The species which come into prominence at the time of this enormous and phenomenal increase of anopheles connected with the monsoon in the Punjab are M. rossi and M. culicifacies. N. fuliginosus, the common mosquito of the spring,. is now comparatively rare. In 1909 M. rossi was not found at Amritsar until the end of June. Yet during the spring of 1910 I had occasion to breed out many thousands of larvæ caught.
81 in different places in the Punjab and though every other species was represented no larvæ of M. rossi were taken. In April many hundreds of adults were collected from the houses in all parts of the city and specimens of all the plains species except M. turkhudi were found, but not a single specimen of M. rossi was among them. At Delhi in April though anopheles were not abundant, specimens of all other species were obtained, but there were no M. rossi. Such complete disappearance of the commonest of all the species for so many months is very remarkable. In regard. to N.fuliginosus we again have a very clearly defined tendency to a marked seasonal prevalence. This species being, as Adie described it at Feroze- pore, the common cold weather anopheles. Its period of greatest preponderance is unconnected with the monsoon and depends largely upon the amount of water left standing from the previous year and showers falling in the early months. It shows little tendency to increase until the season for the autumn species is passing away. The species C. pulcherrima follows the habits of N.fuliginosus, but in the eastern portion of the Punjab is relatively unimportant. Its seasonal prevalence in the western districts requires to be worked out. N.stephensi in Amritsar, Atari, Beas and Delhi is a species which comes into prominence in the early summer. And though. it is found at other times of the year it does not seem to increase much in the autumn. Upon M. culicifacies further observations seem called for, especially in view of the great importance this species possesses as the chief carrier of malaria in the Punjab. In 1909 the numbers of M. culicifacies at Amritsar in the autumn certainly underwent no rise at all comparable with that of M. rossi at this time. I have found the adults of this species in fact as numerous in April as at any time of the year. The larvæ of M. culicifacies however at Mian Mir undoubtedly underwent an increase which commenced in August and continued throughout the autumn. The numbers caught in Delhi were also highest in October. With the cessation of the rain the land more or less rapidly dries, the smaller pools disappear and the pits and more permanent collections of water only remain as breeding places. It is very noticeable that under these circumstances in the absence of fresh rain many pools cease to be suitable for breeding and the number of larvæ therefore tends to be diminished out of proportion to a e extent of desic- cation. Adults however continue to be caught in very large numbers even though breeding places are greatly reduced and larvæ scanty. N. fuliginosus, N. stephensi and M. culicifacies still retaining about the same prevalence for a time again assume relatively greater prominence with the disappearance of M. rossi. But in October the night temperature begins to fall considerably and by November the M
82 average is usually under 60°F. In December it has fallen to 50°F. or thereabouts and the cold weather conditions we have described supervene. III.83 are thus important and may almost be termed anopheles sanctuaries. The follow- ing conditions in the Punjab may be considered as always acting to a greater or less extent in this way84 even a few yards off, or again such collections may be of such a temporary nature as to seem unlikely to breed anopheles. But very commonly though a small shallow pool of this kind may appear to have dried up, it is surprising how often one finds on close inspection that one or two hoof marks of cattle or some other small hollows still contain a little water and that crowds of larva are here collected together. Even if the water entirely dries up the larva still retain, so long as the mud remains moist, the power to continue their development when more rain falls. One may thus find pools of a very temporary nature acting as important breeding places. The part played by irrigation channels is well shown by the work done at Mian Mir in 190185 numbers (April to June) the proportion of males also diminished and in June nearly every anopheles caught was a female. The following tabulated statement of recorded catches illustrates this point:86 (b) After rains had started. N. fuliginosus male 2 87 In the evening anopheles could be seen hatching out from the pupal skin and after resting a short time flying off to the low bushes which grew at the edge of the water. During the day therefore various bushes and tufts of grass which lay on the plain around this source of anopheles were covered with a large mosquito net and beaten vigorously with a stick. (It was found difficult to dislodge mosquitoes during the day but easier towards evening.) Immediately on the banks the result of a number of beatings yielded88 It will be seen that except on the borders of the excavations the species M. rossi, though the Commonest in its larval form, was not nearly so frequently found in the bushes, etc., as N. fuliginosus. Of very great interest was the condition of the females caught in different places. Those caught away from the pools had in many cases blood in the gut and showed ovaries undergoing development just as would have been the case in anopheles caught in a village. Yet in this position it is difficult to see how they got any blood. The females of species other than M. rossi caught near the edge of the pool, being fully gravid and having got rid of every trace of blood, must have been ready at any moment to lay their eggs. It is reasonable to suppose that they had found their way back to the water for this purpose. Up to the present no tests have been made as to the nature the blood found in these mosquitoes, but the fact that most of the females had succeeded. in obtaining blood shows that the species N. fuliginosus and C. pulcherrima can live quite well even on a bare plain with a few tufts of grass and a few small bushes for shelter. In the village a catch of anopheles gave89 found in nature carrying the sporozoites of malaria. M. culicifacies was first shown to carry malaria at Mian Mir by the Royal Society's Commission N. stephensi is recorded by Liston and later by Bentley as actively concerned in the transmission of malaria at Bombay. The power of N. fuliginosus to carry malaria is shown by Adie who found one of 200 specimens dissected at Ferozeporo with sporozoites. In this I am able to confirm Colonel Adie as sporozoites were found in this species from a village near Amritsar in April. It is worthy of note that at the same time the dissection of hundreds of this species caught in Amritsar city gave a negative result. Major Robertson, I.M.S., informs me that N. maculipalpis, which is the common species in the Terai below Naini Tal, also acts as a carrier in nature in this locality. With the exception of M. rossi the power of the remaining species of anopheles in the Punjab to transmit malaria in nature is unknown. Even more important than the question whether the rarer species transmit malaria or not is the question as to what part if any is taken by M. rossi. The results obtained with this species by Stephens, Christophers and James have been lately confirmed by Bentley who, dissecting M. rossi and N. stephensi caught together in Bombay, found the former with sporozoites and the latter entirely negative. But the very strongest evidence is required before this species can be considered never to act as a carrier. IX.90 CHAPTER XI. Rainfall and Temperature in Relation to Epidemic Malaria. The statement is very generally made in the Punjab that following an unusually heavy monsoon, fever is especially prevalent. By this is meant undoubtedly that the chief determinant of epidemic malaria is rainfall. It remains for us to see to what extent epidemic malaria is related to rainfall. I.91 The area over Bhera in' this year is also an area of heavy precipitation. Enough has been said to show that in 1908 there was a very close relation between rainfall and epidemic conditions. But we must not be led to the con- clusion that the epidemic areas were always those which received the heaviest rainfall. Such an, idea can be seen to be inadequate by referring to the figures for Gurgaon and Delhi. According to rainfall Delhi district (34 inches) should have been the most affected, whereas in reality the most affected was Gurgaon (28.9). Or taking another example Sialkot should have been as severely affected as Gujrat. If we examine the eastern and western edge of the heavy rainfall area (30- inch line) and of the epidemic (epidemic figure over 5), we shall see that whilst epidemic conditions often extend considerably further in a south-west direction than the rainfall would lead us to expect, they very seldom extend at all to the north-east, and are apt in this situation to fail to extend to the rainfall limit. The only reasonable explanation of this phenomenon is that the effects we see are those of " floods," a conclusion to which further considerations will also take us. Departure of Rainfall from Normal. The greatest departure from normal in the total monsoon rainfall was over the district of Montgomery (19.01). Following this are the figures for the district of Gujrat (18.5), Jhang (17.48), Sialkot (16.37) and Ferozepore (16.28). Jhelum and Amritsar show 15.85 and 15.54, respectively. There is thus a relation between the excess over normal and epidemic conditions. But this is by no means absolute. Montgomery behaved in regard to epidemic conditions more in accord- ance with its total rainfall than with the excess over normal. Sialkot similarly, though it had a high excess over normal, was not seriously affected by the epidemic. Total Monthly Rainfall and Monthly Excess over Normal Rainfall. In the case of Amritsar the excess of 15.54 was almost entirely due to rain falling in one month, the total rain in this month (August) being 21.6 inches and the excess being 14.0 inches over the normal. Palwal similarly had 20.85 inches in one month. But Sialkot also received over 20 inches in August without be- coming affected, though it is noticeable in this case that, of the excess of 16.37 in the total only 8.72 is made up by the August rainfall, the remainder being dis- tributed over July and September. On the whole if we take those districts which have received over 10 inches excess rain in a single month, we shall in many cases arrive at those which suffered most in the epidemic, but we shall include Ferozepore and only just include Gujrat and generally speaking we are no nearer N 2
92 the solution of our problem than we were when considering total monsoon rain- fall. Rate and Season of Precipitation. The monthly rainfall at Amritsar, Palwal, Bhera, Gujrat and Delhi are given in the following table :93 II.94 1892. In 1892 the 10-inch line includes the greater part of the Punjab, vide Map V. The 20-inch line includes Gujrat, Gujranwala, Lahore, half of Ferozepore and all the eastern districts. The area of rainfall receiving 30 inches and over is not extensive it includes only Gurdaspur, Ludhiana, Umballa and parts of adjoining districts. But the 40-inch line as in 1900 extends to a considerable distance from the hills. In this year, which it will be remembered is one in which a terrible epidemic involved the northern districts, the rainfall and the epidemic areas seems at first sight to bear no relation to one another. But we notice as in 1908 a great westerly extension of the area of heavy rain along with which we have epidemic conditions in Gujrat and Gujranwala and epidemic malaria of moderate intensity in. Shahpur district. Over Gurdaspur also it is possible to account for the malaria by the rainfall. But Sialkot which was severely affected is far to the west of the centre of precipitation. 1890. I have been unable yet to study the detailed figures for this year, which is the more unfortunate as this, besides being one of the most severe, is the most compact epidemic on record. But very heavy rain fell over Sialkot, Gujrat and Gujran- wala, the chief seats of the epidemic. 1884. In this year most of the Lahore district, Ferozepore and parts of Sirsa received less than 10 inches total monsoon rain. The 20-inch line extended only as far west as Amritsar and Ludhiana. At first sight there is but little relation between the area of heaviest precipitation and the large epidemic area. But scrutiny of the rainfall map shows an area of heavy precipitation further south than usual which, if we take into account flooding, accounts for some of the southern portions of the epidemic. North of Gurclaspur there is another centre of heavy precipitation and associated with it an epidemic area. As in the case of 1892 we can only explain the epidemic nucleus in Luhdiana and over the Sutlej by indirect effects (flooding). 1881. The great epidemic of Amritsar in 1881 was associated with unusual precipita- tion over this city. 1879. There was excessive rain over the southern districts in this year. From these facts it is clear that epidemics are associated with areas of heavy precipitation and tend not to occur in years of deficient rainfall.
95 III.96 only point out that a consideration of rainfall alone does not enable us to pick out fever years with any certainty. IV.97 It will be noted that though the northern area has suffered from epidemics of great area and intensity, it is well to the west of the centre of greatest precipita- tion. This alone will show the want of exact correlation between rainfall and epidemic malaria. At the same time the dependence of the condition on rainfall is shown by the fact that the northern epidemics occur in years of great westerly extension of precipitation. The localisation of epidemic conditions to the submontane tracts, which is very clearly shown in Map 11, also shows that a certain rainfall is a necessary factor in the production of epidemic malaria. o
98 CHAPTER XII. Physical Features in Relation to Epidemic and Endemic Malaria. I.99 The Relation to Endemic Malaria. The effect of a high subsoil water upon endemic malaria is not difficult to understand. Whatever the conditions, whether the soil be sandy or impervious, a high subsoil level means the existence of perennial breeding places of anopheles and all the conditions classically associated with this disease. The existence of considerable malarial infection, when the subsoil water is so low as 40 feet, shows that the relation is only a relative one. The Relation to Epidemic Malaria. In this respect we have a more difficult problem. It is clear that the mere exist- ence of a high subsoil water does not in itself lead to epidemic malaria, as is evident from the conditions in Amritsar and in the villages of the Amritsar thana in 1909 and 1910, when a high subsoil level was associated with no epidemic increase of mortality. II.100 figures being obtained. But the following observations serve to enlighten us in some respects as to certain factors concerned in water-logging. Series 1. Sand washed and shaken . . . 30 seconds under 1 minute. " " " . . . 3 minutes in both cases. Amritsar soil shaken . . . 30 seconds 40 minutes. " " " . . . 3 minutes 147 " " " " . . . 10 " 250 " " " " . . . 30 " 375 " Porosity is therefore not only a matter of the original character of the soil but depends upon the effect water has in resorting out its particles. The impervi- ousness noted in the longer shakings was due to quite a thin layer of very fine mud last deposited from suspension. Series 2. Mean of a number of observations on soil shaken 30 seconds. Pirthala soil (sandy) . . . . . 25 minutes. Amritsar soil (close) . . . . . 55 " Palwal soil (very close) . . . . over 4 hours. Series 3. Mean of a number of estimations using the method described above with shaking for one hour. Dhatir soil (sandy) . . . . . 4.25 hours. Pirthala soil (sandy, but less so than above). 7 hours. Palwal soil . . . . . . 11.5 hours. Even the washings of a soil that are obviously sandy may form therefore a very impervious layer. The very slow percolation under these conditions is very marked. Capillarity and Gravity. Series 4. Palwal soil, an estimation as above . . . . 660 minutes. Palwal soil, an estimation as above, but end of tube buried in dry sand instead of being allowed to rest in water 35 minutes. In the former gravity alone is in action. In the latter this is aided by the action of capillarity exerted by the dry sand upon which the tube rests. The action of capillarity under these circumstances in causing percolation is therefore as compared with gravity enormous. Such experiments were repeated under various conditions, in every case yielding results which showed that when dealing with an impervious soil the effect of capillarity was immensely greater in causing percolation than was gravity alone. Two long tubes, ½ inch diameter, were filled (a) with powdered Palwal earth, (b) with fine dry sand; both were shaken down as much as possible and the tubes
101 placed upright, their lower ends resting in a vessel of water. The line of visible wetting rose as follows :102 commented upon in a previous chapter that anopheles larvae are capable, if a pool dries up, of surviving and continuing their development when more rain falls if they are not exposed to more than a certain amount of desiccation. This time is greatly extended in the case cf a water-logged soil. Water-logging therefore greatly favours the breeding of anopheles and may, when associated with frequent rain showers, possibly bring about an increase in their numbers comparable with the swarming of certain other species of insects. In the absence of rain a water-logged soil, though it allowed a certain number of anopheles to breed, is not necessarily favourable to a great increase of the genus. The comparative importance of such conditions as compared with the formation. of extensive sheets of water cannot, in the absence of observations in epidemic times, be stated. III.103 A moment's consideration will show that epidemic prevalence is in no way due to these great irrigation works. It would almost seem that whilst the irrigated tracts are often comparatively exempt from epidemic influences, parts like Sialkot, eastern Ludhiana and Umballa, which are not, irrigated by these systems, suffer especially severely. The real reason of this is of course more or less obvious, the canals irrigating tracts which on account of their natural dryness are compara- tively unsuited to epidemic conditions. If any relation exists between irrigation and epidemic prevalence it can only be that irrigation may render a tract more liable than it would normally be to influences bringing about epidemics. Canals and Subsoil Water. The Bari Doab and especially the district around Amritsar is frequently cited as an over-irrigated tract. It is also stated that the present condition of high subsoil water level is entirely due to this irrigation continued over many years. Even so, with the exception of Amritsar city, we do not find this district so very liable to severe epidemics and the southern portion of the tract will be seen from the composite map (Map 11) to have been comparatively little affected by epidemic conditions. Canal Overflows. If canals are seriously affecting the epidemic incidence in any tract it is very probable that it is due to overflows. By this I do not mean small leaks but the formation of extensive sheets of water which in a sense reproduce the conditions suitable for epidemic intensity. IV.104 In addition to tracts of this nature there are others which are not obviously riverain but nevertheless behave in the same way. One such tract lies to the north-west of Lahore (Muridke, Kamoke, etc.,) and was well picked out in the 1908 epidemic. In reality it is a broad low-lying area at the foot, so to speak, of the district of Sialkot so that it receives much of the drainage from this district. Another type of tract similar to the last mentioned in regard to its behaviour to epidemic disease though not in physical features is that to which Gujrat and the thanas along the foot of the Siwalik hills in Hoshiapur belong. Such tracts not only easily become affected but exhibit a high degree of epi- demic intensity, the death rate generally being during the epidemic months about 400 per mille. 2.Tracts which are possessed of the necessary topographical features but have never or very seldom exhibited an epidemic mortality because they lie beyond the range of the necessary monsoon rainfall. Of such a nature must be large portions of the western Punjab. 3.Tracts which from their physical features are less easily affected by epi- demic conditions and in which the death rate is usually less than in water- logged tracts under similar epidemic conditions. Tracts of this nature when they occur beyond the zone of heaviest rainfall exhibit their relative powers of resist- ance very strikingly. After passing sufficiently west they are often exempt from epidemic malaria whilst the riverains are still liable to be affected. But the protection afforded by physical features once within the zone of full epidemic influence is comparatively small. There is scarcely any part of the eastern sub- montane tract which has not at some time or another become part of an epidemic focus. If we search for a tract which within the last forty years has never exhibited a death rate due to epidemic malaria of over 10 times the normal we shall find that over the large area shown in Map 11 not a single thana has escaped. It we similarly look for a thana which has never been subjected to epidemic conditions of a severity represented by the epidemic figure of 7, we shall find the whole of Gujrat, Sialkot, Gurdaspur and Hoshiapur and most of Gujranwala, Amritsar, Ludhiana and Karnal, as well as the whole of the south-eastern extremity of the Punjab, closed to us. In other words, within these areas it is not a matter of the local conditions of particular thanas which is concerned but simply of the areas chosen by epidemics. A very reasonable presumption, looking at Map 11, is that, given sufficient rainfall, etc., any part of the submontane tract is capable of exhibiting epidemic conditions of the utmost severity.
105 CHAPTER XIII. The Human Factor. The researches of Celli in Italy and of Dr. Bentley and myself in India show the necessity of considering the conditions affecting the human host as well as those affecting the numbers and life generally of the mosquito. In dealing with epidemic conditions associated with high mortality this is especially necessary. I.106 Among poor and dependent classes we therefore get a higher mortality than among the well-to-do. How far this is due to the less deadly effects of malaria or to an increased indirect action of the disease it is impossible to say. The propor- tion of adult deaths would seem to have some significance, but the matter requires further study. The important point is that in arriving at an estimate of the effects of malaria in different towns and villages, it is necessary to recognise and allow for this class coefficient. II.107 These data show clearly the influence of low social status on the spleen rate. They also show the peculiar high rate common among the " cultivator class." This same high rate amongst this class is also seen in the Amritsar figures. III.108 But if heavy rain were to fall upon a famine-stricken district, we might then reason- ably expect this to be followed by severe epidemic conditions. That the most severe epidemics follow very frequently this sequence, is apparently the general experience of all who have had intimate acquaintance with the Punjab. The following abstract from the Gurgaon Gazetteer gives a graphic account of the 1879 epidemic which followed the famine year of 1878 :109 "was increased by the enfeeblement of health which a prolonged period of prixation had produced." In the 1900 epidemic the Famine Commissioners of 1901 found that " much of the mortality was due to an unusually unhealthy autumn acting upon a popu- lation predisposed to disease by privation." In the Punjab severe famines have occurred in 1860-1861, 1868-1869, 1877- 1878, 1895-1896 and in 1899-1900. For the years 1860-1861 there are no records of mortality, in 1868 deaths from fever in October and November were only 31,099, but in the year following the famine 1869 they rose to 116,540 or, considering the registration at that time, a rate characteristic of a first class epidemic. In 1877 deaths in the two months noted above only reached 38,837. In the year following they were 180,356, this being one of the worst epidemics the Punjab has ever suffered from. In October and November 1896 deaths were 73,239, the year following they were 141,573. Follow- ing the year 1899 with 69,200 deaths from fever comes 1900 with a total number of deaths in the two months of 254,580. Each of the four great famine periods for which we have any records was then followed by " fever years." Even if we look at the total deaths from all causes, we shall see that the number of deaths due to the famine was negligible when com- pared with that due to the fever which followed. The effect of famine upon the population was therefore not directly the most important cause of death. On the other hand, one may justly surmise that in these instances malaria merely reaped a harvest prepared for it by the famine. These facts certainly show that there may be a very direct connection between the actual famine or very severe scarcity and epidemics. But we should not be justified in assuming that all epidemic years are of this class. As a matter of fact out of the twelve or so epidemics of which we have records only four can be considered as famine epidemics. As years have advanced it has become more and more impossible for famines to manifest themselves, and even if several monsoons partially fail it is usually scarcity rather than famine that ensues. But if actual famine may be a precursor of epidemics, we may reasonably expect to be able to trace the effects of the mitigated condition of scarcity. This is however a difficult task, for it is clear we must know something about local as well as general conditions of prosperity or the reverse before we can hope to be very successful, and this knowledge is not very easy to get at. IV.110 in the price of the food stuffs. Unfortunately, whilst prices give us a good idea of the degree of general scarcity, they fail to point out to us areas especially affected. by failure of corps and other adverse conditions, the reason being that there is a very remarkable averaging process in regard to ruling prices, so that, however severely one area is affected by shortage of crops, the prices after a brief discre- pancy tend to level up if the other areas are unaffected,. High prices may even increase the prosperity of a tract in which crops have been successful. With this reservation we may compare the average annual rates of the price of wheat for a number of years with the incidence of fever epidemics. It will be seen that these annual average prices have risen and fallen in the course of years almost in a rhythmical manner between a rate of about 10 seers to the rupee and a rate as high as 25 seers for the rupee. Also we cannot help being struck by the fact that if we take the summit of the curve in each case it will be found to coincide with an epidemic. Thus the first curve reached its greatest height in 1869, the second in 1879, the third in 1887, the fourth in 1892, the fifth in 1897, the sixth in 1900 and the seventh in 1908. This sequence carried out with such regularity can scarcely be accidental. Also there is evidently more than mere relation to prices, for that the epidemics should always occur at the culminating point strongly suggests that it occurred when in a period of drought and, scarcity a heavy monsoon fell. This would then both cause fever and, by giving good crops, lower the prices. We have by association with famines and with the actual summit of the curves of prices so far accounted for no less than 7 out of the total of twelve or so major epidemics. Passing along the years and comparing the rises in the seath rates from fever with prices, we find that the epidemics of 1870, 1872, 1878, 1879, 1881, 1887, 1890, 1892, 1897, 1900 and 1908 were all during periods of markedly high prices. We see also that some epidemics have occurred in years of very low prices, the years in question being respectively 1875, 1876, 1884, and 1894. 1875 and 1876 will be seen from the rainfall data to have been years of very exceptional rainfall. Whether local hardship also entered into these years or not I have not been able to ascertain.1 1884 was also a year of very heavy precipitation in the affected areas, Umballa receiving 44 inches and Jagadri 71 inches of monsoon rain. But though the prices given suggest prosperity, I find the year recorded as one in which the very districts concerned (Umballa) underwent great hardship owing to the failure of crops. 1 It is very strange that though the rainfall in 1875 was extraordinarily heavy the epidemic conditions were slight, whereas in the same area less heavy rain next year caused a severe epidemic. It would be interesting to trace out the actual facts were one able to do so, as, for example, whether floods in 1875 did not damage crops to such an extent as to bring about local scarcity. Whichever way one looks at the matter, the year 1876 is quite unique (vide correlations in next section).
111 The year 1894 we have already commented upon. The rainfall over the affected district was phenomenal. As we have shown the epidemic was not a one. V.-CORRELATION OF FIGURES REPRESENTING FEVER MORTALITY WITH THOSE FOR RAINFALL AND PRICES. The close connection between these three series of figures has led me to work out the values with a view to ascertaining the amount of correlation between each series. The figures representing fever are the number of deaths in October and Novem- ber of each year taking the unit as 10,000. Those for rainfall are the averages in inches of the rainfall at 24 stations in the plains. For prices have been taken the number of lbs. at which wheat is selling to the rupee deducted from 60, this being to convert the high rates into the higher figures instead of these being represented as they would otherwise be by the lower figures. A fourth value is also used, namely the coefficient already mentioned in Chapter XI, as obtained by dividing each year's rainfall average by the average for the previous year. The actual values used are given in an Appendix. Working out the coefficients of correlation between the fever series and each of the three other series we get :112 6. Fever with Prices × Coefficient113 . . Consequently at the close of a famine the population consists of an unsusally small proportion of children and old persons and a large proportion of persons in the prime of life, i.e., at the reproductive ages. For some years therefore in the absence of any fresh calamity the growth of the population is very rapid . . . . . This more rapid growth con- tinues for some years, but then as the persons who at the time of the famine were in their prime pass into old age and their place is taken by the generation born shortly before the famine with its numbers greatly reduced by the mortality which then occurred, the birth rate falls not only below that of years following the famine but also below the average, and the pendulum continues its swing backwards and forwards between periods of high and low birth rate, but its oscillations gradually become fainter until they cease from natural causes to be apparent or, as more often happens, until some fresh calamity obliterates them." That at the back of such colossal manifestations as the epidemic of 1908 there should be profound and not easily averted natural influences at work is scarcely to be wondered at. When we approach the question of prophylaxis, we shall do well to bear in mind the magnitude of the influences against which we are pitting our- selves and not be led in a foolish vein to reduce the remedy of the whole matter to trifling proportions.
115 PART IV. EXPERIMENTAL WORK ON THE MECHANISM OF FULMINANT MALARIA. CHAPTER XIV. The Nature of Intense Malaria. In all that has gone before we assume that malaria has, during the epidemic period, been present in a more intense form than usual. But we have not defined intensity nor considered what such a term implies. Spleen Rate. The results of recording the size of 3,134 spleens in children in one or other of the five classes we have hitherto used in recording spleen rate are as follows :116 Similarly treating the figures for rural area we get the results as follows :117 In figures already given in the section upon Amritsar it will be seen that the autumn increase in spleens and parasites was of this nature, and that the condition in February 1909 was as regards parasites and spleen rate more intense than even at the height of the fever season of 1909. The high parasite rate at Palwal shortly after the epidemic is also remarkable and is probably not normal. A remarkable feature in regard to spleen rate and parasite rate demonstrated by Charts 10 and 11 is the relative stability of the curves which are not apparently easily displaced to any degree.
118 CHAPTER XV. Experiments upon the Quantitative Factor in the Transmission of Proteosoma to Sparrows by the Bites of Culex. When commenting upon the possibilities in connection with the causation of malarial epidemics Colonel Leslie, I. M. S., suggested to me that the effect of the number of bites by infected anopheles might be found to cause differences in the resulting infection and in the incubation period. I had already thought over the considerations outlined in the first chapter of this section and I saw much to favour the view that " intensity " in malaria might be a quantitative matter and that it might depend upon the number of infected anopheles by which the members of a community were being bitten. Among other facts I called to mind the severe infections that one often sees following even a single night's exposure under circumstances in which one has every reason for believing that infected anopheles abound and the comparative mildness of attacks seen in those who live under conditions in which infected ano- pheles are comparatively infrequent. That intensity of an attack of malaria might be the result of dosage of infection would also explain the peculiar fact that a person immune to a certain degree of malaria frequently succumbs if he be exposed to a greater intensity of the same disease. If true this conception would also go far to explaining the occurrence of epide- mic conditions and the apparently increased virulence or intensity of the disease at these times. The difficulties of experimenting on the human subject are great and I deter- mined therefore to obtain such data as I could from observations upon Proteosoma in sparrows, the material for which is unlimited. The experiments recorded below were carried out by feeding bred Culex fati- gans upon infected birds and later noting the effect of bites of these upon healthy birds. The sparrows when brought to the laboratory were at once examined and infected ones placed aside. Those found free from infection were, prior to being utilised for experiment, quarantined for a period of at least twelve days. Before being used their blood was again carefully examined for proteosoma. During the period of quarantine they were carefully protected from the bites of culex in a series of large mosquito nets, only two mosquitoes (neither of which contained sporozoites in the glands) being found throughout the course of the experiments to have gained admission to these birds. In the experiments only mosquitoes which in the morning were seen to contain blood were noted as having fed. Birds which had been enclosed with mosquitoes
119 which had apparently not fed were liberated as it was not possible to be sure they had not been bitten. After the experiment as before the birds were most carefully protected from stray mosquitoes. I120 Experiment 4. 31st May 1909.121 16th June 1909.122 Experiment 12. 4th June 1909.123 26th June 1909.124 3rd July 1909.125 when the zygotes have matured and the sporozoites have reached the salivary glands, only a very few of the salivary cells are packed with sporozoites; it is evident that such a mosquito feeding on a bird will inject at the most a comparatively small number of sporozoites. Some of the experiments suggest that in this case one may use large numbers of mosquitoes without producing much result. But in mosquitoes fed on a bird whose blood contains very numerous gametes, the mid-gut is studded with hun- dreds of zygotes and when the sporozoites have reached the glands these become swollen with innumerable multitudes of sporozoites. Such a mosquito must inject a dose perhaps a hundred times greater than one of the slightly infected mosquitoes we have referred to. Using scantily infected mosquitoes even in great numbers it is difficult to get a severe infection; single heavily infected mosquitoes on the other hand often give quite severe infections. But by using a number of heavily infected mosquitoes not only was the incubation period reduced from nine days to as little as five days, but the resulting infections were much more severe and death in every case occurred. The last two experiments show that when a bird already having parasites in its blood is bitten by heavily infected mosquitoes it still developed a new infection over and above the old one. The amount of infection carried by mosquitoes then depends on the number of zygotes which develop in the gut, and the number of these in turn depends upon the number of gametes in the blood of the sparrow by which the mosquito has become infected. It is easy therefore to see that in malaria everything may depend upon the existence of heavy gamete carriers; and if these are present upon the number of anopheles: otherwise the relation of number of anopheles to the amount of fever will not hold good.
127 PART V. Summary of Conclusions. Briefly recapitulating the facts recorded in the earlier parts of the paper we can summarise the results of our observations as follows :128 tendency for epidemics to occur at the point where the first heavy monsoon appears after a succession of years of deficient rainfall. (11) The epidemic areas are not necessarily or even usually coincident with that of the heaviest rainfall nor that receiving the greatest increase over the normal rainfall. Any marked relation to " interval " between the falls, etc., is not suggested by a study of the rainfall figures. The whole facts are only explicable when flooding is taken into account. (12) When epidemic areas are examined in detail the villages are found to have suffered almost exactly in proportion as they have been flooded. Floods act equally whether they are due to local rain or to the indirect effects of rain causing the overflow of rivers. The higher epidemic figures seem to depend entirely upon floods and fulminant malaria of a certain intensity is almost synonymous with malaria of diluvial crigin. The relation to flooding explains why epidemic areas are not exactly coincident with the area of heaviest rainfall and why the former almost always overlaps the latter in the direction of the line of drainage. In the case of lower epidemic rates the thana figures may be influenced in two ways129 a population already infected and that what happens in the fever season is the " hastening up " of this infection. (14) Experiments on sparrows and proteosoma show that severity of infec- tion is largely dependent on the dose inoculated. This is not merely a matter of the number of infected mosquitoes but of the number of sporozoites injected at each bite. This in turn depends upon the number of gametes in the blood of the original sparrow by which the mosquito was infected. Under experimental conditions the latter was the most important factor and it was easy to see as a result of dissection that one heavily infected mosquito might inject more sporozoites than a hundred that were only scantily infected. No observations exist as to the conditions in regard to anopheles at epidemic times, but the close association of fulminant malaria with actual flooding suggests something more than the ordinary reproduc- tion of the genus in pools, etc. The matter is the most urgent still awaiting elucidation. (15) Physical features influence epidemics and low water-logged areas are especially susceptible to epidemic conditions. Higher tracts, on the contrary, are comparatively less susceptible. But these differences are often lost when a district becomes involved in the nucleus of an epidemic area. (16) The great canal systems have no distinct influence upon malaria of this kind, though it is possible that neglected canal irrigation with extensive local floodings may have had very serious effects in the past. s
131 PART VI. Conclusions on the Chief Methods to be Advised in the Prophylaxis of Malaria in the Punjab. An elaborate discussion as to the methods of prophylaxis in malaria would be out of place in the present work. It is necessary only to call attention to the more important considerations called forth as a result of the present investigation. The subject of prophylaxis among Troops, Jails and European communities is also outside the scope of the present report which has dealt throughout with the fundamental conditions as shown by malaria of the native population. Rural Areas. Endemic Malaria in Rural Areas.132 we may distinguish various degrees. The effects of the first degree are such as caused consternation at Amritsar and such as anyone visiting the villages can see was equally exhibited over the country. My own impression supported by facts already given in the descriptions of epidemic areas is that this high degree of epidemic intensity is almost if not entirely a matter of villages being flooded. What the action of the flood waters may be, does not at present concern us. If there are no flooded villages in a thana the total death rate will at most only be moderately increased. In the controlling of floods we have then one very clear objective and one which is within some measure of possible attainment. The controlling of floods must often be a matter of drainage, but such drainage must not be confused with drainage of the soil which, though it may often be affected in the same way, is a much larger question. In Gujrat flooding is largely a matter of overflow of rivers and here extensive bunds are called for and their construction has in some cases been carried out. The beneficial results likely to follow immediate removal or prevention of flood water are so great that there seems little doubt that in the Punjab this should be the first step in the sanitation of a rural tract, especially tracts known to suffer from the effects of such conditions. Drainage in the sense of a system of surface drains or of subsoil drainage is a matter we need not now enter upon. Under the circumstances present in India it can only be carried out in a limited manner. If we seek to avert epidemic malaria by such means we have 50,000 square miles to treat before we have the zone of epidemics under control. It is more important to point out that the facts regarding the influence of subsoil water and the conditions relating generally to the occurrence of the second and third degree of epidemic intensity are still very imperfectly known. Measures of a detailed anti-larval nature are not indicated and as in Mian Mir they probably would not serve to protect the inhabitants in the very year in which this would be necessary. If as seems to be the case severe epidemic malaria follows flooding, the most energetic anti-mosquito campaign can influence but little the vast mortality which may occur in any year in almost any district. That under these circum- stances, until drainage can be instituted, the use of quinine as a prophylatic and as a means of saving the life of actual sufferers must be pushed to the utmost, is self- evident. Small Towns of the Punjab. Nothing can be more striking than the way these towns, often extremely compact and. apparently unlikely to be affected by malaria, have been penetrated to their centre by epidemic conditions. It is extremely doubtful if the origin of these conditions is to be found within the actual limits of the town and any
133 scheme to prevent the disastrous effects of epidemics must be prepared to take into count at least the immediate surroundings. Very often as at Bhera these surroundings strike one as not being very easily controlled, but it is probable if hydraulic measures were considered as of prime importance a good deal might be done. Here as in the rural areas the urgency of quinine organisation cannot be exaggerated. Cities of the Punjab. The conditions at Amritsar were so severe that the desirability of protecting so important a city is very evident. Amritsar is already drained in a fashion and the question arises as to what are the various degrees of drainage we may employ. The crux of the whole question lies in the fact that as a rule those places which it would be compara- tively easy to drain are drained and are not malarious, whilst such places as Amritsar impose great obstacles to proper drainage. The slope of the Punjab in this region is about 1 foot per mile. To find a vent efficiently to carry off flood water from the great depressions around the city of Amritsar, must mean a main drain at least some 20 miles in length. To fill in a small fraction of the land (197 acres) around the city took 8 years (1884134 Appendix. (Vide Chapter XIII.) 197 Year. Fever deaths in ten thou- sands. Rain- fall. Prices. Coeffi- cient. Rain- fall x Coeffi- cient. Prices x Co- efficient. Rain- fall x Prices. Rain- fall x Prices x Co- efficient. 1868 3.11 10.7 25 1.0 10.7 25.0 26.75 26.75 1869 11.65 18.1 32 1.6 29.0 51.2 57.92 92.67 1870 8.05 15.6 28 0.9 14.0 25.2 43.68 39.31 1871 3.82 14.2 16 0.9 12.8 14.4 22.72 20.45 1872 8.24 22.0 20 1.6 35.2 32.0 44.00 70.40 1873 5.81 18.1 16 0.8 14.5 12.8 28.96 23.17 1874 4.42 16.9 12 0.9 15.2 10.8 20.28 18.25 1875 8.45 27.7 10 1.6 44.3 16.0 27.70 44.32 1876 17.42 17.2 10 0.6 10.3 6.0 17.20 10.32 1877 3.98 8.5 14 0.5 4.2 7.0 11.90 5.95 1878 18.04 18.5 30 2.2 40.7 66.0 55.50 122.10 1879 14.20 16.6 34 0.9 14.9 30.6 56.44 50.80 1880 6.81 15.3 32 0.9 13.8 28.8 48.96 44.06 1881 10.61 18.6 24 1.3 24.2 31.2 44.64 58.03 1882 9.36 19.0 18 1.0 19.0 18.0 36.20 36.20 1883 6.12 12.8 16 0.7 9.0 11.2 20.48 14.34 1884 1885 8.16 14.3 10 1.0 14.0 10.0 14.30 14.30 1886 6.68 18.2 19 1.3 23.7 24.7 34.58 44.95 1887 13.66 20.6 32 1.2 24.7 38.4 65.92 79.10 1888 9.37 17.3 30 0.8 13.8 24.0 51.90 41.52 1889 11.91 14.9 20 0.9 13.4 18.0 29.80 26.82 1890 23.46 20.7 26 1.4 29.0 36.4 53.82 75.35 1891 8.45 12.3 30 0.6 7.4 18.0 36.90 22.14 1892 27.32 23.0 33 1.9 43.7 62.7 75.90 144.21 1893 8.45 23.7 24 1.0 23.7 24.0 56.88 56.88 1894 14.28 23.1 10 1.0 23.1 10.0 23.10 23.10
135 Appendix. (Vide Chapter XIII.) 197 Year. Fever deaths in ten thou- sands. Rain- fall. Prices. Coeffi- cient. Rain- fall x Coeffi-cient. Prices x Co- efficient. Rain- fall x Prices. Rain- fall x Prices x Co- efficient. 1895 7.32 15.9 20 0.7 11.1 14.0 31.80 22.26 1896 6.57 11.2 33 0.7 7.8 23.0 36.96 25.8 1897 14.16 14.7 35 1.4 20.6 49.0 51.45 72.03 1898 8.69 13.8 28 0.9 12.4 25.2 38.64 34.78 1899 6.92 7.5 20 0.5 3.7 10.0 15.00 7.50 1900 25.46 21.7 35 3.1 67.3 108.5 75.95 235.44 1901 14.42 12.5 30 0.5 6.2 15.0 37.50 18.75 1902 9.30 15.2 26 1.2 18.2 31.2 39.52 47.42 1903 13.53 16.5 15 1.1 18.1 16.5 24.75 27.22 1904 7.03 10.1 10 0.6 6.1 6.0 10.10 6.06 1905 6.11 10.1 15 1.1 12.0 16.5 16.35 17.98 1906 11.51 19.9 35 1.7 32.5 59.5 66.85 113.64 1907 8.04 11.6 40 0.6 7.0 24.0 46.40 27.84 1908 30.73 26.3 42 2.2 57.9 92.4 110.46 243.01 Mean 11.04 16.6 24 1.07 20.2 28.6 40.2 52.63 Standard deviation 6.3 4.6 9 0.54 14.2 22.3 20.6 52.58
CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 8, HASTINGS STREET
LIBRARY LACKS MAPS 1-3
HIMALAYAS BIKANIR DESERT [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75059047.tif] THE PUNJAB UNITED PROVINCES Scale 1 inch = 24 miles Dotted lines = District boundaries Unbroken line = 1000 ft Contour Broken line = 2000 ft Contour Reg. No. 3123 E., 11. HIMALAYAS BIKANIR DESERT UNITED PROVINCES THE PUNJAB Scale I inch = 24 miles Dotted Lines = District boundaries Unbroken Line = 1000 ft Contour Broken Line = 2000 ft Contour [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75059050.tif] Reg. No. 3123 E., 11.HIMALAYAS [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75059053.tif] BIKANIR DESERT UNITED PROVINCES THE PUNJAB Scale 1 inch = 24 miles Dotted lines = District boundaries Unbroken line = 1000 ft Contour Broken Line = 2000 ft Contour Reg No. 3123 E. 11HIMALAYAS BIKANIR DESERT UNITED PROVINCES THE PUNJAB Scale I inch = 24 miles Dotted Lines = District boundaries Unbroken Line =1000 ft Contour Broken Line = 2000 ft Contour [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75059056.tif] Reg. No. 3123 E., 11.CITY OF AMRITSAR Adult Anopheles Red crosses Breedinq Places Red spots Isospienic lines Red [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75059059.tif] Reg. No. 3124 E., 11[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75059062.tif] Chart 1. To illustrate "Epidemic Rises" in the line of Total. Deaths. Reg. No. 3121 E., 11.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75059065.tif] Chart 2. Admissions for Malaria . Bhera Dispensary.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75059068.tif] Chart 3. Mortality during Epidemic of 1908.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75059071.tif] Chart 4. Epidemic Mortality.
Chart 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75059074.tif] Shewing "Fever" mortality (October and november deaths) for the Punjab (1867 to 1908).
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75059077.tif] Chart 6. To Shew Correlation "Rainfall" with "Fever." The figures in circles represent prices.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75059080.tif] Chart 7. To skew correlation between "Fever Mortalily" and Rainfall x Prices. (Col. 8 of appendix)
Chart 8. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75059083.tif] Graphic representation of "Intensity as shewn by distribution, of Classes of Spleer. (The polygon shews distribution of 3134 splens).
Chart 9. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75059086.tif] Graphic representation of "Intensity" as shewn by parasite finds. The polygon shews result of 599 parasite finds.
Map 4 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75059089.tif] To shew distribution of "Mortality in Amritsar City during the epidemic of 1908 Unshaded areas = epidemic figure under 2. (Twice normal death rate). Hatched areas = " " over 2 and Under 5. Cross hatched areas = " " over 5 and under 10. Block areas = " "over 10. (Ten times normal death rate).
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75059092.tif] Map 5. Plan of Delhi
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75059095.tif] MAP 6. THANAS OF AMRITSAR AND GHERINDA SHEWING EPIDEMIC INTENSITY IN VILLAGES Reg. No. 3122 E., 11.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75059098.tif] MAP 7. GUJRAT THANA SHEWING EPIDEMIC INTENSITY IN VILLAGES
Map 8. Map of Bhera and surrounding Thanas Only villages mentioned in the text are named. The figures are Epidemic figures the villages in October 1908. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75059101.tif]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75059104.tif] MAP 9. MAP OF EPIDEMIC FREQUENCY
