IP/QB.10 m. 91. b No. 60 (NEW SERIES) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA Studies on the Mouth Parts and Sucking Apparatus of the Blood-Sucking Diptera No. 4 The Comparative Anatomy of the Proboscis in the Blood-Sucking Muscidae BY CAPTAIN F. W. CRAGG, M.D., I.M.S King Institute of Preventive Medicine, Guindy, Madras. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL SERVICE [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063460.tif] CALCUTTA. SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1913 Price Rs 1-2 or 1s. 9d.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063466.tif] 3943308
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063472.tif] (NEW SERIES.) No. 60. SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA Studies on the Mouth Parts and Sucking Apparatus of the Blood-Sucking Diptera No. 4 The Comparative Anatomy of the Proboscis in the Blood-Sucking Muscidae BY CAPTAIN F. W. CRAGG, M.D., I.M.S., King Institute of Preventive Medicine, Guindy, Madras. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL SERVICE [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063472.tif] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1913 Price Rs. 1-2 or 1s. 9d.
Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM. Messrs. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, London, W.C. Messrs. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., 68-74, Carter Lane, E.C. Mr. BERNARD QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, London, W. Messrs. P. S. KING & SON, 2 and 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. Messrs. H. S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, and 9, Pall Mall, London. Messrs. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, London, S.W. Mr. T. FISHER UNWIN, 1, Adelphi Terrace, London, W.C. Messrs. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E.C. Messrs. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W.C. Mr. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 51, Broad Street, Oxford. Messrs. DEIGHTON, BELL & Co., Cambridge. Messrs. OLIVER AND BOYD, Tweeddale Court, Edinburgh. Messrs. E. PONSONBY, LD., 116, Grafton Street, Dublin. ON THE CONTINENT. Mr. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Mr. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig, Germany. Messrs. R.FRIEDLANDER & SOHN, Berlin, W. N., Carlstrasse, 11. Mr. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris, France. Mr. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. IN INDIA AND CEYLON. Messrs. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. Messrs. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. Messrs. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. Messrs. S. K. LAHIRI & Co., Calcutta. Messrs. B. BANERJEE & Co., Calcutta. THE CALCUTTA SCHOOL BOOK AND USEFUL LITERATURE SOCIETY, 309, Bowbazar Street, Calcutta. Messrs. BUTTERWORTH & Co. (India), Ld., Calcutta. IN INDIA AND CEYLONList of numbers of Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India (New Series) published previous to the present issue. No. 1. Standardisation of Calmette's Anti-Venomous Serum with Pure Cobra Venom: the Deterioration of this Serum through keeping in India, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 2. Malaria in India, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No. 3. Some Observations on the Poison of Russell's Viper (Daboia Russellii), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M B. Price As. 5 or 6d. No. 4. On the Action of the Venoms of the Cobra and of the Daboia on the Red Blood corpuscles and on the blood plasma, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 5. Specificity of Anti-Venomous Sera, by Captain G. Lamb,I.M.S.Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 6. First Report on the Anti-Malarial Operations in Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 7. Some Observations on the Poison of the Banded Krait (Bungarus Fasciatus), by Captain G. Lamb,I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 8. A Preliminary Report on a Parasite found in Patients suffering from Enlargement of the Spleen in India, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No. 9. Second Report of the Anti-Malarial Operations at Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Lieute- nant S. R. Christophers, I M.S. Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 10. Specificity of Anti-Venomous Sera (Second Communication), by Captain G. Lamb I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 11. On a Parasite found in persons suffering from Enlargement of the Spleen in India-Second Report, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price Rs. 2 or 3s. No. 12. On the Morphology, Teratology, and Diclinism of the Flowers of Cannabis, by Major D. Prain, I.M.S. Price As. 14 or 1s. 4d. No. 13. Oriental or Delhi Sore, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 14. On a Parasite found in the White Corpuscles of the Blood of Dogs, by Captain S. P. James,I.M.S.Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 15. On a Parasite found in persons suffering from Enlargement of the Spleen in India-Third Report, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 16. The Specificity of Anti-Venomous Sera with special reference to a Serum prepared with the Venom of the Daboia Russellii, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 6 or 7d. No. 17. Snake-Venoms in relation to Hæmolysis, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S Price As. 6 or 7d. No. 18. Hæmogregarna Gerbilli, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, M.B. I.M.S. Price As. 10 or 1s No. 19. On Kala Azar, Malaria and Malarial Cachexia, by Captain S. P. James, M.B I.M.S. Price Re. 14 or ls. 11d. B 2
2 No. 20. Serum-Therapy of Plague in India; Reports by Mr. W. M. Haffkine, C.I.E., and various Officers of the Plague Research Laboratory, Bombay, by Lieutenant- Colonel W. B. Bannerman, M.D., B.Sc., F.R.C.S., I.M.S. Price As. 14 or 1s. 4d. No. 21. On the Standardisation of Anti-Typhoid Vaccine, by Captain George Lamb, M.D. I.M.S. (Director, Pasteur Institute of India), and Captain W. B. C. Forster, M.B. D.P.H., I.M.S. Price As. 6 or 7d. No. 22. Mediterranean Fever in India: Isolation of the Micrococcus Melitensis, by Captain George Lamb, M.D.,I.M.S. and Assistant Surgeon M. Kesava Pai, M.B., C.M. (Madras). Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 23. The Anatomy and Histology of Ticks, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price Rs. 3 or 4s. 6d. No. 24. On a Parasite found in the White Corpuscles of the blood of Palm Squirrels, by Captain W. S. Patton, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or ls. 2d. No. 25. On the importance of Larval Characters in the Classification of Mosquitoes, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 26. Leucocytozoon Canis, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 27. Preliminary Report on the Development of the Leishman-Donovan Body in the Bed Bug, by Captain W.S. Patton, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 28. The Sexual Cycle of Leucocytozoon Canis in the Tick, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 29. Piroplasma Canis and its Cycle in the Tick, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price Rs. 2 or 3s. No. 30. The Theory and Practice of Anti-Rabic Immunisation, by Captain W. F. Harvey, M.B., I.M.S., and Captain Anderson McKendrick, M.B., I.M.S.. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 31. The Development of the Leishman-Donovan Parasite in Cimex Rotundatus-Second Report, by Captain W. S. Patton, M.B., I.M.S. Price Re. 1 or ls. 6d. No. 32. An Enquiry on Enteric Fever in India carried out at the Central Research Institute, Kasauli, under the direction of Lieutenant-Colonel D. Semple, M.D., and Captain E. D. W. Greig, M.D. Price Re. 1-2 or 1s. 9d. No. 33. The Production of Alkali in Liquid Media by the Bacillus Pestis, by Lieutenant- Colonel W.B. Bannerman, M.D., B.Sc., .I.M.S. Price As. 5 or 6d. No, 34. Standards of the Constituents of the Urine and Blood and the bearing of the Metabolism of Bengalis on the Problems of Nutrition, by Captain D. McCay, M.B., I.M.S., Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 35. Black-water Fever, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S., and Dr. C. A. Bentley. No. 36. Observations on Rabies: with special reference to an Atrophic form of the disease occurring in animals, by Major G. Lamb, M.D., I.M.S., and Captain, A. G. McKendrick, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 37. Investigations on Bengal Jail Dietaries with some Observations on the Influence of Dietary on the Physical Development and Well-being of the People of Bengal, by Captain D. McCay, M.B., B.Ch., B.A.O., I.M.S. Price Rs. 2-6 or 4s. 3d. Nc. 38. Preliminary Report on the Killing of Rats and Rat Fleas by Hydrocyanic Acid Gas, by Captain W. D. H. Stevenson, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 39. The Applicability to Medico-Legal Practice in India of the biochemical tests for the origin of blood-stains, by Lieutenant-Colonel W.D. Sutherland, I.M.S. price As. 8 or 9d. No, 40. The Destruction of Fleas by Exposure to the Sun, by Captain J. Cunningham, M.D., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d.
3 No. 41. Quinine and its Salts: their Solubility and Absorbability, by Captain A. C. MacGilchrist, M.A., M.D., M.R.C.P., I.M.S. Price As. 9 or 10d. No. 42. The Cultivation of the Bacillus of Leprosy and the Treatment of cases by means of a Vaccine prepared from the Cultivations, Part I, by Major E. R. Rost, I.M.S. The Cultivation of the Leprosy Bacillus, by Captain, T. S. B. Williams, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 43. The Relation of Tetanus to the Hypodermic or Intramuscular Injection of Quinine, by Lieutenant-Colonel Sir D. Semple, Kt., M.D. Price As. 12 or 1s 2d. No. 44. The Preparation of a Safe and Efficient Anti-rabic Vaccine, by Lieutenant-Colonel Sir D. Semple, Kt., M.D., D.P.H., R.A.M.C. (Retired). Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 45. Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta, by Major E. D. W. Greig, M.D., D.Sc., I.M.S. Price Re. 1 and As. 4 or 2s. No. 46. Malaria in the Punjab, by Major S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price Rs. 2 or 3s. No. 47. Dysentery and Liver Abscess in Bombay, by Major E. D. W. Greig, M.D., D.Sc., I.M.S., and Captain R. P. Wells, M.A., M.B., I.M.S. Price Rs. 2 or 3s. No. 48. Investigations into the Jail Dietaries of the United Provinces with some observations on the influence of dietary on the physical development and well-being of the people of United Provinces, by Major D. McCay, M.B., M.R.C.P., I.M.S. Price Re. 1-12 or 3s. No. 49. Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta, being the final report of an enquiry carried out by Major E. D. W. Greig, M.D., I.M.S. No. 50. Preliminary Report on an Investigation into the Etiology of Oriental Sore in Cambay, by Captain W. S. Patton, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 6. No. 51. A Streptothrix isolated from the Spleen of a Leper, by Major W. G. Liston, M.D., D.P.H., I.M.S., and Captain T.S.B. Williams, I.M.S. Price As. 14 or 1s. 4d. No. 52. Dysentery in Hazaribagh Central Jail, January 1910Studies on the Mouth Parts and Sucking Apparatus of the Blood-Sucking Diptera. No. 4. The Comparative Anatomy of the Proboscis in the Blood-Sucking Muscidæ. IN two previous studies I have described the structure and mechanism of the proboscis in Phil2 The flies which I have examined are as follows:3 reversion from the advanced condition to the earlier one. As I have shown in a previous paper, the biting flies in the Orthorrapha have a relatively simple form of apparatus, in which the primitive arthropod structures can be easily traced, for piercing the skin of the host. The sucking portion of the mouth is in fact formed by the simple apposition of the epipharynx and hypopharynx, while the true segmental appendages retain a form not at all unlike that found in quite primitive arthropods. Tabanus, for example, is a true "biting" insect, in the sense that it makes a wound by means of its mandibles and first maxillæ; the wound having been made, it sucks up the blood by means of a sucking pump in the head, through the canal formed by the apposition of the epipharynx and the hypopharynx, exactly as is done by non-biting flies which feed on vegetable or animal juices,. The flies which possess functional mandibles and maxillæ are undoubtedly nearer the primitive arthropod type than those which have neither, and it is reasonable to suppose that, among the Orthorraphic flies, such forms as Tabanus are more primitive than the flower feeders, and that in those cases in which the female has a complete biting and sucking mouth and the male only a sucking mouth, the female is the less removed from the immediate ancestor of the species. The loss of the appendages, in this case, is an indication of specialisation. The mandibles and first maxillæ of the biting flies of this group are clearly primitive structures retained, and their existence is good evidence that the flies are more ancient than those which have lost them, due regard being given of course to other characters. In this case and in this limited sense the hypothesis of Minchin is supported by entomolo- gical considerations, and it is quite possible that the flagellates present in non-biting Orthorraphic flies have for their immediate ancestors similar parasites which inhabited the intestinal tract of blood-sucking flies. The case is quite different with regard to the Cyclorraphic flies. In no case do these possess mandibles or first maxillæ, the only recognisable remnant of these being the palpi, which are believed to be remainders of the first maxillæ. The biting apparatus is developed on the labella, which are derived from the second maxillæ, appendages which take no part in the act of biting in the Orthorraphic flies. Not only is the apparatus formed out of different appendages, but it is of a different nature, and consists, as I have shown in the case of Phil4 bent pad, for the collection of fluid nourishment, which is sucked up the canal in the proboscis by means of the pharyngeal pump, The commonest form of this is the well known pseudotracheal membrane found in the house fly. This form of apparatus is not peculiar to the Muscid flies, but occurs in the Orthorraphic flies as well, and is absent only in those forms which obtain their nourishment by actually piercing some resistant layer to obtain fluid from underneath, and it is evident that its development is generally coincident with the disappearance of the biting appendages. In some instances, as for example the Tabanidæ, it exists side by side with functional and powerful mandibles and maxillæ, the fly being then able to absorb fluid either from a moist surface or through a resistant dry layer which has to be pierced by the stylets. In no case, however, does one find any form of biting apparatus on the labella existing together with functional mandibles or first maxillæ. The development of labellar teeth is a secondary phenomenon, which takes place when a non-biting fly, the mouth of which is adapted only for sucking fluids from moist surfaces, assumes the blood-sucking habit. How this occurs in nature will be discussed in more detail when deal- ing with those flies which are blood-suckers but are without biting mouth parts. We may sum up the evolutionary history of the blood-sucking Diptera as follows. The early insect mouth parts were formed for biting and furnished with simple arthropod jaws: the cockroach represents such a condition. At a remote period the second pair of maxillæ became fused, a condition found in all Diptera. The sucking mouth characteristic of the Diptera is formed by the elongation of the epipharynx and hypopharynx, which together form a tube up which the fluid nourishment is sucked. In the most primitive dipterous types the typical arthropod appendages are retained, co-existent with the sucking tube, and the insect is able to use its appendages to pierce a hole in skin or other substance to obtain fluid food from underneath. Such a condition is found in the Orthorraphic blood-sucking flies. At a later period the appendages of the fourth and the fifth segments of the head, that is, the mandibles and maxillæ, disappear, and the function of obtaining food is carried out by the second max- illæ, the distal ends of which are modified to form a pad suitable for the absorp- tion of fluid from moist surfaces. This condition is found in many families, both in the Orthorrapha and the Cyclorrapha. It reaches its highest degree of development in the complex labella of Musca. Still more recently some flies have developed from this stage a most complex arrangement consisting of a ring of teeth on the end of the labium, and have adapted themselves to a blood- sucking habit. Throughout the evolution there is to be noticed a constant dimi- nution in the importance of the anterior appendages, and the gradual transfer-
5 ence of the entire function of obtaining food to the second maxillæ. These act in the more primitive forms merely as a sheath for the stylets, in the next stage as an absorbent pad, and in the last stage, that of the blood-sucking muscids, as cutting organs. To return for a moment to the hypothesis of Minchin. All Diptera, and one may add all Hemiptera also, are descended from biting or mandibulate ancestors, but these ancestors were not necessarily blood-suckers, and conse- quently flagellates found in non-blood-sucking flies may or may not be descended from ancestors which were at one time hæmoflagellates. It is not to be supposed that there has been any direct line of descent, and it appears to me to be impossible to decide, in the present stage of our knowledge at least, whether those forms, which in the past gave rise to the non-blood-sucking flies we know to-day, were blood-suckers or not. Certainly they were provided with mouth parts which could be adapted for the purpose with comparatively little change, but there is no evidence of any importance one way or the other. In the case of the Muscid biting flies Minchin's hypothesis can only be accepted in a limited sense. Enough has been said already to show that in this group the evolution has progressed from non-blood-sucker to blood-sucker and that the flies of the Stomoxys group are more recent than the simple Musca forms. That being the case, if the flagellates found in Muscid flies are descended from hæmoflagellates, then they can only have reached the fly at the remote period when the fly was mandibulate, before the appendages had atrophied from disuse. To be precise, if the ancestral stock of Herpetomonas musc6 to no less an authority than Williston, a concentration of the wing veins to- wards the anterior margin, and a shortening of the most anterior veins, are evi- dence of specialisation, and once these changes have taken place they are irre- versible; a comparison of the venation of Musca and Glossina indicates clearly that the latter fly, according to this criterion, is the more recent of the two forms. Secondly, we find that a tendency towards the pupiparous habit, un- doubtedly a recent development in the Diptera, and one which indicates a high degree of specialisation, appears along with the blood-sucking habit, though it occurs somewhat irregularly in the group. Phil7 The Proboscis of Musca. Since all the flies to be discussed in this paper are to be regardeds as derived from a Musca-like ancestor, a brief note on the structure of the proboscis of this type must be given. Descriptions of the proboscis of Musca and the allied forms are numerous enough, and I have indeed little to add to what has already been said, but it will be necessary, in view of what follows, to define clearly what is meant by certain of the terms employed, and in certain cases to introduce new ones. Any points which I omit, and regarding which the reader may wish to refresh his memory, are dealt with in Kraepelin's complete account. The species which I have specially studied, and to which the descrip- tion mainly applies, is Musca nebulo, the common bazaar fly of Madras. The differences between different species are however so small that the description will apply in all the important points to any species of like habit. The proboscis of Musca consists of three parts, termed from above down- wards the rostrum, haustellum, and the labella. Between each two of these, and between the rostrum and the head, there is a joint which permits of move- ment in a vertical plane. When the proboscis is in use, the three joints are extended so that the three parts are in the same straight line, and the whole proboscis hangs downwards from the under surface of the head of the fly, approximately at a right angle to the long axis of the body. When the pro- boscis is not in use it is retracted by the flexion of all three joints, in such a way that the three parts are folded on one another and tucked into an orifice on the under surface of the head. This orifice is termed by some systematists the "buccal orifice," an unfortunate name, for it is separated from the true mouth of the fly by the whole length of the pharynx, and is moreover merely an interval in the chitinous integument of the head, and has nothing to do with the buccal cavity. I propose to adopt the term epistomal orifice for this aperture. Of the three divisions enumerated above, the rostrum is, strictly speaking, a portion of the head. It contains the pharynx, and the only portion of the true mouth parts in relation to it is the pair of maxillary palps, which are attached to its anterior surface; the haustellum is the proboscis proper, and consists of the surviving head appendages, viz., the second maxillæ, fused to form the labium, and the labrum-epipharynx and hypopharynx. The labella are parts of the second maxillæ which have remained separate at the distal end. The nature of the joints and the range and nature of the movements of the proboscis will be discussed later, but it should be noted here that the extension of the rostrum is of the nature of an evagination of a part of the head capsule. The so-called "buccal orifice" is merely a thickened rim where the rigid chitin ,of the head capsule gives place to the soft and flexible wall of the rostrum.
8 The Rostrum. The rostrum has the shape of a truncated cone, broad end uppermost. Its outer covering consists of a flexible membrane which is continuous at the epistomal orifice with the chitin of the head capsule. At the distal end it is attached to the wall of the haustellum. Within this membrane there is a somewhat complex chitinous structure termed the fulcrum, part of which forms the pharynx or sucking pump of the fly. This structure affords the necessary rigidity to this part of the proboscis, and gives attachments to the various, muscles which act on the joint between the rostrum and the haustellum. The fulcrum resembles, to use Kraepelin's admirable simile, a Spanish stirrup iron. It consists of a posterior plate, two lateral plates, and an anterior arch. The posterior plate is oblong, slightly concave forwards anteriorly, and narrower above than below. Its upper and lower borders are incurved, the lateral angles of the former being produced upwards into a pair of stout cornua, which are also intimately connected with the lateral plates. The lateral plates are roughly triangular, and are continuous by their longest sides with the posterior plate, projecting forward at right angles from it; their upper sides are deeply incurved. The anterior side, which is much longer than the upper one, is also incurved, but the contour is abruptly broken at the junction of the middle and lower thirds by the projection forwards of a sharp spur, the border being more concave below than above this point. The anterior arch is situated at about the same level as the cornua on the posterior plate, and passes between the upper anterior angles of the lateral plates; it is a thick ridged bar, which gives attachment to part of the dilator muscles of the pharynx, and is the part which is pressed against the clypeus when the rostrum is rotated in retraction. It lies in, and is continuous with, the membraneous anterior wall of the rostrum. The pharynx, or sucking pump, of Musca resembles that of the Orthor- raphic flies, consisting of two superimposed chitinous plates, which can be separated by dilator muscles. The posterior of these plates is the one described above as the posterior plate of the fulcrum; the anterior plate, which lies in close contact with it when the organ is not in use, is of similar shape and extent, but is much thinner, and is drawn away from the other by the action of the dilator muscles. It has a thick ridge of chitin running down its middle line, to which the muscle fibres are attached. The anterior plate, however, is not simply pulled away from the other so as to leave a crecentic interval between the two, but is bent forwards on each side as the muscles pull the median ridge forward, so that the resulting cavity tends to be tri-radiate, an arrangement which recalls that of the pharynx of the mosquito. The
9 fulcrum lies in the anterior part of the rostrum; behind it there is a compara- tively large space, which in the extended position is occupied by two large cylindrical air sacs, which are of great importance in the mechanism of extension. In the middle line between these there is the salivary duct, and on either side and behind there are numerous muscles, which act on the joints above and below. These will be dealt with more particularly later. The fulcrum does not extend quite to the lower end of the rostrum, and communication between the food canal in the haustellum and the pharynx is established by means of the intervention of a small chamber resembling a miniature pharynx. This has been elaborately described by Kraepelin, who, however, did not give it a definite name. Lowne termed the chitin forming its wall the " hyoid sclerite." When describing the corresponding structure in Lyperosia I suggested the name buccal cavity as having the double advantage of indicating at once the position and the homology. The chamber consists, in Musca, of a small triangular piece of thin chitin, arranged with its long axis pointing towards the haustellum, and its broad base between the lower cornua of the fulcrum, so that it occupies the interval between the two divisions of the proboscis. The lateral angles are bent forward, and are connected with one another by means of a thin membrane, which is also attached to the anterior plate of the pharynx. The epipharynx and hypopharynx terminate in the region of this cavity in a manner which will presently be described. The Haustellum. The main bulk of the haustellum consists of the labium, or fused second maxillæ. The other parts are concealed in a groove on its anterior surface in the normal conditions of the parts. The labium is roughly cylindrical in shape, thickest in the middle, and tapering a little at each end. Its wall consists of two pieces of chitin united by a loose membrane, which is attached to the lateral edges of each. Of these the posterior, termed the mentum (Plate II, figure 3) and homologous with the mentum of other insects, is much the largest; it has the shape of a shallow trough, with the concavity directed forwards, and is contracted at its lower end. It forms the posterior and lateral walls of the labium, and has thickened lateral borders. The arrangement of the parts at its lower end should be parti- cularly noted, as they undergo important modifications in the blood-sucking Muscids. The thickened lateral borders converge towards the distal end, and become somewhat attenuated; the distal border, which is about one-third the length of the lateral sides, has in its middle portion a deep square-shaped incision, on the opposing sides of which there are two longitudinal rod-like
10 thickenings of the chitin, extending the whole length of the sides of the incision. Continuous with these there is on each side a second rod of the same length as the sides of the incision; these two rods pass downwards distal to the lower border of the labium, and diverge from one another. They have an import- ant connection with the chitinous arch which supports the labella behind. If they are examined in thoroughly cleared preparations, it will be seen that although they are continuous with one another, there is a distinct thinning of the chitin at the level of the distal border of the mentum, which suggests that the proximal and distal portions of the rod are moveable on one another. The other chitinous portion of the labium is very ill defined in Musca, and can only be recognised in slightly cleared preparations and in sections. It is a thin sheet of chitin, grooved to form a shallow trough, and situated imme- diately behind the hypopharynx, the upper part of which is fused with it. On each side of this groove there is a rod-like thickening, which extends from a point a little distal to the base of the hypopharnyx to the labella, to the anterior sclerite of which it is attached. The groove, with its lateral thicken- ings, may be termed the labial gutter. It corresponds to the structure described in Stomoxys under that name by Stephens and Newstead. The membrane which unites the anterior and posterior plates of chitin, and completes the wall of the labium, is in Musca very lax and of considerable extent. The two chitinous portions are not continuous with one another at any point. The chief contents of the labium are the muscles which move the labella; these will be briefly described in connection with the mechanism of the proboscis. In addition there is the labial salivary gland, situated behind the lower end of the labial gutter, and a nerve and trachea on each side. There are no air sacs in the labium and the tracheæ are little larger than the nerves. The labrum-epipharynx (Plate II, figure 5) lies in the groove on the ante- rior surface of the labium. It is shaped like a lance-head, its greatest breadth being about one-third of its total length. There appears to be some difference of opinion with regard to the composition of this organ, and the terms labrum and labrum-epipharynx are used somewhat loosely in current literature. If one bears in mind that the organ in Musca is homologous with the one in the more primitive Orthorraphic flies its dual nature will be evident. The outer part of the organ, consists of the labral element. It gives its shape to the structure, and, arching over the anterior and lateral sides, terminates at about the middle third of the posterior surface. The inner portion is the epipharynx, and consists of a gutter having a depth of about half a circle. Between these two chitinous parts there is an interval, which is partly occupied by a fan-shaped.
11 muscle passing from the labrum to the epipharynx. The method of termina- tion of the two constituent parts indicates clearly their different origin, for at the proximal end they separate completely. The broad upper end of the labrum becomes continuous with the membrane on the anterior surface of the rostrum, and this of course is directly continuous with the clypeus of the head capsule; the only real difference in the relations of the labrum in the Muscid flies is that it has become separated from the head by the evagination of the rostrum from the head cavity. At the sides of its upper border there are small pits for the articulation of the labral apodemes, stout and heavily pigmented rods which pass upwards and outwards, diverging from one another, into the rostrum. The lower ends of the apodemes are pointed and barbed, the main portion of the rod slightly sinuous, and the upper end expanded for muscle attachment. Some of the muscle fibres attached to these apodemes are prob- ably representatives of the labral muscles found in the Orthorraphic flies, and the apodemes themselves may be derived from the portion of the labrum which in the more primitive group is to be found inside the head capsule, and to which the muscle of the labrum is attached. The upper end of the epipharynx is a considerable distance proximal to that of the labrum, for it projects into the rostrum as far as the upper part of the buccal cavity, to the upper border of which it is connected by means of a soft membrane. In view of the similarity in all essential points between the labrum-epipharynx in Musca and that in the Orthorraphic flies, in which the epipharynx is in direct chitinous continuity with the functional buccal cavity, I do not see any grounds for accepting Kraepelin's view, that the organ is a mere evagination from the head cavity. The hypopharynx retains the structure usual in the Diptera, being a simple spatulate slip perforated by the salivary duct. Its proximal third is fused with the labial gutter. At its upper end it projects into the rostrum behind the epipharynx, and is attached by a fine membrane to the pointed end of the triangular plate which forms the main part of the buccal cavity. It will now be evident that the buccal cavity is completed in its distal portion by the at- tachment to it of the epipharynx and the hypopharynx, which converge to- gether at this point, and are united to the borders of the chitinous plate by membrane. This point, therefore, as correctly stated by Kraepelin, is the true mouth of the fly. It will be shown later that as the blood-sucking proboscis is evolved, the mouth is moved forwards, and the buccal cavity transformed into a tube with complex walls. I have already noted, in a previous paper, that the hypopharynx, like the labrum-epipharynx, consists of two distinct laminæ, which enclose between them the salivary duct. In Musca the labial lamina is only separate in the D
12 distal third of the organ. Separation of whole of this lamina with the form- ation of a free organ is found in the flies to be discussed later. The salivary duct emerges from between the two laminæ just above the point of union of the stomadael element with the walls of the buccal cavity. The Labella. The labella are oval lobes, separated from one another by a median fissure which extends throughout their anterior surfaces, and is there continuous with the groove on the anterior surface of the labium, but which is incomplete behind. The two labella represent portions of the second maxillæ which have remained distinct while the rest of the appendages have united to form the labium. Each lobe has an outer and an inner wall, the outer being composed of thin plates of chitin with membraneous intervals, the inner of the highly specialised pseudotracheal membrane, by means of which the fly absorbs its food. The structure of this membrane is familiar from many descriptions, and full details of its minute anatomy and mechanism will be found in Graham- Smith's recent paper, so that it will be unnecessary to discuss it here, especially since it is one of the first portions to disappear in the evolution of the blood- sucking proboscis. The outer walls impart the necessary rigidity to the labella, and have the chitin concentrated towards the periphery where the inner and outer walls join one another; at the anterior and posterior parts they bear a large number of pigmented macrochætæ, which project forward as a fringe distal to the organ. There are two sclerites which support the labellar walls and at the same time unite the labium and labella, forming joints which permit of free move- ment between the two parts in an antero-posterior direction. The posterior of these is known as the furca (Plate II., figure 3). It is shaped like a rather wide horse-shoe, and embraces the posterior half of the labella. The posterior half of the arch fits between the arms of the fork of the mentum, the short trans- verse part lying opposite the incision between them. The furca is intimately fused with the external labellar wall, and is also attached to the membraneous portion of the wall of the haustellum in the region of the fork of the mentum, so that when it is swung backwards and forwards between the arms of the fork it carries the labellar wall with it; there is in addition a small heart-shaped piece of thin chitin attached to the transverse part of the arch, which passes downwards in the middle line behind, and further assists the furca in its control over the labella. The anterior or discal sclerite (Plate II, figure 4, Plate V, figures 27 and 28) lies between the labella, and is attached to the labial gutter. Its shape and position are of great importance from the comparative point of view, as it undergoes important modifications in the blood-sucking forms.
13 It is a racket-shaped loop of strong and heavily pigmented chitin, the broad distal end of which forms the margin of the oral pit, while the proximal end, corresponding to the handle, gives attachment to an important pair of muscles. The distal end is shaped like an isosceles triangle, forwardly directed and with rounded lateral sides and posterior angles; the base is incomplete in the middle third, the remaining portions projecting inwards as thin flanges. Anticipating subsequent descriptions, this portion of the discal sclerite may be called the axial apophysis, a term used by Stephens and Newstead in their description of the proboscis of Stomoxys. The proximal portion of the sclerite consists of two strong rods, which arise from the thickened posterior angles, and pass backwards, at first parallel to one another, but diverging slightly towards their ends; they are about equal in length to the axial apophysis. When examined in profile it is seen that they are not quite in the same straight line as the distal portion of the sclerite, but are curved a little upwards as they diverge from one another. These portions of the sclerite may be termed the labellar rods. The position of the discal sclerite will be better understood by reverting for a moment to the structure of the labium, as a whole. It is essentially a hollow organ, the chitinous and membraneous walls of which are continuous throughout the labium and labella, and enclose a space in which are contained the muscles which move the labella, some tracheæ, and a labial salivary gland, all of which lie in the hæmatoc14 The prestomal teeth (Plate II, figures 6, 7 and 8), though of only secondary importance in the economy of the house fly, have a special significance front the comparative point of view as being the homologues of the powerful cut- ting teeth of other Muscids. They are situated around the periphery of the prestomum, their proximal ends being attached to the discal sclerite and their distal ends directed outwards. The number and arrangement differ a good deal in nearly allied species, but they always conform to the same general type. Those of Musca domestica have been described by Kraepelin, and those of the Blow-Fly by Graham-Smith. The arrangement in Musca nebulo resembles the above. In Musca convexi frons it is somewhat simpler, as there is only one row of teeth, and only four on each side. Their disposition in this species is represented in figure 8, Plate II, where these are shown in side view, the terminations of the pseudotracheal channels being also indicated. Each tooth is a small petal-like slip of yellow chitin, contracted at its base to a rounded cord and expanded and hollowed distally into a shallow trough. The inner end is articulated to a thin raised flange of the discal sclerite, and the inner half of each tooth is adherent to the membrane between the pseudotrachae ; the distal margin is irregularly serrated, but on account of the extreme thinness of this part of the tooth it is difficult to make out the precise outline. The terminations of the pseudotracheal channels at the prestomum are somewhat peculiar. As the channel approaches the orifice the rings develop a median inward projection, so that when seen in optical section they appear T-shaped instead of straight; in the last complete ring this spur is produced inwards almost to the margin of the orifice, though it does not appear to be actually attached to it. On either side of the end of the channel, and em- bracing the last ring, there are several curved filaments of chitin which unite to form a thick strand, those of two sides passing inwards in contact with one another, between the teeth, to be inserted into the flange on the discal sclerite. The Musculature and Mechanism. It is not necessary to give here a detailed account of all the muscles and other structures which are concerned in the mechanism of the proboscis, but rather to indicate the main features of the movements and the musculature, so that the modifications found in the blood-sucking members of the group may be compared with the Musca type. The muscles are extremely difficult to study, and the chances of making an error with regard to their exact points of attachment are so great that it would not be worth while to attempt to describe minor differences. A full account of the different muscles and their actions will be found in Kraepelin's paper.
15 The first movements to be considered are those which result in the exten- sion and retraction of the proboscis; as already stated, the whole organ is drawn up underneath the head when not in use, and can be extended into a straight line perpendicular to the long axis of the body when required. The labella also can be folded and expanded. The movement has to be considered joint by joint, though it must be remembered that in life all the joints are moved at the same time, the extension and retraction taking place rapidly. The extension of the rostrum on the head is brought about by a rotation of the fulcrum on the anterior border of the epistomal orifice, in such a way that its lower end passes forwards and downwards. The motive power for this is to be found in the distension of the large air sacs which lie on either side of the fulcrum, the air being expressed from the body of the fly into the head by means of the respiratory movements of the fly, as described by Kraepelin. The rostrum is extended, in fact, much as one would straighten the finger of a glove by blowing into it. The extent of possible movement is approximately rotation through a right angle, from the horizontal to the vertical position. Extension of the haustellum on the rostrum is accomplished mainly by the contraction of the muscles which are attached to the apodemes of the labrum, passing between the expanded upper ends of the apodemes and the lower end of the fulcrum; they pull in a downward and inward direction, and so force the labrum, and with it the labium, into line with the rostrum, by straighten- ing the two at the loose joint in the region of the buccal cavity. The actual point on which the rotation occurs appears to be the membraneous union between the epipharynx and hypopharynx and the small chitinous plate which forms the walls of the buccal cavity. The movements in these two joints by which the proboscis is retracted are both produced by muscular action. The fulcrum is rotated upwards and backwards by means of two pairs of muscles. The anterior pair of these is short, and passes between the internal surface of the head capsule, at a point just below the antennae, and the prominent posterior horns of the fulcrum ; its action causes the fulcrum to rotate on the fixed point provided by the pressure of the anterior arch against the anterior edge of the epistomal orifice. The posterior muscle is very long, and passes between the internal surface of the head capsule in the region of the occipital foramen and the upper border of the mentum. The two act together, and the fulcrum, and with it the rest of the rostrum, is drawn upwards as it is rotated. The folding of the haustellum on the rostrum is accomplished by means of certain groups of muscles lying on the anterior surface of the rostrum; these are somewhat ill-defined, and many separate muscles which may fulfil this function have been described. The most important ones appear to be a pair which pass between the distal
16 ends of the labial apodemes and the anterior arch of the fulcrum, and act in the reverse direction to those which are inserted into the expanded ends of the apodemes. These two joints provide a very wide range of movement, and the distal end of the labium may be moved to any point within a segment of a circle the centre of which is situated at the point of attachment of the rostrum to the head, and the radius the length of the organ in the extended position. The upper limit of this segment is in the horizontal plane, a little below the line of the long axis of the body; the posterior limit is the vertical line between the epistomal orifice and the surface on which the fly is feeding. The joints do not permit of any lateral or rotatory movement. The movements of the labella are somewhat complex, but as these organs become fixed and greatly altered in the blood-sucking flies, a brief note will suffice here. The movement is of two kinds, produced by different forces, and brings about very marked changes in the form and position of these organs. In the normal resting position the labella are compressed, and their two walls are separated from one another by only a small amount of cellular tissue. The two lobes are folded backwards on the end of the haustellum, rotation taking place at the joint between the end of the labial gutter and the discal sclerite, and between the fork of the mentum and the furca. The distal margins of the outer walls of the two labella are in contact with one another, and the oral surface is completely concealed. When they are required for use they are distended with blood from the hæmatoc17 the labial gutter. The posterior and lateral group of muscles becomes of very great importance in the more highly specialised flies. It arises together with the retractors of the discal sclerite, and is inserted into the arms of the furca. As one pair of these muscles is inserted into the anterior and the other into the posterior of the two sclerites which connect the labella with the labium, the two are antagonistic; when they act I ogether they will spread out and stretch the labellar walls, and when they act independently one will erect the labella and the other, the one attached posteriorly, will bring the labella to the position of rest. Both acting at the same time will retract the labella, and will there- fore antagonise the transverse muscle, which by driving the blood distally will tend to distend them. The distension of the labella is not, however, due entirely to the action of the transverse muscles, but is helped by the muscles of the abdomen acting as in respiration; the longitudinal muscles of the labium have to antagonise the transverse muscles to the extent of driving the blood from the oral lobes, when the proboseis is to be retracted. The evagination and. invagination of the labella in Musca should be parti- cularly noted, for it furnishes the clue to the mechanism of the biting apparatus of the blood-sucking flies of this group, in which the undoing of the evagination between the walls of the labella, by which the internal surfaces become external, constitutes the act of biting. The prestomal teeth of the house fly are probably used to scrape food surfaces, and are moved by the alternate contractions of the anterior and lateral muscles, which cause the discal sclerite to rotate in an anterior and posterior direction on the pivot formed by its attachment to the labial gutter. When they are in use the posterior portion of the wall is drawn backwards out of the way by the muscle attached to the furca; as only the distal half of each tooth is free from the membrane, they cannot be very efficient weapons, but in view of the homology existing between them and the powerful teeth of other flies their method of action is interesting. The Development of the Blood-Sucking Habit. While the domestic species of Musca are mostly omnivarous, it is a matter of common knowledge that they are especially attracted by animal juices, either excrementa or exudations from the living body. Any slight cut or abrasion of the skin is certain to be sought out, and in the case of sick animals, too weak to protect themselves with their tails, flies collect in enormous numbers, especially in tropical countries, to feed on the exuded fluids. The prestomal teeth are probably sufficiently powerful to scrape away coagulated serum so as to enable the fly to reach the moisture beneath, though not to cut through living tissue. It is not unreasonable to infer that, in the ordinary
18 course of evolution and differentiation of species, certain forms arose which had a special taste for blood and at the same time specially strong prestomal teeth, by means of which they were able to scrape an abraded surface more effectively, and, in a further stage, to make a wound on unbroken skin. Once such a habit was started it would be only a matter of time until the fly became confirmed in this manner of obtaining food, and in succeeding generations the whole structure of the proboscis would become adapted for this specialised function, the separate stages of the process remaining as distinct forms, more or less predominant and widespread according to the degree of perfection of their adaptation to their environment. It so happens that these theoretical considerations receive confirmation from the study of the habits of some members of the genus. There are at least three flies, and probably many more, which, although their teeth are no more powerful than those of Musca nebulo, are nevertheless confirmed blood-suckers, and probably have no other food. These are Musca corvina, Portchinski, Musca pattoni, Austen, and Musca convexi frons, Thompson. The two latter are both common cattle flies in Madras, and have the peculiar habit, first pointed out by Captain Patton, of feeding on the blood which exudes from the wounds made by true biting flies, most frequently associating for this purpose with Philæmatomyia insignis, the commonest biting fly in this district. Both these flies are much larger than Philæmatomyia, and it is very remarkable to watch them, often half a dozen at a time, collect round the smaller fly as it is in the act of feeding, and endeavour to thrust their proboscides near the wound. As soon as the biting fly has finished its meal and flown off, one of the others takes its place and at once settles down to feed, only leaving the wound when it is as fully gorged as possible; both these flies resemble true biting flies in taking at one meal the maximum quantity of blood that they can contain. These three flies, then, are examples of an early stage of the development of the blood-sucking habit; closer observation of the habits of other species in other parts of the world will probably reveal many instances of this peculiar form of parasitism. The matter is one of considerable economic importance, for such flies are as capable of transmitting blood parasites as those on which they rely for food. The presence of even minute prestomal teeth is worthy of consideration when dealing with the question of trypanosome transmission, for it has been repeatedly shown that the discharge from ulcers, which are so constant a N. B.19 feature of many trypanosome diseases, contain large numbers of trypanosomes. Any such delicate organism would die after a very short exposure to the air and to the tropical sun, but flies with teeth sufficiently strong to scrape away the protective clot so as to reach the moisture underneath would be quite capable of transmitting live trypanosomes from one animal to another. The Structural Changes in the Proboscis. Before considering the different forms in detail it will be of advantage to indicate briefly the directions in which the structural changes, which are the response to the change in the habit of life, are to be looked for. All the modifications can be traced to the development of the prestomal teeth, the increase in the size and importance of which has rendered necessary a corresponding increase in the stability of the structures which support them, and in the strength of the muscles which bring them into play. At the same time the proboscis is altered in shape in such a way that it has actually become a piercing organ, pointed at the distal end and able to enter the skin of the host, in some cases to a considerable depth; and as the piercing parts are limited to the haustellum, this part of proboscis has become elongated, until it may be, as in Glossina, more than three times the length of the rostrum. The muscles which actuate the biting apparatus, greatly increased in size, are collected towards the posterior end of the labium, and connected with their insertions by tendons. At the same time the pseudotracheal membrane, no longer of use to the fly, has disappeared. The anterior of the two joints by which the labella in Musca are articulated to the labium is fixed more or less firmly in that position in which the labella are in a line with the labium. The discal sclerite is separated into two parts, the axial apophysis and the labellar rods, to the latter of which the teeth are attached by means of a projecting flange. The rods themselves are expanded into plates forming an incomplete collar round the prestomal orifice. The furca, to which the powerful muscles which move the teeth are attached, is greatly thickened, and takes part in a much more definite articulation. The fork of the mentum is resolved into its two parts, the distal one of which is moved forwards and outwards and takes little or no part in the articulation. The most obvious change is in the posi- tion of the proboscis in the resting attitude. On account of its increased length the haustellum can no longer be concealed when it is retracted, and projects conspicuously in front of the head. The pseudotracheal membrane of Musca, as pointed out by Graham-Smith, fulfils a special function in filtering the food of the fly so as to prevent the ingress into the food canal of particles too large for its lumen. In the biting flies the membrane no longer exists as such, but some sort of filter is E
20 as necessary in these flies as in the non-biting ones, for on account of the method by which the wound is made there must be many particles, torn off by the teeth, sufficiently large to block the canal between the epipharynx and the hypopharynx if they gained access to it. This is prevented by the development, from the remains of the rings of the pseudotracheæ, of a series of processes, which are attached between the teeth and are swept through the wound in advance of them to keep clear the surface to which they are applied. The Genus Philæmatomyia. The genus Philæmatomyia was created by Austen in 1909, for one species, insignis. The characteristic feature of the genus is the presence of a circlet of teeth at the apex of the proboscis, between the labella. In other respects it closely resembles Musca, and unless the teeth are noticed there is nothing about the general appearance of the proboscis to suggest that the fly is a blood-sucker; it is probable that the above species, which appears to be widely distributed and common where it occurs, had previously failed to attract notice on account of its innocent and inconspicuous appearance. Since the description of the above species two others have been found, viz., Philæmatomyia lineata, Brunetti, and gurnei, Patton and Cragg. Both these, and especially the latter, appear to be rare flies, at least in Madras, where insignis is extremely common. All three are of exceptional interest, as they represent separate and early stages in the evolution of the blood-sucking proboscis. In all the proboscis is of the simple Musca type, is completely retractile within the head, and possesses a pseudotracheal membrane: the relative proportions of the rostrum and haustellum are the same as in Musca, the labella are only a little reduced in size, and the hairs and macrochætæ are similarly distributed and fairly abundant. It is obvious that such a proboscis cannot be simply thrust into the skin of the host, and, as will be seen when the mechanism is discussed, the wound made is a scarification rather than a puncture. The teeth are used, in fact, very much in the same way as those of a non-biting Musca. The structure of the proboscis being for the most part identical with that of Musca, it need not be described in detail, and we may proceed at once to consider the modifications which are found. They are all in connection with the teeth, the distal sclerite, and the labial gutter; it will be convenient to deal with each fly separately. Philæmatomyia lineata. The evidence with regard to the blood-sucking habit of this species requires confirmation. In Brunetti's original description it is stated that Dr. Annandale
21 has seen it gorged with blood, but this is not absolute proof that it can itself make an effective wound, for it may have the same habit as Musca pattoni and convexi frons. It is not common in Madras, and neither Captain Patton nor myself has been able to confirm Dr. Annandale's observation, or to ascertain if it can make a wound for itself, though we have frequently seen it on cattle. The teeth (Plate IV, fig. 24) are shaped like rose thorns, and are attached to the membraneous inner wall of the labella by expanded bases, as thorns are attached to a stem. When seen in profile it is evident that only the distal half of each tooth is free from the membrane; the middle portion is com- posed of a slightly expanded base; the proximal portion of the tooth is flatten- ed, adherent to the membrane, and distinctly divided in its long axis, so that it consists of two lateral ribs with a thinly chitinised interval between them; these are articulated to a flange of the discal sclerite. There are four of these teeth, similar to one another in size and shape, situated at the prestomal orifice, and alternating there with the terminations of those pseudotracheal channels which open directly into the prestomum. The pseudotracheæ do not extend quite so far inward as do the corresponding ones in Musca, but terminate at the level of the distal portion of the attached bases of the teeth. On each side of each channel there is a pair of narrow flattened chitinous strands, which unite with those of the opposite sides to form a thicker strand at the level of the separation of the tooth from the membrane. This strand is continued between the teeth to near the attachment of the inner wall of the labellum to the discal sclerite, there being one such strand between each two teeth and one on the proximal side of the proximal tooth. At the distal side of the four large teeth there is a smaller thin slip of chitin, which appears to represent a rudimentary tooth. It is situated at the point where the anterior collecting channels terminate, and is contiguous with the irregularly shaped plates of chitin which replace the rings of the collecting channel in this region. The discal sclerite, though retaining the general shape and appearance of that of Musca, shows evidence of the commencement of important changes. In the first place, it is much stouter and more heavily pigmented than in the non-biting species, to correspond with the increased size of the teeth and the necessity for more powerful muscles. The racket shape is modified by the wide separation of the labellar rods, with the result that the sclerite is V-shaped, the point corresponding to the junction of the parallel rods with the loop in Musca being marked by a prominence on the external surface. The separation of the discal sclerite into two portions is evident even at this early stage. If a well cleared preparation (Plate V, fig. 31), care- fully decolourised with chlorine, be examined under a high power, it will be seen E 2
22 that there is a definite fissure separating the anterior fourth from the posterior three-fourths, commencing on the external surface a little below the pointed apex and running backwards and slightly outwards towards the inner surface. The portion anterior to this fissure is the axial apophysis, and that posterior to it the labellar rod; the importance of this distinction will be seen later. The axial apophysis is Y-shaped, the long arm of the Y, free and forwardly directed, being the most distal part of the sclerite; the lateral arms are only separated from the labellar rods by the fissure described above. The distal part is not straight, but is bent forwards at a right angle, so that its extremity lies in approximately the same plane as the teeth when extended for use; it is interesting to note that in decolourised preparations a median fissure separating the axial apophysis into two lateral halves can be made out. The labellar rods consist of three parts, a posterior part in which the muscles are inserted, an anterior part which unites with the axial apophysis, and a tooth plate. The posterior portions, composing about half the length of the sclerite, are wedge-shaped and have their pointed ends directed outwards and backwards; their broad ends form prominent tuberosities on the outer sides of the sclerite. The anterior part is thinner and somewhat flattened from side to side. The tooth plate is a narrow flange of thin chitin, arising from the whole length of the outer edge of the anterior portion of the sclerite and follow- ing its curve; it is continued in front of the fissure separating the axial apo- physis from the labellar rod, but at the fissure it turns directly forwards as an isolated spur, which reaches to about the level of the tip of the apophysis. It is from this spur that the rudimentary tooth arises. Posteriorly the flange is continued inwards and upwards across the tuberosity, the most posterior portion projecting inwards towards that of the other side. When seen in profile the tooth plate presents a sickle-shaped free border, the anterior and posterior extremities of which are placed at the terminations of the two longitudinal collecting channels of the pseudotracheæ. The bases of all the teeth and the terminations of the central pseudotracheæ fit into the concavity, and the proximal ends of the teeth and the supporting strands of the pseudotracheæ are attached around its margin. In this way the tooth plates of the two sides form a sort of cup into which the bases of the teeth fit. The labial gutter of this species differs from that of Musca in the greater thickness and pigmentation of its chitin. The lateral rods are definitely demarcated, and articulate with the labellar rods at the junction of the anterior and posterior portions. They can be traced almost to the proximal end of the mentum, lying on either side of the labrum-epipharynx. The hypopharynx is free from the gutter except at the extreme upper end.
23 The pseudotracheal membrane does not differ from that of Musca. There are, however, only eighteen channels, whereas twenty six seems to be the average number in non-blood-sucking forms. The mechanism of the proboscis appears to be identical with that described for Musca nebulo. The teeth are brought into play by the contraction of the muscles inserted into the furca, the requisite resistance and adaptation being obtained by the muscles inserted into the labellar rods. When in use the labellar rods are placed more or less perpendicular to the labium, and the teeth, turned outwards by the tightening of the membrane to which their bases are attached, are arranged in a half moon with the axial apophysis in the centre, not in a circle as stated by Brunetti. They may either be drawn across the surface in an antero-posterior plane by the movement of the labellar rods on their attachment to the labial gutter, or they may cut by the simple eversion of the labellar walls, which turns them outwards and at the same time draws their points across the skin. Philæmatomyia gurnei. In a recent paper written in conjunction with Captain Patton of this Insti- tute the discovery of this species was briefly chronicled, a detailed description being deferred in the hope of obtaining more material. Unfortunately this hope has not been realised, and up to the present time the only specimen in our possession is the one from which the original description was given.* It happened, however, that this specimen was caught in the act of sucking blood from a cow, and had its abdomen distended with blood, so that there is no doubt regarding its habits. The proboscis was removed from the head, cleared in potash, and partially dissected so as to display the teeth and con- nected structures. The discal sclerite, separated from the labium by the rup- ture of its tendinous attachment to the end of the labial gutter, was flattened out and compressed, in order to display the teeth of both sides, and in doing so the attachments of the axial apophysis to the labellar rods were fractured and the pseudotracheal membrane and part of the outer wall of the labella, torn. The microphotograph (Plate V, fig. 32) represents the appearance after this dissection. The teeth are much stouter and shorter than those of lineata, though they resemble them in general configuration; their greatest breadth is about one- fourth the length. There are five principal and three rudimentary teeth on each side, arranged in a similar manner to those of lineata; the large teeth are * A series of this species has been obtained while this Memoir was in the press. A detailed description appears in the Indian Journal of Medical Research, Vol. I, No. 1. Examination of farther specimens has confirmed the above account.
24 In the middle, and on each side there is another similar in shape but only about one-fourth the size, and on the inner side, internal to this, there is a small slip which may be taken as a rudimentary tooth. As in lineata, only the distal half of each tooth is free from the membrane; at the extreme tip there is a series of rather coarse serrations. The serrated edge must be directed upwards when the teeth are everted. The proximal ends of the teeth are distinctly bifid. They are not directly attached to the tooth plate. Between the teeth there are certain structures (Plate II, fig. 9) simple in this species, but assuming an extraordinary complexity in the more differentiated forms, which may be termed generally the interdental armature. They occupy the position of the Y-shaped strands of chitin which support the terminations of the pseudotracheæ in lineata, though they, like the teeth, are not attached to the tooth plate directly. They consist in this species of small leaf-like plates of chitin, arranged in pairs, one pair between each two adjacent teeth. The two blades of each pair are turned slightly inwards towards one another, so as to enclose between them the end of the pseudotracheal channel. The blades are about the same length as the teeth, and arise from the membrane by short stalks; the extreme tip and the edge most distant from the pseudotracheæ are thicker than the rest of the blade. There are twelve pseudotracheal channels, arranged in the usual manner, except that the anterior and posterior collecting channels are each only con- tinuous with two pseudotracheæ, the remainder terminating directly at the prestomum. There is a slight difference in the method of termination; the rings, instead of having inwardly directed projections, are split into two halves, and each half is turned inwards towards the tooth plate, one being in advance of the other so that they appear to alternate. The discal sclerite shows a further advance in specialisation both in the degree of separation of the two constituent parts and in the thickness of the chitin. The axial apophysis is a stout conical piece of very deeply pigmented chitin, about twice as long as broad, and produced distally to a sharp point; it lies between the anterior ends of the labellar rods, and is fused with them in the posterior third of its extent. The apex of the apophysis is situated on a level with the bases of the pair of teeth nearest the middle line, so that when the teeth are turned outwards its point must project beyond them. The labellar rods consist of two portions differing greatly in the thickness of the chitin; the posterior portions are stout wedge-shaped rods bent slightly out- wards from one another and terminating in blunt and rather thinner ends; they therefore closely resemble the corresponding parts of the sclerite in the last species. The expanded distal ends of these rods extend much further on the outer than on the inner side, so that the rods are triangular, with two nearly
25 equal sides and one long one externally. The distal side of this triangle is produced forwards and inwards into a thinner sheet of chitin, roughly quadrilateral in shape, which is fused internally with the axial apophysis, and to the distal margin of which the tooth plate is attached; this flattened sheet corresponds to the distal curved portion of the sclerite in lineata and to the horse-shoe shaped arch in Musca (the extreme tip excepted). The tooth plate, as seen in the flattened preparation, is a thin sickle- shaped slip of yellow chitin arising from the distal margin of the labellar rod on each side. The anterior portion, corresponding to the handle of the sickle, occupies about one-third of the length, and is directed straight forwards, those of the two sides being approximately parallel to one another, and situated on either side of the axial apophysis. They are attached to the labellar rods at their proximal ends, the rest of their periphery being connected only with the membrane forming the inner wall of the labella. The middle third of the plate is not distinguishable from the margin of the rod, but the posterior third extends forward and outward to about the level of the tip of the axial apophy- sis. In this way the tooth plate of each side forms a hollow cup into which the bases of the teeth fit, though in this case without any chitinous attachment. The labial gutter in this species appears for the first time as a definite isolated structure, very different from its inconspicuous homologue in Musca. It is a thick and heavily pigmented rod, running the whole length of the labium, and composed for the anterior two-thirds of its length of much thicker chitin than any other part. The lateral margins of the gutter are separated from the middle portion by a narrow area of thin chitin; they do not reach quite to the upper end of the labium, but merge with the base of the hypo- pharynx and the adjacent membrane, which connects them with the mentum. The median groove, so far as can be judged from a specimen mounted on its side, is of considerable depth; like the lateral portions, it is thinnest at the upper end. On the posterior surface of the gutter there is a median backwardly projecting ridge, commencing about the middle of the gutter and increasing in width as it passes upwards, but at the same time becoming thinner, until it is lost in the neighbourhood of the base of the hypopharynx. This is the "keel ", corresponding to the structure in Stomoxys described by Stephens and Newstead. It projects backwards into the cavity of the labium, dividing it into two lateral halves, and is developed to provide additional attachment for an important group of muscles. Its significance will be shown in connection with the next species, in which it has been more closely studied, and it will be sufficient to note here its occurrence and extent.
26 The distal end of the gutter, where it articulates with the discal sclerite, is apparently moulded to form a joint. On the posterior surface there is a deep notch, caused by the extension of the lateral rods beyond the median portion of the gutter; the extremities of the sides of this notch are indented, and project forwards in their most anterior parts. There is no continuous chitinous union between the end of the gutter and the discal sclerite, and it looks as if the two were articulated by this Simple joint to permit of free movement; under a high power the slightly projecting internal angles of the posterior portions of the labellar rods can be seen to be distinctly moulded so as to fit into the notch on the end of the labial gutter. The wide separation between them as shown in the drawing is of course an artifact due to the splitting of the sclerite by pressure. The mentum shows some modification in this species as compared with the preceding. It is deeper, narrower, more capacious at its proximal end, and more pointed distally. The arms of the fork of the mentum are not so long, and the distinction between the two joints of the fork cannot be made out in my specimen. The furca is somewhat rounder and stouter, and is distinctly thickened in its middle portion, where it lies between the arms of the fork. Philæmatomyia insignis. The structure of the proboscis of this fly has already been fully described in a previous memoir, and it will only be necessary to recapitulate such points as have an importance from the present point of view. It is the most highly specialised of the genus, and we may note in passing that it is, so far as is known at present, also much the most common and widely distributed one. In Madras it is quite the most common biting fly found on cattle, and an idea of its prevalence may be gathered from the fact that one can frequently count twenty or thirty specimens on a single cow. It would be almost justifiable to infer that whereas the two previously considered members of the genus have not advanced sufficiently far to adapt themselves with success to an exclu- sively blood-sucking habit, and have at the same time become less fitted to obtain food in the manner usual in Muscids, this species has succeeded in es- tablishing itself, and has become predominant. In external appearance this fly differs no more from Musca than do the other species. Its proboscis is as completely retractile and is blunted at the tip, and the only suggestive thing to be noticed about it is its attitude when feeding. Instead of moving about the skin of its host, it settles down in a crouching attitude and remains on the same spot till obviously gorged with blood, all its legs bent and its head depressed, in an attitude very like that as- sumed by Stomoxys. This species appears to take no food other than blood, and
27 it is somewhat remarkable that the pseudotrachael membrane should be retained in an apparently functional condition, co-existing with a biting apparatus which, as the anatomy of the parts and the observed habits of the insect both go to show, is an extremely efficient one. It is possible that the membrane is used in the same way as that of Musca, when the fly sucks up the blood from the wound. The changes from the Muscid type are all found in the labium and the labella. In the rostrum all that can be distinguished is the relatively rather shorter length, and some elongation of the buccal cavity, the sclerite compos- ing the walls of which is more pointed than in Musca, and curves over a little more laterally. The teeth are reduced in number and increased in size and strength, and are fitted more closely to the end of the discal sclerite. The dis- cal sclerite itself shows complete differentiation into its two parts, and a definite change of form, the object of which is to render the joint between it and the end of the labial gutter more compact, and to fix the bases of the teeth more firmly. The method of attachment of the teeth should be particularly noted. Their bases are not attached to the sclerite, but lie in a cup formed by the pro- jecting flange termed the tooth plate, the bases of the two smaller teeth at either end of the set on each side being a little in advance of those of the larger teeth, so that although the teeth are unequal in size their apices are in approxi- mately the same line, while their bases form a concave line corresponding to the shape of the cup in which they fit. Owing to the alteration in the shape of the sclerite the teeth are attached to its distal end, and are directed downwards when the labellar rods are in the same line as the labium, whereas in Musca the teeth are directed downwards when the discal sclerite is perpendicular to the labium. As a consequence of this the axial apophysis now points in the same direction as the teeth when they are not everted; when they are spread out it forms the most distal part of the proboscis, and it is possible that it is used as an accessory tooth, or perhaps as a fixing point when the teeth cut by eversion. The interdental armature, inconspicuous in the other two species, reaches a high stage of development in the serrated blades, while the pseudotracheal membrane is distinctly smaller than one would expect from the size of the fly ; the rod-like hairs make their first appearance in this species. The labium shows a high development of the labial gutter, and changes, such as the narrowing at the lower end of the mentum, the consolidation of the joint between it and the furca, and the thickening of the latter, which indicate an approach to the Stomoxys type of piercing proboscis. Summary of the Genus Philæmatomyia and its relations to Musca. We have in the genus Philæmatomyia a series of three flies which mark different stages in the adaptation of the Muscid type of proboscis to a F
28 blood-sucking habit. Notwithstanding the fact that the last member of the group is a voracious blood-sucker, and has, so far as I have been able to ascertain by a close observation of its habits and by repeated examinations of its intestinal contents, no other food than blood, there is no change in the external appear- ance of the proboscis, and the existence of biting parts may be unsuspected until they are revealed by dissection; the proboscis retains its retractility, and is withdrawn in a typical Musca-like manner when not in use. The changes from the Musca type fall into three groups; those dependent on the increase in the size and in the functional importance of the teeth, those in the pseudotracheal membrane, and. certain modifications in the general form of the proboscis. These latter are inconspicuous and will be referred to later in connection with the more marked changes of a similar nature found in the Stomoxyclinæ and in. Glossina. In addition to the increase in size, the teeth show a tendency to an ap- proximation of their bases. As this occurs, the flange of the discal sclerite which supports them develops into a cup, formed by the flanges on the two sides and situated at the distal end of the sclerite, into which their 'bases fit. In Musca the proximal ends of the teeth are attached directly to the chitinous margin of the prestomum, but in the last two species they are quite free from it, being attached only to the membrane on the inner wall of the labellum, and held in position by the flange; this facilitates eversion. The discal sclerite is separated into its two parts, the axial apophysis and the labellar rods, to an increasing degree in the three species; at the same time the parts change their shape and their relations. Comparing the two extremes, as seen in Musca and in insignis, we find that there has been a back- ward displacement of the axial apophysis, or, what is the same thing, an elongation of the labellar rods, and that at the same time the attachment of the teeth to the discal sclerite has passed from the sides of the sclerite to the distal end. In Musca the teeth are attached to that side of the sclerite which is distal when the oral lobes are distended for use and the sclerite perpendi- cular to the labium, but insignis they are situated at the end of the sclerite, which can only be distal in position when the labellar rods are in the same line as the labium. In each case the teeth are arranged around the incomplete chitinous ring which is formed by the discal sclerite at the pre- stomum, but in Musca this is only directed downwards, in which position it must lie when the fly feeds, when the labellar rods are parallel to the food surface and therefore perpendicular to the labium, while in. insignis the orifice is only open in a position at a right angle to this. There is therefore an alteration in the position of the discal sclerite, when the teeth are in use,
29 which amounts to a right angle, and we have to consider the causes which have. brought this about. It was stated in the account of the mechanism of the proboscis of Philæmatomyia insignis that the teeth cut by eversion, this being effected by the muscles inserted into the furca and acting on the teeth through traction. on the inner wall of the labella. Now the relation of the size of the teeth to the extent of the inner wall is very different in Musca and in insignis, for in the former the pseudotracheæ are functional and the teeth rudimentary, while in insignis the membrane is reduced in size and complexity, and the teeth very large. It follows that cutting by eversion will be much more effective in insignis than it could be in Musca, though it probably does occur in the latter form. But the teeth of Musca can also be brought into action by alternating contractions of the anterior and posterior muscles, which rotate the discal sclerite in opposite directions on its point of attachment to the labial gutter, and such a movement will evidently be more effective than simple eversion on account of the greater range of movement of the teeth. Probably in Musca the two go on together. The teeth are first everted, the membrane drawn away, and the sclerite moved on its fixed point so that the everted teeth scrape the surface. As in succeeding generations new forms were evolved, the larger size of the teeth would make the act of eversion a more effective one in the scraping operation. But at the same time displacement of the teeth towards the distal end of the sclerite would be most advantageous to the fly, for it would shorten the arm of the lever to which the muscle is attached, and lengthen the one which bears the teeth, in this way giving to the cutting appar- atus an increased facility for rapid action. We find then that in the three species of Philæmatomyia, contrasted with Musca, the teeth show a progressive increase in size, closer approximation of their bases, and displacement towards the distal end of the sclerite. This is associated with a difference in the relation of the labellar rod to the labial gutter in the position of action, for in Musca the discal sclerite can only be rotated on its fixed point until it comes to a per- pendicular position, whereas the sclerite of insignis can pass back until the labellar rods are in line with the labium, a position which would be of no ad- vantage to Musca, but which gives a much longer range of excursion to the teeth in lineata and in gurnnei, in the former of which the sclerite can certainly be brought more into line with the labium than it can in. Musca. At the same time the joint between the sclerite and the end of the labial gutter has become consolidated, until in insignis we find the two parts definitely moulded to one another as a regular articulation. But in the latter species, the sclerite being in the same line as the labium, the teeth in their final terminal position, and the pseudotracheal membrane considerably reduced in extent, the F 2
30 action of eversion of the teeth, brought about in the manner described, will be a most effective one. It is obvious that excursion through a short arc is more suitable for piercing, while a comparatively wide sweep of the teeth, such as would be obtained by rotation of the sclerite on its fixed point with the teeth in the everted position, is the better for scraping a surface. It is probable that scraping by rotation of the sclerite as a whole in an antero- posterior plane, through an angle of half a right angle or thereabout, with the teeth in the everted position, is the predominant factor in Musca and perhaps in Philæmatomyia lineata, while in the higher form which is exemplified in insignis the labellar rods are erected once for all at the commencement of the act of feeding, and the wound actually made by rapidly repeated eversions of the teeth. In spite of the changes in the form and position of the sclerite the relations between it and the labella remain unaltered. The inner wall is attached to the borders of the sclerite as in Musca, and the interval between the two labellar rods corresponds to the median fissure on the anterior surface, between the two lobes. In order that the prestomal orifice may be directed distally, how- ever, the labellar rods must be in line with the labium, not perpendicular to it. It should be remembered that the prestomum is not a closed ring, but is simply the point where the labellar walls converge to each other, and that it is defined by the discal sclerite. In Musca the opening through which food passes is at a right angle to the long axis of the sclerite, and insignis in its long axis, but in each case the interval between the labella is only closed in by the apposition of the two inner labellar walls. The modifications of the labial gutter and the posterior joint are an obvious result of the method of action. The teeth and the discal sclerite are increased in size, and therefore require greater strength in the gutter which supports them the increased weight and the more forcible movement demand greater consolidation of the joint and increased muscle, and this latter factor necessitates an increase in the area of muscle attachment, a demand ful- filled by the development of the keel. The posterior joint and its muscles also show an increase in strength and stability, in accordance with the greater importance of the muscles which evert the teeth. Considerable interest attaches to the origin of the interdental armature, which, from its persistence in all the Muscid biting flies, is evidently an essential part of the biting apparatus. The key to its homology is to be found in a comparison of the two early forms with one another and with Musca, and in the relation between the degree of development which it exhibits and the extent of the pseudotracheal membrane. It was stated in the description of Musca that the method of termination of the channels of the pseudotracheæ
31 was variable, and the large amount of variation there is in even closely allied species is indeed remarkable. The variations are slight and difficult to make out, it is true, but it is just in such a labile structure that one would expect to find new developments. The usual method has already been described; the rings adjacent to the sclerite become more open, and develop a median T-shaped projection which is turned towards the prestomum. It is not :actually attached to the chitinous margin, and on either side of it there are thin slips of chitin, sometimes simple, sometimes branched in au irregular manner, which pass from the sides of the open gutter at the termination of the channel towards the prestomum, and terminate either in very close proximity to it or by actually fusing with it. In some cases there appears to be a sort of loose joint between the two. These strands of chitin lie between the teeth and. on either side of the gutter at their terminations; they are evidently of the same nature and origin as the rings of the pseudotracheæ, and are almost certainly formed by the splitting in the middle line of the terminal T-shaped. rings. Now in Philæmatomyia lineata we find similar but much more conspicuous strands, arising from a common stalk between each pair of teeth, and dividing into four filaments terminally, two of these passing to each side of the end of the gutter. In gurnei, some of the last rings are divided into two, and pass towards the sclerite; outside these, and attached near the chitinous margin, there are two definite leaf-like blades, distinguished from the strands by their flatness, but otherwise disposed in precisely the same way. These are turned slightly outwards from one another at the distal end, where they lie on the sides of the terminal gutter of the pseudotrachea. In insignis the serrated blades, although elaborate, are essentially of the same nature as those seen in gurnei, and like them are derived from the proximal rings at the terminations of the pseudotracheal channels; each of the blades in each bunch represents a modified strand of chitin such as those in gnrnei, attached to a common stalk, and the complexity of structure is more apparent than real. A comparison of the serrated blades of insignis with the chitinous strands which occur in the prestomal region of the blow-fly, as figured by Graham-Smith (his figure 8, e.g.) shows at a glance how the transformation has occurred. The origin of the interdental armature from the pseudotracheal channels is all the more interesting when one considers the function which they fulfil in the two forms. As pointed out by Graham-Smith, the pseudotracheal channels of the blow-fly act as a filter to prevent the ingress into the mouth of particles too large for the food canal, and as I have shown in the case of Lyperosia, which is provided with an arrangement similar to that of insignis, the blades are swept across the wound in advance of the teeth at each eversion, and will thus keep the surface clear while the wound is being made. When it is
32 sufficiently large for the blood to flow, all the fluid which enters the prestomum must first have found its way through the network formed by the blades, which form a sort of brush at the extremity of the proboscis, an arrangement which must act as a most efficient filter. Thus, though the rings of the pseudotracheal channels have undergone a great change of form, the function is retained. The affinities of the three species, so far as can be judged from the struc- ture of their mouth parts, are as follows:33 All the changes from the Musca type are directed to one end the produc- tion of a piercing organ, to enable the fly to pierce the skin of vertebrate animals in order to suck their blood. The fundamental difference between the flies in this group and those of the genus Phil34 solidation and modification of the posterior joint between the furca and the mentum. The alteration in the shape of the proboscis is practically confined to the haustellum. This is always much broader in the upper than in the lower part, and tapers to a point anteriorly. The labella are so much reduced in diameter that they are little if at all wider than the narrowest part of the haustellum, and thus offer no obstacle when the proboscis enters the skin. The macrochætæ which are so conspicuous in Musca are reduced in number and in size, both at the distal margin of the labella and on the sides of the mentum. The alteration in the appearance of the proboscis depends mainly on the progressive enlargement of the haustellum and diminution in size of the ros- trum. This change in the relative proportions of the parts of the proboscis is a fundamental one, and can be traced through the whole group from. Musca to Glossina. It forms a reliable index of the correct position of the several members of the group. The following are the proportionate lengths of the rostrum and haustellum in all the flies considered in this paper. In the case of the Stomoxydinæ the measurements were made along the posterior plate of the fulcrum from the upper to the lower cornua, and from the upper limit or the mentum to the tip of the labella, following the curve of the organ. In Musca and Philæmatomyia, an equivalent measurement of the haustellum was obtained by adding together the length of the labial gutter and of that por- tion of the discal sclerite which is distal to the articulation, including the teeth. The figures represent an average of several observations on different specimens; on account of the impossibility of obtaining a series of preparations mounted in exactly the same way they are to be regarded as roughly approximate only. Rostrum. Haustellum. Musca nebulo 1 to .712 Philæmatomyia gurnei 1 to .733 Philæmatomyia lineata 1 to .777 Philæmatomyia insignis 1 to 1.411 Hæmatobia irritans 1 to 1.86 Stomoxys calcitrans 1 to 1.91 Lyperosia minuta 1 to 2.53 Glossina submorsitans 1 to 3.70 As will appear later, the progressive increase in the length of the haustel- lum is directly proportionate to the degree of fixation of the joint between the discal sclerite and the labial gutter, and to the degree to which the haustellum is drawn out to a point. The rostrum, in addition to the reduction in size and the limitation of movement, is a much more firm and rigid structure than that of Musca; the
35 investment of the fulcrum in the membraneous wall is closer and the air sacs posterior to the fulcrum, by the distention of which the rostrum is pushed forward, are not nearly so conspicuous. The lateral plates of the fulcrum ex- tend further forward, and the membrane uniting them on the anterior surface is thicker and merges indefinitely into the chitin at the sides. On the other hand, the anterior arch is not thickened into a stout bar for muscle attachment, and the whole structure is more closely fixed to the head than in the species previously considered. The buccal cavity has undergone a remarkable transformation. Elon- gation is foreshadowed in the case of Phil36 of the labium, the lateral portions of which curve inwards and forwards so as to almost meet in front. The labial gutter lies out of sight between the edges of the mentum, and the membrane uniting the two is of very small extent. There are no large pigmented macrochætæ on the mentum, and the few hairs which are present are short and inconspicuous. The labella have undergone a complete transformation from the type seen in Musca, and have become converted into a pair of small compact and par- tially fixed organs, the sole function of which is to pierce a hole in the skin of the host. In consequence of the loss of function the pseudo-tracheal membrane has disappeared, and it is only in H37 together and forms the floor of the funnel. This represents the axial apophysis, a term which was first applied by Stephens and Newstead to this, piece in Stomoxys, and subsequently used by me to indicate its homologue in- Phil38 high degree. In the case of Phil39 "bulb" to accommodate them, and they are connected with their insertions by long tendons. The tendon of insertion is spread out after the manner of an aponeurosis. In addition to its main insertion into the lateral arm of the furca, it sends numerous fibres to the external wall of the labellum, and to the distal portion of the fork of the mentum, which is displaced forwards and fused with the labellar wall as stated above. The mechanism of the proboscis has been dealt with in the description of Lyperosia, and the other species show no divergence from that fly except in very minor details. It will be evident from that account, bearing in mind what occurs in Musca and in Philæmatomyia, that the efficiency of the cutting action depends entirely on the great increase in the strength of the posterior articulation between the labium and the labella, and in the muscles which act upon it. The anterior joint is on the contrary limited to such movement as will place the teeth in the position for the next cut, and the muscles which act upon it, not having to work against the same resistance, are of much smaller size. A further point which is of some importance in considering the mechanism both of these flies and of Glossina is that there is a membraneous interval on the lateral aspect of the haustellum in the neighbourhood of the joints, which, while it permits of free backward rotation of the furca, would also detract from the rigidity of the proboscis as a whole, were it not for the fact that the labial gutter reaches its greatest thickness at this point. The labrum-epipharynx and the hypopharynx are remarkably little altered from the Musca type. As a consequence of the narrowness of the groove in. which they lie, they are narrower than those of the non-biting flies, and as from the same circumstance they are much. better protected, they are more slender and less rigid. The labral apodemes are also somewhat shorter, corresponding with the reduction in size of the rostrum as a whole, and are not quite so thick. The most important feature of the food canal is that the fusion of the two lips of the groove in the epipharynx takes place at a higher level in these flies than in Philæmatomyia, which shows that there is a tendency for it to become con- verted into a closed tube, a continuation into the proboscis of the stomadeaum as a closed canal, instead of as dorsal and ventral outgrowths. On the other hand, the separation of the lower lamina of the hypopharynx from the labial gutter is maintained as in other blood-sucking flies. Hæmatobia (Plate III). The proboscis of Hæmatobia presents a most interesting feature in the possession of the remains of a pseudotracheal membrane, and certain other peculiarities which indicate that it represents a relatively early stage in the
40 evolution of the blood-sucking proboscis. I am indebted to Captain Patton of this Institute for named specimens of Hæmatobia irritans and. to Mr. Howlett for specimens sent from Pusa. Unfortunately the genus does not appear to occur in this neighbourhood and lack of fresh material renders my description somewhat more meagre than it would otherwise have been. The relative lengths of the rostrum and the haustellum are practically the same as those in Stomoxys, but the difference in shape is greater than the measurements indicate, for the thickest part of the labium is at the junction of the upper and adjacent fourth, from which the proboscis narrows evenly to the furca, while in Stomoxys the greatest thickness is well above this line, and distal fourth of the labium is practically of a uniform diameter. In the position of rest the labella are bent distinctly downwards on the end of the labium, much more so than is the case in Lyperosia or Stomoxys, and are distinctly wider than the adjacent part of the labium; they also bear a fringe of moderately large macrochætæ along the distal margin. All these points indicate a closer relationship with the Musca type. The keel of the labial gutter, though not so thickly chitinised as that of Philæmatomyia, is almost of equal extent, and is present in the upper two-thirds of the labium, reaching in the upper part almost to the mentum; it thus provides a con- siderable area for the attachment of the anterior set of muscles. The gutter itself is strong and deeply pigmented, and at its lower end (Plate V, figure 25) the separation between the lateral and the median portion is well marked. The articulation between it and the discal sclerite is obviously one which allows of a greater range of movement than can take place in Lyperosia. The lateral portions of the labial gutter are produced into rounded processes, which are inclined slightly backwards (downwards in the position of rest, the labium being horizontal) and extend beyond the median portion of the gutter. They lie in an L-shaped depression at the upper and anterior angle of the sclerite, and are in contact with it when the labella are straightened on the labium, but separated from it when the labella are in the position of rest. The bottom of the median groove in the gutter is produced beyond the rest of the median portion and fits into the space between the lateral walls of the sclerite, through which it can be seen in well cleared preparations. The labella, through the discal sclerite, can therefore be straightened on the labium, and maintained in the extended position by the pressure of the upper border of the lateral wall of the sclerite against the lateral portion of the labial gutter. When in this posi- tion the median portion of the gutter projects between the two walls of the discal sclerite, and. will afford additional support. The discal sclerite itself pre- sents no differences from that of Stomoxys, except that the axial apophysis is more pear-shaped, and that its pointed end projects further forward.
41 The outer wall of the labellum is partly membraneous and partly chitinous. The chitinous portion is in the form of a plate shaped like a cockle-shell; the rounded edge of this forms the lower border of the labellum, and bears some of the hairs forming the terminal fringe; the upper end, which corresponds to the hinge of the shell, is thickened and drawn out, and is closely fused with the extremity of the furca. The upper portion of the posterior side of this plate is also attached to the lower border of the furca by a thin chitinous prolongation, so that the whole outer wall of the labellum is firmly bound down to it, and must follow it when it is drawn upwards. This plate corresponds in position to the space on the inner wall occupied by the teeth, which can be seen by focussing through it in a cleared preparation. The rest of the outer wall is membraneous, and is continuous with a mem- braneous area, on the anterior and lateral aspects of the end of the labium, which extends upwards above the furca for a distance equal to the length of the labella. The membrane is quite different in appearance to any that is met with in the flies already described; it consists of a transparent, homogeneous, and structureless groundwork, in which there are placed small plates of thin chitin, irregularly oval in shape and set close together, though not actually touching one another. At its boundaries it merges indefinitely with the attenuated edges of the chitinous plates, and at the border of the labella it is continuous with the inner wall. At the distal border of the labella there is on each side a row of five finger- like flaps, passing distally beyond the margin, and continuous with its outer wall. They are processes of the labella, and it is on their inner surfaces that the channels of the pseudotracheal membrane are to be found; they will be dealt with in connection with the structures found on the inner wall of the labella The teeth are five in number on each side. Counting from the dorsal or anterior side, the second is the largest, the first and third equal in size and slightly less than the first, and the third and fifth distinctly smaller, the fifth being the smallest of the set. The largest tooth is about one-fourth the length of the labellum. Each tooth is conical in shape and about twice as long as it is broad; the distal end is produced to a blunt and slightly curved point, just below which there is a notch in the margin of the tooth, the edge proximal to the notch forming a second cutting point. The notch is situated on the dorsal borders of the first and the second teeth, on the internal border of the third, and on the posterior or ventral borders of the fourth and fifth. On the inter- nal surface of each tooth, that is to say, on that surface which is turned out- wards when the teeth are everted, there are a number of peculiar secondary teeth (Plate III, figures 18 and 19). These are situated about the middle of
42 the surface, and are arranged in rows across the tooth. Each is a small oblong- or oval eminence, the distal end of which is free from the surface of the large- tooth and forms a cutting point. All the teeth are united at their bases by chitinous prolongations, the union of the first two and the last three to one another being the most firm. When flattened out by the pressure of the coverslip, as in the preparation drawn (Plate IV, figure 22), the bases of the teeth are in the same straight line, but when the proboscis is mounted whole- it is seen that in the position of rest they are arranged in a curve which cor responds with the line of the distal margin of the discal sclerite. The interdental armature consists of a series of lanceolate leaf-like blades. closely resembling the " petiolated blades " described by Stephens and New- stead. Like those of Stomxys, they are extremely delicate objects, containing little or no pigment. Their surface is finely granular, and the stalks from which they arise are thicker and flatter than those of Stomoxys. They are arranged as follows:43 petiolated blades external to the first tooth and the extreme anterior strand of chitin. These rod-like hairs occur in all the biting flies dealt with in this paper, except the first two species of Philæmatomyia, and presumably have some special sensory function connected with the biting habit. The membrane forming the inner wall of the labellum, as far forward as the attachment of the two distal petiolated blades to the common stalk, is trans- parent, homogeneous, and apparently structureless; its existence is only shown, in cleared preparations, by the way it holds the parts together. But distal to this it consists of a membrane of the same nature as that which forms the non- chitinised parts of the external wall, and is produced beyond the distal border of the labella as the inner wall of the finger-like flaps already referred to. The structure of these flaps is as follows:44 end of the channel, there is a minute, short and stout hair set on a thicker base. At the proximal end of the flap the flat plates which form the groove are replaced by rounder rods very similar in appearance to those of ordinary pseudotracheal channels. The transformation takes place gradually and regularly, and there is no doubt that the plates in the region of the flap and the rings between the petiolated blades are the same structure in different forms. The termination of the pseudotracheal channels in the region of the teeth is abrupt and simple, and there are no T-shaped rings, or rings split in half, such as have been described in the previous forms. The terminal rings differ from the rest only in being produced into U-shaped loops. There is no doubt that this structure represents a pseudotracheal mem- brane, and is homologous with that found in Musca. In order to ascertain definitely to what degree the function is retained it would be necessary to examine fresh specimens, but it appears likely that the channels do actually act in conveying the fluid to the prestomum. The space between the two walls of the flap is evidently a part of the hæmatoc45 provisional only, the establishment of a definite nomenclature having been post- poned pending further research. The account therefore lacks cohesion, and is difficult to follow unless one has the actual preparations before one. It will therefore be necessary to explain the relation of the terms used by them to those used in this paper. In so far as they are applicable to structures not already named in Musca, their terminology has been retained and used in the previous papers of this series. To commence with the labium: the whole of the chitinous wall as seen externally, including the bulb, I regard as the mentum, homologous with that of Musca; the two joints of the fork at the lower end are separated from one another, the proximal one being the support of the furca on each side, and the distal one pressed forward against the furca. The former of these is called the " ventral sclerite," the latter the " lateral sclerite of the fork." For the labial gutter and the keel I have used their terms, which are equally applicable to the corresponding parts in other flies. In the labial gutter they distinguish the lateral borders of the terminal portion concerned in the articulation as the " dorsal hooked sclerite " and the base as a separate sclerite, which unites with the lateral ones proximal to the articulation. In their description of the labella there is a good deal of confusion, owing partly to their having placed too much reliance on the appearances seen in sections, and to their not having recognised the nature of the joint. Their figures are so accurate and clear that the confu- sion of the text is to a large extent removed when one compares them with dis- sections. Their tooth plate (k) corresponds to that part of the sclerite which I have termed the labellar rod; the axial apophysis, as before, represents the tip of the discal sclerite which has become displaced upwards. The petiolated blades constitute the interdental armature; the " fork " is the furca, and should not be confused with the fork of the lower end of the labium. The tendon which is shown in their sections is the tendon of the muscle of the bulb, which pulls the teeth outwards and actuates the cutting mechanism. With regard to the mechanism of the cutting apparatus my view, as ex- plained in connection with Lyperosia, differs from theirs. I can find no joint in the whole of the proboscis which could permit of a lateral rotatory move- ment of the teeth, and the transverse muscles at the lower end of the labium fulfil a function entirely different to the one suggested by them. So far as one can gather from their paper these authors do not appear to have had access to fresh material for dissection, a most serious handicap, for without that, and a considerable quantity of it, it is extremely difficult to make sure of points such as these. The action of the muscles of the bulb can only be fully realised by dissecting out the bulk of the muscle and making traction on it while holding the labium firm at a lower point on the other side, thus imitating the natural H 2
46 contraction of the muscle. This is a difficult man47 labella has a fringe of macrochætæ which are distinctly more prom- inent than those of Stomoxys, though not so conspicuous as those of Hæmatobia. The external walls of the labella are far more chitinised than those of Stomoxys, though the chitin is thin and. the plate which it forms is in- terrupted by the presence of longitudinal fissures, which will to a certain extent compensate for the rigidity. The form of the discal sclerite, however, shows clearly that Lyperosia is not directly related to either Hæmatobia or Stomoxys, and at the same time suggests that it is more specialised than either. In its general shape and relations it conforms to the type already de- scribed, but, when seen in section, it is found to be a much more complex structure, the relation of which to the mechanism of the joint it is by no means easy to determine. The change is limited to the axial apophysis, which has lost the solidity of the corresponding part in the other flies, and consists of a shell of chitin with cellular tissue inside. The proximal end is turned upwards behind the end of the labial gutter in a curious manner, and appears to take some part in the mechanism of the joint, though neither muscle nor tendon can be found attached to it. The joint between the labial gutter and the discal sclerite is of the most complex description, and can obviously permit of only a slight degree of movement. Glossina. Glossina is as widely separated from the flies previously considered as regards the structure of the mouth parts as it is in its other anatomical features and in its life history, and there is at least as wide a difference between its proboscis and that of Lyperosia as there is between Lyperosia and Musca in this respect. Nevertheless we find that the great changes in the anatomy of the parts are but an extreme instance of the adaptation of the Muscid. proboscis to a blood-sucking habit, and there is little doubt that the proboscis of this fly is but a modification evolved from the Musca type. The anatomy of the proboscis has been minutely described by Stephens and Newstead, but these authors have not touched on the subject from the point of view of this paper, and have simply described the appearances as seen, with a suggestion regarding the mechanism. My remarks on this fly will resolve themselves into an interpretation of the homology of the parts as described by them, and to a consideration of the mechanism of the proboscis as a whole, dealing in more detail, however, with the structure of the rostrum, which is not touched on in their work. My material has been limited to some dried specimens of Glossina sub-morsitans, for which I am indebted to Professor Newstead, and one specimens of Glossina palpalis, placed at my disposal by
48 Captain Patton. To make the most of such limited material the specimens, after clearing in potash, each for a different period, were mounted whole in different positions, and after examination replaced in clove oil, dissected, and remounted in balsaam. I have found no differences from the description or figures in either palpalis or sub-morsitans. The proportionate lengths of the rostrum and the haustellum as given on page 45 are somewhat misleading, as the position in which the proboscis is held is a much more definitely fixed one than in the other flies, and it is not possible in cleared preparations to stretch the two divisions out into the same straight line. In the figures given by Stephens and Newstead and by Hansen, the haustellum is shown to be about three and a half times as long as the rostrum, The rostrum is short and compact, and is almost entirely occupied by the fulcrum, the space available for air sacs between its posterior plate and. the limiting membrane being very small. The fulcrum is much more regular in shape and more evenly chitinised than in any of the previous flies. Seen in profile it has the shape of a triangle with three approximately equal sides; the posterior side is gently convex backwards, the anterior convex forwards in the upper part, where it is produced into a sharp angle, and concave below; the upper side is concave, but is not produced in the definite cornua at the posterior angle as in Stomoxys. The walls of the fulcrum are equally chitinised throughout, and from this fact and from the absence of ridges for muscle attachment, and from the lack of cornua at the upper and posterior angle, one would infer that the movements of the rostrum on the head, though of the same nature as those of the other flies, are reduced to a minimum; and that the adaptation of the position of the proboscis for feeding is carried out by move- ments of the body of the fly and by the joint between the rostrum and the haustellum. The chitin of the anterior arch occupies a much larger proportion of the anterior surface of the rostrum than is the case in the other forms, The buccal cavity approaches more to the type seen in Musca than to that of the Stomoxys group. It consists of a small chamber with chitinous posterior and lateral walls, formed from a small transverse plate, the up-turned sides of which are united anteriorly by a membrane. I am not able to say whether it has a dilator muscle or not. It is connected with the epipharynx in the same way as in Musca. The membrane which unites the buccal cavity with the pharynx is a very short one, and from the structure of this part of the proboscis it is evident that there is a little movement at the joint. The briefest examination of the haustellum shows that the whole of it has become transformed into a piercing organ, and that the separation of the labella from the labium, though clearly marked, has not the same significance as it has in the Stomoxys group. All the structures have become most profoundly
49 modified, the armature has become a most complex one, and the nature of the joints has altered so completely that it is difficult to say in some cases exactly what they represent or at which point the movement takes place. The funda- mental changes on which the appearance of the proboscis depends are the pre- dominence of the labial gutter over the mentum in the narrow part of the pro- boscis; the fusion of the discal sclerite with the end of the labial gutter, resulting in the total disappearance of the anterior joint; and the conversion of a part of the outer surface of the labella, and a part of the surface of the labium itself, into a cutting apparatus. All this is but an extreme stage of what one sees going on in the evolution of the other flies. To take these changes in detail: The bulb of the proboscis is evidently the same as that of Stomoxys, and may at once be termed a part of the mentum. But at the distal end of the bulb the thick and pigmented chitin of which it is composed gives place to a very much thinner sheet which is flexible and membraneous, and which cannot contribute to the rigidity of the organ. In the middle line it is provided with a bilateral row of peculiar spines, which extend right to the commencement of the bulb. (S. &amp;N., figure 2, i, ii) Sections at any point between the labella and the bulb show that the wall of the mentum is a very thin one; on the other hand, the labial gutter is very well developed, and it undoubtedly constitutes the main support of the proboscis, thus reversing the conditions found in Musca. The membrane which unites the two is short, but in the sections figured it is shown as thrown into irregular folds, which are very noticeable in my preparations. They run obliquely upwards and inwards, not in the same way in all the preparations but varying in different positions of the labella, in such a way as to indicate that the labial gutter and the mentum do not always occupy the same position in relation to one another. The only trace of the keel of the gutter that is to be found is a thin slip of chitin extending less than half the distance between the gutter and the men- tum in the bulb. In the middle line between the two lateral halves of the gutter there is a deep pocket-like indentation in which the hypopharynx lies. The posterior joint, between the labium and the labella, has undergone most profound changes, and it is no longer possible to recognise the constituent parts as seen in Stomoxys. But by reverting to the appearance in Musca, and to the essential nature of the parts, one is able to trace the homology fairly closely. The furca in Musca is nothing more than a thickening of the external wall of the labella on each side; in the biting flies allied closely to Musca it becomes transformed into a strong bar because the important muscles of the bulb are inserted into its lateral arms. In Glossina we find a reversion to the more primitive type. The muscles of the bulb are apparently not inserted
50 by one thick tendon, but are spread out over a considerable area of the external wall, and the necessity for a thick rod therefore does not exist. There is instead a transverse plate, which is united with a longitudinal one.* The latter may, without any great stretch of the imagination, be recognised as formed by the fusion of the two rods which form the fork of the mentum, the ventral sclerites of Stephens and Newstead. These authors have pointed out that the lateral arms of this T-shaped piece are variable in position according to the degree of eversion of the labella, exactly as one would expect if they represent the arms of the furca. A considerable amount of the muscle of the bulb is probably inserted into the region referred to as the " dark ventral chitinous area," The anterior joint has disappeared, and if the sections are traced downwards it will be seen that the walls of the labial gutter become directly continuous with the inner walls of the labella, just as the outer walls of the mentum are continuous with their outer walls. There is, however, a thicker portion shown in their figures 15 to 19, which corresponds to the position of the discal sclerite; the hypopharynx lies at the upper end of this thickening in the position of rest. The situation of the thickening of the internal walls corresponds in position to that of the " dark area " on the outer walls. The interpretation of the mechanism of the cutting apparatus offers no difficulties. The teeth resemble in shape, though not in arrangement, those of the preceding examples, and the " fans " distal to them are evidently the homologues of the petiolated blades of Stomoxys, and therefore of the pseudotracheal rings of Musca. The teeth are united at their bases by the three pieces of chitin which bear the rasps, in a manner corresponding gener- ally with that in which the teeth of Stomoxys are attached to the tooth plate; whether the rasps really represent the united bases of the teeth or are a detached part of the discal sclerite it is not possible to say. The "jointed chitinous rods" appear to be the rod-like hairs, which, in order to maintain their position in advance of the teeth during the act of cutting, have passed through the wall of the labellum in the manner described. The mechanism of the proboscis is evidently the same as that of the Stomoxys group. But here there is an important point which should be noted in the interpretation of the drawings. I pointed out in connection with Lyperosia that the appearance of the labella in the everted position in cleared preparations is not the same as that in fresh dissections, for, when the muscles are dissolved by the action of the potash, the parts relax; it is impossible to get cleared preparations which show the true position of the teeth during the * An examination of more material has convinced me that the longitudinal and transverse portions of this T-shaped rod are not continuous with one another, but are united by a narrow strip of membrane. This serves to hinge them together, while permitting of free movement.
51 act of cutting. The same applies to Glossina, and I have not the least doubt that the lateral arms of the "fork" are turned much further backwards, and the teeth much more fully everted, than is shown in figure 8 (S. and N.). The chitin between the "dark area" and the bases of the rasps is evidently thin and membraneous, and it is here that the eversion takes place when the teeth are brought into action. There is a membraneous area between the end of the labial gutter and the fork, as is found in the other flies. But in the case of Glossina, the entire mentum, with the exception of the bulb, is drawn upwards when the teeth are everted, and the membrane between it and the labial gutter is thrown into the folds already mentioned. The posterior surface of the mentum is armed with spines which would appear to have some cutting action, and it is probable that many of the spine and tubercles so minutely described are really cutting organs accessory to the teeth and rasps, and that not only the inner wall of the labellum, but its outer wall and the outer wall of the labium also are a part of the cutting apparatus. The whole is actuated in the same way as in Stomoxys, by the contraction of the muscles of the bulb, the long tendons of which are so conspicuous in the sections. But instead of a simple eversion of the teeth the whole of the inner wall of the labellum, its outer wall, and part of the mentum are drawn up, until the thickened part which represents the discal sclerite is at the tip of the proboscis. When this has occurred the labrum-epipharynx and the hypopharynx are at the point of puncture, and are able to draw in the blood. The disproportion between the length of these two organs and the total length of the labium and the labella is less than that seen in Stomoxys, and this corre- sponds with the shorter space between the tip and the softer portion of the inner wall at which the eversion takes place. The short excursion of the cut- ting surface is more than compensated for by its greater lateral extent, for the armature extends from the rasps to the bulb, and includes portions of the inner and outer walls of the labella and also of the posterior surface of the mentum. The labrum-epipharynx and the hypopharyx are altered in such a manner as one would expect. On account of the more pronounced stylet-shape of the haustellum as a whole, they are reduced in diameter and fit much more closely into the groove in the labial gutter. They are more firmly united to one another, so as to constitute almost a closed tube, and the labrum is closely fitted to the labium by means of an elaborate arrangement of interlocking teeth, Between the labrum and the epipharynx a small comma-shaped interval can be seen in the region of the bulb, in the situation in which the fan-shaped muscle is found in Musca. Stephens and Newstead state that the labrum, by which term they designate the combined organ, fuses at the upper end with I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063640.tif]
52 the bulb, but they do not describe how the separation between the labral and epipharyngeal portions of the organ occurs, and I have been unable to deter- mine this point for want of series of sections. It is a little unlikely that labrum and labium would unite directly. From the fact that the section shown in their figure 25 includes the attachment of the palp, one would suppose that the section is an oblique one, through the lower end of the rostrum, in which case the anterior membraneous portion is really the anterior wall of the rostrum. It is, as a matter of fact, extremely difficult to get the rostrum and haustellum sufficiently into line with one another to get a series of transverse section of both, as I found in the case of Lyperosia. It would be still more difficult to do it with Glossina, in which the angle is a much more permanent one. I have never myself seen Glossina in the act of feeding, nor is the oppor- tunity likely to occur. I have selected from the numerous descriptions of its mode of feeding one by an observer who presumably had no expert knowledge of the subject, and merely recorded what he saw. It accords so well with what I believe to be the mechanism of the proboscis that I cannot forbear from quoting. Captain Crawshaw writes as follows in 1896: " When a 'Tse-tse ' settles "with the intention of feeding............he inserts his proboscis, lowers his head, "and raises his abdomen till it is almost vertical; when doing this and for some "time after he has commenced sucking, he works his wings, buzzing in a minor "key, rather like a bee when held forcibly, though not so powerfully; when the "keenness of his appetite has been somewhat appeased, he stops working his "wings and sucks in silence. If left to himself he will suck until................" The raising of the abdomen is rendered necessary in Glossina by the fixation of the joint between the rostrum and the head. It does not occur in Stomoxys. The period during which the fly produces the buzzing sound is that in which the wound is being made and the proboscis thrust into the skin, and while this is going on the fly is not absorbing food. The motion of the wings and the buzzing sound are produced by the excessively rapid respiratory move- ments which distend the hæmatoc53 the note one could fix definitely the number of contractions made per second by the muscles of the bulb, for there will of course be one contraction for each respiratory movement, and it is these respiratory movements which produce the vibration in the wing. When the wound has been made to a convenient depth the buzzing ceases, the labella are held in a permanently everted position, and in a very short time the fly sucks up enough blood to distend the abdomen. The motion of the wings does not cease, as Captain Crawshaw supposed, when the appetite is appeased, but at the moment the fly commences to suck, and is no longer occupied in making the wound. The length of the narrow part of the proboscis, the extremely efficient nature of the biting parts, and the rapidity with which the abdomen distends with blood, make it probable that the fly gets well below the epidermis and into a vascular layer before commencing to suck. In several other accounts it is stated that the bite of Glossina causes pain, not at the moment the fly settles down, but after a short interval. One inter- prets this, as in the case of the mosquito bite, as due to the fact that it is the saliva injected into the wound which causes the pain, and not the actual making of the wound. The cutting parts of Glossina are so small and so sharp that one would not expect them to cause pain.
54 Summary and Conclusions. 1. The blood-sucking Muscidæ are descended from a Musca-like ancestor. The entomological facts make it improbable that the flagellates found in the alimentary tract of blood-sucking flies, and of non-blood suckers which are allied to them, are derived from the parasites in vertebrate blood. They are probably the descendants of parasites which entered the alimentary tract at the time the ancestors of the flies were mandibulate and omnivorous. 2. The first steps in the evolution of the blood-sucking habit can be seen at the present day in those flies which are blood-suckers but have no biting mouth parts. These depend on true biting flies for the making of the wound. 3. In the genus Philæmatomyia there are three species which show separate steps in the modification of the Musca-like proboscis to a biting apparatus. The changes all depend on the increase in size and functional importance of the presto- mal teeth. They are:55 a membraneous interval left in the region of the joint which permits the furca to be rotated freely backwards. 6. In all the flies dealt with, in the order given, there is an increase in the relative length of the haustellum, and a diminution in that of the rostrum, together with some diminution in the amount of movement between the latter and the head capsule. 7. Glossina represents an extreme case, and there is a wide interval between it and the Stomoxydinæ. The alterations in the shape and the diminu- tion in the amount of movement are the same in kind as in Stomoxys, but in greater degree. The teeth are more complex, and the interdental armatures are re- presented by the "fans." The cutting apparatus is not limited to the inner wall of the labellum, but extends on to the outer wall as well, and when the muscles of the bulb contract the outer wall is pulled bodily upward as the inner wall is everted. The discal sclerite is fused with the end of the labial gutter and cannot be recognised as a separate sclerite. The furca and the two arms of the fork of the mentum are closely approximated to one another. The main support of the narrow piercing part of the proboscis is the labial gutter, which is very strong, while the mentum in this region is semi-membraneous. The rostrum is capable of so little movement on the head that the fly has to raise itself on its hind legs to bring the proboscis into position for piercing.
56 References. Austen, E. E. Monograph of the Tse-tse Flies. Brit. Mus., London, 1903. Austen, E. E. Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist. (8) iii, page 295, 1909. (Original description of the genus Philæmatomyia.) Brunetti, E. Revision of the Oriental Blood-Sucking Muscidæ. Rec. Ind. Mus., Vol. IV, No. 4, 1910. Cragg, F. W. Studies on the Mouth Parts and Sucking Apparatus of the Blood-Sucking Diptera. No. 1, Philæmatomyia insignis, Austen. No. 3, Lyperosia minuta, Bezzi. Scien. Mem. by Officers of the Med. and Sanit. Departs., Govt. of India, N. S, Nos. 54 and 59, 1912. Crawshaw, R. Letter quoted in Austen's Monograph, vide supra. Graham-Smith, G. S. Some Observations on the Anatomy and Function of the Oral Sucker of the Blow-Fly (Calliphora erythrocephala). Journal of Hygiene, Vol. II, No. 3, November 1911. Hansen, H. J. The Mouth Parts of Glossina and Stomoxys. Chapter V in Austen's Mono- graph, vide supra. Kraepelin, K. Zur Anatomie und Physiologie des Russels von Musca. Zeit. fur Wiesensch aftliche Zoologie, B. 39, 1883. Minchin, E. A. Discussion on the Hæmoflagellates, reported B. M. J. Nov. 9th, 1907. Newstead, R. Insects and other Arthropoda collected in the Congo Free State. Ann. of Trop. Med. and Paras., Vol. I, No. 1, pages 78 and 79, 1907. Patton, W. S., and Cragg, F. W. The Genus Pristirhynchomyia, Brunetti. Ann. of Trop. Med. and Para., Vol. 5, No. 4, 1912. Prowazek, S. Die Entwicklung von Herpetomoras. Arbeit. Kaiserl. Gesund B. 21, 1904. Rouband, E. La Glossina palpalis, Sa biologie, son rôle dans l'étiologie des Trypanosomiases. Thèse de Doctorat ès Sciences Naturelles, Paris, 1909. Stephens, J. W. W., and Newstead, R. The Anatomy of the Proboscis of Biting Flies. I Glossina, Memoir XVIII, Liverpool School of Tropical Med., 1906. II. Stomoxys, Ann. of Trop. Med. and Para., Vol. I, No. 2, 1907.
PLATE I. Figure 1.PLATE I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063670.tif] Fig. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063670.tif] Fig. 2. Photo.-Engraved & printed at the Offices of the Survey of India, Calcutta, 1913.
PLATE II. Figure 3.Plate II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063682.tif] Fig.3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063682.tif] Fig. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063682.tif] Fig.5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063682.tif] Fig.6. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063682.tif] Fig.7. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063682.tif] Fig.8. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063682.tif] Fig.9. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063682.tif] Fig.10. Photo.-Engraved & printed at the Offices of the Survey of India, Calcutta, 1913
PLATE III. Figure 11.Plate III. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063694.tif] Fig. 11. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063694.tif] Fig. 12. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063694.tif] Fig.13. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063694.tif] Fig.14. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063694.tif] Fig. 15. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063694.tif] Fig. 16. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063694.tif] Fig. 17. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063694.tif] Fig.18 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063694.tif] Fig.19. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063694.tif] Fig, 20. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063694.tif] Fig. 21. Photo.-Engraved & printed at the Offices of the Survey of India. Calcutta, 1913
PLATE IV. Figure 22.Plate IV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063706.tif] Fig.22. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063706.tif] Fig.23. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063706.tif] Fig. 24. Photo.-Engraved & printed at the Offices of the Survey of India, Calcutta, 1913
PLATE V. Figure 25.Plate V. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063718.tif] Fig.25. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063718.tif] Fig.26. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063718.tif] Fig.27. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063718.tif] Fig. 28. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063718.tif] Fig.29. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063718.tif] Fig.30. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063718.tif] Fig. 31 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75063718.tif] Fig. 32 Photo.-Engraved & printed at the Offices of the Survey of India, Calcutta, 1913.
