IP/QB. 10 M. 91 b. (NEW SERIES) No. 49 SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA Epidemc Dropsy in Calcutta BEING THE FINAL REPORT OF AN ENQUIRY CARRIED OUT BY MAJOR E. D. W. GREIG, M.D., D.Sc., I.M.S., Under the Direction of the Director, Central Research Institute, Kasauli ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75061024.tif] CALCUTTA SPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1912. Price Re. 1-8 as. or 2s. 6d.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75061030.tif] 3943257
No. 49 X (NEW SERIES) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta BEING THE FINAL REPORT OF AN ENQUIRY CARRIED OUT BY MAJOR E. D. W. GREIG, M.D., D.Sc., I.M.S., Under the Direction of the Director, Central Research Institute, Kasauli ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75061036.tif] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75061036.tif] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1912
Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. Messrs. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, W.C. Messrs. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., 68-74, Carter Lane, E.C. Mr. BERNARD QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, W. Messrs. P. S. KING & SON, 2 and 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, Messrs. H. S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhili, and 9, Pall Mall, London. Messrs. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, London, S. W. Mr. T. FISHER UNWIN, 1, Adelphi Terrace, London, W. C. Messrs. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E.C. Mr. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 51, Broad Street, Oxford. Messrs. DEIGHTON BELL & Co., Cam- bridge. Messrs. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W.C. ON THE CONTINENT. Mr. OTTO HARRASOWITZ Mr. KARL HIERSEMANN Leipzig. Messrs. R. FRIEDLANDER, & SOHN, Berlin, W.N., Carlstrasse, 11. Mr. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. Mr. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. IN INDIA. Messrs. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. Messrs. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. Messrs. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. Messrs. S. K. LAHIRI & Co., Calcutta. Messrs. B. BANERJEE & Co., Calcutta. The CALCUTTA SCHOOL BOOK AND USEFUL LITERATURE SOCIETY, 1, Wellington Square, Calcutta. Messrs. BUTTERWORTH & Co. (India), Limited, Calcutta. Messrs. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras. Messrs. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & CO., Madras. Messrs. G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. Messrs. S. MURTHY & Co., Madras. Messrs. THOMPSON & Co., Madras. Messrs. TEMPLE & Co., Madras. Messrs. COMBRIDGE & Co., Madras. Messrs. P. R. RAMA IYER & Co., Madras. Messrs. THACKER & CO., LD., Bombay. Messrs. A. J. COMBRIDGE & CO., Bombay. Messrs. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & CO., Bombay. Mrs. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay. Mr. SUNDER PANDURANG, Bombay. Messrs. GOPAL NARAYAN & Co., Bombay. Messrs. RAM CHANDRA GOVIND & SON, Kalbadevi, Bombay. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission Press, Rangoon. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-Am Press, Lahore and Cal- cutta. Mr. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazir Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. Messrs. A. CHAND & Co., Punjab. Messrs. A. M. & J. FERGUSON, Ceylon. Babu S. C. TAL UKDAR, Proprietor, Students and Company, Cooch Behar.
List of numbers of Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India (New Series) published previous to the present issue. No. 1. Standardisation of Calmette's Anti-Venomous Serum with Pure Cobra Venom : the Deterioration of this Serum through keeping in India, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 2. Malaria in India, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No. 3. Some Observations on the Poison of Russell's Viper (Daboia Russellii), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 5 or 6d. No. 4. On the Action of the Venoms of the Cobra and of the Daboia on the Red Blood corpuscles and on the blood plasma, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price. As. 8 or 9d. No. 5. Specificity of Anti-Venomous Sera, by Captain G. Lamb,I.M.S. Price As. 3. or 4d. No. 6. First Report on the Anti-Malarial Operations in Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Captain S. P. James, Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 7. Some Observations on the Poison of the Banded Krait (Bungarus Fasciatus), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 8. A Preliminary Report on a Parasite found in Patients suffering from En- largement of the Spleen in India, by Lieutenant S. R, Christophers, Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No. 9. Second Report of the Anti-Malarial Operations at Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 10. Specificity of Anti-Venomous Sera (Second Communication), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 11. On a Parasite found in persons suffering from Enlargement of the Spleen in India2 No. 20. Serum-Therapy of Plague in India; Reports by Mr. W. M. Haffkine, C.I.E., and various Officers of the Plague Research Laboratory, Bombay, by Lieutenant-Colonel W. B. Bannerman, M.D., B.Sc., F.R.C.S., I.M.S. Price As. 14 or 1s. 4d. No. 21. On the Standardisation of Anti-Typhoid Vaccine, by Captain George Lamb, M.D., 1.M.S. (Director, Pasteur Institute of India), and Captain W. B. C. Forster, M.B., D.P.H., I.M.S. Price As. 6 or 7d. No. 22. Mediterranean Fever in India: Isolation of the Micrococcus Melitensis, by Captain George Lamb, M.D., I.M.S., and Assistant ,Surgeon M. Kesava Pai, M.B., C.M. (Madras). Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 23. The Anatomy and Histology of Ticks, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price Rs. 3 or 4s. 6d. No. 24. On a Parasite found in the White Corpuscles of the blood of Palm Squirrels, by Captain W. S. Patton, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 25. On the importance of Larval Characters in the Classification of Mosquitoes, by Captain, S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 26. Leucocytozoon Canis, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 27. Preliminary Report on the Development of the Leishman-Donovan Body in the Bed Bug, by Captain W. S. Patton, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 28. The Sexual Cycle of Leucocytozoon Canis in the Tick, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 29. Piroplasma Canis and its Cycle in the Tick, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price Rs. 2 or 3s. No. 30. The Theory and Practice of Anti-Rabic Immunisation, by Captain W.F. Harvey, M.B., I.M.S., and Captain Anderson McKendrick, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 31. The Development of the Leishman-Donovan Parasite in Cimex Rotundatus3 No. 40. The Destruction of Fleas by Exposure to the Sun, by Captain J. Cunningham, M.D., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 41. Quinine and its Salts, their Solubility and Absorbability, by Captain A. C. MacGilchrist, M.A., M.D., M.R.C.P.,I.M.S. Price As. 9 or 10d. No. 42. The Cultivation of the Bacillus of Leprosy and the Treatment of cases by means of a Vaccine prepared from the Cultivations, Part I, by Major E. R. Rost, I.M.S. The Cultivation of the Leprosy Bacillus, by Captain T. S. B. Williams, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 43. The Relation of Tetanus to the Hypodermic or Intramuscular Injection of Quinine, by Lieutenant-Colonel ,Sir D. Semple, KT., M.D. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 44. The Preparation of a Safe and Efficient Anti-rabic Vaccine, by Lieutenant- Colonel Sir D. Semple, KT., M.D., D.P.H., R.A.M.C. (Retired). Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 45. Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta, by Major E. D. W. Greig, M.D., D.Sc., I.M.S. Price Re. 1-4 or 2s. No. 46. Malaria in the Punjab, by Major S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price Rs. 2 or 3s. No. 47. Dysentery and Liver Abscess in Bombay, by Major E. D. W. Greig, M.D., D.Sc., I.M.S., and Captain R. P. Wells, M.A., M.B., I.M.S. Price Rs. 2 or 3s. No. 48. Investigations into the Jail Dietaries of the United Provinces: with some Observations on the Influence of Dietary on the Physical Development and well-being of the people of the United Provinces, by Major D. McCay, M.B., M.R.C.P., I.M.S. Price Re. 1-12 or 3s. No. 49. Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta, by Major E. W. D. Greig, M.D., D.Sc., I.M.S Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 6d. Published by and on sale at the Office of the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta Copies are also available from all Agents for the sale of Government publications.
CONTENTS. PAGE INTRODUCTION 1 CHAPTER I. STUDY OF OUTBREAK OF EPIDEMIC DROPSY IN CALCUTTA IN 1909 4 (i) METHODS OF COLLECTING INFORMATION REGARDING THE EPIDEMIC 6 (ii) EPIDEMIOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS [ii] PAGE CHAPTER II. NOTE ON OUTBREAK RESEMBLING BERIBERI AT BASTI JAIL 34 CHAPTER III. RELATION OF EPIDEMIC DROPSY TO "SHIP BERIBERI" 39 CHAPTER IV. RELATION OF EPIDEMIC DROPSY TO SCURVY 44 CHAPTER V. RESULTS OF EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATIONS 49 CHAPTER VI. GENERAL CONCLUSIONS 78
DESCRIPTION OF ILLUSTRATIONS. Nos. [ iv ] Nos. Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta. INTRODUCTION. HAVING completed my epidemiological enquiries at Calcutta and as no fresh cases of the disease were occurring I proceeded on 11th December 1910 to Kasauli to officiate (for three months) as Director of the Central Research Institute and also to continue my experimental investigations in relation to the etiology of Epidemic Dropsy. On my leaving Calcutta the services of Assistant Surgeons Taraknath Sur and Charu Chandra Bose were replaced at the disposal of the Inspector General, Civil Hospitals, Ben- gal. Assistant Surgeon J. G. Mukerji assisted me in the experimental investigations at Kasauli. This is the final report so far as the present enquiry is concerned; there are, however, interesting problems arising out of the investigations deserving of further study: these problems are connected with the important question of diet. In recent years, especially in connection with the study of tropical. diseases, a great deal of attention has been directed to the parasitic origin of disease, and deservedly so, because it is a subject of very great importance;. this has, however, somewhat overshadowed the question of the relation of defects of dietary to the causation of disease in the tropics. The time has now come when the older methods of determining the nutritive value of food materials require reconsideration, and further investigation is wanted on this important subject. Defects in dietary not only require careful atten- tion from the point of view of diseases which result directly from them, but they are of equal importance as affecting the course of certain diseases occa- sioned by parasites, as well as the general health of communities. The conclusions arrived at in my first report1 have been confirmed by my subsequent investigations. It may be desirable to summarise shortly the facts connected with the etiology of Epidemic Dropsy as determined by my enquiry at Calcutta. In the first place it will be seen that the two severe epidemics, in 1878-79 and 1908-09, in Calcutta have commenced and declined with a rise and a fall in the price of food grains. During the periods of both the above-mentioned 1 First Report on Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta by Major E. D. W. Greig, M.D., D.Sc., I.M.S. Scientific Memoir No. 45. B
2 epidemics there was a very high and sustained rise in the price of food grains. In the interval between these severe outbreaks the price curve did not show such a change, and associated with this there was no severe out- break of the disease. Further, conditions of dietary remaining the same as at present, an outbreak of Epidemic Dropsy may be expected in the future when the curve of the price of food grains again assumes the characters met with during the two previous outbreaks in Calcutta. Hence it will be evi- dent that a study of this curve is a very important matter, and the curve may be used as an indicator for forecasting the occurrence or non-occurrence of conditions favourable or unfavourable to the development of so-callel Epi- demic Dropsy amongst the population. The modus operandi of this factor in the production of Epidemic Dropsy will be understood from a consideration of the following facts which have been scientifically demonstrated. The signs and symptoms of this disease are liable to develop when a diet, largely composed of polished rice or poor in certain constituents, is consumed. In a dietary largely composed of polished rice these essential constituents, which are required to meet the physiological demands of the body, and especially of the peripheral nervous system, are not present in sufficient quantity; but the necessary constitutents can be supplied by supplementing the dietary by suitable articles of food containing them; a full discussion regarding the nature of these essential constituents will be found in the chapter devoted to experimental investigations in this report, page 49. When the price of food grains is low, it is possible to purchase these supplementary articles, but when the price of food grains rises and remains high the capacity for purchasing additional suitable articles of diet diminishes and the diet becomes danger- ously " One-sided." Enquiry showed that the section of the population in Calcutta, amongst whom the disease was most prevalent, was the class with small fixed incomes, vide page 10 of this report; the reason for this is obvious, seeing that the purchasing power of this class is definitely limited, and there- fore a rise in the price of food grains affects them most severely, because they become unable to purchase the additions necessary to render the diet safe. In this research it has been shown that a most valuable portion of the rice, namely, the Koorah or polishings, is not being utilised, this could be pro- perly cleaned and sifted, and made available as an article of diet. If an adequate percentage of rice bran is consumed daily, scientific investigation shows that considerable protection will be afforded against the accidents classed under the heading Epidemic Dropsy. In this report the subject of rice bran is fully discussed in its various aspects. The question of the addi- tion of rice bran to the diet and other questions dealing with the removal of defects in dietary considered in my reports on Epidemic Dropsy should
3 receive careful attention from those responsible for the administration of Jails, Asylums, etc., etc., in India. Further, in regard to ships, especially those carrying Indian crews and other rice-eating peoples, the responsible authorities should have their attention specially directed to this and other matters dealt with in my reports as they are of very considerable importance to shipping communities. B2
4 CHAPTER I. Study of the Outbreak of Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta in 1909. In the first place I shall deal with the complete study of the outbreak of Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta in 1909. Before proceeding to give a detailed account of the investigations it may be well to record a few facts regarding the city of Calcutta. The notes have been taken from the Gazetteer of India.1 Calcutta, the capital of the Indian Empire, is situated 22° 34" N., 88° 22" E., on the east bank of the Hooghly river, within the 24-Parganas district, Bengal. The city lies about 86 miles from the sea and is only about 18 to 21 feet above mean sea level. It covers an area of 20,547 acres of which only 1,792 are rural, and 1,113 acres form the maidan. The city is bounded on all sides by suburban municipalities which have been excluded from Calcutta for the purpose of municipal administration. These are Cossipore Chitpore on the north, Maniktala on the east, Garden Reach on the south-west, Howrah on the west bank of the Hooghly river. If these be included Calcutta has a population of 1,106,738, which is greater than any European city except London, Constantinople, Paris, and Berlin, and of any city in America, except New York, Chicago, and Philadelphia. Excluding China, the popula- tion of whose cities is uncertain, the only city in Asia with more inhabitants than Calcutta is Tokio: and next to London is the most populous city in the British Empire. In the centre of the town stands Fort William, surrounded by the noble expanse of park known as the Maidan. North of this are the shops and busi- ness houses of the Europeans, whose residential quarter bounds it on the east. Surrounding the European quarter is Burra Bazar, the chief centre of native business: the buildings are mainly one-storeyed masonry shops, and it is only here and in the adjoining quarters of Joraabagan and Bow Bazar that brick buildings are more numerous than tiled huts. Three-fifths of the whole popu- lation live in the latter which have mud or wattle walls and are known as kachcha, houses. The native town is traversed by three main roads from north to south, and by five or six roads from east to west, but with these excep- tions it is extremely ill-arranged. The lanes are tortuous and badly lit; the dwellings are overcrowded and insanitary; and the overwhelming propor- tion of one-storeyed houses gives this portion of the town a peculiarly squalid appearance. 1 Vol. IX, 1908.
5 The soil on which Calcutta has been built has been formed at a compara- tively recent date by the alluvial deposit of the Gangetic delta; excavations made for tanks and foundations disclose alternate layers of sand and clay. The climate is hot and moist. The mean temperature averages 79° F., the mean maximum being 102° F. in May, and the mean minimum 48° F. in Janu- ary. The average temperature in the hot season is 85° F., in the rains 83° F., and in the cold season 72° F. Humidity averages 78 per cent. of saturation, ranging from 69 per cent. in March to 89 per cent. in August. The annual rainfall averages 60 inches, and the average number of rainy days in the year is 118. The population of Calcutta in 1901 was 847,796, the mean den- sity being 41 persons per acre for the whole city, and 68 in Calcutta proper. Judged by European standards the city is seriously overcrowded: more than half the population have less than half a room per head, and 90 per cent. have three-quarters of a room or less. In the whole population there are only half as many women as men. This is due to the large number of immigrants, among whom there are only 279 females to 1,000 males; the majority of these are temporary settlers who leave their families at home. Another result of the large volume of immi- gration is that 44 per cent. of the entire population are adult males, which is double the proportion of the whole of Bengal. Nearly a third of the inhabitants of Calcutta are engaged in manufac- tures and nearly a fourth in trade, while personal service accounts for a sixth. The city has been divided into four municipal districts, each with its own staff for conservancy, roads, and buildings. The drinking water supply is derived from the Hooghly river at Palta, 17 miles north of Calcutta, where it is pumped up into settling tanks and filtered. The pure water is conveyed by gravitation through iron mains to masonry reservoirs at the north end of the city. Thence it is pumped into distributing mains and three other reservoirs in different quarters of the city, and from these it is again pumped into distributing pipes. The scheme was inaugurated in 1860, and it was then intended to supply 6,000,000 gallons per diem or 15 gallons per head. In recent years the works have been greatly extended, and the Corporation has now three pumping stations at Palta and four in the city; there are 1,997 standposts and 5,904 ground hydrants, and the number of filtered water connections exceeds 26,000. These give to Calcutta and the adjacent towns of Barrackpore, Dum-Dum, Cossipore Chit- pore, Maniktala, and Garden Reach a daily supply of over 7,624,000,000 gallons of filtered water, or 21½ gallons per head.
6 The streets are watered and the drains flushed with unfiltered water pumped up in Calcutta, and for these purposes there are more than 3,500 connections. The scheme of underground drainage, by which the city is freed of sur- plus water and of filth, which water will carry, was inaugurated half a cen- tury ago. The drainage is carried eastwards by a series of five parallel conduits which discharge into an intercepting sewer, and thence into a large well at Tangra in the eastern suburbs. There it is raised by steam pumps into a high level sewer, which carries it to the salt water lakes east of the city, there to undergo oxidation. The original project was commenced in 1859 and took sixteen years to complete; but meanwhile fresh additions had been found necessary, these are still incomplete so far as the " added area " is concerned. (i) Method of collecting: Information regarding the Epidemic in Calcutta. As the cases of Epidemic Dropsy were not notified to the Health Depart- ment, Calcutta, it was necessary to seek out as many of these cases as possible and make full enquiry regarding them. From the inspection of bodies at the burning Ghaut, Calcutta, a rough estimate of the cause of death is made, and the name and address of the deceased is taken. From this source, informa- tion regarding the deaths stated to be due to Epidemic Dropsy was obtained, and formed the starting point for further investigations at the house of the deceased, where it was found, as a rule, that other cases of Epidemic Dropsy were present among the family, or there was a history of previous cases or deaths. From the Health Officer, Calcutta, I obtained a complete list of the names and addresses of all fatal cases of Epidemic Dropsy reported from the burning Ghaut, and the houses and inhabitants were carefully investigated by myself or my assistants and the information obtained was recorded on two forms which I had prepared specially for the purpose, see appendix to my first report1 on Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta. During the year, 1909-10, I was engaged on the enquiry at Calcutta, I investigated 321 houses with a total of 4,637 inhabitants among whom were 1,581 cases of Epidemic Dropsy. In this way a large amount of valuable information regarding the epidemic was recorded. In my first report1 some of the facts obtained were dealt with and in this report the remainder are given in full. In dealing with the information collected it has been divided into Epidemiological, Symptomatological, and Dietetic. 1 First Report on Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta by Major E. D. W. Greig, M.D., D.Sc., I.M.S., Scientific Memoir No. 45.
I. CHART SHOWING THE MONTHLY INCIDENCE OF EPIDEMIC DROPSY DURING 1909. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75061087.tif] NUMBER OF CASES OF EPIDEMIC DROPSY. By B. L. DAS. ARTIST.
7 (ii) Epidemiological Investigations. 1. Annual Incidence of Cases. The following table shows the number of cases of Epidemic Dropsy in- vestigated which occurred in Calcutta in 1907-08-09-10:8 The following table shows the number of houses investigated in which cases of Epidemic Dropsy were ascertained to have occurred in the various Wards in Calcutta in 1909:9 5. General Mortality amongst Cases of Epidemic Dropsy investigated The following table shows the total number of cases of Epidemic Dropsy investigated and the total number of deaths amongst these cases:10 8. Mortality from Epidemic Dropsy at different Age Periods. The following table shows the total number of fatal cases of Epidemic Dropsy investigated, the number of deaths from Epidemic Dropsy in each of the following age periods amongst males and females:II. AGE DISTRIBUTION OF 1000 OF EACH SEX IN CALCUTTA (CENSUS OF INDIA, 1901. Vol. VII. PART IV.) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75061102.tif] PER THOUSAND.
II. AGE DISTRIBUTION OF 1000 OF EACH SEX IN CALCUTTA (CENSUS OF INDIA, 1901. Vol. VII. PART IV.) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75061105.tif] NUMBER PER THOUSAND. BY B.L.DAS. ARTIST. MALES.=III. AGE INCIDENCE OF EPIDEMIC DROPSY. MALE AND FEMALE. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75061111.tif] NUMBER OF CASES OF EPIDEMIC DROPSY. BY B.L.DAS. ARTIST., IV. CHART SHOWING MORTALITY FROM EPIDEMIC DROPSY AT VARIOUS AGE PERIODS. MALE AND FEMALE [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75061117.tif] NUMBER OF FATAL CASES. OF EPIDEMIC DROPSY. BY B.L.DAS. ARTIST V. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75061126.tif] BY B. L DAS., CALCUTTA.
11 2.12 11. Case Mortality amongst Hindu Females (Married, Unmarried, and Widows). The following table shows the case mortality from Epidemic Dropsy amongst female Hindus in Calcutta:13 (3) Households of four families. Total number of house- holds investigated. NUMBER OF HOUSEHOLDS IN WHICH One family attacked. Two families attacked. Three families attacked. Four families attacked. 16 10 4 2 0 (4) Households of five families. Total number of households investigated. NUMBER OF HOUSEHOLDS IN WHICH One family attacked. Two families attacked. Three families attacked. Four families attacked. Five families attacked. 1 1 0 0 0 0 (5) Households of six families. Total number of households investigated. NUMBER OF HOUSEHOLDS IN WHICH One family attacked. Two families attacked. Three families attacked. Four families attacked. Five families attacked. Six families attacked. 2 1 0 1 0 0 0 (6) Households of more thaw six families. Number of families in household. Total number of such households investigated. NUMBER OF HOUSEHOLDS IN WHICH One family attacked. More than one attacked. 7 1 1 0 9 2 2 0 10 1 1 0 11 1 1 0 12 1 1 0 In the above tables some of the households investigated have been classi- fied into those with 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 families, and the results of the enquiry as to the number of families in each household which was attacked by Epidemic Dropsy stated. It is interesting to note that in the great majority of instances
14 1 family only in these various sized households was attacked. This limita- tion of the disease to single families in households is important in regard to the question of infectivity of the disease. That is to say, that amongst the healthy inhabitants there were foci of persons attacked by Epidemic Dropsy and the disease did not spread from these foci to the unaffected population. The question of the infectivity of Epidemic Dropsy has been discussed fully in my previous report,1 and reference to it should be made in this connection. 13. Degree of Communication between Families in Households affected by Epidemic Dropsy. The following table shows the degree of communication between families in households affected by Epidemic Dropsy, the food and cooking arrange- ments of these families, and the occurrence or non-occurrence of Epidemic Dropsy in unaffected families:15 This table was referred to in my first report.1It very clearly demon- strates the fact that the spread of the disease does not follow the importation of cases into households previously free from infection; and taken along with the other evidence supports the contention that Epidemic Dropsy is non- infectious. 15. Incidence of Epidemic Dropsy amongst Servants. The following table shows the number of servants in households in which cases of Epidemic Dropsy occurred, and the number of servants attacked by Epidemic Dropsy :16 It is noteworthy that when single cases of Epidemic Dropsy were report- ed from a house it was found, on investigation, that either the disease was not Epidemic Dropsy, or that the case had been imported. It was rare for a single individual to be attacked in a household; generally a whole family. 17. Sanitation of Houses in which Cases of Epidemic Dropsy occurred. The following table shows the number of houses investigated, in which cases of Epidemic Dropsy occurred, and the condition of the sanitation of these houses:17 From this table it will be observed that from 3 to 4 months was the dura- tion of the disease in 40.4 per cent. of the total number of cases examined and 5 to 6 months in 24.9 per cent. It will be seen from these figures that the duration of the disease is prolonged. In many cases certain symptoms, e.g., cardiac disturbance, slight 18 5. 19 Maynard1 contributes an interesting note on increased intraocular ten- sion met with in cases of Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta. He states, " On examining them one usually finds the cornea a little steamy; the anterior chamber normal or deep, pupils small or moderately dilated and acting but sluggishly to light; there is sometimes complaint of pain, but rarely is there any injection of the vessels. The tension of the eyeball is usually distinctly increased; sometimes it is normal, in one case it was diminished. Halos, gene- rally rainbow-like, are spontaneously complained of by those not complain- ing of dimness of vision; it will often be found that they have had halos at some time or another during the attack of dropsy. These halos are some- times seen early in the morning, but more often later in the day and lasting only a few hours, sometimes recurring again in the evening. They are not due to conjunctival secretion. Usually the failure of the vision follows the dropsy, but in some cases it is noticed at the same time and in two cases it preceded the dropsical signs by a short interval. " Two-thirds of the cases showed pathological cupping of the disc from 2 to 6 D in depth, a few showed only physiological cupping, though usually of considerable extent, and a few showed no cupping at all. The retinal veins are usually engorged and both they and the arteries show marked pressure pulsation in several cases. Priestly Smith's scotometer frequently gave nega- tive results, Bijerrum's sign being absent. The fields were generally contracted, especially on the nasal side. In none was the eyeball enlarged. None had R. P. or signs of iritis, past or present. None of the patients had markedly small corneæ. Two were myopes. Two-thirds were men and one-third women. The ages of all except 2 were under 36. Eight were under 28, and. there was no family history of Glaucoma forthcoming." 9. Skin Lesions in Epidemic Dropsy. The following table shows the kind and frequency of occurrence of skin lesions in Epidemic Dropsy:20 The petechiæ were quite distinct from the mottling and their distribu- tion was different, being found on the back, chest and other places, whilst the mottling was confined to the 21 In severe cases with generalised 22 follows that the blood of a Beriberi case is much richer in water than a healthy person. Schaumann1 gives the results of his analyses of the urine and fæces of cases of " Ship Beriberi " at Hamburg. The following table from his monograph shows the results of his analy- sis of urine and fæces before treatment and after treatment:23 INCREASE OF P2O5 IN 624 Schaumann1 also gives the following table:25 Without Phosphorus treatment. AVERAGE OUTPUT IN 24 HOURS. Quantity. Specific gravity. Calcium oxide. Sodium chloride. Sulphuric acid. Phosphoric acid. Urea. c. c. Gram. Gram. Gram. Gram. On first day 1,147 1.021 0.2736 9.8170 1.9563 2.3996 25.66 After 12 days 778 1.022 0.1636 6.4416 1.4185 2.3334 17.06 Difference 26 Schaumann tested the effect of the addition of various other phosphorus containing substances to the diet on the output of phosphorus in the urine. He found that the greatest increase in the output was given with Mung dal and the least with yeast. The beneficial action of Mung dal in the preventive and curative treat- ment of Epidemic Dropsy is fully discussed in this report, page 49. (iv) Diet in Epidemic Dropsy. As it became early evident in the course of the enquiry that there was a relationship between the causation of Epidemic Dropsy and the kind of food consumed, detailed notes of the diet in each case of Epidemic Dropsy investi- gated were made, and these records were analysed with the following re- sults:27 2. Dal. The following table shows the total number of cases investigated with special reference to diet, and the number of those consuming dal:28 5. Meat. The following table shows the total number of cases of Epidemic Dropsy investigated with special reference to diet, and the number of cases consuming meat:29 Several interesting facts emerge from a study of the above tables giving details of the diet of cases of Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta. In the first place it will be seen that every one of the persons attacked consumed rice, and this was their staple food. Further, it will be observed that the amount of rice consumed daily varied from 1 Chittak to 8 Chittaks (1 Chittak equals 2 2/35 oz. Avoir.). In my first report1 I dealt very fully with the question of rice as an etiologic factor in Epidemic Dropsy, and in the pre- sent report, in the chapter dealing with experimental investigations, further particulars are given. It may be recalled, however, that the rice consumed by persons attacked by Epidemic Dropsy had undergone a process of polishing which deprived it of certain constituents essential for the physiological re- quirements of the body. Since the last report was written an interesting paper on "The bran of paddy in the prevention and cure of Beriberi," by Breaudat and Dernier, 2 has been published. They studied an epidemic of Beriberi in 1909-10 at Cape St. Jacques. The disease was of moderate severity with a marked predomin- ance of cardiac troubles. Preventive treatment was attempted in the 5th Regiment of Artillery from 1st July 1909 to 1st March 1910; among the Rifles from the 23rd June to the end of January 1910. 290 men were given rice bran, and 471 were kept as controls. Different doses of bran were administered. From the 23rd June to the 9th August the men took 20 gram. bran. They furnished 17 cases per thousand, the controls 34. From 9th August to the 15th September the men took 30 gram. bran. They supplied 5 cases per thousand, the controls 45 per thousand. From the 15th September to 1st February 1910 the batch of men treated was reduced to 165, and the controls to 189. The men took 40 gram. bran. There was not a single case of Beri- beri amongst the treated, but there were 174 cases among the controls. The experiments on the curative treatment lasted at the Hospital at St. Jacques from 15th September 1909 to 5th April 1910. There were 119 cases during this period. In the first month all the patients without exception were sup- plied with bran. From the 15th October every alternate case was treated, there was thus a batch of treated and a batch of controls. The doses of bran varied from 40 to 350 gram. The patients of this series had the ordinary diet without medicine. The control batch was treated on the usual therapeutic lines; absolute milk diet, cardiac medication (Caffeine and Digitalis), purga- tives, Brandy, Cod liver oil, Potassium Iodide, Cocodylate of Soda, Fowler's solution, Quinine. From the milk dietary they passed on to ordinary food through soups, meat juice, bread and grilled meat. A meat ration entered 1 First Report on Epidemie Dropsy in Calcutta by Major E. D. W. Greig, M.D., D.Sc., I.M.S., Scientific Memoir No. 45. 2 Bull. de la Soc. Path. Exot. Seance. Nov. 9, 1910, Tome III, No. 9.
30 into the diet of these patients. In both batches the progress of the disease was the same. The 31 The analysis of the ration distributed to the prisoners at Poulo Condore leads the author to believe that the symptoms are due to an insufficient quan- tity of phosphorus in the diet. Contagion does not appear to play any part at all. In a note, appended to the report of M. Theze, the Editor of the Annales d'hygiene de medicine coloniales gives an interesting account of the results obtained in the prison at Saigon by excluding polished rice; the orders were given by M. Grall in November 1903. The following table gives the results:32 Gilmore Ellis,1 Medical Superintendent, and Medical Officer, Beriberi Hospital, Singapore, brings forward evidence from his own investigations, which have been carried on since 1901, showing the causal connection between polished rice and Beriberi. It is interesting to note that, in his report on the Medical Department of the Straits Settlements for 1909, Dr. Ellis2 states that no case of Beriberi originated in the Singapore Jail; this is the third year in succession in which this immunity has occurred. In the same report it is stated that parboiled rice is now used in various Government institutions of the Malacca Pro- vince. One fatal case of Beriberi occurred at a police depôt; the victim, a sub-inspector, had been warned against Siam rice, but refused to alter his diet. It will be observed from my tables that the quantity of dal taken by the Bengalis in Calcutta is small; in the great majority of cases under 1 Chittak a day is consumed. This is an important point, because I have shown in my previous report3 that dal, especially the Mung dal, Phaseolus radiatus, has valuable prophylactic and curative properties when administered in suitable doses; it supplies the essential constituents which are deficient in a polished rice diet. In the chapter of this report dealing with the results of the ex- perimental investigations the prophylactic and curative properties of the Indian Mung dal in relation to the neuritis of birds are clearly demonstrated. In regard to the consumption of ata a very interesting fact is brought out, namely, that practically all cases of Epidemic Dropsy amongst Bengalis in Calcutta partook of fine or sifted ata, and this, as was shown in my first report,4 is remarkably poor in certain essential constituents necessary to meet the physiological requirements of the body. Consequently, a diet composed of polished rice and sifted ata is very deficient in respect of these constitu- ents. It will be noted that Hindu widows partake of very little fish and no meat at all. Thus of 84 widows suffering from Epidemic Dropsy, only 13 took fish, and none consumed meat. By reference to the tables giving the mortality it will be observed that the death rate from Epidemic Dropsy amongst the Hindu females in Calcutta is very high. Considerable importance has been attached to mustard oil in connection with the etiology of Epidemic Dropsy, and consequently enquiries were made 1 Brit. Med. Journal, Oct. 2, 1909. 2 Lancet, Feb. 4, 1911. 3 First Report on Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta by Major E. D. W. Greig, M.D., D.Sc., I.M.S., Scientific Memoir No. 45. 4 Ibid.
33 regarding it. It was thought that the causation of Epidemic Dropsy was dependent on certain impurities, mineral oils ("Batch and Bloomless oils"), in the mustard oil, and this hypothesis received a considerable amount of popular attention in Calcutta. The results of the experimental study of this question are recorded in the chapter dealing with experimental investiga- tions in this report. Neither the epidemiological nor the experimental studies, made in connection with the present enquiry, support the above hypothesis, and there is no scientific evidence in favour of it. F
34 CHAPTER II. Note on an Outbreak of Epidemic Dropsy in Basti Jail, United Provinces. As some interesting facts regarding the relationship of rice diet to Epidemic Dropsy were brought out in the course of this enquiry, a record of it may be appropriately inserted at this point. In December 1907 I was directed to proceed to Basti Jail to enquire into an outbreak of a disease resembling Beriberi. I was only able to devote a short time to the enquiry as I was officiating as Director of the Central Research Institute at the time. From the evidence I was able to collect I expressed the opinion, tentatively, that defects in dietary were playing an important part in the causation of the disease. The general features of the condition very closely resembled those of Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta. In this jail rice was consumed, and it is of interest to note that this was the only jail in the United Provinces in which rice was generally consumed by all the prisoners, and it is the only jail in the United Provinces which has recorded an outbreak of this disease. The Honourable Lieutenant-Colonel C. Mactaggart, I.M.S., Inspector- General of Prisons, United Provinces, in answer to a recent query by me kindly supplied me with further notes regarding the epidemic at Basti Jail. He writes under date 23rd February 1910, "So far as I am aware no cases of Beriberi or Epidemic Dropsy have occurred in our jails except those you investigated at Basti. I was on the Factory Commission when the epidemic in Basti Jail occurred, and you yourself know far more about the epidemic than I do. Rice is never given in our jails as an article of diet except to a few toothless old prisoners and infirms. The only exception to this rule was the Basti Jail, where for some years rice was given as a forenoon meal, because some Superintendent of that jail considered it was more in harmony with the diet of the free population of the district, and the prisoners did better on it than wheat. I stopped the issue of rice in the Basti Jail in October 1907 owing to the occurrence of some cases of cholera, and it must have been about the same time that the cases of Beriberi occurred although the disease was not recognised till November. Whether the disease was due to the rice diet or not I cannot say, but it is peculiar that the disease should have occurred in the only jail where rice was issued generally as an article of diet. The epidemic in Basti came to an end in January 1908 I believe. Rice diet has not been reverted to in the jail and so far as I know there have been no cases of Beri- beri in the jail since January 1908.
35 "Mustard oil is issued to all prisoners in our jails daily and the oil issued is made in the jail. I do not think it is at all likely that adulteration with petroleum could occur. I believe there were some cases of Epidemic Dropsy in Gorakhpur city and a few in Cawnpore city some time ago, but otherwise I have never heard of the disease in these Provinces. Cases may occasionally occur but they are certainly rare." The study of this outbreak at Basti Jail presents several interesting features. In the first place it will be noted that the disease occurred in the only jail in the United Provinces in which rice is consumed generally, and this in itself is a significant fact in the light of our recent knowledge of this disease. Nextly, with the cessation of the rice and the replacement of it by wheat the epidemic stopped and no fresh cases occurred. Further, the mus- tard oil consumed could not have been adulterated with petroleum, as will be seen from the letter of the Inspector General. Hence in this case the etiolo- gical connection between adulterated oil and Epidemic Dropsy could be excluded. Evacuation was not carried out. Had it taken place the cessation of the outbreak might have been attributed erroneously to this measure. As my report on the epidemic at Basti Jail to the Sanitary Commissioner with the Government of India has not been published before, I include it in the present one, because, it has important relationships to the Calcutta epidemic. A Report on an Epidemic resembling Beriberi at Basti Jail, United Provinces, by Captain E. D. W. Greig, M.D., I.M.S. Forwarded to the Sanitary Commissioner with the Government of India on 14th January 1908. I have the honour to state that in accordance with your telegram No. 53, dated the 22nd December 1907, I proceeded to Lucknow on December 26th, and arrived there next day and had an interview with Lieutenant-Colonel S. H. Henderson, I.M.S., Officiating Inspector General of Prisons, United Provinces, who gave me particulars of a disease resembling Beriberi in the Basti Jail. I reached Basti next day and remained there till 31st December. This report contains the result of the enquiry which I conducted with the Superintendent, Basti Jail, Dr. N. S. Harvey, who facilitated my work there in every way. 2. The first official intimation of the occurrence of cases of a disease resembling Beriberi in Basti Jail was made by Dr. Harvey, who reported on 2nd December 1907 that, "I took over the jail from Dr. MacLeod on the 19th November 1907, he handed over to me two convicts in the Jail Hospital who F 2
36 were suffering from 37 320 and 350, cases have been admitted into hospital from practically every part of it. Cases have been received from the female ward; here the female prisoners are completely shut off from all communication with the male pri- soners. Also, cases have occurred in the families of the jailors, who never mix with the prisoners. A feature of interest is that the disease was first detected amongst the prisoners employed as cooks, and the incidence of the disease was high amongst them. 38.5 per cent. of the prisoners employed as cooks contracted the disease. 5. The etiology of Beriberi and its allies has not yet been scientifically determined.1 Hence in investigating a disease of this class the most profitable course to adopt is to proceed to analyse systematically, on scientific lines, the bearing of each conceivable factor in the production of the disease. In this particular epidemic, the factor common to all effected individuals, is the food supply, and this factor is, also, common to the population of this district, in which the disease is prevailing. The food supply of the jail, therefore, requires, in the first place, to be carefully studied in its possible causal rela- tion to the disease. 6. By the following observation it could be ascertained whether or not the food supply (grain) of the district, which is partly used in Basti Jail, can produce the train of symptoms associated with this disease. The pri- soners in Basti Jail might be equally divided into two groups A and B for the purpose of this observation. A roll of prisoners in A and B groups re- spectively would be made out. The food of the prisoners in A group would be exactly the same as they are getting at present whilst all the grain for B group would be got from a district free from the disease, preferably, the same kind of grain as is being used in the jail of the selected district. The quanti- ties and kind of grain would be exactly the same for A and B, the only differ- ence being the source. Should, therefore, the disease continue, it would be possible to determine whether or not the grain of Basti district is producing the train of symptoms at present met with amongst the prisoners in the jail.2 7. On my arrival at the Basti Jail the great majority of the cases of the disease resembling Beriberi were already convalescent; so I had not an oppor- tunity of observing the clinical phenomena of the acute phase of the malady. In Table No. 11 an analysis of the signs and symptoms of all cases of this disease at present in hospital is given; the most constant objective feature of these cases is 38 jerks were absent in a number of cases, but they showed no signs of paralysis or paresis.1 In one of the more severe cases there was distinct tenderness on pressure over the nerves. In a certain percentage of cases cardiac signs and, symptoms were present. Examination of the urine by Dr. Harvey had shown it to be normal. Apart from the nervous and circulatory, the systems of the body presented no noteworthy alteration. 8. The daily diet of the prisoners at present is: Wheat (1st Class 12 Chittaks; 2nd Class 10 Chittaks); Gram (1st Class 2 Chittaks; 2nd Class 2 Chittaks); Dal (1 Chittak); Vegetables (3 Chittaks). Mustard oil 2 seers oil per 100 diets. Up to 2nd October the prisoners were receiving Rice (1st Class 7 Chittaks; 2nd Class 6 Chittaks) in addition to a smaller quantity of Wheat (1st Class 7 Chittaks; 2nd Class 6 Chittaks) and Gram (1 Chittak for both classes). On this date owing to cholera the rice was stopped and the amount of wheat and gram increased as before.2 9. In this district I am informed by Dr. Harvey that although actual famine conditions do not exist there is a scarcity at present.3 1 In this respect they closely resemble the cases of Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta. 2 This is a very important point, because shortly after the rice was stopped and the wheat increased the acute phase of the epidemic ceased. The part played by diet in the production of this disease has been more clearly demonstrated by recent research. 3 This is an interesting point, because in this outbreak the conditions of scarcity would operate by bringing about a "One-sidedness" in dietary of the population outside the jail, amongst whom cases of the disease were occurring, in the same way as I have shown the high price of food operated in the Calcutta epidemic. TABLE I. Showing population of Basti Jail in December 1907, the number of cases, and the number of deaths from Epidemic Dropsy which occurred there. Population of Jail. Total number of cases of Epidemic Dropsy. Total number of deaths from Epidemic Dropsy. 329 81 4 TABLE II. Showing an analysis of the signs of Epidemic Dropsy as observed in 63 prisoners at Basti Jail. 39 CHAPTER III. Epidemic Dropsy and Ship Beriberi. In my first report1 I referred to the similarity of the features of Epidemic Dropsy and Ship Beriberi as described by Axel Holst and the Norwegian Ship Beriberi Committee. Since my last report I have obtained furher in- formation on this important question. Fleet Surgeon R. C. Munday, R.N., P.M.O., of the ships in the Persian Gulf, writes under date 28th November 1910 to me2 that, "Last year we had a number of cases of Beriberi amongst the natives in the crews of these ships and there was a high mortality. I advised the Admiral to allow none but cured (parboiled) rice on board any ship. Since then although the number of lascars have enormously increased no Beriberi has occurred. On the other hand although there has been no Beriberi amongst the natives, we have had a run- ning dropping fire of cases of peripheral neuritis closely resembling Beriberi occurring solely amongst Europeans and having no mortality. There was in nearly every case some slight 40 this outbreak is clearly shown, and in this relation the table from Schaumann's monograph given on page 46 showing the phosphorus content of fresh and preserved meat should be studied as it affords an explanation of the ameliora- tion of the symptoms as noted by the P. M. O. The following interesting report regarding an outbreak of Beriberi which occurred on the S. S. "Clan Urquhart " was submitted by Dr. N. N. Chowdhury, Port Health Officer, Chittagong, and forwarded to me. He reports, "that the S. S. 'Clan Urquhart' arrived at this port from the United Kingdom on 17th September 1910; there had been an outbreak amongst the Indian crew during the voyage. This particular voyage con- sisted of nearly 4½ months in all and commenced from Colombo on the 30th April 1910, from where the crew were recruited and terminated at Chittagong on the 17th September 1910. In all she had 68 Indian crew:41 During the period 6 died and three were left at Durban Hospital and the rest improved their health on their way to this port." Dr. Chowdhury also gives a table, given below, which shows the distribu- tion of the disease amongst the crew and he directs attention to the fact that the engine room crew were most affected:42 Lb. Oz. Dram. Vegetables43 June 1910 and it was at the latter port that the master observed the first manifestations of the disease. It is interesting to note, therefore, that the early cases did not occur in a tropical port. Further, the period elapsing between the commencement of the Rangoon or polished rice dietary and the development of the first case was about two months, and this interval corre- sponds closely to that required for the experimental production of neuritis in pigeons and fowls fed on polished rices. As will be seen from the report a change of diet was made on July 25th, 1910, additional articles were given and the dietary became much less "One-sided;" after the change no further cases of the disease occurred. Schaumann1 in his important monograph on the etiology of Beriberi states that in his opinion, "Ship Beriberi" is the pathological expression of a rapidly brought about deficit through a great want of organic phosphorus components, whilst tropical Beriberi is a gradually produced deficit occasion- ed by a slight, and indeed, sometimes, without a failure of these substances." And he concludes further, " 'Ship Beriberi' is a disease of metabolism, which is produced by a poverty of organic phosphorus compounds in the dietary." A consideration of these facts shows that this disease presents an im- portant problem in connection with shipping. In the case of the "Clan Urquhart " the outbreak was brought about by the consumption of very high- ly polished rice which had been deprived of constituents essential for nutrition, especially of the peripheral nerves. Consequently ships undertaking pro- longed voyages should be careful to avoid the use of polished rice and increase the supply of Mung dal. The question of adding rice bran to the diet should be carefully considered. 1Archiv. Schiffs u. Tropenhygiene, Bd. XIV, Beiheft, Dec. 8, 1910. G . 2
44 CHAPTER IV. Epidemic Dropsy and Scurvy. In my former Report I discussed at some length the relationship of Scurvy to Epidemic Dropsy, and quoted the opinions of the old Indian observers on the subject, namely, Chevers, Morehead, Waddell, etc. Since the report was written Couvy, a French investigator, has recorded some interesting observa- tions on this problem. Couvy1 observed an epidemic of Scurvy and Beriberi amongst the garrison of Akjoucht. The Garrison consisted of 11 Europeans and 150 Natives. PROGRESS OF EPIDEMIC. Natives. On 23rd May 4 cases amongst the 150 45 paralytic symptoms occurred. On the 23rd aggravation of symptoms showed itself in 88 cases. This relapse occurred in men already quite convalescent. On June 23rd millet intended for the horses of the post was distributed to the worst cases. Improvement was noted on the 29th and 30th June. From 1st July, after the millet was exhausted, it was necessary to give rice; since the 3rd 17 cases of aggravation of the condition with cardio-respiratory trouble occurred. On the 6th the number of relapses reached 66, some days later 83. Before these occurrences a ration of 350 grammes of meal flour was sub- stituted for rice in the case of the more severely affected patients. The poor state of the provisions never permitted of continuing the appropriate diet until the cure was complete; when a patient improved and was no longer in danger it was necessary to put him on a rice diet which was followed by a fatal relapse. Finally on 23rd August a convoy arrived with millet and bis- cuits; since then all the beriberi cases have been able to consume without inter- ruption their ration of biscuit in place of rice. This absolute suppression of rice has corresponded with a rapid amelioration without relapse, and on 15th September all the symptoms of severe beriberi had disappeared in all the cases. They had 5 deaths on 9th, 17th, 22nd August, that is during the period they failed to have suitable provisions. Two deaths occurred on 1st Septem- ber from cardiac disorder, the symptoms commenced on 20th August. Suppression of rice and substitution of biscuit had always a beneficial and rapid effect on the cardiac disorders. This influence was so distinct that it was possible to obtain an improvement even in the most severe cases by stopping rice for 2 to 6 days. On the contrary the absorption of 1 to 2 kilo- grammes of rice in 2 to 4 days sufficed in the majority of cases to produce a severe relapse. This interesting paper brings out the point that there is a relationship between Scurvy and Beriberi, and further, it demonstrates how the symptoms may be modified by change of diet. Monteith,1 whilst in North-West Australia during 1890-91 and 1892, as Medical Officer to Messrs. Streeters, Pearling Fleet, observed an epidemic of Beriberi with symptoms which pointed very strongly to a Scorbutic origin. The disease affected chiefly the lugger boys shipped from Koepang, F. M. S. The cooks, Chinamen generally, the West Australian aboriginals, and the white men who lived aft in the schooners, seemed exempt from the disease The disease manifested itself when the men had been many months at sea. The prominent symptoms were:46 painful, especially at night. A bronzing or pigmentation was visible in the buccal mucous membrane and the gums were redish and spongy and in some cases overgrown. In a case of fatal termination the symptoms would be obstinate constipation and vomiting and dyspn47 Food material (dried at 100 C. (In the dried substance). 100 GRAM. OF FOOD MATERIAL CONTAIN TOTAL P2O5. Phos- phatid P2O5. Water soluble Ester P2O5. Nuclein and Proteid P2O5. WATER SOLUBLE PHOSPHATES P2O5 Estimated direct. Calculated. In gram. of substance. In per cent. of total P2O5. Gram. Gram. Gram. Gram. Gram. 3. Salt meat (beef) fat free from ship M. K. 0.241 0.219 0.053 0.048 0.094 0.024 9.96 4. Salt meat (beef) fat free from ship L. P. 0.139 0.161 0.040 0.055 0.048 0.018 12.96 5. Salt meat (beef) fat free from ship H. 0.386 0.378 0.066 0.079 0.160 0.073 22.12 6. Preserved meat (boiled beef) fat free from ship C. H. 1.179 1.063 0.214 0.198 0.124 0.527 44.70 7. Dried fish from ship H. fat free. 1.823 1.625 0.144 0.125 0.148 1.208 66.26 8. Fat free preparation of Testicles. 3.550 3.477 0.382 1.050 0.977 1.068 30.08 Phosphorus in fresh vegetables. Vageler,1 states that, "The fresh vegetables, which in spring and summer are always available, and whose advantages are generally recognised, are es- pecially rich in Phosphatides. One will not go far wrong if one ascribes in great part the excellent physiological action of these substances to the alcohol soluble phosphatides." Schaumann agrees with this and adds, "The salad is frequently considered to be a specially active vegetable, this is explained not only by the high Phosphatide content, but also by the fact that it is eaten raw, hence all loss and alteration of phosphorus containing substances by cooking is avoided." The above facts afford an explanation of the improvement of the symp- toms in the cases of Epidemic Dropsy amongst the Europeans of the ships of the Squadron in the Persian Gulf, page 40 of this Report. As noted by Staff Surgeon Munday as soon as fresh fruit and meat were added to the dietary cases of peripheral neuritis diminished and finally ceased. These questions, therefore, should be carefully noted by authorities re- sponsible for the maintenance of health on board ship. 1Biochem. Zeitschr. 1909 Bd. XVII, p. 189 (quoted by Schaumann).
48 Effect of Pickling on Phosphorus Content of Meat. The observations of Nothwang1 on the effects of pickling beef are of in- terest. The following table shows the loss of Proteid and Phosphoric acid which results from pickling:49 CHAPTER V. Experimental Investigations. In my first Report a number of experiments with fowls and pigeons are recorded. It was shown that progressive loss of weight and neuritis resulted from feeding pigeons on polished Bengal and Rangoon rice, whereas when fed on a mixture of wheat and pulses no neuritis developed and the animals remained in perfect health. The observations were carried on over several Months. In the present Report the results of further experimental researches are given. In December 1810 Fraser and Stanton1 published the results of their re- cent investigations on the etiology of Beriberi in the F. M. S. Schaumann2 in. the same month published an important monograph on the etiology of Beriberi including " Ship Beriberi " in which he gives the results of his chemical and experimental investigations on this subject. As these results are very inter- esting and important a full summary of the two works is given here before proceeding to describe the details of my further experimental investigations. Fraser and Stanton during the past year have directed their attention to- wards the determination of the nature of the substances present in the sub- pericarpal layers of the original rice grain which are removed in the milling process and which it would appear are of such high physiological importance in maintaining the normal nutrition when a diet largely composed of white, polished rice is consumed. As in the previous experiments Fraser and Stanton employed fowls for testing the value of the various materials. In the present investigation all the products employed, unpolished rice, polished rice, polishings, etc., were de- rived from the same lot of paddy. The following table shows the results of their analyses:50 They also give the following table which shows the composition of these articles calculated on dried materials which renders differences more striking and accurate, and also the composition of a diet composed of 60 gram. of polished rice and 5 gram. of polishings calculated in the same manner and shows how closely this diet approximates to one of polished rice:51 polished rice alone. Fraser and Stanton disproved the importance of phytin by their experiments. 3. Substance soluble in 0.3 per cent. hydrochloric acid.52 and previous researches as a test of Beriberi producing power of a rice when it forms the staple of a diet in man. 3. The addition of rice polishings to a diet of white rice is an effective preventive of the development of polyneuritis in fowls. Rice polishings comprise from 8 to 10 per cent. by weight of the original grain. 4. The substances contained in polishings which are effective in prevent- ing polyneuritis are soluble in 0.3 per cent. HCL. and are not precipitated from the solution on the addition of 95 per cent. alcohol, in quantity sufficient to make the resulting mixture of proof spirit strength. These substances comprise 16 per cent. or less by weight of rice polishings or 1.6 per cent. or less by weight of the original unpolished rice grain. 5. The fats, which are contained in comparative abundance in rice polishings, have been proved of no importance in preventing polyneuritis. 6. Phosphorus compounds equal to 85 per cent. of the total phosphorus content have been proved to be unimportant in preventing polyneuritis. Breaudat1 has extracted from rice bran a nucleoalbumin or vegetable casein, a gluten, which is present in the rice to the amount of 12 to 13 per cent. and which he found protected pigeons fed on white polished rice from poly- neuritis. In my previous Report2 the effect of the addition of meat to and its absence from the dietary in cases of Epidemic Dropsy was recorded. Hindu widows, for religious reasons, do not consume meat at all and the mortality from Epidemic Dropsy was shown to be very high amongst them, whilst male Hindus (Bengalis) pertake of a considerable amount of meat and the mor- tality was low. It is interesting to note that McCay3 has shown from his investigations on Bengal Jail diet that the reduction of the quantity of rice and the addition of fish or meat to the dietary improves nitrogen metabolism as the following table from his Report shows:53 The following is a fairly full summary of a recently published Mono- graph by Dr. H. Schaumann1 on the etiology of Beriberi including " Ship Beriberi." The monograph contains a very complete, up to date bibliography on the subject. Schaumann has exhaustively examined possible factors as causal agents in Beriberi and particularly " Ship Beriberi." The following are extracts from his important monograph:54 " A protective action of the mineral constituents added to the food was ex- cluded." 5. Phosphorus and its relation to Beriberi.55 the number of these combinations to an extraordinary extent, since according to the investigations of Tanmann1 the metaphosphates as concerns their rich- ness in Isomeres and Polymeres, are unique. 3. Paranucleoproteids (Nucleo-albumin). Kasein. 4. Phytin.56 Schaumann gives the following table which shows the distribution of P2O5 in the organs of the human body:57 Schaumann considers it probable that the absence of the different phos- phorus combinations in the organism will be expressed specifically in various ways, that it will produce different kinds of morbid phenomena, e.g., Scurvy, Beriberi, Ship Beriberi, etc. He admits, however 2 that the subject is a very complex one. As a result of his experimental studies in animals he comes to the follow- ing conclusions:58 is the case, as has been proved in plants, and as is the case in other food stuffs (albumins and carbohydrates). 7. Nitrogen and Phosphorus metabolism, as has been shown by former experiment and confirmed by my own observations, stand in close relationship. If the content in organic phosphorus combinations sinks below a certain amount in the food, then nitrogen transformation is simultaneously depressed. 8. The polyneuritis, which occurs in animals, dependent on an alimentary origin or produced intentionally, is a disease of metabolism, which in the latter case is dependent on the poverty of the food in certain organic phosphorus combinations, which require to be more closely defined. Schaumann comes to the following final conclusions on the etiology of Beriberi including " Ship Beriberi":59 4. Osteomalacia.1 5. Pellagra perhaps. He considers that the explanation of the difference in the features of the above diseases is dependent on the absence of different kinds of combinations of organic phosphorus: each combination plays a specific part in the function. of metabolism of the human body; and their absence is expressed by disease processes, which are as specifically different from one another, as are the organic phosphorus combinations, the absence of which produces them. Heubner & Reeb2 give as the result of their analysis the following dis- tribution of Phosphorus in polished rice:60 Having discussed the literature of the most recent and important experi- mental investigations on the etiology of Beriberi including " Ship Beriberi " I now proceed to detail the results of my own experimental enquiry on the etiology of Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta. The animal experiments referred to in my previous Report1 have been continued and a large number of feeding experiments with pigeons and fowls to test the nutritive value of the various kinds of food grains have been carried out by me. As already pointed out these animals form very delicate in- dicators of the food value of the different grains. When fed on polished grains they lose weight progressively and develop neuritis. A symptom, which was frequently noted in pigeons and fowls, which showed signs of neuritis, was a recurving of the neck, the head being drawn over towards the animal's back. Post mortem the peripheral nerves of pigeons and fowls dying with symptoms above noted show well marked degeneration changes, and a plate is given in my first Report1 which depicts these changes in the nerves of the animals. I have carried out a large number of experiments with pigeons and fowls fed on different kinds of polished grains with the result that progressive loss of weight and neuritis with death invariably occurred. The symptoms developed whether the rice was boiled or unboiled; indeed a more rapid course was taken by the disease in the case of animals fed on boiled rice. The rice was also placed in the autoclav for one hour before giving it to the pigeons, in this way any organisms, moulds, bacteria, etc., and, probably, enzymes, pre- sent in the rice would be destroyed; yet loss of weight and neuritis invariably resulted when pigeons were fed on polished rice so heated. An account of the experimental work is given below and Charts No. 6 to 9 and Photographs 10-14 illustrate certain experiments. The details of the conditions under which the experiments were conducted are given in my first Report.1 1. Experiments with polished grains. Bengal(Khulna) rice polished (unboiled) This variety of Bengal rice was used because a sample was sent in to the Medical College from Khulna district, where Epidemic Dropsy was prevailing at the time, to be examined. Six pigeons Were fed on 30 gram. of this rice daily. No other grain was given. 1 First Report on Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta by Major E. D. W. Greig, M.D., D.Sc., I.M.S., Scientific Memoir No. 45.
61 The chemical analysis of these grains gave the, following results:62 The following table shows the number of pigeons fed, the duration of the experiment, the weight at the beginning and end of experiment, the percentage loss of weight, and the occurrence of neuritis:63 percentage loss of weight, and the occurrence or non-occurrence of neuritis:64 The chemical analysis is same as that given under Experiment 22. The following table shows the number of pigeons fed, the duration of the experiment, the weight at the beginning and end of the experiment, the percentage loss of weight, the occurrence or non-occurrence of neuritis:65 Remarks.66 (2) By substituting unpolished for polished rice or by adding the polishings of rice (Koorah) in a certain percentage to the polished rice diet. The following table gives the results of the analysis of the various ingre- dients of the mixture:67 percentage gain or loss of weight, and the occurrence or non-occurrence of neuritis:68 The following table shows the number of fowls fed, the duration of the experiment, the percentage gain or loss of weight, and the occurrence or non-occurrence of neuritis:[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75061300.tif]
VI. EXPERIMENT XXXXVI FOWLS ON POLISHED RICE. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75061303.tif] EXPERIMENT XXXVII FOWLS ON UNPOLISHED RICE. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75061303.tif] PERIOD DURING WHICH THE FOWLS ARE FED ON POLISHED RICE. ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,,UNPOLISHED RICE.
SHOWING PIGEONS [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75061309.tif] PIGEONS FED O BY B.L. DAS., CALCUTTA. THIS CONTINUOUS LINES DOTTED ,, THICK CONTINUOUS LINE DOTTED ,,
VII. PREVENTION OF NEURITIS, SHOWING EFFECT OF ADDING MUNG DAL TO POLISHED RICE. EXPERIMENT 54. PIGEONS FED ON POLISHED RICE (RANGOON). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75061312.tif] EXPERIMENT 47. PIGEONS FED ON MIXTURE POLISHED RICE & MUNG DAL. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75061312.tif] BY B .L.DAS.,CALCUTTA THIS CONTINUOUS LINES SHOW THE WEIGHT OF PIGEONS IN GRAMMES FED ON POLISHED RICE . DOTTED ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,,AND MUNG DAL. THICK CONTINUOUS LINES SHOW THE PERIOD THE PIGEONS WERE FED ON POLISHED RICE. DOTTED ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, AND MUNG DAL.
69 percentage gain or loss of weight and the occurrence or non-occurrence of neuritis :70 on the polished rice and on the wheat pulse mixture, the weight at the begin- ning and end of the periods of experiment on polished rice and on wheat pulses, the percentage gain and loss of weight during both periods, the occurrence or non-occurrence of neuritis during these periods:- Period on polished rice (Rangoon). No. of pigeon. Duration of experiment. Weight at beginning of experiment. Weight at end of experiment. Gain or loss of weight. Result. Days. Gram. Gram. Per cent. 1 28 330 200 -39.3 Neuritis. 2 13 290 240 -17.3 ,, 3 20 240 190 -12.5 ,, 4 20 280 210 -25.0 ,, 5 36 310 200 -35.4 VIII. Ex. XXXV. Fowl, No I . [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75061324.tif] BY B.L. DAS.,ARTIST Period during which the fowl is fed on Barley. Period during which the fowl is fed on MSHOW WHEA [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75061330.tif] THIN CONTINUOUS LINE DOTTED ,, THICK CONTINUOUS LINE DOTTED ,, Reg No. 3705 E., 11.IX. DIETETIC TREATMENT OF NEURITIS . SHOWING EFFECT OF CHANGING DIET FROM POLISHED RICE TO WHEAT AND PULSES AFTER DEVELOPMENT OF NEURITIS, EXPERIMENT 49. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75061333.tif] BY B. L. Das. THIN CONTINUOUS LINES SHOW THE WEIGHT OF PIGEONS IN GRAMMES FED ON POLISHED RICE. DOTTED ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, SAME ,, ,, WHEN DIET CHANGED TO MUNG DAL,WHEAT AND PULSES. THICK CONTINUOUS LINES SHOW THE, PERIOD THE PIGEONS WERE FED ON POLISHED RICE. DOTTED ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, SAME ,, ,, ,, MUNG DAL AND PULSES, Reg. No. 3705E., 11.71 ments already made. By stopping the rice dietary completely and substitut- ing wheat and pulses I was able to save all five pigeons. The symptoms of neuritis gradually disappear. In one animal the gait remained altered for some weeks, but gradually improved. All five pigeons regained the weight which they had lost. The experiment is of very considerable importance and throws light on the treatment of this condition. If the structural alterations are too ad- vanced then, of course, change of diet will not be so likely to effect an improve- ment. Hence in the case of human beings the early recognition of the disease is of great importance in order that the change of diet may be made at the earliest opportunity before the anatomical lesions are too pronounced. In regard to the above experiments on the prophylactic and curative treatment of Epidemic Dropsy a recent publication of Hulshoff Pol.1 in which he communicates the results of his researches on Beriberi in the Dutch East India Colonies with special reference to its prophylactic and curative treat- ment is of interest and a full summary of this important paper is given. He conducted an investigation on the curative action of Phaseolus radiatus, the Mung dal of India, on Beriberi cases occurring in his Lunatic Asylum. The observation lasted from August 1901 to end of April 1902. He added to the usual dietary of half the Beriberi patients, Phaseolus radiatus 50 grammes thrice daily. The other articles of diet were 500 gram. rice daily; in the morning, rice and flesh or fish. Abundance of vegetables and spices were given also. Later when he became convinced of the curative value of the bean one meal of rice was withdrawn and replaced by 150 grammes beans. The beans were cooked as porridge, and sweetened with sugar. It was definitely determined that the beans were eaten, by the observa- tions of himself or his European attendants. The following table gives the results of his observations :72 The following observations were made by him on the prophylactic value of Phaseolus in Beriberi :73 The following table shows the complete results of his prophylactic experi- ments with Phaseolus which extended over three years:74 75 B. Experiment with decoction. 18 Beriberi cases. (a) Recovered . 13 Became better . 5 (c) Remained stationary . 0 (d) Became worse . 0 (e) Became very ill . 0 (f) Died . TOTAL . 18 Kiewiet de Jonge confirmed the curative action of the decoction of Phaseolus. Hulshoff Pol isolated chemically from the decoction of beans an active ingredient, and he calls it X. acid. He reaches the following conclusions as a result of his investigations :76 10. The practitioner must regularly determine that the patients are taking the remedy, because a few of them oppose it after long use. 11. The poor results which Japanese practitioners have had in treating Beriberi with Phaseolus (Aduki) are partly due to the fact that they have attempted to treat the degeneration of the neurones with Aduki. 12. The Japanese Aduki and the Dutch East Indian Katjong hidjoe be- long to the same plant family: Phaseolus radiates, L., but they are different varieties. The Japanese beans are red to black, the Dutch East Indian are green. The Japanese variety can thrive in the Dutch East Indian Colonies, but not well. 13. The Katjong hidjoe has no direct specific action on the kidneys. The disappearance of the 77 mustard oil consumed by Bengalis attacked by Epidemic Dropsy during the last Calcutta outbreak. Experiment 33.78 CHAPTER VI. General Conclusions. As will be seen from a study of this report, the two main factors which have determined the recent outbreak of Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta are :79 It has also an important bearing on the maintenance of the health of crews of ships undertaking prolonged voyages, particularly those ships carry- ing rice-eating crews. Consequently the accounts of recent researches on this subject should be brought to the notice of all concerned with a view to prevent- ing outbreaks of this disease. An Indian food grain, which I have shown has valuable prophylactic curative properties in this disease, is the green Mung dal of India, which corresponds to the Katjong hidjoe of the Far East and the Aduki of Japan and its technical name is Phaseolus radiatus. Green Mung or Mung dal is cultivated in India, chiefly at Bijapur,1 North Canara,2 Kathiawar,3 Poona,4 Satara,5 Sirsi, North Canara.6 Van Andel,7 in the treatment of Beriberi patients, CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 8, HASTINGS STREET
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75061369.tif] Photo.-Engraved printed at the offices of the Survey of lndia, Calcutta. 1911 PIGEON No. 1. NEURITIS EARLY
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75061375.tif] Photo.-Engraved & printed at the Offices of the Survey of India, Calcutta, 1911 PIGEON No. 2. NEURITIS MODERATLY ADVANCED.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75061381.tif] Photo.-Engraved & printed at the Offices of the Survey of India, Calcutta, 1911. PIGEON No. 3. NEURITIS ADVANCED.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75061387.tif] Photo.-Engraved & printed at the Offices of the Survey of India, Calcutta, 1911. PIGEON No. 4, HEALTHY. NEURITIS CURED BY MUNG DAL & PULSES.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75061393.tif] Photo.-Engraved & printed at the Offices of the Survey of India Calcutta, 1911 PIGEON No. 5, HEALTHY. POLISHED RICE & MUNG DAL DIET.
