m.63.d. 91. e. IP/25/MB.4
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75064909.tif]
A CODE OF MEDICAL AND SANITARY REGULATIONS FOR THE GUIDANCE OF MEDICAL OFFICERS SERVING IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY. (COMPILED UNDER THE ORDERS OF GOVERNMENT) BY WILLIAM ROBERT CORNISH, F.R.C.S., SURGEON, MADRAS ARMY, SECRETARY AND STATISTICAL OFFICER TO THE INSPECTOR-GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL DEPARTMENT. VOL. II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75064915.tif] MADRAS: PRINTED BY H. MORGAN, AT THE GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1870.
CONTENTS OF VOL. II. SECTION XIII. INDENTS AND VOUCHERS. Page. I.ii CONTENTS. SECTION XXI. TRANSPORT OF TROOPS. Page. I.APPENDIX. VOL. II. No. 16. General Return of Invalids referred to at page 43 ERRATA, AND ALTERATIONS SINCE DATE OF PUBLICATTON. VOLUME I. Page 12, para. 48vi ERRATA AND ALTERATIONS. Clothing issuable in kind will be supplied by the Clothing Department, the issue being made on 1st April annually. Bills for compensation should be submitted through the Superior Medical or Regimental authorities, under whom the Subordinates may be serving. (G. O. G., No. 294 of 18th October 1870.) Page 133, para. 18ERRATA AND ALTERATIONS. vii years, at the expiry of which retirement shall be compulsory in all cases. (G.O. G. No 276 of 23rd September 1870.) Page 179viii ERRATA AND ALTERATIONS. and Lascars 3, Rs. 16-8-0. (G. O,, No. 557 of 10th February 1868, M.D.) (G. O., No. 2,628 of 15th September 1870, M.D.) Page 293ERRATA AND ALTERATIONS. ix VOLUME II. Page 32, para. 62, and page 34, para. 69, addSECTION XIII. INDENTS AND VOUCHERS. I.2 INDENTS AND VOUCHERS. [SECT. XIII. Cir. No. 2,135, of 17th May1866. for articles extra to the established list of hospital sup- plies, require the sanction of Government, and Deputy Inspectors General are not to countersign such indents unless of opinion that they are urgently required. G. O. C. C. No. 75 of 1860. 7. EMERGENT INDENTS.SECT. XIII.] INDENTS AND VOUCHERS. 3 proper authority, and that the amount issued is the same as that sanctioned, and for which a due receipt is granted, He is, moreover, responsible that the proper nomenclature is given to the articles supplied, and that they are delivered in good condition. (e.) RECEIVING OFFICER.4 INDENTS AND VOUCHERS. [SECT.XIII. but when the indent is for the conveyance of sick carriage, to which no Euro- pean officer is attached, the certificate should be signed by the officer despatch- ing or ordering the same. 12. INDENTS SANCTIONED BY THE MEDICAL DEPARTMENT.SECT. XIII.] INDENTS AND VOUCHERS. 5 "I hereby certify that the articles above specified are indispensably necessary for the purpose mentioned, according to the best of my judgment and belief, after the most careful examination." A. B. (Indents from departments should be countersigned by heads of depart- ments, except in cases when Regulation sanctions the countersignature by Deputy.) Indents on the Commissariat department requiring sanction of the Inspector General, will be forwarded by indenting officers to the Deputy Inspector General of Hospitals of the Circle, by whom they will be sent to the Commissariat officer, who after entering them in his register, will forward them with a list to the Inspector General. The originals of all receipted Indents will, after sanction by the Inspector General, be forwarded direct to the Examiner of Commissariat Accounts, and the duplicate indents will be returned to the Deputy Inspector General for delivery to the executive Commissariat officer. The original and duplicate of indents not receipted, will, after sanc- tion, be both returned to the Deputy Inspector General for delivery to the executive Commissariat officer, who will after obtaining the receipt of the Medical officer, himself forward the original to the Examiner of Commissariat Accounts. 14. European Medicines and Instruments.6 INDENTS AND VOUCHERS. [SECT. XIII. At the foot of the indent the following declaration is to be signed by the indenting officer :SECT. XIII.] INDENTS AND VOUCHERS. 7 18. It would be an ill-judged economy to withhold from the officers of the Medical Department, in India, any medicine of acknowledged efficacy and importance; but it must be obvious that it can never be contemplated to issue to Army hospitals every article of doubtful, or limited utility, which might occasionally be prescribed in an extensive fixed establishment. 19. SIMPLICITY OF PRESCRIBING ENJOINED.8 INDENTS AND VOUCHERS. [SECT. XIII. 23. On the occasions just noticed, all glass-stoppered. bottles, fluted poison bottles, Europe glazed jars, jelly pots, &c., which have become disposable, or can be emptied, without inconvenience, will be arranged for inspection, and a list of them presented to the Deputy Inspector General, who, after due examination and correction, if necessary, will transmit it to the Medical Store- keeper; and this officer will, without delay, send a store lascar to receive charge of the articles, and convey them to the Stores. Articles thus returned will be accounted for with the " packing articles," being distinctly noticed in a column headed " received from Hospitals." 24. Medical Officers, at a distance from the principal station, shall attach to their indents an explanation of the circumstances which may have led to the expenditure of any of the articles, enumerated in paragraph 22, which may be entered as " expended" in their indents. 25. Jars and bottles, which, by the issue of their contents, may become disposable in the Division Medical Stores, are never, on any account, to be sold with unserviceable packing cases and materials, but are to be transferred to the stock of "packing articles" for issue as required, or for use in preparing supplies. 26. TRUSSES.SECT. XIII.] INDENTS AND VOUCHERS. 9 Cir. No. 1,920 of 30th April 1866. 29. Stationery Indents.10 INDENTS AND VOUCHERS. [SECT. XIII. ink-stands, which will be supplied to Hospitals, instead of wooden ones, in conse- quence of the greater liability of the latter to be broken on the line of march :SECT. XIII.] INDENTS AND VOUCHERS. 11 (h.) When articles are indented for in excess of the average expendi- ture of the last two years, explanation should be given in the Indent in the column "Remarks" or by letter accompanying. (i.) Blue cloth (salampores) will be supplied from the Stationery Office, or dusters and pen-wipers to Public Offices at the Presidency, inthe following proportions, and for such other stations only, where the article cannot be obtained locally at as cheap a rate as at the Presidency: Dusters, one yard annually to each Peon on the Office Establishment; pen-wipers, one yard annually for every nine Clerks, Accountants, &c. (j.) The articles issued periodically are to be indented for only when actually required, but never before the minimum period which they are required to last shall have expired, and then they will be supplied only in exchange for such as have become unserviceable, or are otherwise satisfactorily accounted for all articles reported to have been lost or broken must be replaced at the expense of the party through whose carelessness the loss or injury may have occurred. Officers for whom no public establishments are maintained, should quote in the Indent in the column " Remarks," the order of Government, authorizing them to draw stationery upon Indent from the Stationery Office. (k.) All transactions shall be bonâ fide a charge for the year in which the issues are made, and Indents not complied with in full at the close of the year will be considered cancelled. (l.) Controlling officers are directly responsible for the accuracy and propriety of the various items of the Indents of their subordinate officers. (m.) The Indents of subordinate officers are to be submitted through and checked by the Controlling heads of departments, and Controlling officers will from these Indents prepare one general Indent as per Form B., upon the Superintendent of Stationery, which will enable them readily to detect any marked differences in the Indents of subordinate offices of apparently similar requirements. (n.) The General Rules regarding the description and period of supply of stationery articles will be observed in the case of hospitals. Indents for such supplies will, therefore, be prepared by each Deputy Inspector General for all hospitals under his control and when countersigned by the Inspector General Medical Department, will be sent for compliance to the Superin- tendent of Stationery. (o.) All officers at out-stations receiving stationery articles in exchange for others, will be responsible that the articles exchanged, and the packing materials (dealwood cases and tin linings) in which the stationery for their office was received, are sold by Public Auction, and the proceeds with Account Sales of particulars forwarded to the Superintendent of Stationery, for the purpose of the amounts being credited to Government.
12 INDENTS AND VOUCHERS. [SECT. XIII. FORM A. INDENT for Stationery for the use of the Medical Department for the official year ending 30th April 18. DESCRIPTION OF ARTICLES. Quantity used in the year 1862-63. Quantity used in the year 1863-64. Average annual expendi ture. Quantity on hand on date of this indent. Probable quantity that will remain on 30th April 1863. Quantity required for 1865-66. Date of last supply of articles to be exchanged. Remarks. Annual Supplies. Royal quires. Medium do. Demy do. Foolscap do. Kings-arm do. Twine, Bengal Skeins. Indian Rubber Oz. Black-lead pencils No. Drawing pencils. do. Colored Cotton- thread Skeins. Cotton, twisted, for stitching Books. Oz. Cotton-thread, Europe, for stitching paper. Balls. Quadrennially. Penknives, Desk. No. Quinquennially. Slates No. Scissors do. Steel drawing- pens do. Octennially. Hones No. Strops do. Decennially. Ink-stands, wooden, complete No. Rulers, round do.
SECT. XIII.] INDENTS AND VOUCHERS. 13 FORM A.14 INDENTS AND VOUCHERS. [SECT. XIII. FORM B. ABSTRACT or Detailed Statement of Stationery required for the use of the Medical Department for the year 18 SECT. XIII.] INDENTS AND VOUCHERS. 15 38. Indents on Ordnance Departments.SECTION XIV. MEDICAL BOARDS AND CERTIFICATES. I.SECT. XIV.] MEDICAL BOARDS AND CERTIFICATES. 17 Officer a written statement, detailing their opinion as to the man's health, muscular development, age, &c., and in case of rejection a full explanation of their reasons; and this statement they should all sign, and attach to the re-engagement form. 5. MILITARY OFFICERS TO SURVEY BARRACK SUPPLIES, RATIONS, &c.18 MEDICAL BOARDS AND CERTIFICATES. [SECT. XIV I further declare my belief that he will not be able to resume his duties in a less period than SECT. XIV.] MEDICAL BOARDS AND CERTIFICATES. 19 No. 5 (BRITISH REGULATIONS.) 12. Wounded Officers.20 MEDICAL BOARDS AND CERTIFICATES. [SECT. XIV. We do further declare upon our honour, that we consider the injury received in action with the enemy on the or slight, as the case may be), and that a period of will be required for his recovery. to be (severe, dangerous, President. Members. No. 8. CERTIFICATE of the SURGEON, to be attached to Proceeding (No. 7). of Her wound in action Majesty's with the enemy at received a on the (A minute description of the wound and its probable result to be given here). Surgeon. No. 9. CERTIFICATE of the COMMANDING OFFICER to be attached to Proceeding (No. 7) This is to certify, that in action with the enemy at of on the was wounded No. 10. CERTIFICATE of the OFFICER applying for COMPENSATION, to be attached to Proceeding (No. 7). I declare, upon my honour, that I have not received, or elsewhere applied for any gratuity or allowance in consideration of my wound, received in action at on the (Signed) SECT. XIV.] MEDICAL BOARDS AND CERTIFICATES. 21 18. EMERGENT CERTIFICATES.22 MEDICAL BOARDS AND CERTIFICATES. [SECT. XIV. stations the three senior Medical Officers of the Indian Department will be nominated for the duty. When it does not interfere with their other duties, Civil Surgeons are to be considered available as members of Boards if there is not a sufficient number of Medical Officers without them. (a.) At stations where there may be only two Medical Officers besides the one who has charge of a patient, the Commanding Officer shall constitute them a Board for the above purpose; and should there be a difference of opinion upon the case, the recommendation of the officer's medical attendant will be sufficient to decide, that a sick certificate shall be confirmed or not. (b.) At stations where there is but one Medical Officer, he may grant sick certificates, but in every such case, as also when a certificate is granted under the provisions of clause a the patient is to be informed that he will be required to appear for examination before a Board of Medical Officers at the Presidency, or other convenient station on his route, at which a Board of three members can be convened; and with a view to obviate unnecessary delay or inconvenience to the patient, the Officer Commanding the station from which the sick officer is proceeding, will communicate with the Officer Commanding such station, where the necessary steps will be taken to assemble the Board upon the sick officer's arrival. 25. BOARDS ON MEDICAL OFFICERS.SECT. XIV.] MEDICAL BOARDS AND CERTIFICATES. 23 examination by the permanent Board of Medical Officers at Madras and Bombay. Final certificates, recommending embarkation at an out-port, or departure from a frontier station, are not to be subjected to revision by another Board at such out-port, Presidency, or station, except under provision of the preceding clause. Officers in British Burmah, who are passed by a Medical Board at Rangoon, are not required to appear before another Board. (d.) A Medical Officer granting a certificate, recommending a change of residence or climate, is required distinctly to state, in the written case accom- panying the patient, his opinion as to the course which ought to be ultimately pursued; and he is prohibited from giving any verbal opinion or advice on this point, that is not fully noticed in the case; such verbal opinions being only calculated to deceive the patient, and to mislead or perplex the succeeding attendant. 27. FORM OF PROCEEDINGS.24 MEDICAL BOARDS AND CERTIFICATES. [SECT. XIV. Captain25. SECT. XIV.] MEDICAL BOARDS AND CERTIFICATES. G. O. G., No 290 15th Sept. 1857 33. ILLNESS CONTRACTED ON FIELD SERVICE.26 MEDICAL BOARDS AND CERTIFICATES. [SECT. XIV. 38. CONVALESCENT OFFICERS.27 SECT. XIV.] MEDICAL BOARDS AND CERTIFICATES. so that a connected view may be given of the history and progress of the case, from its commencement to the time of each transfer. (e.) In the event of any Medical officer being required to attend a sick officer without being furnished with the information herein required, an immediate report must be made of the circumstance to the Administrative Medical Officer of the Circle. 41. MEDICAL CASES AND CERTIFICATES TO BE MADE OUT IN DUPLICATE.28 MEDICAL BOARDS AND CERTIFICATES. [SECT. XIV. Cir. No. 2,402 of 4th July 1867. 45. INSANE OFFICERS.29 SECT. XIV.] MEDICAL BOARDS AND CERTIFICATES. ii. Persons debilitated from protracted residence in India, unaffected with any marked disease, or persons suffering from dyspepsia, irregular action of the bowels, or symptoms of functional derange- ment of some of the viscera, and iii. Young men of weakly constitutions, having no actual disease, but from debility and exhaustion unfit for military duty. 50. In cases of the above description, residence on the Hills is often found peculiarly beneficial; to many such, however, the climate of Coonoor, on account of its mildness is, especially for the first six or eight weeks, best suited. 51. To persons who have been long subject to returns of intermittent, or who have repeatedly suffered from attacks of remittent fever, and to those who have experienced repeated attacks of acute hepatitis, or have long suffered from chronic hepatic or dysenteric affections, or those who labour under rheumatism, syphilitic or pseudo-syphilitic affections, the climate of the Hills has been found to be, generally, speaking, injurious, and as a rule they must be debarred from proceeding to a hill climate; in such cases, a long sea voyage, or a return to Europe should be had recourse to. 52. The season of the year, and station on the Neilgherries, to which patients are recommended to proceed, should be carefully considered; and the precautions, in regard to clothing and exposure, necessary for obviating the bad effects which might arise from sudden reduction of temperature on ascending the Hills, should be carefully explained to the patient. Patients who are much enfeebled, and consequently most liable to suffer from such a transition, may with advantage, in the first place, proceed to the lower, and more temperate stations of Coonoor, Wellington and Kotagherry, especially during the monsoon months of June, July, and August. Cir. No. 2,108 of 1867. 53. FORMS OF MEDICAL CERTIFICATES.30 MEDICAL BOARDS AND CERTIFICATES. [SECT. XIV. No. 2. In extension. I do hereby certify that A. B. has not sufficiently recovered his health to enable him to return to his duty; and I am of opinion that he should receive further permission, to be absent thereform until the31 SECT. XIV.] MEDICAL BOARDS AND CERTIFICATES. (c.) No other application for leave is to be made by the officer himself but he will forward to his regiment or department, for information, a dupli- cate of the medical certificate, with confirmation of Medical Board recorded thereon, when one has been convened, which the Officer Commanding the station will cause to be delivered to him. (d.) Upon the approval by a Medical Board of a certificate recom- mending extension of leave or change of locality, or at stations where there may be only one medical officer, upon an urgent certificate to that effect, which is also to accompany the application, the patient may be allowed by the Officer Commanding the station, to act accordingly in anticipation of leave from Army Head Quarters. (e.) Medical Boards or officers are to grant the certificates, required by the foregoing regulations, to officers to proceed to the Presidency or elsewhere, as they may consider most conducive to the health of the patient. 55. APPLICATIONS FOR EXTENSION OF LEAVE.32 MEDICAL BOARDS AND CERTIFICATES. [SECT. XIV, are not of course intended to supercede others required to be made to the several authorities by the regulations of the service. 60. Whenever a sick officer residing at Madras, may change his place of residence, or remove into another district, he shall make an immediate report of the circumstances to the medical officers of both districts. 61. PRESIDENCY STANDING COMMITTEE.33 SECT. XIV.] MEDICAL BOARDS AND CERTIFICATES. The following form shall be observed by the Inspector General or the Deputy Inspector General, in countersigning the Surgeon's certificate.* I do hereby certify, that according to the best of my professional judgment, after careful personal examination of his case, I consider the state of health of D. F. to be such as to render, leave of absence for a period of34 MEDICAL BOARDS AND CERTIFICATES. [SECT. XIV. may be granted in Form. No. 8. The practice of granting retrospective certificates is prohibited. 68. These forms of certificates are to be strictly adhered, to on all occasions for persons employed in the Department of Public Works, FORM No. 6. For Civil Members, Covenanted and Uncovenanted. * This proportion of the certificate may be omitted if change of air is not neces- sary. CERTIFICATES PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT.35 SECT. XIV.] MEDICAL BOARDS AND CERTIFICATES. judgment, absolutely requisite for restoration to health. If the requisite leave be for a longer period than six months, the certificate must be countersigned by the Deputy Inspector General of the Circle. In cases of leave beyond sea, the certificate must be also submitted, with the statement of the case, for the countersignature of the Inspector General of the Indian Medical Department. In the latter case, a duplicate copy of the statement and medical certificate is to be furnished for record in the Inspector General's Office. 70. EXTENSION OF LEAVE.36 MEDICAL BOARDS AND CERTIFICATES. [SECT. XIV. 73. This certificate must be countersigned by the Inspector General Indian Medical Department, if the applicant is in India. Cir. No. 1,517 of 25th April 1868. 74. Pension Certificates.37 SECT. XIV.] MEDICAL BOARDS AND CERTIFICATES. has been under my treatment for months, for (disease) and that he is not likely to derive permanent benefit from further treatment, or from change of air. He is, in my opinion, unfit for, further service; and to the best of my judgment, such disqualification is not the result of intemperance, or other irregular habits." No. 12. "I (name and designation) do hereby certify that I have carefully examined (name and designation) of the Establishment (place); that his age is, by his own statement ,and by appearance about ; and that I find him to be unfit for further service, from old age and infirmity, or from premature decay and infirmity, the result of ), not, in my opinion, attributable to intemperance, or other irregular habits." G. O. No. 224, of 14th June 1866, Pen- sion Department. G. O. No. 314 of 28th Sept. 1866, Pen- sion Department. 75. CONFIRMATION OF PENSION CERTIFICATE.38 MEDICAL BOARDS AND CERTIFICATES. [SECT. XIV. Committee shall be deemed indispensable in such stations only as those in which two such medical officers may be present. Notification, Pub. Dept., 10th Dec.1869. 79. DISMISSAL FOR ILL-HEALTH, &c.39 SECT. XIV.] MEDICAL BOARDS AND CERTIFICATES. Occupation (if any). Place of abode. Degree of relationship (if any), or other circumstances of connection with the patient. Dated this day of one thousand eight hundred and To the Superintendent of the Asylum at (describing the Asylum). STATEMENT. (If any of the particulars in this statement be not known, the fact to be so stated). Name of patient, with Christan name at length. Sex and age. Married, single, or widowed. Condition of life, and previous occupation (if any). The religious persuasion, as far as known. Previous place of abode. Whether first attack. Age (if known) on first attack. When and where previously under care and treatment. Duration of existing attack. Supposed cause. Whether subject to Epilepsy. Whether suicidal. Whether dangerous to others. Whether found lunatic by inquisition, or inquiry under order of Court, and date of commission or order for inquisition or inquiry. Whether any member of patient's family has been, or affected with insanity. (Signed) When the person signing the statement is not the person who signs the order, the following particulars concerning the person signing the statement are to be added, namely :40 MEDICAL BOARDS AND CERTIFICATES. [SECT. XIV. FORM C. Mode of taking notes of the case of an, Insane Patient. Disease. Name. Age. Sex. By whom sent. Date of admission. Temperament. Married or single. Number of children. Occupation. Where born and residence. Religion. Whether first attack, and duration of present attack. Cause Moral. Physical.
SECTION XV. INVALIDING I.42 INVALIDING. [SECT. XV. G. O. C. C. No. 95 of 12th August 1865. 1. Date and place of enlistment, birth- place, age last birth- day, former trade or occupation. 2. General remarks on habits and conduct in the service, tem- perance, &c. 3. Rank and dates of promotion, also dates of transfer to other regiments, dates of punishment, and whether corporal or by imprisonment. 4. MEDICAL HISTORY SHEETS.SECT. XV.] INVALIDING. 43 and that under no circumstances are men to be allowed to remain a second year on the Hills, save on the recommendation of the annual Invaliding Board. B. M. S. Cir. No. 15 of 16th June 1868. 10. Invalid documents.44 INVALIDING. [SECT. XV. the Convalescent Depôt be accompanied by one copy of his detailed Medical History on W. O. Form, No. 891, under each head, of which full information must be given up to the date of the man's leaving his corps. 12. PAPERS TO ACCOMPANY MEN SENT TO POONAMALLEE.SECT. XV.] INVALIDING. 45 circumstances under which the accident occurred, and whether on or off duty, should be stated. VII. Gunshot or other wounds, or injuries which the soldier may at any time have received in action, or under circumstances contingent upon service before the enemy or otherwise, or by accident, or by his own fault, should be described, with a view to adjustment of the claim they give, and to proper arrangement of the case in the prescribed classification. If the wound or injury be of distant date, the extent of inconvenience or discomfort continuing therefrom should be stated. VIII. Any physical defects and results of previous injuries and diseases, though not immediately connected with the disability for which the soldier is invalided, should be noticed, and such information given as may tend to elucidate any claim that may be founded on them. IX. Full particulars of the medical treatment of the case up to date of invaliding. 14. In cases where soldiers on foreign stations are invalided as totally unfit for further service, and may be permitted to remain abroad, the prescribed documents are to be forwarded in the same manner as if those invalids were on their way home. 15. CASES OF MENTAL DERANGEMENT.46 INVALIDING. [SECT. XV. 13th.SECT. XV.] INVALIDING. 47 (b.) If after such period of treatment the patient should not recover, or, if in consequence of exceptional circumstances which do not admit of delay, it be desirable to remove him, application should be made by the medical officer in charge to the Inspector General for permission to transfer the insane soldier to an establishment in which lunatic wards exist. (c.) Such applications should be accompanied by an abstract of the case, drawn up in accordance with the instructions laid down in para. 15 together with a copy of the Soldiers' Medical History Sheet, and a state- ment of the reasons which induce the medical officer in charge of the case, to believe, that if discharged, he will not be able to re-enter the service. (d.) On receipt of the documents by the principal medical officer, the necessary instructions will be issued for the disposal of the case. Indian Troops. G. O. C. C., No. 65 of 1st Nov. 1845. 18. INVALIDING BOARD.48 INVALIDING. [SECT. XV. FourthSECT. XV.] INVALIDING. 49 27. WOUNDED MEN.50 INVALIDING. [SECT. XV. in their Proceedings in the column "Remarks of the Medical Committee" whether the injury is, or is not of such a nature as to incapacitate the individual from earning a livelihood. 32. APPEALS AGAINST DECISION OF MEDICAL BOARDS.SECT. XV.] INVALIDING. 51 Native Troops. 37. Discharge of short service men.SECTION XVI. SPECIAL HOSPITALS. I.SECT. XVI.] SPECIAL HOSPITALS. 53 the Gun Carriage Factory, and pensioned Military servants are also received. As a rule, the General Hospital is intended for the accommodation of persons in the service of the Government, and their families, as well as of the civil population. At present no females are admitted as patients. The expendi- ture on account of the General Hospital is debited to the Civil Department. (b.) SAILORS.54 SPECIAL HOSPITALS. [SECT. XVI. FORM A. Return of Military Men belonging to other Stations in the General Hospital of Fort Saint George. Corps. No. Rank. Names. Diseases. Date of Admission. Whether likely to recover, and when. MADRAS, GENERAL HOSPITAL, 18. Physician, General Hospital. 6. MILITARY DETAILS TO RECEIVE NO PAY IN HOSPITAL.SECT. XVI.] SPECIAL HOSPITALS. 55 8. DISCHARGE CERTIFICATE.56 SPECIAL HOSPITALS. [SECT. XVI, Officer. Assistant Surgeons doing duty at the General Hospital, being his juniors are placed under his orders. 14. Assistant Surgeons doing duty at the General Hospital.SECT. XVI.] SPECIAL HOSPITALS. 57 All students on duty in the Dispensary are under the immediate orders of the Hospital Assistants. The Hospital Assistants are held respon- sible for order and method in the Dispensary, for the accurate preparation of all prescriptions, for the safe custody of all poisons, and for the careful entry, in their own hand-writing, of all issues in the Prescription Books. 18. Steward.58 SPECIAL HOSPITALS. [ SECT. XVI. 25. Ward Coolies.SECT. XVI.] SPECIAL HOSPITALS. 59 30. DIET TABLE.60 SPECIAL HOSPITALS. [SECT. XVI. HALF DIET. Breakfast Dinner . Supper. Tea 1 pint. Mutton Broth 1 pint. As Breakfast. Bread 6 oz Or meat roasted or fried 10 oz. Butter ½ SECT. XVI.] SPECIAL HOSPITALS. 61 senior Apothecary. From 6-15 to 7 A.M., the students take the new cases and generally attend to the state of those patients committed to their care. The morning visit begins at 7 A.M. precisely, and the evening visit at 5-15 P.M. At 9-30 A.M., the clinical bell is rung and students are then, but not till then, permitted to leave hospital. The following is the Establishment of the General Hospital as sanctioned in Pro- ceedings of Government, Public Department, No. 1016, dated 28th September 1865 and subsequent orders. No. European Wards. No. Native Wards. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. *1 Clerk 35 0 0 1 Peon 7 0 0 1 Steward 120 0 0 1 Cook 8 0 0 1 Assistant Steward 30 0 0 1 1st Class Cooly 6 0 0 1 Cooly Maistry 10 0 0 4 2nd Class Coolies, at Rs. 5-8 22 0 0 1 Peon 7 0 0 1 Bheasty 7 0 0 2 Tailors, at Rs. 8 each 16 0 0 1 Sweeper 3 0 0 1 Head Cook 14 0 0 1 Washerman 8 0 0 1 Cook's Mate 5 0 0 2 Toties, at Rs. 6 12 0 0 3 1st Class Coolies, at Rs. 7 ¼ each 21 12 0 8 2nd Class Coolies, at Rs. 7 56 0 0 3 Sweepers, at Rs. 4. 12 0 0 2 Watermen, at Rs: 7 14 0 0 , 4 Toties, at Rs. 6 24 0 0 2 Do. 65 SPECIAL HOSPITALS. [SECT. XVI. ophthalmic Surgery and Physiology in the Medical College. The duties of the Infirmary are conducted under the general supervision of the Deputy Inspector General of Hospitals, Presidency Circle, and of the Inspector Gene- ral, Indian Medical Department. 36. OPEN TO THE PROFESSION.SECT. XVI.] SPECIAL HOSPITALS. 63 enjoined that a very full account of the medical treatment of each case of ophthalmic disease coming before an Invaliding Committtee, or recommended to be sent to the Eye Infirmary, shall accompany the individual for the informa- tion of the Committee, and eventually of the oculist. 43. TRANSFER OF MILITARY PATIENTS.64 SPECIAL HOSPITALS. [SECT. XVI. 49. APOTHECARY.SECT. XVI.] SPECIAL HOSPITALS. 65 III.66 SPECIAL HOSPITALS. [SECT. XVI. 60. FEMALE STUDENTS.SECT. XVI.] SPECIAL HOSPITALS. 67 ESTABLISHMENT.68 SPECIAL HOSPITALS. [SECT. XVI. 71. Port Duties.SECT. XVI.] SPECIAL HOSPITALS. 69 76. The Fort Surgeon, and the medical officers in charge or attached to the General Hospital with their establishments, being from their vicinity the most easily or readily available, will in such cases invariably hold themselves in readiness to attend. 77. APOTHECARY.SECTION XVII LUNATIC ASYLUMS. SUB-SECTION I. 1. Official Visitors, &c.SECT. XVII.] LUNATIC ASYLUMS. 71 6. The ordinary control and superintendence of each Lunatic Asylum; as in the case of other hospitals, are vested in the Deputy Inspector General of the Division, who shall, at least once every month, inspect the asylum. SUB-SECTION II. 7. Admission and Discharge of Patients, Military and Civil.72 LUNATIC ASYLUMS. [SECT. XVII. if necessary, under treatment in the Regimental Hospital for a period of four months; and should no sign of recovery be then apparent, they are to be brought before an Invaliding Medical Committee for final disposal. 12. The authorities in whom is vested the power of granting an order for the admission of military patients into a Lunatic Asylum are The Governor in Council. The Commander-in-Chief. Officers Commanding Divisions or Brigades Subject to confirmation of Commander- in-Chief. Inspector General, Indian Medi- cal Department. Prior to the transmission of a military or civil patient, it should be ascer- Inspector General, British Me- aicdl Service. tained from the superintendent, or officer in charge of the asylum to which Officers Commanding Stations or Corps. it is intended to send the patient, whether accommodation is available or not. 13. Every admission into a Lunatic Asylum of a military patient belong- ing to the Indian Army, except when effected by direct order of the Inspector General, Indian Medical Department must be immediately reported by the Superintendent to the Deputy Inspector General of the Division, and the order of admission, medical history, and certificate be at the same time forwarded for the information of the Inspector General, Indian Medical Department. The admission into an asylum of an officer or soldier of the British Army must be immediately reported to the Inspector General, British. Medical Service, with whom the Superintendent will communicate directly on all matters connected with the admission, discharge, or removal to England of military insanes belonging to the British Service. 14. Regimental clothing, money, or other valuables sent along with a Non-commissioned officer or soldier of Her Majesty's British Army to a Lunatic Asylum, shall be returned immediately to the Adjutant of the corps to which he belongs, and his receipt obtained for the same. In the case of Native soldiers, sums of money should be sent to the Brigade Major; but clothing, cooking utensils, &c., may be kept in the asylum while the patients remain there. 15. As removal from a tropical climate generally proves beneficial to Europeans afflicted with insanity, all such persons shall, if they show no signs of amendment at the expiration of six months from date of admission, be sent to England at the public expense. If, however, the medical officer in charge of an asylum should deem it necessary that any such should be sent there at
SECT. XVII.] LUNATIC ASYLUM. 73 an earlier period, he shall forward a recommendation to that effect, supported by the approval of the Deputy Inspector General of Hospitals of the Division. 16. Whenever it is thought necessary to send a patient to England, the Superintendent of the Asylum shall forward, through the usual channel, for transmission to the Inspector General, Indian Medical Department, a letter on. the subject, enclosing a statement, in quadruplicate, of the medical history of the case, together with all available information concerning the name, address, and occupation of the next of kin of the patient. In the case of officers and soldiers of the British Service, these documents will be forwarded to the Inspector General, British Medical Service, for disposal. 17. On the receipt of the order for the despatch of the patient to Europe, the superintendent shall forward an indent for such out-fit and necessaries-as may be required for the use of the patient during the voyage. 18. On the receipt of an intimation from the Quarter Master General of the Army of the time fixed for embarkation, the Superintendent of the asylum shall apply to the Brigade Major of Fort Saint George for an European guard to attend at the embarkation of the patient; an European keeper of the Asylum shall also be in attendance, and he shall procure the signature of the Officer Commanding Troops on board, or of the Commander of the ship, for the receipt of the person of the patient and his baggage. The date of embark ation of soldiers of the British Army is to be reported to the Officer Command- ing the Regiment to which the soldier belongs, and to the Commandant of the Depôt at Poonamallee. 19. When a patient is considered sufficiently recovered to be restored to liberty, the superintendent shall forward, through the usual channel, a discharge certificate to the Inspector General, Indian Medical Department; and on the certificate being returned confirmed by him, the patient is to be sent to the Brigade Major's Office for orders. In the case of officers or soldiers of the British Service, the discharge certificate will be forwarded to the Inspector General, British Medical Department, for disposal. All such discharge certificates are to be kept as records in the office of the Superin- tendent of the Asylum, and a notice of the discharge is to be immediately com- municated to the officer under whose order the patient was sent to the asylum. 20. In case of the escape of a patient, notices of the same are to be instantly forwarded to the Deputy Inspector General, Indian Medical Depart- ment, and to the officer in charge of Police, in order that measures may be taken for his recapture. Deaths are to be reported to the Deputy Inspector General, Indian Medical Department, and Brigade Major. 21. CIVIL, PATIENTS.74 LUNATIC ASYLUMS. [SECT. XVII. and the medical officer, who has been in charge of the case, shall send along with the patient a complete medical history, according to Form C., in duplicate, and certificate according to Form A. 22. An Uncovenanted Civil Servant, when insane, may be sent to a Lunatic Asylum under the order of a Magistrate, or the Commissioner of Police, in Form A., from a medical officer. A complete medical history, according to Form C., must also be furnished, if the patient has been under regular treatment. Such a patient may be handed over to the care and custody of a relative or friend by order of the Magistrate, or Commissioner of Police, who sent him to the asylum, (see paragraph 27, Section II. of these Rules). When he is considered fit to be discharged, the superintendent shall forward a discharge certificate, and on obtaining the sanction of three of the official visitors, shall discharge him, and send a notice of the order of discharge to the public officer under whose order the patient was detained (see paragraph 28, of Section II. of these Rules). 23. PERSONS NOT BELONGING TO THE PUBLIC SERVICE.SECT. XVII.] LUNATIC ASYLUMS. 75 immediately brought to the notice of the Inspector General, Indian Medical Department. If the lunatic has not been under the care of the certifying medical officer, he shall then collect from the lunatic's friends all information likely to throw any light on the nature and cause of the disease, and forward this along with the medical certificate. 26. On the admission of a lunatic into any asylum, the superintendent shall immediately forward a report of the occurrence to the Deputy Inspector General, Indian Medical Department, of the Division, for the information of the Inspector General, Indian Medical Department. 27. When any relative or friend of a lunatic is desirous to remove such from an asylum, he must make an application to the Magistrate, or Commis- sioner of Police, under whose order the lunatic was sent there; and the Magistrate or Commissioner of Police, if he think fit, after communicating with one of the official visitors, being a medical officer, and upon receiving from the relative or friend a satisfactory bond in writing that the lunatic will be properly cared for and prevented from doing injury to himself or others, shall grant an order for the discharge of such lunatic. On the receipt of this order, the superintendent shall thereupon discharge the patient. 28. When a patient is considered fit to be discharged, the superintendent shall send a discharge certificate through the Deputy Inspector General, Indian Medical Department, for the sanction of three of the official visitors, and on receiving this, will release the patient; the sanctioned certificate being kept as a record in the asylum, and an intimation of the patient's discharge sent to the public officer under whose order he was received. Before discharging a patient, it will generally be advisable to request his friends to come and take charge of him. When a patient about to be discharged has a long distance to proceed to his place of residence, and no money or friends to assist him, a small sum, sufficient to cover travelling expenses, will be given to him when he leaves the asylum. 29. Clothing and other property brought with patients to the asylum will be deposited in the store-room, to be restored on discharge. Accounts of property received in this way must be carefully kept. 30. In case of death, the funeral expenses of poor patients will be met by Government; but those of paying patients must be defrayed by the party responsible for the payment of bills of maintenance. 31. All patients who do not bear satisfactory marks of previous vacci- nation, or of small-pox, shall be vaccinated on admission into a Lunatic Asylum, or as soon after as practicable.
76 LUNATIC ASYLUMS. [SECT. XVII. SUB-SECTION III. 32. Criminal Lunatics.SECT. XVII.] LUNATIC ASYLUMS. 77 tearing clothes, and the withdrawal of some luxury, such as tobacco or snuff, by way of punishment, will cure the bad habit. 40. As a rule, European and East Indian patients are to have clean clothing every second day, and Natives, twice weekly. Bedding must be changed at least once a week. When patients manifest a propensity to dirty bedding, clothing, or rooms with their excreta, the keepers should be instructed to take them to a latrine at regular intervals, as in this way the acquisition of a troublesome and offensive habit may be prevented. 41. Clothing for European and East Indian patients. Males. 1 White shirt. 1 Pair socks, worsted or cotton, according to season. 1 Pair gingham trowsers. 1 Pair flannel drawers (if neces- sary). 1 Cap (gingham). 1 Towel (dimity). 1 Loose jacket. 1 Pair slippers. 1 Flannel shirt. 1 Pairshoes for out-door exercise. Females. 1 White shift. 1 Pair stockings, worsted or cotton, according to season. 1 White gown. 1 Chintz petticoat. 1 Towel (dimity). 1 Flannel shirt. 1 Pair slippers. 1 White jacket. 1 Pair shoes for out-door exercise. 42. Clothing for Native patients. Males. 1 Flannel jacket (if necessary). 1 Pair short white trowsers. 1 White jacket. Females. 1 Flannel jacket (if necessary). 1 White cloth, 12 cubits long, 2½ cubits broad. 43. Bedding, furniture, &c., for European and East Indian patients. Males and Females. 1 Straw bed. 1 Chair. 1 Gingham quilt. 1 Brass basin (if there be no lavatory). 1 Red blanket. 2 Pillows stuffed with cotton. 2 Plates. 1 White sheet. 1 Bowl. 1 Iron cot. 1 Spoon. 1 Table for each cottage. 44. Bedding, furniture, &c., for Native patients.
78 LUNATIC ASYLUMS. [SECT. XVII. Males and Females. 1 Mat (coir, if not furnished with cot). 1 Straw pillow. 1 Gingham quilt (if necessary). 1 Cumbly. 1 Iron cot (if necessary). 1 Straw bed (if necessary). 1 Tin bowl. 45. The superintendent shall make a yearly inspection of Clothing, bedding, and furniture, noting such articles as may be repairable, and such as are unserviceable. Such of the unserviceable articles as may have been supplied by the Commissariat must then be submitted to a Committee of Survey, and such as were got by contract, to the Deputy Inspector General, Indian Medical Department, and if condemned by these authorities, they will be sold on the public account. For repairs necessary on articles of furniture, a special indent must be submitted to the Inspector General, Indian Medical Department, and the repairs will be effected by the oontractor for Civil Hospitals. SUB-SECTION V. 46. Diet.SECT. XVII.] LUNATIC ASYLUMS. 79 DIET Table for European Sick. Meal. Full Diet. Half Diet. Low Diet. Spoon or Fever Diet. Milk Diet. Remarks. Breakfast Tea ½ oz. Tea ½ oz. Tea ½ oz. Tea ¼ oz. Tea ½ oz. Bread 1 lb. Bread 1 lb. Bread 8 oz. Sugar ¾ oz. Bread 1 lb. Butter 1 oz. Butter ½ oz. Sugar ¾ oz. Butter ½ oz Sugar ¾ oz. Sugar ¾ oz. Sugar ¾ oz. Dinner A pint of broth, with barley, greens and onions, and 1 lb. of meat, either mutton or beef. A pint of broth, with rice, barley, greens or onions, and 8 oz. of mut- ton of good and edible quality, or a pint of chicken soup, with vege- tables as above; a chicken or half a fowl, weighing, when ready for being dressed, not less than 8 ozs. A pint of mutton or chicken broth. Bread ½ lb., to be made to panado or pudding, or 4 ozs. of sago, with ¾ oz. of sugar. A pint of milk (new), or a pint of rice and milk, with ¾ oz. of sugar. N. B.80 LUNATIC ASYLUMS. [SECT. XVII. Explanations. The quantities of raw rice allowed under the different denominations of diet are as follows:SECT. XVII.] LUNATIC ASYLUMS. 81 52. Wine, beer, or other liquors may be ordered when considered requi- site, and monthly Nominal Returns of the expenditure of these articles must be sent through the usual channel for sanction. Tobacco, snuff, or betel and nut, may be given to patients who have been accustomed to the use of them, but the giving of these articles is to be held out as a reward for correct conduct and industry; and in the case of idleness or misbehaviour, they should generally be withheld. 53. European, East Indian, and Native patients, whose means will allow of their paying for their diet, or who may have friends capable of supporting them, will be charged according to the scale authorized in the Proceedings of the Madras Government, Public Department, dated 21st March 1862, No. 363. Native Non-commissioned officers and sepoys, whether borne on the strength of the Army, or pensioned, will be charged at the uniform rate of 2 annas each per diem for rations. A pensioner, however, whose pension does not amount to Rupees 5 per mensem, will be received as a pauper. SUB-SECTION VI. 54. Medicines, &amp;c.82 LUNATIC ASYLUMS. [SECT. XVII. File Book. Contingent Bill Book. Pay Abstract Book. Nominal Register and Index of the sick. Steward's Book. Diet Roll Book. Book for Official Vistors' remarks, &c. Printed Cholera Reports in Cheque Book. Cholera Register. Returns. Monthly Return of European and Native sick. Nominal Return of expenditure of wines and spirits. Diet Rolls for European and Native sick. Monthly Indent on Contractor. Salary Bill of Establishment. Retrospective Indent. Return of Medical Officers and Subordinates. Receipt for materials for diets for European patients. Receipt for materials for diets for Native patients. General Contingent Bill for diet, &c., &c. Stoppage Rolls and Abstracts. Statement of expenses incurred for dieting Native Military insane patients. Register of petty offences. Receipt for wines and spirits. Half-yearly Return of Surgical Instruments. Annual Return of European sick. Do. of Native sick. Do. of state of mind. Do. of state of mind of Native sick. Annual Medical Report. Return of patients received, discharged, died. Annual Financial Statement. Do. Indent for medicines. Abstract Annual Return of sick, and concise Medical Report. Statement of the Establishment to Civil Paymaster. Statement and Return of Uncovenanted Europeans attached. Budget Estimate, Civil. Budget Estimate, Military. Do. for Stationery. Annual Indent for Stationery.
SECT. XVII.] LUNATIC ASYLUMS. 83 Miscellaneous.84 LUNATIC ASYLUMS. [SECT. XVII. physical capabilities, and its probable therapeutical influence must receive due consideration; and, in all cases, the remedial effects of labour are to be more regarded than the pecuniary gain. For carrying out the varieties of industry specified above, the necessary tools, and a sum of money for the purchase of materials, will be sanctioned on the first introduction of the labour system into an asylum, but thereafter it will be expected that the proceeds of work will more than cover all attendant expenses. To give encouragement to industry, a reasonable proportion of the profits may be devoted to the purchase of extra articles of diets, &c., for patients who have been diligent. The hours for labour, and all minor details, will be left to the discretion of the superintendent. For the recreation of native patients, native musical instruments and games are sanctioned; but mere amusement must never be permitted to trespass on the hours for labour: For educated natives, books in the vernaculars and writing materials will be supplied. 60. For the mental occupation and recreation of Europeans and East Indians, periodicals, books, musical instruments, games, and writing and drawing materials will be provided. Every effort should also be made to induce patients of these classes to take regular exercise, and engage in some appropriate out-door occupation, such as tending a garden plot and range of flower-pots, or superintending a gang of native patients at work. 61. Tractable and well-behaved patients may, at the discretion of the superintendent, be allowed to go out for a few hours of the day on parole, accompanied by a Keeper. Native patients, who are quiet, may, in charge of Keepers, be employed in carrying things to or from the bazaar. 62. The relatives or friends of patients will be allowed to see them at stated intervals, when the visit is not likely to prove prejudicial; but some official of the asylum staff must be present during the interview. 63. No one unconnected with the establishment, except the official and ex-officio visitors, shall be permitted to enter an asylum without an express order from the superintendent. Letters for, or from, patients must always be submitted to the superin- tendent, prior to delivery or despatch. In case of a letter for a patient con- taining anything likely to produce or aggravate excitement, it should be returned to the writer with an explanatory note; and letters from patients may be forwarded or not, as the superintendent thinks proper. SUB-SECTION IX. 64. Classification of Patients.SECT. XVII.] LUNATIC ASYLUMS. 85 I. Military and Civil Lunatics. 1. Females 1. Europeans 1. Tranquil and convalescent. 2. East Indians 2. Troublesome, violent, and noisy. 1. Convalescent, and tranquil and industrious. 2. Males 3. Natives 2. Impetuous, irritable, and not regularly industrious, and those under observation. 3. Violent, noisy, and idle. 4. Of dirty habits. Criminal Lunatics. 1. Females* 1. Europeans. 2. East Indians 1. Tranquil and industrious. 2. Males 3. Natives 2. Violent and idle. SUB-SECTION X. 65. Sanitary Arrangements86 LUNATIC ASYLUMS. [SECT. XVII. instructed in the use of them. The part of the floor on which these vessels are placed must be protected by a coating of asphalte or coal tar, and over this a thick layer of dry earth should be put down and removed daily. 70. The night vessels must be put in their proper places at 4 P.M. daily, and removed as soon as the doors are opened in the morning to some suitable places, where their contents will be disposed of in the prescribed manner. The vessels are then to be thoroughly cleaned and scrubbed with dry earth, and exposed to the sun during the day. 71. When the patients go out in the morning, the rooms are to be swept and cleaned, and the bedding spread out for airing. In case of any patient having soiled the walls, floor, or bedding with excreta, proper means must be taken for the thorough cleansing of these, and the circumstance be brought to the notice of the superintendent. 72. Great attention should be paid to secure pure water for drinking and cooking purposes. A due proportion of country filters will be allowed for every asylum, and care must be taken to keep these in a clean and efficient condition. 73. An ample supply of water for bathing purposes must also be secured, as there are few secondary remedial means more useful in the treatment of insanity than bathing. Douche and shower-baths, and bath tubs will be provided for all asylums. All patients should be required to take a bath daily; and native patients who may have been engaged in work, should be washed before being shut up in their rooms for the night. 74. The conservancy of wells by the removal of mud and other filth, and preventing the entrance of leaves, storm water, and sewage, is to be carefully attended to. SUB-SECTION XI. 75. General Rules.SECT. XVII.] LUNATIC ASYLUMS. 87 two or more Keepers, who will direct the men in their work, and be respon- sible for them until they return to their rooms. 78. Every Keeper accompanying a gang will be furnished with a whistle, which he will sound in case of any serious difficulty or danger arising and on hearing the whistle, all other Keepers in the neighbourhood must hasten to render assistance. 79. Any unusual accident, such as an attempt to escape or commit suicide or homicide, must be immediately reported to the superintendent. 80. In case of a patient receiving an injury, self-inflicted or otherwise, the Keeper in charge must at once report the circumstance to the apothe- cary. Should the injury be of a serious nature, it must be brought to the notice of the superintendent immediately. 81. The food for the patients will be served out to them under the immediate inspection of the European Keepers, who will see that it has been properly cooked, and that each gets his due allowance. Meat and vegetables for European and East Indian patients must be cut into small pieces, so that they can be easily eaten with a spoon. 82. The first and second class Native Keepers will attend on European and East Indian patients when eating their meals, and must help such of them as may be unable to feed themselves. 83. In case of a patient refusing all sustenance, the circumstance must be reported to the superintendent, and no attempt should be made to force such to swallow food except in his presence. 84. Native patients during meals will be arranged in gangs, so that those who refuse food, or are unable to feed themselves, can be observed, any attempt on the part of one to take the rations of another prevented, general order maintained, and assistance rendered when necessary. While the patients are eating, the water-woman must be in attendance with drinking water, and a pot of water should also be carried out with every gang proceeding to work. 85. In the evening, the patients must be collected, mustered, and shut up in their wards at 6½ P.M., under the inspection of one of the apothecaries. The persons of the patients, the rooms, and the furniture are then again to be strictly examined, and any dangerous instrument or thing found is to be removed. At this time, the apothecary will see that the earth closets and urinals are in their proper places, and that there is a due supply of drinking water in each room. 86. When patients are noisy or violent during the night, the European and native keepers must speak to and endeavour to quiet them; but should that have no effect, the apothecary must visit and seek to pacify them. A
88 LUNATIC ASYLUMS. [SECT. XVII. few kind words, bit of tobacco, drink of cold water, or re-adjustment of bedding will often have the desired effect. All such occurrences are to be reported to the superintendent in the morning. 87. No mechanical instruments of restraint are to be used under any circumstances. If a patient is violent, destructive, or dangerous, he must be put in charge of a number of keepers sufficient to make him feel that resist- ance is useless, and violence impracticable. 88. All cases of sickness occurring by day or night are to be immediately reported to the apothecary, who will have the patients removed to the hospital for treatment. 89. No spirituous liquors or intoxicating drugs are to be introduced into an asylum, and as the craving for these on the part of insanes is often so strong as to lead them to adopt clandestine means of getting them, all keepers, servants, and guards are to be specially warned on this subject. Any asylum servant found transgressing this rule, or permitting others to do so, shall be suspended or dismissed. 90. No letters or messages between patients and their friends must be carried without the express sanction of the superintendent. 91. All asylum attendants are strictly prohibited from receiving presents of any kind, either from patients or their friends, and from selling or making presents of things to patients. 92. Keepers and servants must not quarrel with each other, or make a noise, but attend to their duties in a quiet and orderly manner. 93. Servants are not to employ patients to assist them in their duties, without express sanction; and all servants who get patients to help them, will be held responsible for their cleanliness and safety. SUB-SECTION XII. 94. Superintendent.SECT. XVII.] LUNATIC ASYLUMS. 89 superintendence of manufactures and gardens; and the improvement and embellishment of the asylum grounds. 96. In regulating the conduct and habits of the insane, he must care- fully discriminate between acts which they are able, and those which they are unable, to control; and while exercising inflexible firmness, at the same time manifest kindness, sympathy, and patience. He must also, as the patients are necessarily left for a great part of the day in charge of the keepers, endeavour to secure attendants as well qualified as possible for these important duties, and seek, by considerate treatment, to render them contented with their position, and by vigilant supervision to prevent harshness or negligence. 97. The superintendent shall regularly visit the asylum in the morning, and as often during the day or night, as circumstances may render necessary. At the morning visit he shall see every patient, inspect the premises, and give such orders and adopt such measures as may be required. He shall also at uncertain periods visit gangs at work, inspect the meals of the patients, and see that the keepers are attending to their duties. At the Presidency quarters are provided for the Superintendent on the Asylum grounds. 98. He shall also take care that the various records specified in Sub- Section VII. are duly kept, and enter in the journal the case of each patient, with the treatment and results. SUB-SECTION XIII. 99. Apothecary and Assistant Apothecary.90 LUNATIC ASYLUMS. [SECT. XVII. 102. Both Warrant Medical Officers should try to win the confidence and regard of all the patients, and in the case of those newly admitted, seek to learn their history, and note their peculiarities and symptoms, for com- munication to the superintendent. 103. In carrying out the orders of the superintendent regarding the management of patients, they must display unwearied kindness, and never allow any curative measure to acquire the appearance of a, punishment or vindictive act. In case of misconduct on the part of a patient or servant, the matter should be referred to the superintendent for his decision. 104. They will receive reports from the keepers regarding patients, &c., investigate every thing brought to their notice, and be ready at all hours to render assistance in case of accident, turbulence, or sickness. They are to report to the superintendent, at his visit, every circumstance that should be brought to his notice, and in case of any emergency, to make an immediate report. 105. They will on alternate days inspect the rations after they have been cooked, and the senior will report daily to the superintendent as to their condition and quantity. Should an European keeper at meal time report that any patient refuses food, the Apothecary will visit him and ascertain the cause of the refusal. SUB-SECTION XIV. 106. Matron.SECT. XVII.] LUNATIC ASYLUMS. 91 107. European Keepers.92 LUNATIC ASYLUMS. [SECT. XVII. to the apothecary, reporting the number of patients in each cell, and that the doors have all been locked, and the necessary precautions adopted. 112. The Keepers will take the night duties on alternate nights, and the one on duty will go round twice during the night and see that the Native Keepers are present and attentive. He will also, in case of sickness or excitement amongst the patients, be ready to assist the Native Keepers, and in case of any emergency, is to call the apothecary. In the morning, the Keeper will report the various occurrences of the night to the apothecary. 113. The Keepers are strictly to prevent the introduction of intoxi- cating liquors and drugs into the asylum, and if such articles are found in the possession of a patient, they will immediately seize them, and bring both the patient and the Native Keeper in charge to the notice of the superintendent. 114. The Keepers are to prevent strangers from entering the premises, unless they have an order of admission from the superintendent. When friends are visiting patients, they are not to allow them to give articles of food or money to the patients, without the special consent of the superintendent. They are also strictly forbidden to receive, and must take care that the Native Keepers do not receive presents of any kind from patients or their friends. They are not to talk regarding the condition or extravagancies of patients with friends or visitors, but to refer them for information to the superintendent or apothecary. 115. The Keepers are not to permit letters or messages from patients to be sent out, or letters or messages for them to be delivered, without the sanction of the superintendent. 116. The European Keepers must perform their duties with firmness, temper, and unwearied kindness, and endeavour by every means in their power to win the confidence and regard of the patients. They must remember that they are of unsound minds, and not responsible agents, and never, in case of abuse or violence, retaliate by word or deed. They will find too, that although the mind may be deaf to reason, the heart generally remains open to kindness. 117. The Keepers shall obey all orders which shall from time to time be given to them by the superintendent, and they shall keep an Order Book for the reception of these. 118. The Keepers are not to be absent without leave, and if sick, or absent on leave, must provide substitutes at their own expense. 119. The Keepers shall be appointed by the superintendent, in communi- cation with the Inspector General, Indian Medical Department, and in case of incompetence or misconduct, may be discharged, subject to the sanction of the same authority.
SECT. XVII.] LUNATIC ASYLUMS. 93 SUB-SECTION XV. 120. Native keepers, 1st Class.94 LUNATIC ASYLUMS. [SECT. XVII. immediately to the apothecary. They will also be held responsible for all the subordinates being present, and that they do not quarrel, make a noise, or use bad language. 128. They must, under all circumstances, treat and see that the patients are treated kindly, remembering that they are insane, and, therefore, objects of pity, and not responsible for their words or acts. When abused or threatened by a patient, they must never seek to retaliate, but try to maintain a cool demeanour, and strive to calm him by some harmless concession or kind words. If attacked by a patient, they must never return a blow, but summon assistance by sounding their whistle. 129. They are strictly to obey the asylum rules regarding messages, letters, forbidden articles, and presents. 130. The 1st Class Native Keepers, and all other subordinate attendants and servants, will be appointed by the superintendent, subject to the sanction of the Deputy Inspector General, Indian Medical Department, and in case of misconduct, they may be fined or discharged by him, subject to the confirma- tion of the same authority. 131. Applications for leave of absence from any of the Native Keepers or servants must be made through the apothecary to the superintendent during the morning visit. A Keeper or servant absent on any account for more than twelve hours must provide a substitute. SUB-SECTION XVI. 132. Second and Third Class Keepers and Female Keepers.SECT. XVII.] LUNATIC ASYLUMS. 95 137. Throughout the day they will constantly be present with the patients, to prevent escapes or accidents, and give such assistance and atten- tion as may be. necessary. When the patients are at labour, they will obey the Overseers, and see that the patients do not injure tools, waste materials, or spoil the work. The Overseers will be responsible for the implements issued, and will every evening hand them over to the European Keepers. 138. In the evening they will collect the patients for muster, examine their persons and rooms for dangerous articles, and see them comfortably arranged for the night. Should a patient become sick or violent during the night, they will call the European Keeper on duty. 139. They are not to allow patients to defecate or urinate, or do so themselves, except in the appointed places, and when a patient goes to the latrine, a Keeper must, as a rule, accompany him. 140. They are, under all circumstances, to treat the patients kindly, and in case of any of them becoming excited, to summon assistance. Any Keeper found negligent of, or using offensive language to, a patient will be fined, and any one found guilty of cruelty will be discharged, and handed over to a magistrate for punishment. 141. In case ofaccident, attempt to escape, or other emergency, those on the spot will sound the whistles, with which each will be provided, and all those hearing the alarm must at once hasten to give assistance. 142. They are strictly to obey the asylum rules regarding messages, letters, forbidden articles, and presents; and, in default, will be severely punished. 143. One half of the Keepers will be permitted to sleep at home every alternate night, but must be again at their posts at gun-fire. 144. Besides the duties specified here, they must attend to any other assigned to them by the superintendent, or under his sanction. 145. They are not to be absent without leave. SCHEDULE. FORM A. Certificate of Medical Officer (see Sub-sections IV. and VIII). I, the undersigned (here enter name and official designation), hereby certify that I, on the day of July at personally examined (here enter name and residence of lunatic), and that the said is a lunatic (or-an-idiot, or a person-of unsound mind), and a proper person to be taken charge of, and detained under care
96 LUNATIC ASYLUMS. [SECT. XVII. and treatment, and that I have formed this opinion on the following grounds, namely,97 LUNATIC ASYLUMS. SECT. XVII.] Whether any member of patient's family has been, or is affected with insanity. (Signed) Name. When the person signing the statement is not the person who signs the order, the following particulars concerning the person signing the statement are to be added, namely,SECTION XVIII. RECRUITING (NATIVE ARMY). 1. RECRUITS.99 SECT. XVIII.] RECRUITING (NATIVE ARMY). 5. RECRUIT BOYS.100 RECRUITING (NATIVE ARMY). [SECT. XVIII. ness of the rings; disease of the spermatic chords or testes ; hæmorrhoids; varices of the legs; nodes; cicatrices, with adhesions; flat feet; ringworm; sores, or old wounds; with depres- sion or injury to the bones of the head, loss of many teeth, or several being in a state of decay, or loss of front teeth; cupping, medical treatment, and traces of corporal punishment, are just causes of rejection. 9. Upon entering the inspection room, the Recruit, being undressed, is to walk across it several times pretty sharply, to show whether he has the perfect use of his legs. He is to hop on one leg across the room and back, then on the other leg. He is then to be halted and set up in the position of a soldier under arms, with his knees about an inch apart, and examined both in front and rear, from head to foot. Should no material defect be discovered, the Recruit is next to perform, in imitation of the havildar, or native officer, the following evolutions :SECT. XVIII.] RECRUITING (NATIVE ARMY). 101 13. Every Recruit is to be vaccinated, if requisite, on enlistment. 14. REJECTION OF RECRUITS.102 CORRESPONDENCE. [SECT. XIX. I do hereby certify, that I have minutely examined every individual in the above Roll, and that with reference to the recruiting regulations, all, with the exception of those rejected, are perfectly eligible for the service. Station, Date, A. B. Senior Surgeon (Station). 15. Medical officers at out-stations examining recruits, proposed for enlist- ment by recruiting parties, are directed to keep a descriptive register similar to the above, of all recruits passed by them as fit for the service. As there is reason to suppose that other persons have occasionally been substituted for passed recruits when en-route to join their regiments, Medical Officers are enjoined to be very particular in entering under the proper head all marks, scars, &c., which may be observable with a view to prevent such practices, and to secure themselves from the responsibility of having passed ineligible recruits. SECTION XIX. CORRESPONDENCE. 1. GENERAL RULES.SECT. XIX.] CORRESPONDENCE. 103 (c.) Every letter should contain full particulars upon the subject to which it relates, and be completely intelligible in itself without reference to any other document. (d.) Every letter must refer to one subject only. (e.) Letters are to be written on foolscap paper, with a quarter margin left blank on the inner side of the page. A quarter sheet of paper may be used for short letters; when the communication extends beyond a whole page, and not beyond a page and half, half a sheet is to be employed. The bottom half of the page is to be folded down on the upper half, and the letter to be continued. A whole sheet is to be used when the writing exceeds a page and half. (f.) Paragraphs of letters are to be numbered (g.) When another document is referred to, its number, date, and purport are to be quoted in the margin left blank for such purpose. (h.) When a G. O. is quoted, the page on which the order is to be found is always to be mentioned, as well as the number and date of the order. (i.) Enclosures are to be described in the margin, or in a separate schedule. The transmission of unnecessary enclosures is to be avoided, and when additional papers are forwarded, all blank fly leaves are to be removed from them. When correspondence in original is forwarded, the whole should be tacked together in order, with an additional half sheet of paper for the endorsement. This will be considered as one enclosure. In copying documents for despatch to superior authority, a strict attention to accuracy is enjoined. 3. ENDORSEMENT OF LETTERS.104 CORRESPONDENCE. [SECT. XIX. 5. BINDERS.SECT. XIX.] CORRESPONDENCE. 105 liberty to seek redress by an appeal to superior authority, through the regular channel. On the other hand his publishing official documents, or availing himself of them for carrying on personal controversies, or for any private purpose without due authority, will be viewed and treated as a positive breach of official trust. 12. ENVELOPES.SECTION XX. REPORTS AND RETURNS. I.SECT. XX.] REPORTS AND RETURNS. 107 (f.) CHOLERA REGISTER.108 REPORTS AND RETURNS. [SECT. XX. 6. In the revised nomenclature, there is little deviation as regards the English names of diseases, from the terms employed by the Registrar- General of England, in the returns compiled by him for the past thirty years. As regards classification of diseases, however, the new system is based "on anatomical considerations" alone, and in this respect differs considerably from the system of classification hitherto followed in Army and other official returns. 7. In all statistical returns the English names of diseases must be given. A reference to the original volume of "Nomenclature of Diseases" (copy of which is attached to every medical charge), will show the Latin, French, German, and Italian equivalents, of the English definitions, but it is not intended that any of these shall be introduced in official documents when a descriptive term can be given in English. 8. A good classification aids and simplifies the registration of diseases; helps towards a more easy comparison and knowledge of them, and towards the storing of experience respecting them, and facilitates the discovery of general principles, from the collected, grouped, and compared phenomena. 9. Many modes of classification might be adopted, such as according to symptoms, the intimate nature of diseases, the tissues or systems affected, or to the parts of the body as they lie anatomically, but the anatomical system of classification has been considered, in the present stage of medical science, to be the simplest and most complete. 10. In subservience to this anatomical distribution, diseases may also be grouped as being General or Local. 11. General diseases are such as affect the whole frame rather than any special part of it. Local diseases are such as occupy special parts of the body. 12. General diseases are classified in two Sub-divisions, A. and B. Sub-division A. comprehends those disorders which appear to involve a morbid condition of the blood, and which present for the most part, but not all of them, the following characters :SECT. XX.] REPORTS AND RETURNS. 109 are sometimes spoken of as constitutional diseases, and they often manifest a tendency to transmission by inheritance. 13. In the arrangement of local diseases, the list at page 29 of the "Nomenclature" should be carefully consulted. 14. Diseases are not to be returned under such general names, as "Dropsy," "Convulsions," "Palsy," &c., if the morbid conditions upon which they depend are known. If the cause has been ascertained, the case should be registered under the head of the primary disease. 15. The following headings will show the main features of the "nomen- clature of diseases" now adopted. The work being supplied to every independent medical charge, it is expected that Medical Officers and subordi- nates will make themselves familiar with the definitions of disease and system of classification employed :110 REPORTS AND RETURNS. [SECT. XX. of Eustachian Tube. of Tympanum. of Internal Ear. 4. DISEASES OF THE NOSE. 5. DISEASES OF THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM. of Heart and its Membranes. of Pericardium. of Endocardium. of Muscular structure of heart. of Blood vessels. of Arteries. of Veins. 6. DISEASES OF ABSORBENT SYSTEM. 7. DISEASES OF DUCTLESS GLANDS. of Thyroid Gland. of Thymus Gland. of Supra-renal Capsules. 8. DISEASES OF RESPIRATORY SYSTEM. of Nostrils. of Larynx. of Trachea and Bronchi. of Lung. of Pleura. of Mediastinum. of Bronchial Glands. 9. DISEASES OF DIGESTIVE SYSTEM. of Lips. of Mouth. of Jaws, including antrum. of Teeth, Gums, and Alveoli. of Tongue. of Fauces and Palate. of Pharynx. of Salivary Glands. of SECT. XX.] REPORTS AND RETURNS. 111 of Pancreas. of Spleen. of Peritoneum. of Mesenteric Glands. 10. DISEASES OF URINARY SYSTEM. of Kidney. of Bladder. of Prostrate. of Male Urethra. 11. DISEASE OF GENERATIVE SYSTEM. Diseases of Male organs of Generation. of Penis. of Scrotum. of Cord. of Tunica Vaginalis. of Testicle. Diseases of female organs of Generation unimpregnated. of Ovary. of Fallopian tube. of Broad ligament. of Uterus, including the cervix. of Vagina. of Vulva. Functional diseases. Diseases of Female Breast. of Male Mammilla. 12. DISEASES OF ORGANS OF LOCOMOTION. of Bones. of Joints. of Spine. of Muscular system. 13. DISEASES OF CELLULAR TISSUE. 14. DISEASES OF CUTANEOUS SYSTEM. III. Conditions not necessarily associated with General or Local diseases IV. Poisons. Metals and their Salts. Caustic Alkalies. Metalloids. Acids. Vegetable poisons.
112 REPORTS AND RETURNS. [SECT. XX. Animal poisons. Gaseous poisons. Mechanical Irritants. Poisoned wounds. V. Injuries. General. Local. VI. Surgical operations. APPENDIX. Human Parasites. Congenital Malformations. 16. Statistical and Sanitary Returns.SECT. XX.] REPORTS AND RETURNS. 113 during the month to which the report refers. "No change" is considered a sufficient entry under such circumstances. But all changes are required to be noticed as they occur. The condition of barracks, latrines, ablution-rooms and cook-houses, as to cleanliness or otherwise, and the state of the drains are always required to be stated, and the quality of the rations and canteen drinks must always be mentioned. In the report for the third month of each quarter full particulars must be given under each head. Monthly Sanitary Reports must be countersigned by Commanding Officers of Corps previous to despatch. For native troops the sanitary report is required to be rendered only at the end of every quarter instead of monthly. (c.) ANNUAL SANITARY REPORT.114 REPORTS AND RETURNS. [SECT. XX. Statistical Report. Daily reports of admissions and deaths from malignant cholera are to be sent, so long as the disease continues epidemic. 22. EPIDEMIC DISEASES AMONG TROOPS.SECT. XX.] REPORTS AND RETURNS. 115 Operations, (Form No. 26) and the form filled up is to be sent by the Surgeon with his Annual Report. 29. ADMISSION AND DISCHARGE BOOK AND MEDICAL CASE BOOK FOR OFFICERS.116 REPORTS AND RETURNS. [SECT. XX. as to the influence of the climate on particular constitutions and temperaments, and on the progress and termination of diseases. 35. He should describe, generally,SECT. XX.] REPORTS AND RETURNS. 117 (c.) Whether rations and diets are properly cooked by roasting, boiling, baking, &c. ; (d.) The quality of bread or of biscuit, and the amount of either in the ration; (e.) The spirits, beer, or other liquors used by the troops, their quality and effect on health ; 42. Similar information as to hospital diets, and a statement of any changes made in them on account of the character or kind of supplies available; 43. Whether the clothing of the troops is sufficient and adapted for the climate, and if not, to state what improvements might be made; 44. The nature of the bedding, and whether sufficient; 45. The nature and amount of duty or labour performed by troops, and their influence on health; drills how often, and at what hours they take place; length of marches, and at what hours; 46. The proportion of nights in bed to those on duty; 47. Gymnastics, amusements, and recreations in use, and if conducive to health; 48. State of canteens, size and state of ventilation of rooms, and quality of provisions and liquors sold in them; whether the canteens are under proper regulations; whether disease is traceable to articles sold in them; 49. Amount of intemperance and of crime and disease directly or indirectly traceable to its effects; also the means in use for repressing intemperance. 50. State of vaccination in the Corps, and the extent to which it is a preservative against small-pox; whether re-vaccination has been carried out, and the results. 51. The Annual Report must contain a carefully filled-up table of diseases and mortality classified according to the Statistical Nomenclature now in use. The Annual Return of sick and wounded, (W. O. Form No. 298) must also be filled up and transmitted along with the Annual Report. Also a general summary during the year, showing: (a.) The average strength of the Regiment throughout the year, distin- guishing and showing any change in its composition; also the stations and strength of each detachment. (b.) The causes of mortality arranged under the orders of each class, and the total deaths to strength for the year, calculated at the rate per 1,000 per annum.
118 REPORTS AND RETURNS. [SECT. XX. (c.) The proportion which admissions and deaths from epidemic diseases have borne to the total admissions and deaths from all causes during the year.* (d.) Any specialities in the types of disease should be accurately noted. 52. Diseases belonging to the zymotic class,* being the chief causes of loss of efficiency in armies, Medical Officers should carefully note those local or personal conditions with which these diseases may have been connected under the following heads :SECT. XX.] REPORTS AND RETURNS. 119 (l.) Bad water, especially if polluted by putrescent organic matter. (m.) Drunkenness, or use of unwholesome liquors. (n.) Nature and description of duties. (o.) Heavy rains, or unusual heats, calms. (p.) Climatic peculiarities. (q.) Prevalence of epidemics, and at what season. 53. The Medical Officer should endeavour to form an estimate of the relative value of each class of causes which have predisposed the troops to these diseases. He should give a minute account of them, together with a state- ment of what precautionary measures he recommended, either verbally or in writing, to his Commanding Officer, and the result of his recommendations. 54. If any diseases have become epidemic in the district, he should examine carefully into their history, and predisposing causes, and report on these as well as the steps he recommended to protect the troops from an invasion of the disease, with the results. 55. He should state to what extent new arrivals at the station have suffered from climatic disease: also the proportion of acclimatised troops who have been affected; and whether the proportion of attacks and deaths have been greater in young soldiers or in those of more mature age. 56. If cholera has prevailed, he should state the measures adopted by him for discovering and treating the disease in its premonitory stages, and the results. 57. If any disease, such as fever, erysipelas, hospital gangrene, &c., has appeared among the sick after they have been admitted into hospital, he should report the history of the occurrence, its causes, the measures adopted to arrest these diseases, and the results. 58. If diseases, not of the zymotic class, have occurred among the troops to any unusual extent, the circumstances should be specially recorded; also the causes, with the steps taken for their removal, and the prophylactic measures adopted. 59. The Medical Officer should state to what extent, and with what results, he has used mercury in the treatment of syphilis. 60. All important or unusual cases of disease should be carefully reported as to their120 REPORTS AND RETURNS. [SECT. XX. 61. Phthisis pulmonalis and other chest affections should be carefully investigated, their stethoscopic signs minutely noted, and their history and causes registered under the following particulars :SECT. XX.] REPORTS AND RETURNS. 121 69. If a propensity to suicide be manifested by the patient, all means of effecting this object should be removed; he should be carefully watched, and, during the night time, an attendant should be placed to sleep in the same room with him. 70. In every case of insanity it is essential to bear in mind, that the patient is not accountable for his actions, and, consequently, that a more than ordinary degree of responsibility attaches to the Medical Officer and others entrusted with his care and treatment. 71. The symptoms, progress, and the remedies employed should be care- fully recorded; and, in the event of a transfer to another establishment, a full statement of the past history, and of the existing condition, mental and bodily, of the patient, should be drawn out and sent with him. In order to preserve a full record of all cases of insanity occurring in the Army, the particulars in regard to such cases required by the instructions for invaliding (see page 45) must be carefully recorded. 72. The previous diseases to which the patient has been subjected for at least the two preceding years, (if the man has been with his regiment for that period), must also be noted. In the event of a fatal termination of the case, a careful record should be made of the morbid appearances of the brain, spinal marrow, thoracic and abdominal viscera. VI.122 REPORTS AND RETURNS. [SECT. XX. 77. Under each year, A.D., will be recorded in a few words the following particulars :SECT. XX.] REPORTS AND RETURNS. 123 from the first day of his admission into hospital, and is to be carefully filled up with the particulars of every attack of illness till the man is dead or discharged the service. 82. If a man is invalided, or is transferred to another regiment, his Medical Histories Sheet is to go with him, and, in the latter case, is to be inserted forthwith in the Medical Histories Book of the regiment he has joined, by the medical officer of the regiment. 83. When any man dies, or is discharged, his Medical Histories Sheet is to be transmitted by the Regimental Surgeon, through the Administrative Medical Officer, to the Inspector General. When any man is sent to an Invalid Depôt, his Medical Histories Sheet, which had been sent with him, is to be transmitted to the Inspector General by the medical officer of the Invalid Depôt whenever the man is discharged. 84. By these means the Inspector General will become possessed of a vast amount of important information respecting the health of the army, derived from papers which have ceased to be of use to the regiment. FORM G. (No. 27.) Regimental Hospital Admission and Discharge Book (for Non-Commissioned Officers and Men). 85. This book is intended to last only a year, and is to contain124 REPORTS AND RETURNS. [SECT. XX. (j.) The date of death should be accompanied by a statement as to whether the man died in the Regimental Hospital, on sick furlough, in a General or Depôt Hospital, or elsewhere. (k.) The Surgeon should take means of ascertaining the date of death of men on sick furlough, and should fill up the date as soon as he obtains it. 86. Certificates of deaths, recoveries, and discharges (see Medical Certi- ficate Book) among men sent from the regiment to any General Hospital, or left in charge of any other medical officer, will be sent to the Regimental Sur- geon by the Registrar of the hospital, or by the medical officer in whose charge the man has been left, as soon as the death recovery or discharge has occurred, and immediately on the receipt of the information, the facts and the dates must be entered in the Admission and Discharge Book. The column for diseases should contain both the disease for which the man was admitted into hospital, and also the connected secondary diseases with which the patient may have been attacked while in hospital. Operations must also be entered with any subsequent disease from which the patient may have suffered. If a patient admitted for one disease, such as ulcer, is attacked by another disease, such as erysipelas, unconnected with the former, the man must not be discharged, the new disease must simply be entered as another admission, and the date of the recovery for the first disease (ulcer) must not be filled up until the ulcer is healed. At the same time as the entry of the new disease (erysipelas) is made, a note must be written in the discharge column of the admission for ulcer, simply referring to the new number under which the case is entered thus (see No. ). The date of recovery from the second disease, erysipelas, must be entered in the column opposite that disease, where the date of the man's discharge will also appear. The duration of the case should be given in days; but if less than a day, the duration should be expressed in hours as fractions of a daySECT. XX.] REPORTS AND RETURN. 125 All cases recorded in the Case Book must be referred to by a number in column, thus: see Case Book No. 87. As a certain number of cases will necessarily be left in hospital on December 31 of each year, it will be impossible to enter the results in the Admission and Discharge Book at that date. 88. For the purpose of including the results of the cases so left, the Surgeon may retain the Admission and Discharge Book in his possession for two months, to February 28, on which date, or as soon after as possible, it is to be transmitted to the Inspector General through the Principal Medical Officer of the station, with the results of the cases entered up to the date of transmission. 89. He will then transcribe all the cases remaining incomplete at that date in the Medical Certificate Book, to be filled up as the cases terminate, and to be transmitted, when the results are known, to the Inspector General. Care must be taken that none of the cases left in hospital on December 31 are re-entered in the Admission and Discharge Book of the following year. 90. Each yearly Admission and Discharge Book is to contain the admis- sions within the year only, and the results of the cases admitted. 91. Each book is, in fact, to be complete in itself. The Surgeon will be supplied by the Administrative Medical Officer of his station with a new Admission and Discharge Book in sufficient time before the end of the year. FORM I. (No. 28.) Medical Certificate Book. 92. Is intended to facilitate the registration of cases by supplying the results of those cases left behind by a regiment leaving any barrack or station, and is to be filled up in conformity with the memorandum printed on the back. FORM K. (No. 34.) General Hospital Admission and Discharge Book. 93. This Form is to be filled up precisely in the same manner as Form G., except that the regiment or corps from which the man has been received must be stated in the second column; and that in the fourth column, in addition to the rank and name, the station from which the man came is to be entered. FORMl L. (No. 29.) Medical Case Book. 94. The Medical Case Book is intended to contain the details of every acute or important case received into any Regimental, General, or Depôt Hospital. 95. The medical officer should study to make his report of every such case clear and graphic, and to express it in as few words as possible.
126 REPORTS AND RETURNS. [SECT. XX. 96. He should record the etiology of the case, the symptoms on admis- sion, the daily changes in the symptoms, the diagnosis, the prognosis, the diet, regimen, medical or surgical treatment, operation, remedial agents applied, with their daily effect. 97. He should note carefully the pathological changes, the development, crisis, decline, and terminations of the disease; and he should, moreover, carefully record the morbid changes discovered after death in all fatal cases, accompanying his description of the morbid anatomy with an account of the microscopic and chemical analysis of morbid products, so far as he may have an opportunity of doing so. 98. The Medical Case Book will be called for by the Inspector General, from time to time, in order that any remarkable cases or experience which it may contain may be abstracted and published for the benefit of the service; and the best recorded cases will be selected and published, with the authors' names. STATISTICAL FORMS REQUIRED FOR THE ARMY MEDICAL DEPARTMENT. FORM M. (No. 21.) Weekly Classified Return of Diseases and Deaths. 99. The form is intended to receive the medical statistics of the regiment for one week. The week ends with Friday night, 12 P.M. STATISTICS OF AN ARMY IN THE FIELD. FORM N. (No. 24.) 100. In addition to the usual Weekly Regimental States for diseases, it is necessary to classify and register wounds and injuries received in action, according to the regions of the body injured, and the nature of the weapon or projectile. For this purpose the particulars in Form N. must be carefully filled up and transmitted to the Principal Medical Officer of the Army at such time as he may appoint. FORM O. (No. 25.) 101. Is intended to contain a classified return of wounds and injuries of every kind received in action and admitted into hospital with their results. It is to be filled up and transmitted to the Principal Medical Officer of the Army at such time as he may appoint. FORM P. (No. 26.) 102. This Form is for classifying operations with results, and should be made up at such times as the inspector General may direct, and sent to the Inspector General through the Administrative Medical Officer.
SECT. XX.] REPORTS AND RETURNS. 127 103. LOCK HOSPITALS.128 REPORTS AND RETURNS. [SECT. XX. condition of public health in the station and surrounding district. (When this information is given by the medical officer in the Annual Jail Report, it need not be repeated here). II. Detailed, narrative of any epidemic disease. (Vide special instructions at pages 203-17, vol. i.) III. Principal diseases and classes of disease prevalent during the year. IV. Special or remarkable cases suited for communication to the profession, extracted from the Case Book. V. Surgical operations performed during the year, with results. VI. Economic statistics and management of the hospital, accompanied by a financial statement showing the income and expenditure and funded capital of the year in Form (No. 36.) VII. Condition as to usefulness of Lying-in-Ward, if any. VIII. Changes in, or additions to hospital buildings,&c. during the year. Jails. 110. RECORDS.SECT. XX.] REPORTS AND RETURNS. 129 113. ANNUAL RETURNS.SECTION XXI. TRANSPORT OF TROOPS. I.SECT. XXI.] TRANSPORT OF TROOPS. 131 4thty.132 TRANSPORT OF TROOPS. [SECT. XXI. day on which the troops are to disembark. These men will proceed with the second or Head-quarter division in charge of the Senior Medical Officer. 10. A Medical Officer is to be placed in charge of the first division. 11. MEDICAL SUPPLIES.SECT. XXI.] TRANSPORT OF TROOPS. 133 SCALES OF RATIONS, MEDICAL COMFORTS, WATER, AND FORAGE FOR SEA-GOING SHIPS. Troops or Third Class Passengers. Scale of Rations per Man. Days of the Week. DAILY. WEEKLY. Salt Beef. Flour. Suet. Raisins. Salt Pork. Split Peas. Preserved Meat. Compressed mixed Vegetables. Biscuit. Fresh Bread. Rice. Porter (or Beer). Preserved Potatoes (uncooked). Sugar (unrefined). Tea. Vinegar. Mustard. Pickles (of various descriptions). Pepper, ground. Salt oz oz oz oz oz Pint oz oz. oz lb oz Pint oz. oz oz Pint oz oz, oz oz Sunday ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 .. ... 1 ... 1 2 2 ½ 1/6 ½ 6 1/6 2 Monday 12 6 1 2 ... ... ... 1 12 ... ... 1 ... 4 ½ Tuesday ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 ... ... 1 4 1 ... 2 ½ Wednesday ... ... ... ... 12 2/9 ... 1 12 ... ... 1 ... 2 ½ Thursday 12 6 1 2 .. ... ... 1 ... 1 ... 1 ... 4 ½ Friday ... ... ... ... ... ... 12 ... 12 ... ... 1 2 2 ½ Saturday ... ... ... ... 12 2/9 ... 1 ... 1 ... 1 ... 2 ½ NOTE.134 TRANSPORT OF TROOPS. [SECT. XXI. Scale of Rations per Child of 5 years and under 10 years of Age. Days of the Week. DAILY WEEK- LY. Salt Pork or Salt Beef. * Flour. Suet. Raisins. Soup and Bouilli. Rice. Preserved Meat. Biscuit. Fresh Bread. Preserved Potatoes (uncooked). Sugar (unrefined). Tea. Fresh Milk.SECT. XXI.] TRANSPORT OF TROOPS. 135 Scale of Medical Comforts for Troops and Third Class Passengers, calculated for 1,000 persons for 1 day. (To be provided in addition. to the ordinary Rations) Brandy, bottle. Rum, gills.* Port Wine, bottles. White Wine, bottles. Preserved Meat, lbs. Prepared Soup, pints. Essence of Beef, tins ¼ pints. Sago, lbs. Arrowroot, lbs. Rice, lbs. Preserved Milk, pints (in small tins). Lime juice, pints.136 TRANSPORT OF TROOPS. [SECT. XXI. (f.) Preserved meat is to consist of beef and mutton, which are to be provided in equal quantities, and to be issued alternately. (g.) Fresh meat and fresh vegetables are to be issued whenever practicable, 1 lb. fresh meat being considered equal to 1 lb. salt meat; but 8 ozs. of fresh vegetables are to be the ration for men, women, or children. When fresh vegetables are not procurable, preserved potatoes (uncooked) 2 oz., or com- pressed mixed vegetables 1 ounce, are to be issued in lieu. (h.) Fresh vegetables are to be issued, whenever procurable, with salt or preserved meat, in lieu of the flour, suet, raisins, peas, compressed vege- tables, preserved potatoes or rice, specified in the scales. (i.) Fresh meat and fresh vegetables are also to be obtained for two days' consumption after leaving Port, should the weather admit of their keeping sweet. (j.) In cases in which it may be impossible to provide fresh bread, biscuit is to be issued as the ration in the proportions shown in the respective scales for men, women, and children. The Commanding Officer of the Troops will report to the military authorities, on his arrival in Port, if he should consider that biscuit has at any time been improperly or unnecessarily substituted for fresh bread. (k.) Any articles in the foregoing scales of, rations may be stopped or changed, but only in individual cases upon the special requisition of the medical officer. (l.) The scales of rations are to be regarded as generally applicable to invalids, as well as to persons in health; invalids are, however, to be provided with fresh bread every day. In ships engaged for the conveyance of invalids, there is also to be provided a liberal portion of Live-stock (oxen, sheep, and poultry; but not pigs), with provender and water for their subsistence. The extent and nature of these supplies are to be, in each case, at the discretion of the Naval or other Government Authorities at the Port; and they are to be replenished as far as may be practicable, at any Ports at which the ship may touch. Issues of poultry are to be made at the discretion of the Surgeon. 18.WATER.SECT. XXI.] TRANSPORT OF TROOPS. 137 shown below. In order, however, to meet cases in which it may be actually necessary to depart from the scale, a list of equivalents is appended. Fresh Bread 1 lb. To be esteemed equal to ¾ lb. biscuit. Flour ¾ lb. Rice ¾ lb. Fresh Meat 1 lb. To be esteemed equal to 1 lb. salt meat. Spirit ½ gill. To be esteemed equal to 1 pint Porter. Coffee (roasted and ground) 1 oz. To be esteemed equal to ¼ oz. tea. Chocolate 1 oz. FreshVegetables ½ lb. To be esteemed equal to 2 ozs. preserved potatoes (uncooked) or 1 oz. compressed mixed vegetables. Flour. ½ lb. May be issued in lieu of each other. Split peas 2/9 pt. Calavances ½ pt. Dholl ½ pt. Rice ¼ lb. Oatmeal 1/6 pt. May be issued in 2/9 pint of split peas. 20. Scale of Forage for Horses. For each Horse daily. Oats. Hay. Bran. Water. Vinegar Nitre. 6 lbs. 10 lbs. ½ peck or 2¼ lbs. 6 Gallons. Such quantities as may be required for daily use. NOTE.138 TRANSPORT OF TROOPS. [SECT. XXI. 23.Survey.SECT. XXI.] TRANSPORT OF TROOPS. 139 soldiers, and also the women and children, will be provided by the transport. An Officer, Commissioned or Non Commissioned, as the case may be, will be invariably sent on board by one of the first boats. It will be his special duty to see that every necessary assistance is afforded. in the removal of the sick, and the women and children from the boats. In rough weather, or whenever circumstances render it desirable, a chair will be made available, notwith- standing that an accommodation ladder has been already provided. 29. REPORTS ON ARRIVAL OF TRANSPORTS AT THEIR DESTINATION.140 TRANSPORT OF TROOPS. [SECT. XXI. Indian Coasting Steamers. G. O. No. 522, of 1868, M. D. 32. INDIAN COASTING STEAMRRS.SECT. XXI.] TRANSPORT OF TROOPS. 141 specifying what pay they have received, what pay and rations they are entitled to, and how they are to be disposed of on arrival at the port of debarkation. 39. TONNAGE ALLOWED TO OFFICERS AND MEN IN TRANSPORTS.142 TRANSPORT OF TROOPS. [SECT. XXI. 46. OFFICERS' FAMILIES.SECT. XXI.] TRANSPORT OF TROOPS. 143 52. DISPENSARY.144 TRANSPORT OF TROOPS. [SECT. XXI. 57. PRISON AND SUPPLY ROOM.SECT. XXI.] TRANSPORT OF TROOPS. 145 64. The Quarter Master General will furnish the Superintendent of Marine, early in the season, annually, with a statement showing the probable number of invalids, pensioners, time-expired men, insanes, or men to be discharged in England or the Colonies, including their wives and families, who will be embarked in the above period for England. When the men have passed the final Medical Committee, a second statement will be furnished, showing the exact number to go, including women and children. The ages of all the Children should be Stated, and the boys and girls shown separately, any casualties or alterations occurring after these returns have been sent in, are to be forthwith reported to the Quarter Master General, with a view to, his preventing passage and provisions being provided for them. 65. INSANES EMBARKED ON APPLICATION FROM MEDICAL DEPARTMENT.146 TRANSPORT OF TROOPS. [SECT. XXI. row or rows. A clear space of 16 inches is to be left between the side of the vessel or side bunks, and a similar space between the middle rows (where there is a double row mid-ships for a passage). 70. The size of the standing berths for adults to be 6 feet 7 inches X 2 feet 4 inches inside. These bunks are to be raised 2 feet from the deck, and fixed at intervals by means of upright stanchions, so as to admit of a swinging cot above, if requisite, in bad weather. 71. WINDSAILS.SECT. XXI.] TRANSPORT OF TROOPS. 147 Hospital of the British Regiment at Madras, instead of to Poonamallee, and will be under the medical charge of the Surgeon of the British regiment stationed in Fort Saint George. 77. SICK MARRIED SOLDIERS TO POONAMALLEE.148 TRANSPORT OF TROOPS. [SECT. XXI. shall call upon the medical officer arriving with the troops to prepare a Return, as per form below, showing the expenditure of medical comforts for the use of the sick on board. 86. The medical officer is to be instructed to forward this return to the Deputy Inspector General, British Medical Service, who will transmit a certified copy of the same to the Medical Examiner, to enable him to examine and pass the bill of the agents of the transport. List of Medical Comforts shipped on board the undermentioned Transport, for the use of embarked for on the day of 18. Name of Tansport. Bottles, Port Wine. Bottles, White Wine. Brandy, gallons. Preserved Meat, lbs. Corned Beef, lbs. Prepared Soup. Preserved Meat Juice. Gravy, Soup, quarts. Preserved, mixed Vegetables. Preserved, Potatoes. Lime-juice. Suger, lbs. Tea, lbs. Cofee, lbs. Salt, lbs. Pepper, Mustard. Sago, lbs. Arrowroot, lbs. Vinegar. Soap, lbs. Rice, lbs. Barley, lbs. Chloride of Lime. Chloride of Zinc. Materials for fumigation. Received on board this day of ... Quantities ex- pended during the voyage ... Quantities re- maining on dis- embarkation this day of ... ... How disposed of, and when ... Signature of Medical Officer. I certify that, on due examination of the returns kept by____ the medical officer in charge, the consumption of the above quantities of medical comforts appears to have been necessary and duly accounted for, and I further certify as to the correct disposal of the quantities remaining as above stated. Principal Medical Officer___________ day of_________ 87. The above Return is only applicable to Government stores, a similar return should also be furnished for the medical comforts expended from the ship's stores. 88. The following alteration will be made in the form above given:SECT. XXI.] TRANSPORT OF TROOPS. 149 89. WHEN UNDUE SICKNESS OCCURS IN TRANSPORTS.150 TRANSPORT OF TROOPS. [SECT. XXI. an unusual practice amongst the men, at least amongst those near the hatch- ways, to tie up the bottom of them, by which this salutary purpose is defeated. The officer of the watch is to be held responsible that this irregularity is never committed. Sentries near the wind-sails are also to be directed to enforce this order. 94. SLEEPING ON DECK.SECT. XXI.] TRANSPORT OF TROOPS. 151 War Office, Cir. No. 62 of 1867. 100. In the case of hired ships from India, the medicine chest and surgical instruments, and any other Government stores which may be placed on board for the use of the troops, are to be handed over to the master of the ship, and a receipt for them obtained. G. O. G. G., Feby. 18th, 1859, No. 209. 101. All medicines and surgical instruments for use with the troops in transports will be provided, on embarkation, at the expense of the Indian Government. 102. HEAD-MONEY TO SURGEONS WHO PAY THEIR OWN PASSAGES.SECTION XXII. MADRAS MEDICAL COLLEGE. 1. UNDER EDUCATIONAL DEPARTMENT.SECT. XXII.] MADRAS MEDICAL COLLEGE. 153 9. EDUCATION OF MILITARY STUDENTS.154 MADRAS MEDICAL COLLEGE. [SECT. XXII. 16. DISCIPLINE.SECT. XXII.] MADRAS MEDICAL COLLEGE. 155 (b.) Such students when indisposed for more than one day are to be admitted to the General Hospital as patients, and on discharge will present to the College authorities the usual certificate. (c.) Students of the above-named departments doing duty at other hospitals and dispensaries, shall remain on the premises when taking medicine, and shall be transferred to the General Hospital as patients if the duration of the illness exceeds one day. The usual certificate must be produced. (d.) Senior department students, when attacked with illness, are to report the same in writing to the Principal, and are to produce a certificate from some competent medicial authority, covering the whole time during which they have been absent from College and hospital. VIII. Any student absenting himself for the purpose of attending the Police Office, shall be subject to the same penalty as if absent without leave, unless he can produce a certificate, for the information of the Prin- cipal, that his attendance has been necessary either as witness, or, if as a defendant, that he has been acquitted by the magistrate of the charge preferred against him. Absence on account of attendance at the Small Cause Court will be regulated by the same principle. IX. Leave of absence during the vacation of the College shall be granted to such students alone as have paid satisfactory attention to their studies during the previous course, and to those whose conduct has been in all other respects satisfactory. X. Every student, to whom books or other property of Government are entrusted, will be held responsible for their preservation in good condition, and in the event of their being lost or damaged, will be required to replace them, or defray their cost. XI. No student shall receive his certificate of qualification until he has paid all expenses incurred on account of the purchase of Text Books, and has satisfied all demands against him arising out of the preceding rule. XII. PUNISHMENT.156 MADRAS MEDICAL COLLEGE. [ SECT. XXII. 3rd. Confinement in Congee- house or any convenient room. For Europeans, bread and water diet; for Natives, rice congee with salt. 7 days, taking no duties. 4th. Confinement in Solitary Cell, or place as nearly like as may be avail- able. For Europeans, bread and water diet; for Natives, rice congee with salt. 7 days, taking no duties. 18. Government Scholarships, SENIOR DEPARTMENT.SECT. XXII.] MADRAS MEDICAL COLLEGE. 157 monthly stipend of the Lane Scholarship commences with Rupees 30, rising to Rupees 40, and Rupees 50 on passing the preliminary scientific and first examinations for the degree of M. B. and C. M. 20. PRIVATE STUDENTS.158 MADRAS MEDICAL COLLEGE. [SECT. XXII. Materia MedicaSECT.XXII.] MADRAS MEDICAL COLLEGE. 159 MEDICAL COLLEGE. CURRICULUM OF STUDY. Senior Department. 1ST YEAR. 2ND YEAR. 3RD YEAR. 4TH YEAR. 5TH YEAR. Win- ter. Medicine. Medical Wards. Winter. Anatomy. Surgical Wards. Winter. Physiolgy. Surgical Wards. Pathology. Winter. Medicine. Medical Wards. Win- ter. Anatomy. Dispensary and Surgical Wards. Physiology. Midwifery. Ophthalmology. Surgery. Clinical Medicine. Materia Medica. Clinical Surgery. Clinical Medicine. Chemistry. Dissection & Operative Surgery Surgery. Dissection and Operative Surgery. Dissection. Botany. Clinical Surgery. Sum- mer. Practical Chemistry. Summer. Clinical Ophthalmology. Eye-In- firmary. Summer. Diseases of Women and Children. Medical Wards and Iying-in Hospital. Dissection. Operative &Minor Surgery Summer. Clinical Ophthalmo- logy. Eye-In-firmary & Living- in Hos- pital. Practical Pharmacy. Sum- mer. Clinical Surgery. Comparative Anatomy. Organic Chemistry. Microscope. Clinical Medicine. Operative Surgery, Practical Phar- macy. Hygiene. Medical Jurisprudence. Microscope. Second Department. 1ST YEAR. 2ND YEAR. 3RD YEAR. Anatomy. Surgical and Medical Wards. Winter. Medicine and Clinical Medicine. General Hospital, Eye Infirmary, and Lying-in-Hospital. Surgery and Clinical Surgery. Winter. Anatomy. Hospital Attendance. Winter. Physiology. Midwifery. Chemistry. Surgery and Clinical Surgery. Ophthalmology. Materia Medica. Medicine and Clinical Medicine. Dissection and Demonstrations. Dissection and Demonstrations. Summer. Practical Chemistry. Summer. Practical Pharmacy. Summer. Medical Jurisprudence. Practical Pharmacy. Hygiene. Minor Surgery. Examinations, daily, by the Assistants. Diseases of Women and Children. Examinations by the Assistants. Operative and Minor Surgery. Junior Department. 1ST YEAR. 2ND YEAR. Winter. Medicine. General Hospital, Eye Infirmary, and Lying- in Hospital during both Sessions. Winter. Anatomy. Attendance at the General Hospital dur- ing both Sessions. Clinical Medicine. Surgery. Materia Medica. Clinical Surgery. Examinations by the Assistant. Midwifery. Dissections. Summer. Outlines of Physiology. By the Assistants. Examinations by the Assistants. Practical Pharmacy. Summer. Hygiene. Minor Surgery. Minor Surgery by the Assistant. Examinations by the Assistants.
SECTION XXIII. HOSPITAL EQUIPMENTS. G. O. G., No 280, of 15th July 1862, and G. O. G., No. 38 of 2nd Feb. 1869. 1. TENTS FOR THE PROVISION DEPARTMENT, HOSPITAL CLOTHING, AND COVER OF MEDICINES.SECT. XXIII.] HOSPITAL EQUIPMENTS. 161 7. TENTS USED FOR CHOLERA HOSPITALS.162 HOSPITAL EQUIPMENTS. [SECT. XXIII. 15. At Secunderabad and at all stations to the south of that one-half the number of doolies, according to the former calculation will be withheld, and bullock ambulances, of a comfortable and easy going pattern (devised by Captain Hawkes) will be supplied for the carriage of the remainder of the sick. 16. TATTOOS OR RIDING BULLOCKS.SECT. XXIII.] HOSPITAL EQUIPMENTS. 163 23. Whenever invalids or time-expired men of H. M.'s Regiments are required to proceed from Poonamallee, for the purpose of embarkation, the officer commanding at that station, shall, on receipt of the warning orders, transmit to the Quarter Master General of the Army a present state of the party, showing the number requiring carriage for their kits, and a statement of the sick carriage required, supported by a medical officer's certificate. 24. Sick carriage in the regulated proportion is also allowed to the convalescent part of the detachment. 25. SICK CARRIAGE FOR NATIVE DETAILS.SECTION XXIV. MEDICAL EXAMINER. 1. Duties.SECT. XXIV. ] MEDICAL EXAMINER. 165 10. Retrenchments against officers in the Military Department serving in this Presidency are adjusted by recovery through the Paymaster of the Circle, in whose range of payment they are located, except in the case of officers attached to regiments, European and native, Brigades and Batteries of Artillery, in regard to whom recoveries are effected through the Regimental Paymasters or Commandants of the several corps, &c., and accounted for in their general statements. 11. Sums due by officers serving under other Governments are adjusted with the Military Accountants of the Governments concerned, through the Military Accountant at Madras. 12. Moneys tendered by parties other than the above should be paid into the Civil Treasury, as directed in para. 164 of the revised rules, for bills of exchange, and the duplicate simple receipt should be forwarded to the Examiner for adjustment. 13. instructions regarding the course of procedure to be observed in reference to appeals from the decisions of Examiners, see G. O. C. C., No. 114, of 4th September 1868.
SECTION XXV. BUDGET ESTIMATES. I.SECT. XXV.] BUDGET ESTIMATES. 167 the Government of India, and communicated to medical officers by the Inspector General, will be the sum actually available, and cannot be exceeded by medical officers, either as regards the total sum, or as regards the sums specifically allotted for each minor head of their estimate. 7. The Inspector General alone has the power to authorize the transfer of the savings of one minor head for the benefit of another; or to divert the unexpended grant of one institution for the necessities of another. II.168 BUDGET ESTIMATES. [SECT. XXV. 15. PERSONNEL.SECTION XXVI. MEDICAL INSPECTOR OF EMIGRANTS. 1. DUTIES.170 MEDICAL INSPECTOR OF EMIGRANTS. [SECT. XXVI. (b.) No compartment shall take more than one adult Emigrant for every twelve superficial feet on deck, and for every cubic space of seventy-two feet. (c.) A distinct and separate place shall be fitted up for a hospital in every Emigrant ship. A sick bay must be erected on the lower deck, to be divided in half for separate sexes, and a space assigned on the upper deck for epidemic disease. (d.) Women and children shall occupy a compartment of the vessel distinct and separate from the compartments of the single men. (e.) An Emigrant above the age of ten is counted as an adult, and two children from one to ten years of age, as one adult. Sect. XLVIII. 9. Good and wholesome provisions, and water at the rate of seven gallons per head per week, shall be provided for the use of Emigrants at sea. The Medical Inspector must satisfy himself that the food, &c., is according to the sanctioned scale. 10. Every Emigrant ship must be provided with a qualified European or Native Surgeon, and medicines and stores as per schedule annexed. Sect. LXIII. 11. The ship's Surgeon must present himselfto the Medical Inspector and submit his medicines, instruments, &c., for approval three days before the embarkation of the Emigrants. 12. The Medical Inspector is required to certify his approval of the Surgeon of the Emigrant Ship, and forward the certificate to the Protector of Emigrants. 13. The Medical Inspector is to satisfy himself before the embarkation of Emigrants that there is nothing in their state of health to render it unadvisable. He will give a clean bill of health before the departure of Emigrants.
SECT. XXVI.] MEDICAL INSPECTOR OF EMIGRATION. 171 TABLE A. Provisions, Firewood, Water, and Stores for a Ship conveying Emigrants from Madras to Mauritius or Réunion. PROVISIONS. For every statute adult the ship is licensed to carry. Articles. Quantity per day. Remarks. Articles. Quantity per day. Remarks. Rice 24 ounces. Chillies ¼ ounce. Dholl 4 172 MEDICAL INSPECTOR OF EMIGRANTS. [SECT. XXVI. TABLE B. THE MEDICINES. Proportion of Medicines necessary for a Ship carrying Emigrants to Mauritius or Réunion. (50 per cent. to be added for ships proceeding to Natal or Queensland.) Names of Medicines. For 100 Men. For 200 Men. For 300 Men. For 400 Men. Calomel One ounce and half Two ounces Three ounces Four ounces. Blue Pill One ounce Two ounces Three ounces Four ounces. Rhubarb Powder One ounce Two ounces Three ounces Four ounces. Compound Jalap Powder Six ounces Eight ounces Twelve ounces Sixteen ounces. Ipecacuanha Powder One ounce One ounce and half Two ounces and half Three ounces. Opium One ounce Two ounces Three ounces Four ounces. Dover's Powder One ounce One ounce and half Two ounces Three ounces. Magnesia One ounce Two ounces Three ounces Four ounces. Epsom Salts Three pounds Six pounds Nine pounds Twelve pounds Tartar Emetic Two drachms Four drachms Six drachms One ounce. Quinine One ounce One ounce Two ounces Two ounces and half. Antimonial Powder Two drachms Four drachms Six drachms One ounce. Extract of Colocynth Comp Four drachms One ounce One ounce and half Two ounces. Carbonate of Amonia Six drachms One ounce One ounce and half Two ounces. AssafSECT. XXVI.] MEDICAL INSPECTOR OF EMIGRANTS. 173 Cholera Pills in phial Six dozens Six dozens Six dozens Six dozens. Cubeb Powder Two pounds Two pounds Two pounds Two pounds. Sweet Spirit Nitre Eight ounces One pound One pound One pound. Copaiba Eight ounces One pound One pound and half One pound and half. Sulphate of Copper One ounce One ounce One ounce One ounce. Sulphate of Zinc Half ounce Half ounce Half ounce Half ounce. Lunar Caustic Two drachms Three drachms Four drachms Four drachms. Hydrarg C. Creta Two drachms Three drachms Four drachms Six drachms. Plumbi: Acetas Four drachms Six drachms One ounce One ounce and two drachms Pulvis: Acacia Two ounces Three ounces Four ounces Six ounces. 174 MEDICAL INSPECTOR OF EMIGRANTS. [SECT. XXVI. TABLE C. Clothing to be supplied to Native Emigrants from Madras to Mauritius Or Réunion. For each adult Male Emigrant. For each adult Female Emigrant. 1 Cumblie (Native Blanket). 1 Cumblie (Native Blanket). 2 Dhovtees (Waist Cloth). 2 Saddies (Cloths). 1 Cotton Merzæ or Jacket. 1 Tin Plate and 1 Tin Mug. 1 Chintz Cap. 1 Flannel Banian. 1 Tin Plate and 1 Tin Mug. For each Girl. 1 Flannel Banian. For each Boy. 1 Cumblie (Native Blanket). 2 Saddies (Cloths). 1 Cumblie (Native Blanket). 1 Tin Plate and 1 Tin Mug. 2 Dhovtees (Waist Cloth). 1 Flannel Banian. 1 Cotton Merzæ or Jacket. For each Infant. 1 Chintz Cap. 1 Tin Plate and 1 Tin Mug. 2 Yards of coarse cloth for covering, and 1 Flannel Banian. 1 Flannel Banian. For Sick Emigrants. 5 Extra Cumblies for every 100 men. 6 Flannel Belts do. do. TABLE D. Provisions, Firewood, Water, and Stores, for a Ship conveying Emigrants from Madras to Colonies in the West Indies. PROVISIONS. For every statute adult the ship is licensed to carry for 18 weeks. Artcles. Quantity. per day. Articles. Quantity per day. Rice 24 oz. Tamarind 2 oz. Dholl 4 SECT. XXVI.] MEDICAL INSPECTOR OF EMIGRANTS. 175 Water. The quantity of water allowed to each Emigrant, children included, to be not less than five Imperial gallons per week; but if the vessel has a distilling apparatus, the quantity may be reduced by one-third. Additional articles and fittings required for the voyage. Lime juice, 10 gallons per 100 men. Cabooses, double ... 2 in No. Rum or Brandy, 20 gallons do. Boilers, iron with ladles ... 4 Port Wine, 12 bottles do. Hatchets for cutting wood... 1 per 100 men. Pumpkins, 1,000 Ibs. do. Curry Stone with roller ... 1 do. Yams, and Buckets ... ... 10 do. Potatoes Swabs ... ... 12 do. Biscuits, 360 Ibs. do. Brooms ... ... 40 do. Bale Fruit, 50 in No. do. Scuttle Butts ... ... 2 in No. Sheep or Goats, 20 in No. do. Oil, Cocoanut ... ... 20 gallons. Preserved Milk, 1,000 pints do. Wind Sails to each Hatchway 1 in No. Country Soap, 80 lbs. do. Booby Hatches ... 2 do. Europe Soap, 112 lbs. do. Air Shafts of 9 superfi ... 2 do. Tea, 2 lbs. do. cial feet aperture Condensed Eggs,* 20 lbs. do. Deck Ventilators ... 4 do. Sugar,* 56 lbs. do. Life Buoys ... ... 4 do. Soojee, Oatmeal, Sago, *750 Ibs. do. Dirt Tubs Sick Bay ... ... ... ... 3 2 do. do. and Arrow Root ... Water for sick,* 600 gallons do. Hanging Stoves ... 1 do. Necessaries, double ... 4 do. ... 2 do Bull's-eye Lamps with} padlocks Rockets ... ... 24 do. Blue Lights ... ... 24 do. Storm Book ... ... 1 do, The articles marked * are to be issued at the discretion of the Surgeon for the use of children under six years of age.
176 MEDICAL INSPECTOR OF EMIGRANTS. [SECT. XXVI. TABLE E. List of Medicines. Articles. Statute Adults. 100 200 300 400 Calomel oz. 3 4 6 8 Blue Pills SECT. XXVI.] MEDICAL INSPECTOR OF EMIGRANTS. 177 Articles. Statute Adults. 100 200 300 400 Leeches No. 50 75 100 125 Gum Arabic oz. 6 8 10 12 Acid Tartaric lb. 1 2 3 4 Croton Oil dr. 2 3 4 5 Scammony oz. 1 1½ 2 2 Sulphate of Iron 178 MEDICAL INSPECTOR OF.EMIGRANTS. [SECT. XXVI. List of Instruments, &c. Instruments. Quantity. Capital case of amputating and other surgical instru-ments with needles ligatures, silk, &c. ... 1 One ounce glass measures ... 2 Minim glass measures ... 2 Pestle and mortar ... 1 Set of weights and scales (grains in box) ... 1 Sets of common splints ... 2 Sets of bleeding lancets ... 2 Silver catheters (Nos. 9 and 12) ... 2 Spatulas ... 2 Pocket dressing case ... 1 Infusion pots ... 2 Quire of Country Paper, for every 100 men ... 1 Penknife ... 1 Enema apparatus ... 1 Metal bed pan, for every 100 men ... 1 Sponge oz. 4 Pewter pint (XX measures) SECT. XXVI.] MEDICAL INSPECTOR OF EMIGRANTS. 179 TABLE F. Clothing to be supplied to Native Emigrants from Madras to Colonies in the West Indies. Articles. Quantity. For each Male adult or Boy. Woollen trouser ... 1 Cotton cloth trouser ... 1 Wollen coat ... 1 Cotton jackets ... 2 Doveties or waist cloths ... 2 Red woollen cap ... 1 Worsted stockings Pair 1 Cumblies or blankets ... 2 Teessalah or dish ... 1 Lotah or pot ... 1 Shoes ... 1 For each Female adult or Girl. Flannel jackets ... 2 Woollen petticoat ... 1 Sadi or cloth ... 1 Cumblies or blankets ... 2 Teessalah or dish ... 1 Lotah or pot ... 1 Worsted stockings Pair 1 Shoes SECTION XXVII. DRESS REGULATIONS. 1. BRITISH MEDICAL SERVICE.SECT. XXVII.] DRESS REGULATIONS. 181 shoulder seam; the collar laced round top with lace and gold braid on the collar seam. (Gold. braided eyes inside the lace for officers ranking with Field Officers only). Relative collar badges; thus for Deputy Inspector General of Hospitals after 5 years' service, a crown and. star, for Deputy Inspector General of Hospitals under 5 years' service, and Surgeon-Major a crown, Surgeon a star (other ranks omitting the braided eyes), Assistant Surgeon, with 6 years' service, a crown and star, Assistant Surgeon under 6 years' service, a crown; size of eyes182 [SECT. XXVII. DRESS REGULATIONS: ranks. Medical officers below the rank of Deputy Inspector General are permitted to wear at Levees; Balls, a dress sword belt similar to that prescribed for Deputy -Inspectors General. To be worn over the coat. PlateSECT. XXVII.] DRESS REGULATIONS. 183 forage for a horse, blue cloth, same dimensions as for Infantry officers, with the lace of black silk, oak leaf pattern one inch wide; two rows of lace for Inspector and Deputy Inspector General. Badges in black silk. Holsters, covered. with black leather. Girths, blue. Saddle, hunting. Assistant Surgeon, no badges. APOTHECARIES AND ASSISTANT APOTHECARIES. Winter Uniform184 DRESS REGULATIONS. [SECT. XXVII. Summer Uniform UniformROYAL WARRANT. VICTORIA R. WHEREAS, we have taken into Our consideration the recommendation of the Commissioners appointed by Our authority to inquire into the Regula- tions affecting the sanitary condition of Our Military Forces and. the Medical treatment of the sick and wounded of Our Army; Our Will and Pleasure is, that from and. after the date of this Warrant, the following Rules shall be established for the future admission, promotion, and relative rank and allow- ances of the Medical Officers of Our Indian Military Forces, and that by these rules Our Governor-General in Council, and the Governors in Council of Madras and Bombay respectively, shall be governed. 1. The grades of Medical Officers in Our Indian Military Forces shall be four in number, viz.:186 ROYAL WARRANT 1860. In cases, however, of emergency, or when the good of the Service renders such alteration desirable, it shall be competent for the Governor-General in Council to shorten the several periods of service above mentioned, in such manner as he shall deem fit and expedient. 6. Assistant Surgeons shall, as a general rule, be promoted to the rank of Surgeon in the order of their seniority in the Service, unless unfit for the discharge of their duties from physical or professional incompetence or mis- conduct. In cases of distinguished service, however, an Assistant Surgeon may be promoted by Brevet, without reference to seniority.; and in such. cases, with a view to insure the responsibility attaching to an appointment made out of the regular course of promotion, the recommendation in which the services of the officer shall be detailed shall be published in the General. Orders of our Indian Military Forces, and in, the Gazette in, which. his promotion appears.. 7. All promotion from the rank of Surgeon to that of Deputy Inspector, and from the rank of Deputy Inspector to that of Inspector, shall be given by selection for ability and merit and the grounds of such selection, shall be, stated to Us in, writing, and recorded in the Office of the Seceretary of State for India in Council, the selection for the grades of Deputy Inspector being made from the whole rank of Surgeons, whether styled Surgeons or Surgeons- Major. 8 .With a view to maintain the efficiency of the Service, all Medical Officers of the rank of Surgeon. Major, Surgeon, or Assistant Surgeon, shall be placed on the Retired List, when they shall have attained the age of 55 years, and all. Inspectors-General and Deputy Inspectors-General when they shall have attained the age of 65 years. 9. The relative rank of the Medical Officers. of Our Indian. Military Forces shall be as follows:ROYAL WARRANT 1860. 187 his joining such army in the field, or according to the date of the completion of such service. 10. Such relative rank shall carry with it all precedence and advantages attaching to the rank with which it corresponds [except as regards the Presidency of Courts-martial, where Our Will and Pleasure is, that the senior combatant officer be always President], and shall regulate the choice of quarters, forage, and prize-money. But when a Medical Officer is serving with a Regiment or Detachment, the Officer Commanding, though he be junior in rank to such Medical Officer, is entitled to a preference in the choice of quarters. 11. Medical Officers shall be entitled to all the allowances granted to Our Indian Military Forces, on account of wounds and injuries received in action, as combatant officers holding the same relative ranks. 12. Their families shall, in like manner, be entitled to all the allowances granted, under existing regulations, to the families of combatant officers holding the same relative ranks. 13. Medical Officers. shall be held entitled to the same honours as the other officers of Our Army of equal relative rank.APPENDIX. VOL. II VOL. II Z
190 APPENDIX. VOL. II. FORM No. 16. ______________________ 187 . General Return of Invalids, and Men whose health may be benefited by a removal to Europe examined by a Medical Board held by order of ____________________________ No. Regiments. Names. Age. LENGTH of SERVICE. Years on Station. RECOMMENDED Diseases. Duration of Disease. Summary of previous Treatment Years. Months. For dis- charge from the Service. For change of Climate. General Return of Invalids, and of Men whose health may be benefited by a re- moval to Europe examined by a Medical Board held by order of_____________ Page 187, Me- dical Regulations.
APPENDIX VOL. II. 191 FORM No. 17. Return of Men proposed on account of Disease to be discharged the Service, or sent Home for change of climate. Date of Embarka- tion. Regi- mental Number Regiments. Names. Age. PERIOD OF SER- VICE. ON STATION. Disease, or Medical Reasons for Dis- charge, with particulars, Summary of pre- vious Treatment: RECOMMENDBD Remarks. Years. Months. Years. For dis- charge from the Service. For change of Climate. Commanding. Men appointed to act as servants during the voyage. Surgeon. Regimental No. Regiments. Names. Date of Appointment. No. 1. Regiment______________ RETURN OF IN- VALIDS. From____________________ Station_____________ ____________187 . Name of Ship Name and Rank of Me- dical Officer in charge NOTE.192 APPENDIX. VOL. II. FORM No. 18. Return of Men belonging to the Regiment, under three years' service, who are proposed for Examination in consequence of being considered not likely to become efficient Soldiers. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Number. RANK AND NAME. Age. Size. Service. Name of the Medical Officer by whom origi- nally approved as a Recruit. Date on which approved as a Recruit. Place at which approved as a Recruit. Brief account of the cause and degree of each Man's disability. Observations of the Medical Staff Officer. Years. Months. Feet. Inches. Years. Months. Corps. Surgeon, Commanding Officer. H. M.'S REGI- MENT. RETURN of Men belonging to the above Corps, under three years' service, who are proposed for Examination in consequence of be- ing considered not likely to become efficient Soldiers. Station Date NOTE.APPENDIX. VOL. II. 193 FORM No. 19. B. Nominal Roll of Men recommended for change of Climate in India, or for transfer to the Invalid Depôt. Regimental No. RANK AND NAME. Age. Service. Disease and date of admission. Character. Short Abstract of each man's case, and of Medical treatment. Sttation. Date. Commanding ___________ Surgeon ___________ Depy. Inspector-General of Hospitals, ___________ Division. MADRAS FROM. B. H. M's.__________ Nominal Roll of Men recommended for change of cli- mate in India, or for Transfer to the Invaliding Depôt. N. B.194 APPENDIX. VOL. II. FORM NO. 20. Return of Men of the Regiment considered unfit for further Service. Corps or Department. Regimental No. Bank. Names. Present Age. Disease or Medical reason for considering the Men unfit (see para. 16, clauses 1st, 2nd, and 3rd of G. O. C. C. 1st Novem- ber 1845, No. 65). Summary and period of previous treatment, with opinion as to benefit to be derived from fur- ther treatment (see para. 16, clauses 4 and 5, G. O. C. C., lst November 1845, No. 65.) Station and Date (Size Demy or Foolscap.) A. B. Surgeon Regiment.
APPENDIX. VOL. II. 195 FORM No. 21. For P. M. O. Station. W. O. Form No. 294 A. (REVISED AS PER NOMENCLATURE OF 1869.) Weekly Sick Return. TROOPS SERVING ABROAD. RETURN of Sick of the Battn. or Brigde. of Regt. of for the Week ending Friday. the of 187 . Station Strength. Strength. Strength of Non-Com- missioned Officers and Men, whose cases of sickness are included in this Return H. Qrs. at______ Strength of De- tachments not included in this Return at ______ Det. at ________ at ______ Det. at ________ at ______ Total DISEASES. Remained last Return. Admitted into Hospital during the Week. DIED DIS- CHARGED. Transferred to other Hospitals. REMAINING IN HOSPITAL. In Hospital. Out of Hospital. To Duty. Otherwise.* 196 APPENDIX. VOL. II. FORM No. 21.APPENDIX. VOL. II. 197 FORM NO. 21.198 APPENDIX. VOL. II. FORM No. 21.APPENDIX. VOL. II. 199 FORM No. 21.200 APPENDIX. VOL. II. FORM No. 21.APPENDIX. VOL. II. 201 FORM No. 21.202 APPENDIX. VOL. II. FORM No. 21.203 APPENDIX. VOL. II. FORM No. 22. W. O. Form 463. Sanitary Branch, Army Medical Department. SANITARY REPORT for the Month of 186 Regiment Barracks Station Average Strength Average Daily Sick Remained in hospital last report Admitted into hospital during the month Discharged from do. do. Total Deaths do. do. Number in hospital on last day of month 1. State of barracks, huts, or tents and of guard-rooms and cells, particularly with reference to over-crowding, and the state of ventilation. Mean cubic space per man, for the month, in barracks, huts, cells, and guard-rooms. Mean superficial area per man per month in barracks. 2. State of latrines, urinals, and ash-pits, and of ablution and bath-rooms, and wash- houses. 3. State of drainage and sewerage, and general sanitary condition of the vicinity of the barracks and station.
204 APPENDIX. VOL. II. FORM No. 22.APPENDIX TO VOL. II. 205 FORM No. 22.206 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM NO. 23. Actual route marched by the from to DATE. Name of village (If on board ship, give name of vessel, or state if by rail or transit. DISTANCE TRAVELLED. Remarks. Year. Month. Day. Miles. Furlongs. APPENDIX TO VOL. II 207 FORM No. 23.208 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM No. 23.APPENDIX TO VOL. II. 209 FORM No. 24. W. O. Form, No. 151. Classified Return of Wounds and Injuries received in action on the ____________________________at ____________________________ N. B.210 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM NO. 25. W. O. Form, No. 151 A. Classfiied Return of Wounds and Injuries of every kind received in action at _______________________ Admitted into the Hospital of the _____________ between the_______of _____________ and ______ of ______________ 18_____ N. B.APPENDIX TO VOL. II. 211 FORM No. 26. W. O. Form, No. 151, B. Classified Return of Operations performed, and of Deaths following them between the _______ day of __________ and the ________________ day of ________ 18 ___ in the ________________ Hospital at __________ Nature of Operations. Operations per- formed. Deaths following the foregoing Operations. Primary. Second- ary. Primary. Second- ary. TOTAL AMPUTATIONS. UPPER EXTREMITIES. Shoulder-joint Arm Fore-arm _____________________________ Thumbs Fingers LOWER EXTREMITIES. Hip-joint At upper third Thigh At middle third At lower third Leg Ankle-joint Medio-tarsus Tarso-metatarsus Toes ______________________________ EXCISIONS. UPPER EXTREMITIES. ______________________________ ______________________________ ______________________________ ______________________________ LOWER EXTREMITIES. ______________________________ ______________________________ ______________________________ ______________________________ EXTRACTION OF BALLS AND OTHER FOREIGN BODIES TREPHINING LIGATURES OF ARTERIES _________________ _________________ _________________ _________________ OTHER OPERATIONS H. M.'s. Regt. Classified Re- turn of Opera- tions, &c. From To W. O. Form 151, B.
212 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM (Form G.)APPENDIX TO VOL. II. 213 No. 27. Regiment or Corps. _____________________ (NOTE.214 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM No. 28. (Form I.) MEDICAL CERTIFICATE BOOK. MEDICAL CERTIFICATE BOOK. Extract from the "ADMISSION and DISCHARGE BOOK" of the _________ Regiment. No. of Case ___________ No.of Case. Reg. No. RANK AND NAME. Completed Years of DATES. DISEASES. (a) Primary. (b) Secondary. Also Operations. Regimental No. ________ (If married, write M under his Name.) Age (last Birth-day.) Service Injured or attacked by Diseases. Admit- ted into Hospi- tal. Discharg- ed from Hospital. Died or Re- covered. When and Where* Rank and ___________ Name ___________ Disease ______________ Date of Extract___________187 Duration of Case from period of Attack to Recovery or Death. When Discharged from Hospital. OBSERVATIONS. (State briefiy the circum- stances in or by which the Sickness was induced, and in case of Death the results of post mortem examination.) Extracted from Admission and Discharge Book of the above Regiment this__________day of_____________187___ by _________________ _________________ State of Health. (Whether Healthy or otherwise.) Destination. Man left at _______________ Particulars of Discharge, &c., filled in, and Extract trans- mitted to _______________ _____ this _____________ day of ______________187____by _________________ _________________ in charge of ______________ ____________________ Man left at ___________________ * Write DIED in case of Death, and R for Recovered. in charge of ________________________________________________ MEMORANDUM. When a Regiment leaves any of its Sick in the charge of the Medical Officers of another Regiment, or sends them to a General Hospital, this Form (filled in with the particulars of each man's Regimental Number, Name, Age, and Service, the Dates of Attack of Illness and Admission into Hospital, Disease, &c.), is to be left or sent with the man by the Surgeon of his Regiment; and on the termination of the case the Medical Officer having the man in charge will complete the entry by filling in the parti- culars as to Discharge, &c., and forward the Form, at the earliest opportunity, to the Surgeon of the Regiment to which the man belongs. This Form will be used on any other occasion for conveying information respecting a sick soldier from one Surgeon to another; or from the Regimental Surgeon to the Director-General.
215 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM No. 29. (Form L.) MEDICAL CASE BOOK for Non-Commissioned Officers and Men of the 216 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM No. 30. W. O. Form 833. Monthly Return of Staff Medical Officers doing duty with from to 187. Rank. NAMES. Stations. Date of arri- val in the Command. Married or Single; if Mar- ried, No. of Children. How employed. If on leave, the cause and period to be stated. Monthly Return of the Regimental Medical Staff of from to 187 . Regiment. Strength. No. of Sick. NAMES AND RANKS OF MEDICAL OFFICERS. Married or Single; if Married No. of Children. STATION. Date of arrival in the Command. NUMBER UNDER CHARGE OF EACH MEDICAL OFFICER. Remarks. If on leave, the cause and period to be stated. Men. Women. Children. Treated. NOTE.217 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM No. 30.218 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM No. 31. Classification of the Diseases, Wounds, and Infirmities of Invalids during the year ending 31st December 18 . N.B.219 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM NO. 32. (Form E.) Register of Invalids arrived at Invalid Depot. Date of Arrival at Depot. Regiment. RANK AND NAME. (If married write "M " under the Name.) Age. Actual Service. Character and Num- ber of Good Con- duct Bad- ges. Nature and Ex- tent of Disabi- lity as report- ed by Regi- mental or Staff Officer. Station whence Invalided. If requiring Hospital treatment, date of. No. of Medical Register and of Case. Opinion of Prin- cipal Medical Officer. How disposed of. Remarks. Total Years. Stations. Period in Years. Admis- sion. Dis- charge Death.
220 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM No. 33. (Form F.)221 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM No. 33.222 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM No. 34. (Form K.)223 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM No. 35. 18 Dispensary Monthly Return of Sick of In and Out-Patients. To be arranged agreeably to revised Nomenclature of 1869. IN-PATIENTS. OUT-PATIENTS. DISEASES. (Diseases not mentioned here must be inserted in their proper places in M.S.) Remained last Return. Admitted since. Total treated. Discharged. Died. Remaining. Remained last Return. Admitted since. Total treated. Discharged. Died. Remaining. Cured. Relieved. No better. Total. Cured. Relieved. No better. Absented. Total. I. GENERAL DISEASES. 1 Sub-division A. Simple continued Fever Febricula Ague Remittent Fever Simple Cholera Malignant do. Sub-division B. Acute Rheumatism. Chronic do. Primary Syphilis Secondary Syphilis. Anæmia General Dropsy
224 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM NO.35.225 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM NO. 35.226 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. Form No. 35.227 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM No. 36. Financial Statement exhibiting the working of the for the year 187 . In-Patients. Out-Patients. Total. Cr. Dr. Balance in hand 1st January 187 RS. A. P. By Medical Officer's salary RS. A. P. Invested up to do 228 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM No. 37. 187 . Monthly Return of Sick of the under-mentioned Classes of Prisoners. To be arranged agreeably to revised Nomenclature of 1869. Convicted Prisoners. Prisoners under or waiting for trial. Civil Prisoners or Debtors. Average Strength...No. Average Strength...No. Average Strength...No. DISEASES. Remained last Return. Entered dur- ing Total treated. Discharged cured. Transferred. Died. Remaining. Remained last Return. Entered dur- ing Total treated. Discharged cured. Transferred. Died. Remaining. Remained last Return. Entered dur- ing Total treated. Dischared cured. Transferred. Died. Remaining. (Diseases not mentioned here must be inserted in their proper places in M.S.) I. GENERAL DISEASES. Sub-Division A. 1 Simple Continued Fever Febricula Ague Remittent Fever Simple Cholera Malignant do. Sub-Division B. Acute Rheumatism Chronic Muscular Secondary Syphilis Purpura Scurvy Anæmia General Dropsy
229 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM No. 37.230 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM No. 37.231 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM No. 37.232 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. Return of Medical Officers and Servants. Names. Rank. Date of Rank in the Amry. Date of Appoint- ment to the Station. Remarks. 187 . MONTHLY RETURN OF SICK OF PRISONERS. Surgeon. Division, Received Forwarded Depy. Inspr.-Genl., Indian Medl. Dept. Inspr.-Genl.'s Office, Received CIVIL, Return exhibiting the Strength, Admissons, and Deaths of the three classes of Prisoners mentioned within, according to Age and length of Confinement in the Jail. Age. Under 15. 15 to 20. 20 to 25. 25 to 30. 30 to 35. 35 to 40. 40 to 45. 45 to 50. 50 to 55. 55 to 60. Above 60. Total. M. F. T. M. F. T. M. F. T. M. F. T. M. F. T. M. F. T. M. F. T. M. F. T. M. F. T. M. F. T. M. F. T. M. F. T. Strength. Admitted. Died Years of Confine- ment. Under 1. 1 to 2. 2 to 3. 3 to 4. 4 to 5. 5 to 6. 6 to 7. 7 to 10. 10 to 15. 15 to 20. Above 20. Total. M. F. T. M. F. T. M. F. T. M. F. T. M. F. T. M. F. T. M. F. T. M. F. T. M. F. T. M. F. T. M. F. T. M. F. T. Strength. Admitted. Died
233 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM No. 38. MONTHLY RETURN OF SICK FOR 187 . Mofussil Police in the District. Classes of Disease. Specific Diseases. Remained on Admitted into Hos- pital. Total. DIS- CHARGED. Died. Remaining 31st. REMARKS. To duty. Otherwise. I. II. III. IV. V. VI. Station. Date. ________in Medical charge of Mofussil Police in the ________ District. Deputy Inspr.-Genl., Indian Medical Dept. Abstract. Strength at beginning of the month No. Discharged from Hospital No. Recruits joined during the month 234 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM No. 38.APPENDIX TO VOL. II. 235 FORM No. 39. FORM C. EUROPEAN TROOPS. CHAPTER IV., SECTION I. MEDICAL DEPARTMENT. BUDGET FOR 1 7 . _____________ Station. TITLE II., MATERIEL. ARTICLE I. Hospital Supplies to Europeans. Minor heads. Description of articles. Quan- tity. Rate. Amount. Total of each minor head. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. Hospital Attend- ants. Hospital of Average No. of sick per day or Aggregate No. of sick per annum Bheasties No. Cooks 236 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM No. 39.APPENDIX TO VOL. II. 237 FORM No. 39.238 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM NO. 39.APPENDIX TO VOL. II. 239 FORM No. 39.240 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM No. 39.APPENDIX TO VOL. II. 241 FORM No. 39.242 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM No. 39.APPENDIX TO VOL. II. 243 FORM No. 39.244 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM No. 39.APPENDIX TO VOL. II. 245 FORM No. 39.246 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM No. 39.APPENDIX TO VOL. II. 247 FORM No. 40. ARTICLE 3. Medical Depôt Supplies. Description of Articles. Quantity. Rate. Amount. Total. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. (To be continued if required.)
248 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM No. 41. FORM B. TITLE II., MATERIEL. PRESIDENCY MADRAS. MEDICAL DEPARTMENT. Division. No. of Appendix. PERSONNEL. MATERIEL. Hospital Attend- ants. Extra Ser- vants. Hospital Conser- vancy. Total. Diet. Hospital Neces- saries. Hospital Miscel- laneous. Carriage Contin- gencies. Reserve Stock. Total. Bedding and Clothing. Other Articles.
APPENDIX TO VOL. II. 249 FORM No. 41.250 APPENDIX TO VOL. II. FORM No. 41.INDEX TO VOL. II. Para. Page. Accidents and shipwrecks, Port Surgeon's duties during 72 68 Accommodation and space for European Troops proceeding in Transports to England viâ the Cape 45 141 ii INDEX TO VOL. II. Para. Page. Assistant Apothecary, Lying-in Hospital 58 65 INDEX TO VOL. II. iii Para. Page. Boards, professional 1 16 iv INDEX TO VOL. II. Para. Page. Certificate Medical, forms of, B. M. S. 9 17 INDEX TO VOL. II. V Para. Page. Course of study for Military Students 15 153 Criminal Lunatics 32 76 Curricula at Medical College 26 158 Death report of Lunatic patients 20 73 vi INDEX TO VOL. II. Para. Page. Dooly bearers 20 162 Dress, British Medical Service 1 180 INDEX TO VOL. II. vii Para. Page. Establishment of Eye Infirmary viii INDEX TO VOL. II. Para. Page. General Hospital, Classes of patients 2 52 INDEX TO VOL. II. ix Para. Page. Indents for stationery rules for preparing 37 10 x INDEX TO VOL. II. Para. Page. Invalids not to be kept too long at Sanitaria 9 42 INDEX TO VOL. II. xi Para. Page. Lunatic Asylum, space and area for each patient 66 85 xii INDEX TO VOL. II Para. Page. Medical Examiner, duties of 1 164 INDEX TO VOL. II. xiii Para. Page. Oculist, to give advice to any public institution 37 62 Occupation and recreation of Lunatics 58 83 Officers, Sick, at Presidency to report to District Surgeons 59 31 xiv INDEX TO VOL. II. Para. Page. Proceedings of Medical Boards, B. M. S 9 18 INDEX TO VOL. II. xv Para. Page. Report, Sanitary, Monthly 16 112 xvi INDEX TO VOL. II. Para. Page. Sanitary Boards 1 16 INDEX TO VOL. II. xvii Para. Page. Soldiers, Boards for examination for re-engagement of 4 16 xviii INDEX TO VOL. II. Para. Page. Survey of Transports 23 138 INDEX TO VOL. II. xix Para. Page. Trusses, requisitions for 26 8 Uncovenanted Civil Service, certificates for leave 69 34 Unmarried Soldier Invalids 5 42 Unserviceable articles, how disposed of 22 7 Utensils and Instruments, certain not to be entered as expended 22 7 Vaccination of Lunatic patients 31 75 