IP/QB.10 m.91.b. (NEW SERIES) No:52A SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA THE PHYSIOLOGICAL ACTION OF CERTAIN DRUGS IN TABLET FORM BY MAJOR H. M. MACKENZIE, I.M.S. (Edited by the Director-General, I.M.S.) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062149.tif] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1912 Price Rs. 3-8 or 5s. 3d,
M 91 b
No, 52A. (NEW SERIES) SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA THE PHYSIOLOGICAL ACTION OF CERTAIN DRUGS IN TABLET FORM BY MAJOR H. M. MACKENZIE, I.M.S. (Edited by the Director-General, I.M.S.) ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE SANITARY COMMISSIONER WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, SIMLA [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062161.tif] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062161.tif] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1912
Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. Messrs. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, W. C. Messrs. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., 68-74, Carter Lane, E. C. Mr. BERNARD QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, W. Messrs. P. S. KING & SON, 2 and 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster. Messrs. H. S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, and 9, Pall Mall, London. Messrs. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, London, S.W. Mr. T. FISHER UNWIN, 1, ADELPHI TERRACE, LONDON, W. C. Messrs. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E. C. Mr. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 51, Broad Street, Oxford. Messrs. DEIGHTON BELL & Co., Cambridge. Messrs. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W. C. ON THE CONTINENT. Mr. OTTO HARRASOWITZ Mr. KARL HIERSEMANN Leipzig. Messrs. R. FRIEDLANDER & SOHN, Berlin, W. N., Carlstrasse, 11. Mr. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. Mr. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. IN INDIA. Messrs. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. Messrs. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. Messrs. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. IN INDIAList of numbers of Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India (New Series) published previous to the present issue. No. 1. Standardisation of Calmette's Anti-Venomous Serum with Pure Cobra Venom: the Deterioration of this Serum through keeping in India, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 2. Malaria in India, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No. 3. Some Observations on the Poison of Russell's Viper (Daboia Russellii), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M. B. Price As. 5 or 6d. No. 4. On the Action of the Venoms of the Cobra and of the Daboia on the Red Blood corpuscles and on the blood plasma, by Captain G. Lamb, Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 5. Specificity of Anti-Venomous Sera, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 6. First Report on the Anti-Malarial Operations in Mian Mir, 19012 No. 20. Serum-Therapy of Plague in India; Reports by Mr. W. M. Haffkine, C.I.E., and various Officers of the Plague Research Laboratory, Bombay, by Lieutenant- Colonel W. B. Bannerman, M.D., B.Sc., F. R.C.S., I. M. S. Price As. 14 or 1s. 4d. No. 21. On the Standardisation of Anti-Typhoid Vaccine, by Captain George Lamb, M.D., I. M. S. (Director, Pasteur Institute of India), and Captain W. B. C. Forster, M. B., D. P. H., I. M. S. Price As. 6 or 7d. No. 22. Mediterranean Fever in India: Isolation of the Micrococcus Melitensis, by Captain George Lamb, M.D., I.M.S., and Assistant Surgeon M. Kesava Pai, M. B., C. M. (Madras). Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 23. The Anatomy and Histology of Ticks, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M. B., I. M. S. Price Rs. 3 or 4s. 6d. No. 24. On a Parasite found in the White Corpuscles of the blood of Palm Squirrels, by Captain W. S. Patton, M.B., I. M. S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 25. On the importance of Larval Characters in the Classification of Mosquitoes, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M. B., I. M. S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 26. Leucocytozoon Canis, by Captain S. R. Christophers,M. B., I. M. S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 27. Preliminary Report on the Development of the Leishman-Donovan Body in the Bed Bug, by Captain W. S. Patton, M. B., I. M. S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 28. The Sexual Cycle of Leucocytozoon Canis in the Tick, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M. B., I. M. S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 29. Piroplasma Canis and its Cycle in the Tick, by Captain S. B. Christophers, M.B., I. M. S. Price Rs. 2 or 3s. No. 30. The Theory and Practice of Anti-Rabic Immunisation, by Captain W. F. Harvey, M. B., I.M.S., and Captain Anderson McKendrick, M.B., I. M. S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 31. The Development of the Leishman-Donovan Parasite in Cimex Rotundatus3 No. 41. Quinine and its Salts: their Solubility and Absorbability, by Captain, A. C. MacGilchrist, M.A., M.D., M. R. C. P., I. M. S. Price As. 9 or 10d. No. 42. The Cultivation of the Bacillus of Leprosy and the Treatment of cases by means of a Vaccine prepared from the Cultivations, Part I, by Major E. R. Rost, I.M.S. The Cultivation of the Leprosy Bacillus, by Captain T. S. B. Williams, M.B., I. M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 43. The Relation of Tetanus to the Hypodermic or Intramuscular Injection of Quinine, by Lieutenant-Colonel Sir D. Semple, Kt., M.D. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 44. The Preparation of a Safe and Efficient Anti-rabic Vaccine, by Lieutenant-Colonel Sir D. Semple, Kt., M.D., D. P. H., R. A. M. C. (Retired). Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 45. Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta,. by Major E. D. W Greig, M.D., D.Sc., I. M. S. Price Re. 1 and As. 4 or 2s. No. 46. Malaria in the Punjab, by Major S. R. Christophers, M. B., I. M. S.Price Rs. 2 or 3s. No. 47. Dysentery and Liver Abscess in Bombay, by Major E. D. W. Greig, M.D., .D.Sc., I.M.S., and Captain R. P. Wells, M.A., M.B., I.M.S. Price Rs. 2 or 3s. No. 48. Investigations into the Jail Dietaries of the United Provinces with some observations on the influence of dietary on the physical development and well-being of the people of United Provinces, by Major D. McCay, I. M. S. Price Re. 1-12 or 3s. No. 49. Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta, being the final report of an enquiry carried out by Major E. D. W. Greig, M.D., I.M.S. No. 50. Preliminary Report on an Investigation into the Etiology of Oriental Sore in Cambay, by Captain W. S. Patton, M. B., I.M.S. Price As. 6. No. 51. A Streptothrix isolated from the Spleen of a Leper, by Major W. G. Liston, .M. D., D. P. H., I. M. S., and Captain T. S. B. Williams, I. M. S. Price As. 14 or 4d. No. 52. Dysentery in Hazaribagh Central Jail, January 1910CONTENTS. PAGE Introductory 1 Source and date of original Tablets and Controls 3 Chemical Examiner's Report 4 Aloin Compound 5 Ammonium Carbonas 7 Colchicini Salicylas 9 Extractum Euonymi Siccum 12 Hydrargyri Subchloridum 13 Phenacetinum 14 Phenacetinum cum Caffeinâ 15 Pil. Plumbi cum Opio 18 Pil. Hydrargyri Subchloridum Co. 21 Soda Mint 22 Sodium Chloridum 22 Tinct. Camphoræ Co. 23 Tinct. Digitalis 25 Tinct. Opii 31 Zinci Sulphas 33 Hypodermic TabletsThe Physiological Action of Certain Drugs in Tablet Form THE investigation whose results are embodied in this report was conducted during the Winter of 1910-11. The experiments which were carried out were directed towards ascertaining whether the drugs which are made up in tablet form for Field Hospitals deteriorate with age, and, if deterioration occurs, to what extent the physiological action of the drug is affected. In making out an experimental scheme for each drug the normal physio- logical effects of the drug were first tabulated. The actions were then chosen which seemed to be best adapted for experiments on animals and most likely to give accurate recordable and comparable results. Experiments were then devised which would show the actions selected, if any were present, and the results were recorded. In every case the drug under investigation was tested against an identical solution or suspension of either fresh drug or fresh tablet, and the action of the two compared. In several instances of compound tablets, for example, Pil. Hydrarg, Sub- chlorid. Co., in which the various ingredients could not be separated from one another, it was impossible to obtain precise physiological dat2 and loss of blood as possible. A hook was inserted superficially in the apex of the heart in such a manner as to avoid perforating the whole thickness of the ventricular wall, and was connected by a thread to the end of a light heart lever. The beats were recorded on a slowly moving kymograph, the time tracing being made simultaneously by a chronograph marking seconds. All tracings were made with the heart in situ and with the nerves intact, and no curara or other drug except that under experiment was used. Atropine was not used, as what was required was the combined effect of the drug under in- vestigation on the heart muscle and the vagus terminations, and not the action on the heart muscle alone. No curves were taken for at least ten minutes after pithing, in order to avoid irregularities attributable to shock. In some cases the solution of the drug was allowed to flow slowly over the external surface of the heart. In others it was introduced with a hypodermic syringe and a very fine needle into the right auricle. In the perfusion experiments, which were carried out in order to show the effect of the drug on the peripheral vessels, as regards vaso-constriction or vaso- dilatation, the following procedure was adopted : A frog was pithed and fixed back downwards on a frog board. The heart was exposed, one aorta opened, and the blood permitted to flow out. A fine cannula was then tied in the aorta, the other aorta being closed by including it in the ligature. The cannula was connected with a rubber tube containing normal saline solution and having a Y-shaped glass tube interposed so that it could be put in communication with either of two bottles, one of which con- tained normal saline solution only, the other containing normal saline solution mixed with a solution of the drug under examination. A constant pressure of 38 centimetres was maintained. The sinus venosus was then opened and, with due precaution against the entrance of any air bubbles, the normal saline solu- tion was allowed to flow through the peripheral circulation of the frog, until all the blood had been washed out and the fluid was coming through clear and at a constant or nearly constant rate, the amount passing through in succes- sive periods of five minutes being recorded. The fluid containing the drug was then perfused by putting the cannula in communication with the other bottle, and the amount passing through the circulation in successive five minute periods measured and recorded. If the amount was less, vaso-constriction was present, if more, then vaso-dilatation, and the amount by which the flow was lessened or increased was in direct ratio to the amount of vaso-constriction or vaso-dilatation which was produced. Many of the experiments recorded were repeated several times, and the average result, or a typical tracing, given. Had time permitted it would have been more satisfactory to have done all the experiments several times, but with
3 the large number of drugs to be worked through in a limited period this was impossible. All the tracings shown are portions of continuous records and the time tracing, where shown, indicates seconds. Table showing source and date of original tablets and of tablets or drugs used as controls. Drug. ORIGINAL. CONTROL. Source. Date. Source. Date. Aloin Compound B. W. & Co. 1906 B. W. & Co. 1910 Ammon. Carbonas P. D. & Co. 1907 Ditto 1910 Colchicini Salicylas Ditto 1907 Ditto 1910 Extr Euonymin Siccum Ditto 1907 Ditto 1910 Hydrarg. Subchlor. Ditto 1907 B. & T. 1910 Phenacetinum Ditto 1907 B. W. & Co. 1910 Phenacetinum cum Caffeinâ Ditto 1907 Ditto 1910 Pil. Plumbi cum Opio Ditto 1907 B. M. S. 1910 Pil. Hydrarg. Subchlor. Co. Ditto Unknown Ditto 1910 Soda Mint Ditto 1907 B. W. & Co. 1910 Sod. Chlorid. Ditto 1907 B. & T. 1910 Tinct. Camph. Co. Ditto Unknown S. S. & Co. 1910 Tinct. Digitalis Ditto 1907 B. & Co. 1910 Tinct. Opii Ditto 1907 Ditto 1910 Zinc. Sulphas B. W. & Co. 1906 B. & T. 1910 Hypodermic Tablets. Apomorphin. Hydrochlorid. B. W. & Co. 1903 P. D. & Co. 1910 Atropin and Morphin. Sulph. Ditto 1903 Ditto 1910 Digitalin Ditto 1903 B. W. & Co. 1910 Morphin. Tartras Ditto 1903 P. D. & Co. 1910 Physostigminæ Salicylas Ditto 1903 Ditto 1910 Strophanthin Ditto 1903 Ditto 1910 Abbreviations used in the foregoing table. B. W. & Co.4 All the control drugs which were used were in tablet form, with the exception of those obtained from Messrs. Baird and Tatlock which were fresh salts guaranteed chemically pure, and those obtained from Messrs. Bathgate and Co., and Messrs. Smith Stanistreet and Co., which were fresh tinctures prepared according to, and complying with the tests laid down by, the British Pharmacop5 Phenacetin and Caffein6 To another dog of 19.2 kilos, 1.264 grams of old tablet was given in the same way. In neither case was there any apparent effect, the dogs being kept under observation for 48 hours and eating, sleeping, and defæcating normally. There was no sign of cholagogue or cathartic action. (2) PURGATIVE AND CHOLAGOGUE ACTION ON MAN. Two laboratory attendants of nearly equal weight volunteered for the experiment, and two fresh tablets were given to one, the other receiving two old tablets. The man who had received the fresh tablets had three motions within ten hours, the first motion being passed three hours after administration of the drug and being semi-solid, the second and third being fluid in consistence. There was a considerable amount of griping which began five hours after the dose had been taken and lasted five hours. The man who had received the old tablets had no griping and passed one soft solid motion ten hours after taking the drug. (3) EFFECT WHEN INJECTED IN SOLUTION INTO PERITONEAL CAVITY OF FROG. Two solutions of equal strength were made, solution A containing five old tablets in five c.c. of water, and solution B five fresh tablets in the same amount of water. The old tablets dissolved more easily than the fresh ones, the solution in both cases being turbid and that of the old tablets being darker in colour than that of the new. The solutions were filtered and one c.c. of A injected into frog X, frog Y receiving one c.c. of B. Frog X, five minutes after receiving the injection, showed strong muscular contracture, all the muscles being firmly contracted. On the application of any external stimulus to the skin, the contractions in- creased in severity, spasms typical of strychnine poisoning being produced. This condition lasted for 25 minutes when respiration stopped, death occurred and the frog ceased to react to any stimulus. Frog Y, which had received the fresh solution, remained for five minutes without showing any sign of being affected by the drug. At the end of that period a condition of rigid muscular contracture set in, the contractions becoming spasmodic on the application of external stimuli, but the spasms being more severe and lasting longer than in
7 the case of frog X. This condition only lasted for five minutes, when death took place and the muscles relaxed. In both cases death was verified by opening the animal and exposing the heart. The results of these experiments would appear to indicate that the old tablets, while still retaining a very considerable degree of activity, have deterio- rated to an appreciable extent when compared with the fresh tablets. Ammonium Carbonate Tablets. These showed much efflorescence, and some had crumbled to powder. On opening the bottle a strong ammoniacal odour was given off. Some of the Pharmacop8 (2) Two SOLUTIONS WERE THEN MADE. A containing 5 per cent. of the fresh tablets and B containing 5 per cent. of the old tablets, i.e., five grams of each made up to 100 c.c. with distilled water. Solution A was clear and solution B was turbid. When treated (a) with Silver Nitrate solution and subsequent supersaturation with Nitric Acid, (b) with Barium Nitrate solution, and (c) with Barium Chloride solution, no difference was found between the reactions given by A and B. (3) VOLUMETRIC ESTIMATION. Two grams of the old tablet were dissolved in a mixture of 50 c.c. each of water and Normal Volumetric Solution Sulphuric Acid, boiled for ten minutes to expel the liberated CO2 and cooled. The solution was then titrated against Normal Volumetric Solution Potassium Hydroxide, Litmus test solution being used as an indicator. The amount of Normal KOH required for exact neutrali- sation was 22.5 c.c. as compared with 12.7 c.c. which ought to be sufficient when perfectly fresh translucent salt is used. The test was repeated using two grams of the fresh tablets, and the amount of Normal KOH required for neutralisation was 23.9 c.c. Comparing the two tablet drugs with fresh salt in perfect condition con- taining 100 per cent. of Ammonia, the old tablets contained 56 per cent. and the fresh tablets 53 per cent. of Ammonia. (4) PHYSIOLOGICAL ACTION OF THE TABLETS. (See Plate I.) Ammonium Carbonate in therapeutic doses shows activity mainly as a cardiac, gastric and respiratory stimulant and an expectorant. The action on the isolated heart of the frog was chosen as an index of comparison between the old and the new tablets. A 1 per cent. solution of each was made up, A containing 1 per cent. of old tablets and B containing 1 per cent. of fresh tablets. A frog was pithed and the heart isolated and arranged for recording contractions. Normal contractions were recorded for five minutes (Plate 1, Chart 1, No. 1), 0.5 c.c. of solution B was then allowed to flow slowly over the heart, and an immediate slight diminution in the amplitude of the contractions was observed lasting 13 seconds (No. 2). Thereafter the contractions continued normal in character and regularity but slightly less in amplitude for 70 seconds, when irregu- larity became apparent (Nos. 3 and 4), which continued to the end of the experiment half an hour after the application of the drug.
9 The experiment was repeated with a fresh frog, 0.5 c.c. of solution A being applied in the same way. A normal tracing was first recorded (Plate 2, Chart 2, No. 1). The drug was then applied and the contractions became gradually smaller for four minutes, when they reached their minimum (Nos. 2, 3, and 5). The contractions then began to increase in strength (No. 6) and, at 8 minutes after the application of drug, the tracing was again very nearly normal (No. 7) and remained so to the end of the experiment. The inference to be drawn from the foregoing experiments is that both sets of tablets have deteriorated very markedly when compared with the fresh salt, but that between the old (1907) tablet and the new (1910) tablet there is very little difference in degree of deterioration, the old tablet in fact showing greater activity than the new. Colchicine Salicylate Tablets. These tablets showed no visible signs of deterioration and were indistin- guishable in appearance from fresh tablets against which they were tested. Frogs were used for the experiments as being the most convenient and easily obtainable animals and as giving reliable and comparable results. Colchicine Salicylate being a compound salt, one had to take into account the action both of Colchicine and of Salicylic Acid. Pure Colchicine is said to have very little action on the frog, but the impure preparation produces toxic effects. Salicylic Acid and Salicylates when injected into the frog in large doses may produce paralysis, whereas applied locally they are toxic to frog's muscle. On the heart, small doses have no effect, but large doses cause cardiac paralysis, dilatation of peripheral vessels, and fall of blood pressure. Two solutions were made, A being a 0.1 per cent. solution of the old tablets and B being a 0.1 per cent. solution of the fresh tablets to be used as a control. A was slightly turbid before filtering, B was perfectly clear. (1) ACTION ON ISOLATED HEART OF PITIED FROG. (See Plate II). Heart isolated and arranged for recording contractions on a drum moving slowly at a constant rate. Contractions were recorded for five minutes before the application of the drug (Plate II, Chart 1, No. 1). 0.5 c.c. of solution A was then allowed to flow over the heart and the contractions were recorded for five minutes. Me result was a gradual diminution in the amplitude of the contraction C
10 (Nos. 2 and 3). At the end of five minutes a second dose was applied. without any further diminution in the contractions being produced (No. 4). The same experiment was repeated in another frog, using solution B (fresh drug). The contractions were recorded for five minutes before the application of the drug (No. 1). 0.5 c.c. of solution B was then applied, and an immediate diminution. in the amplitude and slight slowing of the rate of contraction were seen (Plate II, Chart 2, No. 2). The contractions remained small and fairly regular during the next five minutes (No. 3), when (5 minutes after the first applica- tion) a second dose of 0.5 c.c. was applied. This caused a still further reduc- tion in the amplitude of the contractions (No. 4). On the drug being washed off with normal saline solution, the heart rapidly resumed its normal action both as regards amplitude and rate of contraction (No. 5). (2) EFFECT ON PERIPHERAL VESSELS, AS SHOWN BY PERFUSING VESSELS OF PITHED FROG WITH DRUG. Pithed frog and apparatus arranged as stated on page 2. The frog was perfused with normal saline solution until bloodless, and then the saline solution traversing the peripheral circulation was measured during successive five minute periods. When the flow had become constant and uniform, normal saline solution containing 2 per cent. of solution A was perfused, and the amount traversing the peripheral circulation in successive five minute periods was similarly measured. The results obtained are noted below :11 The experiment was then repeated with a fresh frog, using first normal saline solution and then saline solution containing 2 per cent. of solution B, the figures obtained being as follows :12 The experiment was then repeated with a fresh nerve muscle prepara- tion, using solution B, the same curves being recorded after the same intervals, (Chart 2, Plate III). In the case of solution A (old tablets), the first drug curve, two minutes. after the application of the drug, shows only a slight deviation from the normal, the contraction being a shade less and the relaxation period shorter. In the second drug curve, five minutes after the application of the drug, the contraction is only half the normal, the latent period is considerably prolonged, and the relaxation period shortened. In the case of solution B (fresh tablets), the first curve, at two minutes, shows less amplitude and considerable lengthening both of the latent and of the relaxation periods. The second curve, at five minutes, shows a pro- longed latent and a shortened relaxation period, with greatly diminished amplitude. The results of these experiments would indicate that very little, if any, deterioration has occurred in the 1907 tablets, which yield results varying very slightly from those obtained with the 1910 tablets. Euonymin Siccum Tablets. This drug acts almost entirely as a drastic purgative and a cholagogue. Its effect on man and on dogs was studied when given by the mouth, crushed and suspended in water. Equal quantities of freshly prepared crushed tablet were similarly administered as controls. (1) EFFECT ON MAN. Two laboratory attendants of nearly equal weight were selected and to one (A) two grains of old tablet, and to the other (B) two grains of fresh tablet were administered at 3 P.M. " A " had one motion on getting up at 6 A.M. next morning, solid but soft in consistence and greenish yellow in colour. " B " had two motions on getting up at the same time next morning, the first being soft but solid, and the second being fluid. The colour of both was greenish yellow. (2) EFFECT ON DOGS. Two dogs of approximately equal weight were taken and to A a dose of two grains of fresh tablet was given at 11 A.M., B at the same time recei- ving two grains of old tablet. No effect was produced in either dog,
13 A week later the same dogs were taken and " A " received six grains of fresh and " B " received six grains of old tablet, the drugs being administered at 12-30 P.M. " A " at 6 P.M. passed a motion and in the early morning passed another, both motions being copious, greenish yellow in colour and solid in consistence. " B " at 5 P.M. passed one motion and passed another in the night, the total quantity being somewhat less than that passed by " A ". Both motions were solid and greenish yellow in colour. From these results it would appear that the old tablets retain a very con- siderable degree of activity, but show some slight deterioration and loss of power when compared with the fresh tablets. Hydrargyri Subchloridum Tablets. The chief non-specific action of Calomel is that of a mild purgative. These tablets were tested for this on man and on dogs, control experiments being car- ried out with equal quantities of fresh Calomel, not made up in tablet form. (1) ACTION ON MAN. Two laboratory attendants of nearly equal weight, A and B, were taken for this experiment, and at 2 P.M. " A " was given by the mouth three one- grain tablets, " B " getting three grains of the fresh salt at 2-30 P.M. " A " defæcated three times within the next eighteen hours, one ordinary stool at 6 P.M., one watery stool at 11 with much griping, and one loose motion at 6 A.M. next morning. " B " defæcated twice within the same period, one ordinary stool at 8 P.M., and one watery motion the following morning at 5 A.M. He had no griping or pain. (2) ACTION ON DOGS. Two grains of fresh salt was given to a dog of eighteen kilos and two one- grain tablets to another dog of nineteen kilos without any apparent effect. This experiment was repeated using a larger dose. The same dogs were used, a week having been allowed to elapse in order to ensure their being quite normal after the previous experiment. Five grains of the fresh salt was given to one dog and five one-grain tablets to the other. The dog which received the fresh salt hiccoughed for five minutes after getting it. Thereafter it showed no abnormal signs for eight hours when it vomited a large quantity of undigested food. It did not defæcate during the eighteen hours following the administration of the drug.
14 The dog which received the tablets passed urine ten minutes later and at fifteen minutes passed a large black hard mass of fæces. At 54 minutes it vomited about two ounces of yellowish matter mixed with froth and mucus. At 8½ hours it vomited a large quantity of undigested food, but it did not again defecate during the 24 hours it was kept under observation. This experiment was repeated later with the same doses, a negative result again being obtained. No information was afforded by the experiments on dogs as to the relative activity of the tablets and the fresh drug, but the human experiments show that the tablets have retained their full activity and give results equal to those of the fresh drug. Phenacetinum Tablets. Phenacetin being practically insoluble in water (1 in 1,700), the tablets had to be crushed and administered suspended in water, by the mouth. Tablets manufactured in 1905 were tested against an equal weight of 1910 tablets. (1) ANTIPYRETIC ACTION ON RABBITS. Two rabbits of equal weight were given an abnormally high temperature by injecting hypodermically into each of them 0.5 c.c. of purulent matter from a septic wound. Rabbit A. Temperature before injection of septic material 101.4 Temperature 48 hours late 103 With the temperature at 103, 0.5 gram of crushed 1910 tablets were administer- ed in water by the mouth at 1-45 P.M., and the temperature recorded every half hour till 4-30. Temperature at 1-45 103 ,, ,, 2-15 102.5 ,, ,, 2-45 102 ,, ,, 3 101.6 ,, ,, 3-30 102.6 ,, ,, 4 103 ,, ,, 4-30 103 Rabbit B. Temperature before injection of septic material 101 Temperature 48 hours later 103.3
15 With the temperature at 103.3, 0.5 gram of crushed 1905 tablets was ad- ministered in water by the mouth at 1-30 P.M. and the temperature recorded every half hour till 4-30. Temperature at 1-30 103.3 " " 2-5 102.1 " " 2-30 102 " " 3 102.5 " " 3-30 102.8 " " 4 103.2 " " 4-30 103.2 From the above noted figures it will be seen that the temporary reduction of temperature was practically equal in each case, and the 1905 tablets may be said to have retained their activity in full when tested against freshly made tablets. Phenacetinum-cum-Caffeina, Tablets. Each tablet contains four grains of phenacetin and one grain of caffeine. CAFFEINE. A separation was effected between the phenacetin and the caffeine by utilising their different solubilities. Caffeine is soluble in water in the propor- tion of 1 in 68, whereas phenacetin is practically insoluble in water (1 in 1,700). By crushing and dissolving the tablets as far as possible in water, and then filtering, a solution of caffeine was obtained containing phenacetin only to the extent of 1 in 1,700, the undissolved phenacetin being left on the filter. Two solutions were made, A of 2.5 grams of old (1905) tablets, (contain- ing 0.5 gram of caffeine) in 50 c. c. of water, well filtered, equalling a one per cent, solution of caffeine, and B of the same strength made in the same way with fresh (1910) tablets. (1) EFFECT ON STRIPED MUSCLE OF FROG WHEN APPLIED LOCALLY. (See Plate IV.) A nerve muscle preparation was arranged for recording contractions and a normal curve first recorded. Then 0.25 c.c. of a ten-fold dilution of solution A with normal saline solution was applied to the muscle, and a curve taken immediately after the application. This curve was almost the same height as the normal curve but about double its length. The muscle was then washed with normal saline and a five-fold dilution of solution A applied in the same way
16 and a contraction recorded. This was lower and slower than the previous two and relaxation was not complete. After Washing the muscle a two-fold dilution (containing 0.5 per cent. caffeine) was applied. This caused a considerable shortening of the muscle. A contraction was recorded which was very flat with incomplete relaxation. The muscle was again washed and undiluted solution A was applied, causing great contraction, the base line being now above the level of the highest part of the normal contraction. A contraction was recorded, which was also very flat and showed incomplete relaxation. These results are shown in Chart No. 1, Plate IV. The experiment was repeated with a fresh muscle nerve preparation and solution B, the results being identical, and being shown in Chart No. 2, Plate IV. (2) ACTION ON ISOLATED HEART OF PITHED FROG. (See Plates V and VI.) The heart was isolated and arranged for recording contractions on a slow- ly moving drum. A normal tracing was first made (No. 1, Plate V). 0.5 c.c. of solution A was then allowed to flow over the heart (No. 2). The effect became apparent in six seconds, the contractions gradually diminishing in amplitude and the diastole becoming greatly prolonged, up to as much as 5.8 seconds (Nos. 3 and 4). At the end of two minutes the contractions were regular but only from 0.6 to 0.75 of the normal amplitude, and the diastole was regular lasting just under two seconds (No. 5). At 2 minutes 40 seconds a second dose of 0.5 c.c. was applied, but no further effect was perceptible (Nos. 6 and 7). The experiment was repeated with a fresh frog's heart, using solution B. The normal tracing was first taken (No. 1, Plate VI), and then the drug applied (No. 2). The effect was similar but not so marked as with solution A, and was recovered from to a greater extent (Nos. 3 and 4). At two minutes a second dose was applied (No. 5), which apparently almost paralysed the heart (Nos. 6, 7, and 8). (3) VASO-DILATOR ACTION ON PERIPHERAL VESSELS OF PITHED FROG. Pithed frog and apparatus arranged as stated on page 2. The frog was perfused with normal saline solution until bloodless and then the saline solution traversing the peripheral circulation was measured during successive five minute periods. When the flow had become approximately constant and uniform, normal saline solution containing 2 per cent. of solution A, was
17 perfused and the amount coming away in successive five minute periods was similarly measured. The results obtained are noted below :18 Phenacetin.19 On doing a quantitative test with Esbach's tubes, using an albuminous solution of known strength and taking the same amount of solution A and solution B, both produced the same amount of coagulum. (2) ACTION ON EXPOSED MESENTERY OF FROG. Both solutions produced a similar effect, namely, first a slight dilatation of the vessels followed after between six and seven minutes by gradual slowing and finally stasis of, the circulation, with a slight white deposit on the surface of the mesentery, probably due to coagulation of albumin. (3) INTRA-PERITONEAL INJECTION IN FROG. One c.c. of solution A was injected into one frog and the same amount of solution B into another. No effects were observed during the following three hours, the muscular power remaining unimpaired and the reflexes normal. The dose was increased up to 4 c.c. of one per cent. solution without producing any effect either in the case of solution A or solution B. Solutions were next made from both the old and the fresh pills as follows. Five pills were crushed and dissolved in 20 c.c. of water. Then sulphuretted hydrogen was passed through the solution to precipitate the lead in solution as lead sulphide. The solution was then thoroughly filtered to get rid of the lead, the filtrate containing no lead and being clear and yellowish in colour. Solution C was made from the old pills and solution D from the fresh pills. (4) INTRA-PERITONEAL INJECTION OF LEAD-FREE SOLUTION. Four c. c. (equal to 0.04 gram of opium) of solutions C and D respectively were injected into two frogs. In the case of solution C the following events were noted. Diminution of reflexes was first perceptible 15 minutes after the exhibition of the drug. This gradually became more marked and at one hour and forty minutes the reflexes were greatly diminished and very slow. The frog was unable to walk and response to stimulation was very late. At 1 hour 45 minutes no response could be elicited to any stimulus applied to the legs. At 1 hour 50 minutes head spasm occurred, five spasms being counted in one minute, each followed by a relaxation of the muscles. At two hours from the injection of the drug and thereafter, any stimulus caused spasmodic contractions, but the frog was unable to move except when stimulated, This condition persisted for two hours more. Next day the frog had recovered and was apparently normal. Solution D produced similar effects but more quickly. Diminution of reflexes was perceptible in five minutes from the injection. The frog could D 2
20 still walk but had stopped jumping. At 13 minutes the frog could only move about slowly. The corneal reflex was normal and the pupil not contracted. When placed on its back it could still regain its normal position. At 16 minutes it was unable to right itself but made slow movements when in its normal posi- tion. The first spasms appeared at 25 minutes and at 35 minutes there was a continuous spasm lasting for nearly five minutes. Any stimulus applied to the frog or even any movement of its containing cage produced a spasm. Apart from these spasms the frog was unable to move, and the pupil was in a state of contraction. This condition lasted from minute 35 to minute 56, after which no response or spasm was evoked by any stimulus. The frog was dead in one hour after the injection of the drug. (5) EFFECT WHEN GIVEN BY THE MOUTH TO RABBITS. Twenty c. c. of solution C was given to one rabbit and 20 c.c. of solution D to another, being introduced into the stomach by a tube. Condition on receiving the drug. SOLUTION C RABBIT. Temperature 101 Respiration 58 Pupil normal SOLUTION D RABBIT. Temperature 100.8 Respiration 60 Pupil normal AFTER ONE HOUR. Temperature 101 Respiration 56 Pupil normal Temperature 101 Respiration 56 Pupil normal Both animals were kept under close observation for four hours, but no effects attributable to the drug were observed. (6) ACTION ON FROG'S MESENTERY. 0.25 c.c. of solution C was applied to the mesentery and the application was followed at once by some engorgement of the vessels which appeared a deeper red under the microscope and also showed perceptible dilatation. Solution D gave rise to the same effects but the engorgement and dilatation were more marked, the smaller vessels appearing bright red and considerably increased in calibre. From the foregoing results I conclude that the lead in the old pills has not undergone deterioration and is practically as active as the lead in the fresh pill.
21 The opium in the old pills, however, has decomposed considerably and is much less active than that in the fresh pills. In rapidity of solution and ease of disintegration there is practically no difference between the old and the fresh pills. Pil. Hydrargyri Subchloridi Co. Some experiments were first made to compare the ease and quickness of solution of the old pill with that of the fresh. (1) TWO DISHES EACH CONTAINING 100 C.C. OF A 5 PER CENT. SOLUTION OF HYDROCHLORIC ACID IN WATER WERE KEPT AT 37° CENTIGRADE. In one was placed a fresh pill and in the other an old pill and both were observed for an hour. The old pill showed no sign of dissolving, only two cracks having formed in the coating. The fresh pill showed some melting of the coating in five minutes and the whole of the coating had dissolved off in ten minutes, but the pill itself re- mained undissolved, the fluid remaining quite clear. (2) THE EXPERIMENT WAS REPEATED WITH A 5 PER CENT. SODIUM CARBONATE SOLUTION. The old pill showed some cracks in the coating at 15 minutes and in half an hour the coating was entirely dissolved. At the end of an hour the liquid close to the pill showed some brown discoloration, indicating some slight solu- tion of the pill itself. In the case of the fresh pill the coating took half an hour to dissolve completely and the brown discoloration was rather more marked than in the case of the old pill. (3) THE EXPERIMENT WAS REPEATED WITH BOILING WATER. The old pill was entirely broken down into fine suspended matter in be- tween eight and nine minutes. The fresh pill only took five minutes to disintegrate. Physiological action. (4) PURGATIVE ACTION ON MAN. Two laboratory attendants who volunteered for the experiment and were of approximately the same weight received an old and a fresh pill respectively at 3-30 P.M.
22 The recipient of the old pill had one motion at 8 Pm., hard and yellowish. At 6-30 A.M. he passed a small quantity of soft solid fæces followed by a large quantity of yellow liquid. No griping or loss of appetite was complained of. The recipient of the fresh pill passed one motion at 7 P.M., soft but fairly normal in appearance. He passed a second motion at 9 P.M. consisting almost entirely of yellow liquid, and a third motion at 10-30 P.M. consisting of a large quantity of yellow liquid containing a small amount of solid fæcal matter. He complained of loss of appetite and also of griping which lasted four hours. (5) PURGATIVE ACTION ON DOGS. Two old pills were crushed and given in suspension to a dog weighing 18 kilos, at 11-30 A.M. At 12-33 the dog vomited about two ounces of greenish matter mixed with froth and mucus. At 3-30 it defecated once, a small hard greenish-black mass. At 6 P.M. it again vomited a small quantity of greenish frothy matter. It passed no more fæces during the 24 hours following the administration of the drug. Two fresh pills were crushed and given to a dog weighing 19 kilos at 11-40 A.M. This dog did not vomit and passed one small liquid yellowish motion at 8 P.M. No further action took place during the 24 hours following the administration of the drug. Conclusions.23 (2) ONE SOLOID WAS DISSOLVED IN 100 C.C. OF DISTILLED WATER, GIVING A SOLUTION WHICH SHOULD BE 1.944 PER CENT. This was titrated against Standard Solution of Silver Nitrate and was found to correspond to a 1.845 per cent. solution, showing a loss of 99 milli- grams of Sodium Chloride per soloid. The difference between the results obtained in experiments (1) and (2) is probably due to some of the loss of Sodium Chloride being made up for by absorbed moisture. (3) A 0.75 PER CENT. SOLUTION BY WEIGHT WAS MADE WITH FRESH PURE SODIUM CHLORIDE AND ALSO WITH THE SOLOIDS AND EACH WAS DILUTED WITH DISTILLED WATER UNTIL IT PRODUCED PERFECT AND COMPLETE HÆMOLYSIS OF HUMAN RED BLOOD CORPUSCLES. Complete hæmolysis was only produced in the case of the fresh salt when it had been diluted up to four volumes. In the case of the soloid solution, a dilution to 3.8 volumes produced complete hæmolysis. These results, with those obtained by the Chemical Examiner, show that the Sodium Chloride soloids, except for a very minute loss of substance, have not undergone deterioration. Tinct. Camph. Co. Tablets. One ounce of Tinct. Camph. Co. contains two grains of opium, two grains of Benzoic Acid and one and a half grains of Camphor. One tablet is equal to fifteen minims and therefore contains one-sixteenth of a grain (equal to 0.004 gram) of opium. Ten tablets contain, therefore, 0.04 gram of opium. Two solutions were made. Solution A consisted of 20 tablets dissolved. in 50 c.c. of water and contained 0.0016 gram of opium per c.c. Solution B (control), of the same strength, consisted of 300 minims of fresh Tinct. Camph. Co. made up to 50 c.c. with distilled water. Having no means of separating out the constituents of Tinct. Camph. Co. one was compelled to take the combined action of the composite preparation. (1) INTRA-PERITONEAL INJECTION IN FROG. Two frogs were taken, one receiving an injection of one c.c. of solution A and one an injection of the same amount of solution B. Both frogs were kept under observation for four hours and in neither case was any deviation from the normal detected.
24 (2) THE SAME EXPERIMENT WAS REPEATED WITH A LARGER DOSE. Two frogs were taken. Frog X received an injection of five c.c. of solution A intra-peritoneally, frog Y receiving five c.c. of solution B. In the case of frog X no deviation from the normal was observed, the animal responding to stimuli and behaving in a perfectly natural manner during the four hours it was kept under observation. Frog Y showed effects very soon after the exhibition of the drug. Five minutes after, it was unable to jump normally when stimulated, and could only move at a walk. At nine minutes, on the hind legs being pinched or pricked, they were withdrawn very slowly after a considerable interval. At twelve minutes the hind legs were stretched out and then retracted, after which the frog remained in this position. When placed on its back it was unable to right itself. After twenty minutes it ceased to respond to any cutaneous stimulation, and the cor- neal reflex was greatly impaired and retarded, the eyes being closed very slowly. From minute 25 to minute 33 spasmodic contractions of all the muscles occurred four times at intervals of about two minutes. After minute 33 the frog remain- ed quiet and no more spasms occurred. Respiration which had ceased to be perceptible ten minutes after the injection of the drug again became visible at one hour 20 minutes and the frog gradually recovered although next day the reflexes were still sluggish. (3) EFFECT WHEN LOCALLY APPLIED TO EXPOSED MESENTERIC VESSELS OF PITHED FROG, Two frogs were pithed and the abdomen opened enough to permit of a loop of intestine and its attached mesentery being drawn out on a slide and kept under observation with the low power of a microscope. To the mesentery of frog X, 0.2 c.c. of solution A was applied and to that of frog Y, 0.2 c.c. of solution B. Frog X.25 Frog Y.26 (1) ACTION ON ISOLATED HEART OF PITHED FROG. (See Plate VII.) Heart isolated and arranged for recording contractions on a drum moving slowly and at a constant rate. Contractions were recorded for five minutes before the application of the drug (No. 1). 0.5 c.c. of the clear supernatant fluid of solution A was then allowed to flow slowly over the heart and the contractions were recorded for five minutes (No. 2). The tracing showed a slight increase in amplitude of the contraction and a very slight slowing of the heart. Solution A was then shaken up and 0.5 c.c. of the turbid fluid was allowed to flow over the heart and the contractions recorded for five minutes (No. 3). There was no perceptible change in the curve. The heart and its surroundings were then washed with normal saline solution and 0.5 c.c. of solution B applied to the heart with no apparent difference in the contractions (No. 4). (2) ACTION ON ISOLATED HEART OF PITHED FROG. (See Plates VII and VIII.) The arrangements were as in (1), but the stronger solution C was used and instead of being allowed to flow over the surface of the heart it was injected into the right auricle. Normal contractions were first recorded for five minutes. 0.5 c.c. of solution C was then injected into the right auricle with a hypodermic syringe fitted with a very fine needle. The effect was instantaneous. The ventricle contracted firmly and stopped beating and only a small auricular con- traction was maintained (No. 1, Plate VII). At the end of nine seconds slight ventricular contractions began again and these increased in volume during the next 24 seconds, when the curve produced showed the same amplitude as before the exhibition of the drug, the relaxation between the auricular and ventricular contractions being however much less marked and relaxation not always being of equal completeness (No. 2). Fifty-five seconds after exhibition of the drug, the contractions began to show irregularity, a second contraction occurring before the relaxation of the previous one was complete (No. 3). At 2 minutes 15 seconds the first pro- longed diastole occurred. (No. 4). Thereafter the tracing showed groups of from two to twelve contractions with incomplete relaxation, each group being separated by a prolonged diastole (No. 5). With the exception of some groups of single contractions, each contraction being followed by a prolonged diastole, this characterises the record up to the end of the experiment, 25 minutes after the exhibition of the drug. During the last 10 minutes the contractions gradually became feebler.
27 The experiment was repeated with solution D, normal contractions were first recorded for five minutes (No. 1, Plate VIII). 0.5 c.c. of solution. D was then injected into the right auricle. The heart at once stopped beating, with the ventricle in complete contraction (No. 2). At the end of 25 seconds feeble auricular contractions began and at the end of 60 seconds very slight ventricular contractions were seen. At the end of five minutes the contractions were again well established and regular but smaller than normal (No. 3). At eight minutes the prolongation of the diastole first appeared (No. 4), and from this point to the finish of the record at 27 minutes, the contractions showed this characteristic. The contractions were both single and arranged in groups of two, three and four, the majority being single or in pairs (No. 5). The amplitude was normal from 9 minutes 30 seconds to 25 minutes when the contractions began to diminish and show great irregularity (No. 6). (3) ACTION ON ISOLATED HEART OF PITHED FROG. (See Plate VIII.) In this experiment a frog was used to whose heart solutions A and B had already been applied externally with practically no effect. The heart was beating normally and a tracing was first recorded at this stage. 0.5 c.c. of solution D was then injected into the right auricle. The effect was instantaneous. The ventricle stopped beating and remained firmly contracted, very slight auricular contractions being still perceptible (No. 1) . This condition persisted as long as the record was maintained, namely, 25 minutes. The probable explanation of the difference in the results of this experiment and those of the previous experiment is that some of the previously applied Digitalis had already been absorbed and the combined effect of that and of the dose now injected was sufficient to account for the more severe effect. (4) ACTION ON ISOLATED HEART OF PITHED FROG. (See Plate IX.) Arrangements as before. A normal tracing was first taken (No. 1, Plate IX). 0.5 c.c. of solution C was then allowed to flow over the surface of the heart. No effect was perceptible until 3' 36" after the application of the drug, when considerable slowing of the beat, increased amplitude, and a marked in- crease in the auricular contraction became evident (No. 2). This was main- tained for 1' 40", the contractions being mostly in pairs with an exaggerated and prolonged relaxation between each pair (No. 3). For the next three minutes there was considerable irregularity (No. 4), but this gradually passed off and at the end of fifteen minutes from the first injection the action was, again regular (No. 5). This regularity was maintained till the end of the experiment. E 2
28 (5) ACTION ON ISOLATED HEART OF PITHED FROG. (See Plate IX.) Arrangements as before. A normal tracing was first taken (No. 1, Plate IX). 0.5 c.c. of solution D was then allowed to flow over the surface of the heart. A considerable slowing of the beat was at once produced with an in- crease in the force of the systole (No. 2). The prolonged diastole seen in experiment (4) was not apparent here and the heart continued to beat regularly, with a slightly prolonged " systolic plateau " to the end of the experiment 20 minutes after the application of the drug (Nos. 3 and 4). (6) VASO-CONSTRICTION EFFECT, AS OBSERVED MICROSCOPICALLY IN INTER-DIGITAL MEMBRANE OF FROG. Two frogs were pithed and an inter-digital membrane of each fixed under a microscope. Frog X received 0.5 c.c. of solution C injected into its dorsal lymph sac, frog Y receiving 0.5 c.c. of solution D similarly. In neither case could any change in the calibre of the vessels of the mem- brane be made out during fifteen minutes' observation. (7) VASO-CONSTRICTOR EFFECT AS OBSERVED MICROSCOPICALLY IN MESEN- TERY OF PITHED FROG- AFTER LOCAL APPLICATION OF DRUG-. Two frogs (X and Y) were pithed and the mesentery of each placed on the stage of a microscope and kept moist with normal saline solution. Two minims of solution C was applied to mesentery of frog X and the same amount of solution D to that of frog Y. In X on the application of the drug the circula- tion which had been very slow, occasionally showing only a pulsatile movement, instantaneously became very active, but no change in the diameter of the vessels was apparent for 9 minutes when a slight narrowing became perceptible. This diminution in the diameter became more marked up to 14 minutes but never approached in degree that shown in frog Y. Fourteen minutes after the application of the drug an appearance of inflammation was seen. This became much more intense during the following 5 minutes and the vessels began to dilate again. Half an hour after the application there was intense inflamma- tion over the area to which the drug had been applied, with considerable dilatation of the vessels, but the circulation was still rapid. In the case of Y, to which fresh Tinct. Digitalis (solution D) had been applied, the circulation which had been similar to that seen in X, immediately became very rapid and a considerable degree of constriction of the arterioles and to a less extent of the small veins was at once apparent. This constriction increased for a period of 6 minutes, after which the calibre of the vessels
29 remained unaltered during the rest of the experiment. The membrane and adjacent intestine were kept under observation for 30 minutes after the applica- tion of the drug and no sign of inflammation or irritation was seen. (8) EFFECT ON PERIPHERAL VESSELS, AS SHOWN BY PERFUSING VESSELS OF PITHED FROG WITH DRUG. Pithed frog and apparatus arranged as stated on page 2. Several prelimi- nary experiments were done to determine the best perfusing fluid, the optimum pressure, the time taken to render the frog bloodless, the best strength of the drug in the perfusing solution, and some other minor points. At first Ringer's solution was used, but later it was found that normal saline solution, which took much less time to prepare, gave equally good results. The best marked effects were got with normal saline solution containing 6 per cent. of solution A and solution B. The following figures were obtained: (The frog was perfused with normal saline solution until bloodless, and then the saline solution traversing the peri- pheral circulation was measured during successive 5 minute periods. When the flow had become approximately constant, normal saline solution containing 6 per cent. of solution A was perfused and the amount traversing the peripheral circulation in successive 5 minute periods was similarly measured.) Amount passed in successive 5 minute periods in c.c. Normal Saline Solution. Saline containing Solution A. 30 22 34 19 34 16 29 17 28 14 26 24.5 22.5 26 25
30 The experiment was then repeated with a fresh frog, using first normal saline and then saline containing 6 per cent. of solution B, the figures obtained being as follows :31 compared with the fresh preparation, but the deterioration does not affect all its actions equally. In its action on the heart, which is its most important one therapeutically, it shows a distinctly weaker effect, and its action on peripheral vessels, when applied locally to the exposed mesentery, is weaker and at the same time more irritating. On the other hand, perfusion experiments show that its vaso-constricting power is slightly greater than that of the fresh preparation. The administration of very large doses to guinea-pigs without any evil effects indicates the absence of any undesirable toxic bodies from both tablets and fresh drug. To summarise.32 Two frogs were taken, frog X got 5 c.c. of solution C and frog 5 c.c. of solution D. Frog X, 20 minutes after the injection, was moving about freely and responded normally to stimuli. At 60 minutes the condition was practically the same. At 2 hours and 5 minutes movements in response to stimuli were not quite so marked, but there was no delay of response. This condition per- sisted to the end of the experiment. The pupil remained normal throughout. Frog Y, 22 minutes after the injection, had ceased to make any spontaneous movements and responded very slowly and feebly to stimuli. Very slight con- traction of the pupil was present. At 52 minutes stimuli produced convulsive movements, and spasmodic contractions occurred at intervals during the next hour. At two hours and seven minutes after the injection respiration had ceased and the frog was apparently dead, although on opening the body the heart was found still to be beating. It is well known, however, that frogs can recover after very large doses of Morphine and after their respiration has been stopped for several hours. (3) VASO-DILATOR EFFECT ON VESSELS OF EXPOSED MESENTERY OF PITHED FROG. Two frogs were pithed and a loop of intestine with its attached mesentery brought out and fixed under the low power of a microscope. 0.2 c.c. of solution C was applied to one and 0.2 c.c. of solution D to the other. In the case of solution C, the application of the drug was followed immediately by a perceptible dilatation of both the larger vessels and the capillaries. Thirteen minutes later slowing of the circulation in the capillaries became apparent, dilatation of all the vessels remaining about the same. At 40 minutes the vessels had returned to their original calibre and circulation had stopped completely in the smaller capillaries. At 55 minutes circulation in the larger vessels was still taking place but much more slowly, and it gradually came to a standstill in the course of the next half hour. In the case of solution D, application of the drug was at once followed by dilatation of all the vessels, but to a greater extent than in the case of solution C. Three minutes after application the larger vessels had dilated to about twice their original calibre. Some of the capillaries showed an appearance of engorgement, but the circulation remained quite free. Some of the smallest capillaries showed a very marked increase in size. At 28 minutes dilatation was still maintained, but the circulation was much less rapid and there was a tendency to stasis in some of the vessels, specially the capillaries. At
33 43 minutes the circulation had almost stopped and complete stasis occurred within an hour. (4) EFFECT WHEN GIVEN BY THE MOUTH TO RABBITS. Two rabbits of 478 and 464 grams were taken and to one (X) five tablets crushed in 30 c.c. of water were administered by a stomach tube, the other (Y) receiving 50 minims of fresh Tinct. Opii in 30 c.c. of water. Both animals were kept under observation for five hours. X's temperature before receiving the drug was 101.2. No difference in temperature, contraction of pupil or other effect of the drug was apparent throughout the experiment. Y's temperature was 101.2 before receiving the drug. At 25 minutes after administration slight contraction of the pupils was perceptible. At 70 minutes the animal was sitting quietly with eyes half shut and appeared rather dizzy, staggering slightly when pushed. The temperature had dropped to 100.2. At 1 hour and 40 minutes the pupil contraction had passed off and the animal was moving about occasionally. Thereafter no further effects were noticed. These results would indicate that, although by no means on a par with the fresh tincture in physiological effect, the tablets have retained a portion of their activity. They cannot, however, be regarded as a satisfactory substitute for the fresh tincture. Zinc Sulphate. These one grain tablets were tested against fresh pure zinc sulphate obtained from Messrs. Baird and Tatlock. (1) CHEMICAL TESTS. (a) Solutions of equal strength (5 per cent) of tablets and of fresh salt give a similar reaction with Ammonia, both giving a precipitate which dis- solved in excess. (b) Both solutions were precipitated by Barium Chloride. (c) Both solutions were precipitated by Ammonium Sulphydrate. (2) COAGULATION OF ALBUMIN. An aqueous solution containing 4 per cent. of egg albumin was prepared and two Esbach tubes were filled with it up to the U mark. One tube was filled up to the R mark with 2.6 per cent. solution of tablets, the other being similarly filled up with 2.6 per cent. solution of fresh salt. The tubes were shaken and allowed to stand for 24 hours, the precipitate being thus given time to settle. The precipitate was the same in both tubes, viz., 0.025 per cent.
34 The experiment was repeated with undiluted beaten up and filtered egg albumin and again the solution of the tablets and that of the fresh salt gave the same result, viz., 0.24 per cent. (3) EMETIC ACTION ON DOGS. Thirty grains being taken as a dose for a man of 75 kilos, this works out at 0.4 grain (0.026 gram) per kilo as an emetic. Two solutions of different strengths were made, both with the tablets and with the fresh salt. Solution A 2.6 per cent. Tablets. " B 2.6 " Fresh Salt. " C 26 " Tablets. " D 26 " Fresh Salt. Two dogs were taken and weighed, one weighing 3.02 kilos and the other 16.41 kilos. To the smaller one 0.078 gram of tablet was given by the mouth, i.e., 3 c.c. of solution A. It was kept under observation for six hours, but no effects attributable to the drug were seen. To the larger dog 0.853 gram of fresh salt was given, i.e., 3.3 c.c. of solu- tion B. The dog was kept under observation for six hours and showed no signs of vomiting or salivation. Two days later the experiment was repeated, reversing the drugs, i.e., the small dog receiving the fresh salt and the larger one the tablets. The small dog, 10 minutes after receiving the drug, began to bark and yawn and passed urine three times during the first hour and a quarter. There- after its behaviour was quite normal. The larger clog, 9 minutes after receiving the drug, began to show signs of uneasiness, swaying about and trembling. At 11 minutes it vomited once, a small quantity of frothy thick fluid. It kept shaking its head to and fro for 15 minutes after this, and then lay down quietly, remaining quiet and showing no further signs of any action on the part of the drug. The Zinc Sulphate tablets appear to be in all respects equal to the fresh salt and show no sign of having deteriorated. Hypodermic Tablets. Apomorphinum Hydrochloridum (0.1 grain =0.0065 gram). The solubility of this salt is one in sixty in water. In its action it is emetic, acting on the central nervous system. Locally applied it diminishes
35 and finally abolishes the irritability of both striped and cardiac muscle in the frog. A solution of 0.005 gram per c.c. was made by dissolving 5 old tablets in 6.5 c.c. of distilled water36 The experiment was repeated with a fresh muscle nerve preparation, using solution B, when the maximum distance separating the coils and giving an effective stimulus was found to be 24 c.m. before and 19 c.m. after the appli- cation of the drug. Taking the normal irritability of the muscle as 100, the old tablet solution reduces it by 15 per cent. and the new tablet solution by 21 per cent. (3) ACTION ON ISOLATED HEART OF PITHED FROG. (See Plates XI and XII.) A frog was pithed and its heart exposed and arranged for recording con- tractions. Normal contractions were recorded for five minutes (No. 1, Plate XI). 0.5 c.c. of solution A was then allowed to flow slowly over the heart (No. 2, Plate X). No immediate effect was perceptible, but in the course of one minute the action became perceptibly slower, the rate of contraction falling to 75 per cent. of the normal as taken before the application of the drug (No. 3). This diminution in rate increased up to three minutes after the application of the drug and then the rate remained constant until the end of the experi- ment (Nos. 4, 5, and 6). The experiment was repeated with a fresh frog using solution B. A nor- mal tracing was first taken (No. 1, Plate XII), and then the drug was applied, (No. 2, Plate X). No immediate result was seen, but in the course of the next forty seconds the rate of contraction had become noticeably slower (No. 3), and at the end of one minute the rate of contraction had fallen to 77 per cent. of the normal as taken before the application of the drug (No. 4). The rate gradually got slower and slower until at the end of 7 minutes 30 seconds it had fallen to 29 per cent. of the normal. The slowing was chiefly due to prolongation of the diastole, the systole being only very slightly lengthened (Nos. 5, 6, and 7). This condition of prolonged and irregular diastole per- sisted up to the end of the experiment. (4) EFFECT ON CONTRACTION OF STRIPED MUSCLE OF FROG. (See Plate X.) A nerve muscle preparation was dissected out and arranged to record con- tractions on a rapidly moving drum, a revolving contact-maker being attached to the shaft of the drum in such a manner that successive stimuli were applied at the same point in each revolution of the drum. A muscle curve was then recorded under normal conditions (Plate X, Chart 1, No. 1). 0.25 c.c. of solution A was then allowed to flow over the muscle and a second curve was recorded, superimposed on the first, two minutes after the application of the drug (Chart 1, No. 2).
37 The experiment was then repeated with a fresh muscle nerve preparation, using solution B (Plate X, Chart 2, No. 1 normal, No. 2 drug). In the case of solution A, the only noticeable feature in the drug affected curve is a diminution in speed, both the contraction and the relaxation being slower than normal. In the case of solution B there is a marked lengthening of the latent period, a slowing of the whole contraction, and a diminution in its amplitude. The results of these experiments show that the rapidity of solution of the old tablets is greatly diminished, and, although they retain considerable emetic action, they have suffered a marked loss of activity when compared with fresh tablets. Physostigmine Salicylate. (0.01 grain = 0.00065 gram.) Solubility.38 No muscular twitchings, loss of reflexes, or muscular weakness were detected. Both frogs remained apparently perfectly normal. (4) ACTION WHEN APPLIED LOCALLY TO FROG'S MUSCLE. (See Plate XIII.) A nerve muscle preparation was arranged for recording contractions on a rapidly moving drum. The minimal stimulus was obtained with a distance of 20 cm. between the coils. A normal contraction was recorded with the secondary coil at a distance of 20 cm. from the primary, i.e., with the minimal stimulus. 0.25 c.c. of solution A was then applied to the muscle and five minutes later curves were taken with a distance between the coils of 20, 22, and 24 cm. (Chart 1, Plate XIII). The minimal stimulus was obtained at 24 cm., beyond which no contrac- tion was elicited. The experiment was repeated with a fresh muscle nerve preparation and solution B and very similar results were obtained, the increased irritability of the muscle after the application of the drug not, however, being so great. The minimal stimulus was at 24 cm. here also (Plate XIII, Chart 2). (5) VASO-CONSTRICTOR ACTION ON PERIPHERAL VESSELS OF PITHED FROG. The arrangements for perfusion of the drug were the same as in the case of digitalis. Each frog was first perfused with normal saline solution till bloodless, then the saline solution traversing the circulation in periods of five minutes was measured and when the flow was fairly constant, saline solution containing 0.2 per cent. of solution A or solution B was perfused and the amount flowing through was measured. Amount passed in successive 5-minute periods in c.c. Normal Saline Solution. Saline containing Solution A. 60 56 59 51 62 48 60 47
39 SECOND FROG. Amount passed in successive 5-minute periods in c.c. Normal Saline Solution. Saline containing Solution B. 64 62 63 59 63 58 63 52 62 50 In both cases the vaso-constrictor action was well marked and approxi- mately equal. (6) ACTION ON ISOLATED HEART OF PITHED FROG. (See Plates XIV and XV.) Tracings were first taken using 0.5 c.c. of solution A and solution B which were applied locally to the heart. In neither case was any deviation from the normal perceptible. The experiment was then repeated with fresh frogs, using stronger solu- tions. A normal tracing was first taken (Plate XIV, No. 1), and then 0.5 of an old tablet dissolved in 0.5 c.c. of water was allowed to flow over the heart (No. 2). No immediateeffect was seen, and during the following 90 seconds the tracing was identical with that taken before the application of the drug (Nos. 3 and 4); 2 minutes 3 seconds after the application the only alteration in the action was a slight increase in the auricular contraction (No. 5), which gradually passed off (No. 6). The experiment was repeated using a solution of fresh (1910) tablet of equal strength on a fresh frog. Curves are shown (Plate XV, Nos. 1 to 6), corres- ponding to those shown in the case of the old tablet. The drug has very little effect. The foregoing experiments indicate that there is no recordable deterioration of the old tablets on comparison with fresh ones, the action of both being, identical.
40 Strophanthin. (0.002 grain=0.00013 gram.) Rapidity of Solution.41 (2) ACTION ON ISOLATED HEART (STRONGER SOLUTIONS). (See Plates XIX and XX.) Heart arranged as before and normal tracing taken (Plate XIX, No. 1). 0.5 c.c. of solution C applied at X (No. 2). No immediate effect was produced, but at the end of 1 minute the rate had slowed down. to 93 per cent. of the normal (No. 3), This slowing was transient, however, and at 2 minutes the rate was normal (No. 4), and at 3 minutes 40 seconds the rate was some 5 per cent. over normal (No. 5). The contractions got slightly weaker and at 7 minutes the first prolonged diastole was recorded (No. 6). prolonged diastole kept recurring up to the end of the experiment, usually at intervals of seven beats (Nos. 7 and 8). The experiment was repeated with solution D and a fresh frog. The result was identical, even to the recurrence of the prolonged diastole at intervals of seven beats. (Plate XX.) (3) EFFECT ON CONTRACTION OF STRIPED MUSCLE OF FROG. (See Plate XXI.) A nerve muscle preparation was arranged for recording single contractions on a quickly moving drum with an automatic key. A normal curve was first recorded. 0.5 c.c. of solution A was then applied to the muscle and three minutes later a second contraction was recorded. The curve showed a consider- able lengthening of the latent period, and a slight lengthening of the relaxation period, as well as a smaller contraction (Plate XXI, Chart 1). The experiment was repeated with a fresh muscle nerve preparation using solution B. The curves three and five minutes after the application of the drug show the same features as in the case of solution A except that the curve recorded after three minutes is slightly higher than the normal one (Chart 2). The first experiment would show the old tablets to be considerably more toxic than the fresh, but the other experiments (several others were done giving results similar to those recorded)42 dissolved in 1 c.c. water in 65 seconds and one new tablet dissolved in an equal quantity in 55 seconds. (1) ACTION ON ISOLATED HEART OF PITHED FROG WHEN INJECTED INT) AURICLE. (See Plates XXII, XXIII, XXIV and XXV.) Two solutions were made, A being one old tablet in 10 c.c. of normal saline solution, and B being one fresh tablet in an equal amount of saline. The heart was arranged in the usual way and a normal tracing was first recorded (Plate XXII, No. 1). 0.5 c.c. of solution A was then injected into the right auricle with a hypodermic syringe having a very fine needle. The immediate effect was a well marked increase in the amplitude of the contrac- tions, the rate however remaining the same (No. 2). This effect lasted for less than a minute, the contractions dropping to smaller than the normal and also quickening up to 7 per cent. above normal (Nos. 3 and 4). The amplitude of the contraction continued to diminish up to the end of the experiment (30 minutes). The rate increased up to 18 per cent. over the normal (Nos. 5, 6, 7, and 8). The experiment was repeated with a fresh frog using 0.5 c.c. of solution B. Plate XXIII, No. 1, is the normal tracing. The drug was injected at X (No. 2), and the almost immediate effect was a slowing of the rate of contraction to 87 per cent. of the normal. There was no increase in the amplitude. The slowness was maintained for the next 4 minutes and 40 seconds (Nos. 3 and 4), when it gradually dropped to 82 per cent. and finally to 80 per cent., the amplitude being greatly diminished and falling to about 65 per cent. of what it was before the application of the drug (Nos. 5, 6, 7, and 8). (2) EFFECT WHEN APPLIED TO EXTERNAL SURFACE OF ISOLATED HEART OF PITHED FROG. In this experiment stronger solutions were used, solution C consisting of two old tablets dissolved in 2 c.c. of water and solution D being the same but made with fresh tablets. The heart was arranged as usual and a normal tracing taken, Plate XXIV (No. 1). 0.5 c.c. of solution C was then allowed to flow slowly over the sur- face of the heart (No. 2). The immediate effect was a slowing down to 90 per cent. of the normal. At the end of 1 minute 40 seconds the rate was again normal and the tracing was identical with the normal one (No. 3). From
43 this point onward till the end of the experiment, the contractions remained the same, varying between a slight slowing down to 95 per cent. and normal (Nos. 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8). The experiment was repeated using 0.5 c.c. of solution D. (Plate XXV.) The immediate effect was a quickening of the rate to 4 per cent. over nor- mal (No. 2), but this was replaced 40 seconds after the application of the drug by a slowing of the rate to 96 per cent. of the normal (No. 3). 2 minutes 30 seconds later the rate was again normal (No. 4), and it remained normal to the end of the experiment (Nos. 5, 6, and 7). The amplitude throughout was slightly greater than before the application of the drug and the action of the heart was regular. (3) VASO-CONSTRICTOR ACTION ON THE PERIPHERAL VESSELS OF PITHED FROG. For this experiment a solution of five tablets in 25 c.c. of water was used, A being the solution of the old tablets and B being that of the fresh. The usual arrangements for perfusing the fluid through the peripheral circulation of the frog were made, and after the frog was bloodless and the rate of the saline solution flowing through was fairly constant, norma saline solu- tion containing 2 per cent, of the drug solution was perfused and the effect recorded. The results obtained are noted below:44 The experiment was repeated with a fresh frog using first normal saline solution and then saline solution containing 2 per cent. of solution B. The figures obtained were as follows:45 (4) ACTION WHEN APPLIED LOCALLY TO EXPOSED MESENTERIC VESSELS OF PITHED FROG. Two frogs were pithed and a loop of intestine of each with its attached mesentery was placed under the low power of a microscope. To the mesentery of frog X 0.25 c.c. of solution A was applied and to the mesentery of frog Y, 0.25 of solution B. In frog X circulation was sluggish and came to a stand46 In all four cases the results observed were identical, namely, slight slowing and diminution of reflexes on cutaneous stimulation. No loss of muscular power, no spasms and no effect on respiration were perceptible. (2) ACTION WHEN APPLIED LOCALLY TO EXPOSED MESENTERIC VESSELS OF PITHED FROG. Solution A and solution B produced the same result in equal times, namely, dilatation of vessels, most marked in the arteries and arterioles. The dilatation was of an approximately equal degree, and in both cases stasis occurred in the sixth minute after the application of the drug. (3) ACTION ON CATS, HYPODERMICALLY INJECTED. Two cats of approximately equal weight were used. One cat received one old tablet dissolved in 1 c.c. of water and hypodermically injected, the other cat receiving one fresh tablet in similar fashion. The animals remained under observation for five hours and failed to show symptoms of any kind, apparently remaining in a perfectly normal state. No difference was detected between the behaviour of the two animals. (4) ACTION OF LARGER DOSE ON CAT HYPODERMICALLY INJECTED. A cat weighing 1.6 kilos received two old tablets in solution hypoder- mically. Ten minutes later there was salivation, frothy mucus running from the mouth. The cat was drowsy and lay down and could not be made to stand or move by stimuli such as pricking or pinching. It would not touch food and one hour after the injection its pupils showed slight contraction. Two and a half hours after the injection it took food and thereafter its behaviour was normal. At no time was there any appearance of excitement. Four days later, the same cat, having quite recovered from the effects of the old tablets, was given two fresh tablets hypodermically. Within five minutes of the injection mucus and froth began to run from its mouth and at ten minutes the cat seemed drowsy and lay down, moving its head. to and fro laterally for five minutes. It could not be made to stand. One hour after the injection it again began to move its head laterally from side to side and continued to do so for nearly half an hour. There was slight contraction of the pupil. It took food 3¾ hours after the injection. At no time were there any signs of excitement. These results fail to show any difference in activity between the old and the new tablets.
47 Atropine and Morphine Sulphate. (Atropin. Sulph. 1/155 grain=0.00043 gram. Morphin. Sulph. ¼ grain=0.0162 gram.) Action.48 (3) ACTION ON SKIN AND CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM IN FROG. Two frogs were taken; one received 1 c.c. of solution A intraperitoneally, the other receiving 1 c.c. of solution B in the same way. No difference between the two was perceptible. In both cases at the end of one hour there was slight exaggeration of reflexes. In neither case was there any apparent inhibition of the skin glands. (4) PARALYSIS OF VAGUS TERMINATIONS AS SHOWN IN ISOLATED HEART OF PITHED FROG. (See Plates XXVI and XXVII.) A frog was pithed, the heart exposed and isolated, and arranged for recording contractions, the vago-sympathetic having first been exposed on one side and placed upon a pair of electrodes connected with a secondary coil. A normal tracing was first taken (Plate XXVI, No. 1). The vago- sympathetic was then stimulated for ten seconds (No. 2). On the application of the stimulus all the muscular structures were thrown into contraction so that the heart was retracted considerably, the tracing moving proportionately higher up on the paper. Two abortive beats occurred after the stimulus was applied and then the heart's action was entirely inhibited until the current was stopped, when the heart resumed its former position and began to beat again. The beats were slower and of less amplitude for the first 14 seconds. Thereafter they were first normal and eventually of greater amplitude than normal (No. 3); 0.5 c.c. of solution A was then allowed to flow slowly over the heart and five minutes later the vago-sympathetic was again stimulated for 13 seconds. This time there was no stoppage, the contractions only showing slight irregularity and diminished amplitude(No. 4). The experiment was repeated with a fresh frog and using solution B. Plate XXVII, Curves Nos. 1, 2, 3, and 4, show the same phases as are described above. Before the application of the drug, stimulation of the vago-sympathe- tic caused complete temporary stoppage of the heart's contraction, whereas vagal stimulation five minutes after the application of the drug failed to stop the heart and led to the same results as occurred in the case of solution A. Both the fresh and the old tablets, therefore, show equal activity in para- lysing the terminations of the vagi. These results indicate that the old tablets have not deteriorated and that they possess activity equal to that of the fresh (1910) tablets. Summary of results. Aloin Compound.49 Ammonium Carbonate.50 dissolve. Their activity, physiologically, is considerably less than that of the new tablets. Physostigmine Salicylate.51 The Effects of Chloride, Sulphate, Nitrate and Nitrite Radicles of some common Bases on the frog's heart, Cook; (American Journal of Physiology, Vol. XXIV, p. 263, May 1st, 1909.) The Action of Caffeine on the capacity for muscular work, Rivers and Webber; (Journal of Physiology, Vol. XXXVI, p. 33, August 27th, 1907.) Strychnine and Reflex Inhibition of Skeletal Muscle, Sherrington; (Journal of Physio- logy, Vol. XXXVI, p. 185, November 29th, 1907.) On the physiological action of the seeds of Garcia Nutans, Omphalea Megacarpa, and Omphalea Triandra from Trinidad, Cash; (Journal of Physiology, Vol. XXXVI, p. 488, February 28th, 1908.) Concerning the action of Curara and Physostigmine upon Nerve Endings or Muscles, Edmunds and Roth; (American Journal of Physiology, Vol. XXIII, p. 28, October 1st, 1908.) The Action of the Alkaloids of the Papaveraceæ upon the isolated Frog s Heart, Hale; (American Journal of Physiology, Vol. XXIII, p. 389, March 1st, 1909.) On the Munchi arrow poison and Strophanthin, Mines; (Journal of Physiology, Vol. XXXVII, p. 37, May 6th, 1908.) CALCUTTA: SUPDT. GOVT. PRINTING, 8, HASTINGS STREET. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062335.tif]
AMMONIUM CARBONATE. FRESH TABLETS. PLATE I. CHART 1. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062341.tif] No. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062341.tif] No 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062341.tif] No. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062341.tif] AMMONIUM CARBONATE, OLD TABLETS. CHART 2. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062341.tif] No. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062341.tif] No. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062341.tif]
AMMONIUM CARBONATE. FRESH TABLETS. PLATE I. CHART 1. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062344.tif] No. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062344.tif] No 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062344.tif] No. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062344.tif] AMMONIUM CARBONATE, OLD TABLETS. CHART 2. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062344.tif] No. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062344.tif] No 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062344.tif] No. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062344.tif] No. 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062344.tif] No. 6. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062344.tif] No. 7. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062344.tif]
PLATE II. COLCHICINE SALICYLATE, OLD TABLETS. Chart 1. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062350.tif] No. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062350.tif] X 1 57/.. DOSE. No. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062350.tif] No. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062350.tif] X 2 DOSE. COLCHICINE SALICYLATE, FRESH TABLETS. Chart 2. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062350.tif] No. 2 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062350.tif] X DRUG APPLIED. No. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062350.tif] No. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062350.tif] X ANOTHER DOSE. No. 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062350.tif]
PLATE III. COLCHICINE SALICYLATE, OLD TABLETS, Chart 1. Muscle Curve, (a) Normal. (b) Two minutes after application of drug. (c) Five PLATE IV. CHART No. 1. CAFFEINE, OLD TABLETS, EFFECT ON STRIPED MUSCLE . [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062362.tif] CHART No. 2. CAFFEINE, FRESH TABLETS, EFFECT ON STRIPED MUSCLE . [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062362.tif] Normal.
PLATE V CAFFEINE, OLD TABLETS, EFFECT ON ISOLATED HEART. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062368.tif] No. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062368.tif] No. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062368.tif] No. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062368.tif]
PLATE V CAFFEINE, OLD TABLETS , EFFECT ON ISOLATED HEART. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062371.tif] No. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062371.tif] No. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062371.tif] No. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062371.tif] No. 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062371.tif] No. 6. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062371.tif] No. 7. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062371.tif]
PLATE VI. (CAFFEINE, FRESH TABLETS), EFFECT ON ISOLATED HEART. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062377.tif] No. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062377.tif] No. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062377.tif] No. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062377.tif] No. 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062377.tif]
PLATE VI. (CAFFEINE, FRESH TABLETS), EFFECT ON ISOLATED HEART. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062380.tif] No. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062380.tif] No. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062380.tif] No. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062380.tif] No. 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062380.tif] No. 6. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062380.tif] No. 7. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062380.tif] No. 8. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062380.tif]
PLATE VII. TINCT. DIGITALIS; EXPERIMENT 1. Solution A. EFFECT ON ISOLATED HEART. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062386.tif] No. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062386.tif] No. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062386.tif] No. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062386.tif] TINCT. DIGITALIS; EXPERIMENT 2. Solution C. EFFECT ON ISOLATED HEART. A.
PLATE VII. TINCT. DIGITALIS; EXPERIMENT 1. Solution A. EFFECT ON ISOLATED HEART. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062389.tif] No. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062389.tif] No. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062389.tif] No. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062389.tif] TINCT. DIGITALIS; EXPERIMENT 2. Solution C. EFFECT ON ISOLATED HEART. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062389.tif] No. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062389.tif] No. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062389.tif] No. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062389.tif] No. 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062389.tif]
PLATE VIII. TINCT. DIGITALIS; EXPERIMENT 2. Solution D. EFFECT ON ISOLATED HEART. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062395.tif] No. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062395.tif] No. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062395.tif] No. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062395.tif] No. 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062395.tif] No. 6. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062395.tif] TINCT. DIGITALIS; EXPERIMENT 3. EFFECT ON ISOLATED HEART. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062395.tif]
PLATE IX. TINCT. DIGITALIS; EXPERIMENT 4. EFFECT ON ISOLATED HEART. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062401.tif] No. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062401.tif] No. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062401.tif] No. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062401.tif] No. 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062401.tif] TINCT. DIGITALIS; EXPERIMENT 5. EFFECT ON ISOLATED HEART. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062401.tif] No. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062401.tif] No. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062401.tif]
PLATE X. TABLETS APOMORPHINUM HYDROCHLORIDUM. ACTION ON STRIPED MUSCLE. Chart 1, Solution A. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062407.tif] Chart 2, Solution B. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062407.tif]
PLATE XI. TABLETS APOMORPHINUM HYDROCHLORIDUM. ACTION ON ISOLATED HEART. Solution A. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062413.tif] No. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062413.tif] No. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062413.tif] No. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062413.tif] No. 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062413.tif] No. 6. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062413.tif]
PLATE XII. TABLETS APOMORPHINUM HYDROCHLORIDUM. ACTION ON ISOLATED HEART. Solution B. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062419.tif] No. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062419.tif] No. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062419.tif] No. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062419.tif] No. 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062419.tif] No. 6. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062419.tif] No. 7. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062419.tif]
PLATE XIII. TABLETS PHYSOSTIGMINAE SALICYLAS. (4) ACTION ON STRIPED MUSCLE. Chart 1, Solution A. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062425.tif] Chart 2, Solution B. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062425.tif]
PLATE XIV. PHYSOSTIGMINAE SALICYLAS. ACTION ON ISOLATED HEART, OLD TABLET. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062431.tif] No. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062431.tif] No. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062431.tif] No. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062431.tif] No. 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062431.tif] No. 6. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062431.tif]
PLATE XV. PHYSOSTIGMINAE SALICYLAS. ACTION ON ISOLATED HEART, NEW TABLET. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062437.tif] No. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062437.tif] No. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062437.tif] No. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062437.tif] No. 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062437.tif] No. 6. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062437.tif]
PLATE XVI. STROPHANTHIN. (1) ACTION ON ISOLATED HEART OF PITHED FROG. Solution A. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062443.tif] No. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062443.tif] No. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062443.tif] No. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062443.tif] No. 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062443.tif] No. 6. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062443.tif] No. 7. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062443.tif] No. 8. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062443.tif]
PLATE XVII. STROPHANTHIN. (1) ACTION ON ISOLATED HEART. Solution B, first experiment. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062449.tif] No. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062449.tif] No. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062449.tif] No. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062449.tif] No. 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062449.tif] No. 6. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062449.tif] No. 7. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062449.tif]
PLATE XVIII. STROPHANTHIN. (1) ACTION ON ISOLATED HEART. Solution B, second experiment. No. 1a. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062455.tif] No. 2a. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062455.tif] No. 3a. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062455.tif] No. 4a. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062455.tif] No. 5a. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062455.tif] No. 6a. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062455.tif] No. 7a. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062455.tif]
PLATE XIX. STROPHANTHIN. (2) ACTION ON ISOLATED HEART. Solution C. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062461.tif] No. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062461.tif] No. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062461.tif] No. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062461.tif] No. 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062461.tif] No. 6 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062461.tif] No. 7. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062461.tif] No. 8. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062461.tif]
PLATE XX. STROPHANTHIN. (2) ACTION ON ISOLATED HEART. Solution D. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062467.tif] No. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062467.tif] No. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062467.tif] No. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062467.tif] No. 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062467.tif] No. 6. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062467.tif] No. 7. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062467.tif] No. 8. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062467.tif]
PLATE XXI. STROPHANTHIN. (3) ACTION ON STRIPED MUSCLE. Chart 1, Solution A. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062473.tif] Chart 2, Solution B. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062473.tif]
PLATE XXII. DIGITALIN. (1) ACTION ON ISOLATED HEART. Solution A. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062479.tif] No. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062479.tif] No. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062479.tif] No. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062479.tif] No. 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062479.tif] No. 6. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062479.tif] No. 7. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062479.tif] No. 8. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062479.tif]
PLATE XXIII. DIGITALIN. (1) ACTION ON ISOLATED HEART. Solution B. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062485.tif] No. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062485.tif] No. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062485.tif] No. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062485.tif] No. 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062485.tif] No. 6. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062485.tif] No. 7. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062485.tif] No. 8. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062485.tif]
PLATE XXIV. DIGITALIN. (2) ACTION ON ISOLATED HEART. Solution C. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062491.tif] No. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062491.tif] No. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062491.tif] No. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062491.tif] No. 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062491.tif] No. 6. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062491.tif] No. 7. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062491.tif] No. 8. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062491.tif]
PLATE XXV. DIGITALIN. (2) ACTION ON ISOLATED HEART. Solution D. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062497.tif] No. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062497.tif] No. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062497.tif] No. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062497.tif] No. 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062497.tif] No. 6. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062497.tif] No. 7. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062497.tif]
PLATE XXVI. ATROPINE AND MORPHINE. (4) PARALYSIS OF VAGUS TERMINATIONS. Solution A. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062503.tif] No. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062503.tif] No. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062503.tif] No. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062503.tif]
PLATE XXVII. ATROPINE AND MORPHINE. (4) PARALYSIS OF VAGUS TERMINATIONS. Solution B. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062509.tif] No. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062509.tif] No. 3.
PLATE XXVII. ATROPINE AND MORPHINE. (4) PARALYSIS OF VAGUS TERMINATIONS. Solution B. No. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062512.tif] No. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062512.tif] No. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062512.tif] No. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062512.tif] Reg. No.4269 E.,11.