IP/QB.10 m. 91. b (NEW SERIES.) No. 55. SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA The Structure of Hæmatopota Pluvialis (Meigen) BY CAPTAIN F. W. CRAGG, M.D., I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL SERVICE. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062537.tif] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1912 Price Re. 1 and Annas 2 or ls. 9d.
M. 91. b.
(NEW SERIES.) No. 55. SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA The Structure of Hæmatopota Pluvialis (Meigen) BY CAPTAIN F. W. CRAGG, M.D., I.M.S. ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL SERVICE. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062549.tif] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062549.tif] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1912
Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. Messrs. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, W.C. Messrs. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., 68-74, Carter Lane, E.C. Mr. BERNARD QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, W. Messrs. P. S. KING & SON, 2 and 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster. Messrs. H. S. KING & CO., 65, Cornhill, and 9, Pall Mall, London. Messrs. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, London, S.W. Mr. T. FISHER UNWIN, 1, Adelphi Terrace, London, W.C. Messrs. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E.C. Mr. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 51, Broad Street, Oxford. Messrs. DEIGHTON BELL & CO., Cambridge. Messrs. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W.C. ON THE CONTINENT. Mr. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Mr. KARL HIERSEMANN, Leipzig Messrs. R. FRIEDLÄNDER & SOHN, Berlin,. W.N., Carlstrasse, 11. Mr. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. Mr. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. IN INDIA. Messrs. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. Messrs. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. Messrs. R. CAMBRAY & CO., Calcutta. Messrs. S. K. LAHIRI & CO., Calcutta. Messrs. B. BANERJEE & CO., Calcutta. The CALCUTTA SCHOOL BOOK AND USEFUL LITERATURE SOCIETY, 309, Bow Bazar Street, Calcutta. Messrs. BUTTERWORTH & CO. (India), Limited, Calcutta. The WELDON LIBRARY, 18-5, Chowringhee Road, Calcutta. Messrs. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras. Messrs. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & CO., Madras. Messrs. G. A. NATESAN & CO., Madras. Messrs. S. MURTHY & CO., Madras. Messrs. THOMPSON & Co., Madras. Messrs. TEMPLE & Co., Madras. Messrs. COMBRIDGE & Co., Madras. Messrs. P. R. RAMA IYER & Co., Madras. Messrs. THACKER & Co., LD., Bombay. Messrs. A. J. COMBRIDGE & Co., Bombay. Messrs. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & CO., Bombay. Mrs. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay. Mr. SUNDER PANDURANG, Bombay. Messrs. GOPAL NARAYAN & CO., Bombay. Messrs. RAM CHANDRA GOVIND & SON, Kalbadevi, Bombay. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission Press, Rangoon. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid- i-Am Press, Lahore and Calcutta. Mr. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazir Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. Messrs. A. CHAND & Co., Punjab. Messrs. A. M. & J. FERGUSON, Ceylon. Babu S. C. TALUKDAR, Proprietor, Students and Company, Cooch Behar.
List of numbers of Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India (New Series) published previous to the present issue. No. 1. Standardisation of Calmette's Anti-Venomous Serum with Pure Cobra Venom: the Deterioration of this Serum through keeping in India, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 2. Malaria in India, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No. 3. Some Observations on the Poison of Russell's Viper (Daboia Russellii), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 5 or 6d. No. 4. On the Action of the Venoms of the Cobra and of the Daboia on the Red Blood corpuscles and on the blood plasma, by Captain G. Lamb, I .M .S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 5. Specificity of Anti-Venomous Sera, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 6. First Report on the Anti-Malarial Operations in Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 7. Some Observations on the Poison of the Banded Krait (Bungarus Fasciatus), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 8. A Preliminary Report on a Parasite found in Patients suffering from Enlargement of the Spleen in India, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No. 9. Second Report of the Anti-Malarial Operations at Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 10. Specificity of Anti-Venomous Sera (Second Communication), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 11. On a Parasite found in persons suffering from Enlargement of the Spleen in India2 No. 21. On the Standardisation of Anti-Typhoid Vaccine, by Captain George Lamb, M.D., I.M.S. (Director, Pasteur Institute of India), and Captain W. B. C. Forster, M.B., D.P.H., I.M.S. Price As. 6 or 7d. No. 22. Mediterranean Fever in India: Isolation of the Micrococcus Melitensis, by Captain George Lamb, M.D., I.M.S., and Assistant Surgeon M. Kesava Pai,M.B., C.M. (Madras). Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 23., The Anatomy and Histology of Ticks, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price Rs. 3 or 4s. 6d. No. 24. On a Parasite found in the White Corpuscles of the blood of Palm Squirrels, by Captain W. S. Patton, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 25. On the importance of Larval Characters in the Classification of Mosquitoes, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 26. Leucocytozoon Canis, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 27. Preliminary Report on the Development of the Leishman-Donovan Body in the Bed Bug, by Captain W. S. Patton, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 28. The Sexual Cycle of Leucocytozoon Canis in the Tick, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 29. Piroplasma Canis and its Cycle in the Tick, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price Rs. 2 or 3s. No. 30. The Theory and Practice of Anti-Rabic Immunisation, by Captain W. F. Harvey, M.B., I.M.S., and Captain Anderson McKendrick, M.B., I .M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 31. The Development of the Leishman-Donovan Parasite in Cimex Rotundatus3 No. 42. The Cultivation of the Bacillus of Leprosy and the Treatment of cases by means of Vaccine prepared from the Cultivations, Part I, by Major E. R. Rost, I.M.S. The Cultivation of Leprosy Bacillus by Captain, T. S. B. Williams, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 43. The Relation of Tetanus to the Hypodermic or Intramuscular Injection of Quinine, by Lieutenant-Colonel Sir D. Semple, KT., M.D. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 44. The Preparation of a Safe and Efficient Anti-rabic Vaccine, by Lieutenant-Colonel Sir D. Semple, KT., M.D., D.P.H., R.A.M.C. (Retired). Price A. 8 or 9d. No. 45. Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta, by Major E. D. W. Greig, M.D., D.Sc., I.M.S. Price Re. 1-4 or 2s. No. 46. Malaria in the Punjab, by Major S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price Rs. 2 or 3s. No. 47. Dysentery and Liver Abscess in Bombay, by Major E. D. W. Greig, M.D., D.Sc., I.M.S., and Captain R. P. Wells, M.A., M.B., I.M.S. Price Rs. 2 or 3s. No. 48. Investigations into the Jail Dietaries of the United Provinces: with some Observa- tions on the Influence of Dietary on the Physical Development and well-being of the people of the United Provinces, by Major D. McCay, M.B., M.R.C.P., I.M.S. Price Re. 1-12 or 3s. No. 49. Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta, by Major E. W. D. Greig, M.D., D.Sc., I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 6d. No. 50. Preliminary Report on an Investigation into the Etiology of Oriental Sore in Cambay, by Captain W. S. Patton, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 6d. No. 51. A Streptothrix isolated from the Spleen of a Leper, by Major W. G. Liston, M.D., D.P.H., I.M.S., and Captain T. S. B. Williams, I.M.S. Price As. 14 or 1s. 4d. No. 52. Dysentery in Hazaribagh Central Jail, January 1910The Structure of Hæmatopota Pluvialis * (Meigen) BY CAPTAIN F. W. CRAGG, M.D., I.M.S. INTRODUCTION. THE rapid advance which has taken place in recent years in our knowledge of the h2 Chrysozona for the well known one of H3 the bite is usually trifling, less than that of a mosquito bite. Some individuals, however, appear to be remarkably sensitive, and suffer for days, even a week or longer, from local irritation and inflammation. The fly takes about three minutes to obtain a full meal, and while feeding it is not readily disturbed; and the process can be watched on one's hand through a pocket lens. The habit of defæcating while feeding, usual in blood-sucking insects, has an important bearing on the question of the normal parasites of the fly, for it is obvious that any encysted phases of such parasites which may be free in the hind gut at the time of feeding will be deposited on the skin of the host, and will be in a position to be taken up by another fly. In the case of the Tabanid4 For the study of the mouth parts and of the complicated structures at the base of the skull, it was found convenient to embed the whole head, after prolonged treatment with a weak solution of caustic soda, in paraffin, and then to cut away by hand the portions not required. The paraffin was then dissolved off in clove oil, and the preparation mounted, with or without further dissection, in a hollow slide. Similar preparations were made of the sides and lower part of the thorax, and were found to be much more satisfactory than simple dissections. The separate organs were fixed and preserved, after dissection, in Bles' fluid,* and subsequently embedded and cut in sections. This is a most convenient method of fixation when one is away from a laboratory, and the tissues, even after preservation for several months in the fluid, stain quite well. In the description of the parts, the terms superior, anterior, etc., are used in their strict anatomical sense, with reference to the fly in a resting position on a horizontal surface. It is important to note this in the description of the head, since the mouth parts are almost perpendicular to the long axis of the body. The term proboscis is used to include all the protruding mouth parts. EXTERNAL ANATOMY. I.5 In front of the above piece, at the apex of the dome, there is a shining black transverse band, elevated somewhat from the surface, which bears the antennæ. This band occupies almost the entire space between the eyes, and is separated from the epicranial plate behind and the clypeus below by definite sutures. The Clypeus is an oblong plate, rather narrower above than below, which stretches from the antennal plate to the labrum. It is light fawn in colour, and is speckled with fine pigment spots, and covered with fine hairs. There are two pigment patches, resembling those on the superior epicranial plate, in its upper half. The anterior openings of the intracranial tunnels, to be subsequently des- cribed, lie in the lower third of the sutures bounding the clypeus in each side. The Gen6 (b) The Mouth Parts. These consist of two paired organs, the mandibles and maxill7 The Lacinia is a short peg-shaped projection arising from the inner edge of the galea at its base. The two laciniæ project inwards opposite to one another at the level of the articulation of the mandible, and assist in supporting the membrane at the base of the skull. The Stipes, which is directly continuous with the galea, is a much convoluted piece, lying behind the pharynx and extending upwards to a point about midway between the base of the mandible and the occipital foramen. It may be described as consisting of a vertical rod, flattened transversely, and bent outwards in its lower third, then inwards and again outwards at its upper end, where it articulates with the cardo. The lower third of the inner edge is turned forwards, and there is a blunt projecting spur on the middle of the outer edge. On the posterior surface of this plate, at its lower end, there is a well-marked ridge, into which the central strand of the galea runs, and to which the palp is attached. The Cardo is a small wedge-shaped piece which connects the maxilla with the cranial wall. Its base articulates with the stipes, while its apex, which is turned outwards, rests in a notch in the thickened edge of the epicranium bounding the central space. (Plate III, Fig. 13.) The cardo lies behind the base of the intracra- nial tunnel, and is crossed by the attachment of this tube to a curved rod, to be subsequently described. The Labrum (Plate II, Fig. 7) is a thin spatulate slip, which is fused, except for a short interval at its upper end, with the epipharynx. When the two are separated by dissection, it is seen that the labium does not extend quite to the tip of the epipharynx and that its margins are extremely thin and ill-defined. It is attached to the clypeus by a narrow Y shaped slip of brown chitin. The Epipharynx (Plate II, Fig. 7) is shaped like a broad two-edged sword. It is directly continuous at its base with the anterior of the two chitinous plates which form the pharynx, and has on its posterior surface a deep groove, the edges of which are incurved so as to include about four-fifths of a circle. This groove, when opposed to the hypopharynx, forms the canal up which blood is sucked. The tip of the epipharynx is blunt, and is occupied by three small tubercles, two of which are lateral and anterior, while the third is situated at the extreme tip. These tubercles consist of a large number of small blunt teeth, arranged in rows in a radiating manner. The edges of the epipharynx are fine and sharp, and show an oblique striation, internal to the edges, and there is on each side a strong sup- porting band of fibres running in a longitudinal direction, and internal to this, between it and the canal, there is a small amount of cellular tissue, well seen in cross section. (Plate II, Fig. 3.) The Hypopharynx (Plate II, Fig. 8) resembles the epipharynx in shape, but is more slender, and tapers more towards its point. It is pierced throughout its
8 length by the salivary duct, which opens at its tip. The edges of the blade con- tract sharply at the base, where the duct opens into the salivary reservoir. The hypopharynx consists of two laminæ, which are readily separated in dissection. The anterior and larger of these is continuous with the posterior plate of the pharynx and with the salivary reservoir, while the posterior lamina is attached to the cornua of the labium. The Labium (Plate II, Figs. 4 and 6) has a somewhat complicated structure. It is partly composed of thin chitinous plates, and partly of a flexible membrane, which connects the chitinous parts so as to enclose a tubular space, in which there are contained certain muscles and cellular structures. The distal half of the labium is divided into two labellæ, on the opposing surfaces of which the arthrodial membrane is replaced by a pseudo-tracheal membrane, similar to that of the house fly. The loose connection of the chitinous plates, by means of the membrane, permits of a considerable degree of movement of the labellæ on the labium and on one another. The anterior surface of the labium is deeply grooved for the recep- tion of the piercing mouth parts. The main support of the upper half of the labium is a large shield-like plate, aptly termed by Meinert the scutum. This piece is concave forwards, and forms the posterior and lateral walls of the upper half of the organ. The narrow upper end is produced into a pair of cornua, which lie behind the salivary receptacle and are attached to the non-chitinized membrane, which, as will be seen subsequently, completes the base of the skull. The arched upper border of the scutum has, on each side, a row of six long black macro chaetæ. In the middle of this border a pair of short, pointed processes, called by Meinert the cardines, project downwards. In front of the scutum, and of course, separated from it by the muscles lying between the membraneous folds, there is a somewhat ill-defined chitinous plate which forms the floor of the groove in which the piercing parts lie. This plate is also concave forwards, though its contour differs considerably at different levels. The membrane which completes the wall of the labium in this region is attached to the sides of this trough-like piece and to the corresponding sides of the scutum, and is folded forwards, to a degree varying in different preparations, over the groove in the anterior surface. In this way the membraneous wall of the labium together with the maxillary palps, which lie in front of the upper part of the labium, entirely conceal the rest of the mouth parts. Below the level of the scutum, and external to the cardines, there is on each side an oval plate, called by Meinert the Stylus Extensoers labell9 chitinous framework of the labellæ, when the latter are brought parallel to the surface on which the insect rests. The Labell10 being traceable almost to the tip. Contraction of all these bundles together will retract the labellæ, while contraction of the anterior fibres only will bring the labellæ more parallel to the surface on which the fly is resting. Two trachea enter the base of the labium. They expand at the region of the scutum into two comparatively large air sacs, from which the trachea can be traced downwards for a short distance. There is also a pair of small nerves, lying internal to the muscles. Cellular Structures.11 There are no ducts to be made out in connection with the labial gland cells. Their secretion is probably exuded by means of the cubical cells lining the pseudo-tracheal membrane. (c) The Intracranial Tunnels. These remarkable structures lie in the lower part of the head. Each consist of a stout hollow chitinous tube, which opens on to the anterior and posterior sur- faces in the positions already indicated in the description of the external char- acters. The two tubes lie in a horizontal plane, and converge somewhat towards one another from before backwards. The main portion of the tube is cylindrical and is narrowest about its middle. The anterior end is funnel-shaped, and has a wide attachment to the epicranium in the region of the clypeus and gena. The posterior end, which lies in front of the cardo of the maxilla, is more irregular and is produced into three tubercles. One of these projects inwards, while the others are firmly attached by strands of chitin to the thickened lateral edge of the epicranium, and to the curved rod which extends from the region of the orifice to the occipital foramen. From the upper surface of each of these tubes there arises a thin trabecular membrane. This is triangular in shape, and is attached in front to the epicranium at the junction of the clypeus with the gena, extending as high as the antennal socket. The free upper margins of the two trabecular plates separate off a median compartment in this region of the head, in which the pharynx and the pharyngeal dilator muscles are contained. These intracranial tunnels resemble those described in Chironomus (14) and in Anopheles (7). They are of the nature of supporting buttresses, and the fact that they are hollow has probably no more singificance than that, weight for weight, a hollow cylinder is stronger than a solid rod. Their special functions will be discussed in relation to the mechanism of feeding. (d) The Structure of the Base of the Skull. (Plate III, Fig. 13.) The chitin of the head capsule is deficient in a space extending from the oc- cipital foramen to the bases of the mandibles, this area being filled in by a flexible non-chitinized membrane. The space is bounded in front by the cornua of the mandibles and the lacinæ of the maxillæ, and laterally by the thickened edge of the epicranium, and by a specially developed curved rod. The central part of the space is occupied by the pharynx, on each side of which lie the stipes of the maxillæ. The lateral curved rods, previously referred to, extend from the posterior orifices of the intracranial tunnels to the occipital foramen. They are flattened c2
12 and shaped like boomerangs. The lower end of each rod is produced into a tubercle which projects inwards into the central space, while the upper ends are produced inwards in front of the occipital ring, and are united by a few strands of fibres, so as to form the anterior boundary of the foramen. About the middle of each rod there is a constriction, and above this the rods are fused with the epicranium. The upper and posterior border of the occipital foramen is formed by a thick- ened arched ridge, continuous with the posterior wall of the head capsule. (e) The Homology of the Head. It is of course somewhat difficult to assign the component parts of the head to their respective segments with precision from a study of the adult insect, and especially when, as in this case, few of the sutures marking the lines of fusion of the segments can be made out. The parts in H13 sutures, and encloses the occipital ring above. The sternite has undergone con- siderable modification in the development of the membraneous area at the floor of the skull. The palatal membrane, representing the gular region of other insects, and the cornua and scutum of the labium, representing the submentum and mentum, belong to the sixth sternite. The cardines of Meinert and the stylus may represent the cardines and stipes of a primitive second maxilla. II.14 Sternum, and a Sternellum. The Presterna lie on the inner sides of the spaces in which the forelegs are articulated, and behind the jugulares. They are quadri- lateral in shape, and are firmly united by their inner borders, from which a thick ridge projects upwards into the thoracic cavity. Their anterior borders form a continuous thickened arch, to which the arthrodial membrane is attached. The Sternum is a small semicircular plate, which is wedged in between and behind the presterna, which project backwards on each side of it. The sternel- lum is heart-shaped, and is inset between the diverging inner borders of the sterna of the meso-thorax. The sternum and sternellum do not bear hairs, and are easily recognizable on the external surface of the thorax. The Episternum lies external to the articulation of the foreleg, and is firmly attached to the meso-thorax. The Epimeron lies in front of the episternum, and is closely adherent to it and to the præsternum. Both lateral sclerites are rounded and convex, and are conspicuous on the external surface, having dense tufts of hairs. The Pronotum is represented by two small convexities on the outer edges of the prescutum; they are continuous with the epimera. Passing between the ventral and lateral sclerites there is a somewhat complex. arrangement of fibrous bands, representing an antefurca, which serves both to compensate for the laxity of the thoracic wall in the region of the jugulares, and to provide for muscle attachments. (Plate IV, Fig. 14.) It consists of two parts, arising from the sternum and sternellum respectively. The anterior fibres arise from the arched border of the sternum, from the posterior fourth of the median ridge between the presterna, and from a thick transverse strand which separates the sternum from the sternellum. The fibres are collected into a broad-arched transverse band, which, as it runs outwards, contracts to form a stout round cord. The posterior fibres arise from the thickened and ridged lateral borders of the sternellum, and run outwards and forwards. All these fibres run towards the junction of the epimeron and episternum, and are mainly attached to the recurved anterior margin by the latter sclerite. They form a strong supporting buttress for this part of the thorax. (b) The Mesothorax. This constitutes the main part of the thorax. The tergite, which occupies. the whole dorsal surface of the thorax, is separated into a Prescutum, Scutum, and Scutellum. The two former pieces together make up the greater part of the tergite, and the separation between them is only indicated by a short lateral furrow anterior to the wing base. The Scutellum is a stout triangular piece, with rounded margins, which overlaps the first abdominal segment, and conceals the metathorax from above.
15 The Sternum is divided into two quadrilateral plates, which are united along the middle line at an angle, thus giving the thorax a keeled appearance. The Episternum lies directly above the sternum, and resembles it in shape. Both these sclerites are united to the adjacent plates, and to one another, the lines of junction being marked on the internal surface by prominent ridges. The Epimeron is a narrow and irregular vertical plate, extending from the wing base to the middle line below. The upper third of its anterior margin is separated a short distance from the episternum, the interval being filled in by arthrodial membrane, on which the anterior series of wing sclerites lies. The middle third of the margin is united with the mesosternum, and below this the two diverge, leaving an interval in which there lies a conical coxal plate, with which the middle leg articulates. The upper third of the epimeron is concealed, from within, by the wing sclerites. Its posterior margin is ill-defined, and merges into the membrane to which the squama is attached. The middle third is produced backwards, forming a dome-shaped expansion, which lies below the squama, and which gives origin to the mesophragma. The posterior thoracic spiracle lies in a membrane- ous interval below this expansion. The lower third of the epimerion tapers to a blunt point; it is partially fused with the metathorax. The Mesophragma is a funnel-shaped expansion, which projects backwards and inwards into the thorax, materially diminishing the size of the thoracic outlet. It arises from the upper and lower borders of the dome-shaped expansion on the epimeron. From these borders thin sheets of chitin are reflected upwards and downwards into the cavity of the thorax, those from the two sides meeting above and below, so as to form a sort of inner chamber in the thorax. This funnel, which is more extensive above than below, extends backwards as far as the first abdominal segment, and contains all the organs passing from the thorax to the abdomen. In cross sections of the posterior end of the thorax it appears as an isolated ring of chitin, giving attachment to the longitudinal muscles of the thorax. Between the scutum and prescutum above, and the episternum below, there is a narrow longitudinal interval, filled in by arthrodial membrane. This is prolonged downwards to separate the episternum from the epimeron. The anterior thoracic spiracle lies at the anterior end of this space. (c) The Selerites of the Wing Base. These are arranged in two sets. The anterior set consists of three wedge- shaped rods, which are attached to one another and to the adjacent sclerites by their expanded upper ends, their pointed apices hanging down internal to the episternum and the arthrodial membrane. The largest rod is situated between and internal to the other two. The pointed anterior angle of its base is attached
16 to the prescutum, near the lateral furrow separating it from the Scutum, by a strong band of fibres. The anterior rod is attached at its base to the largest rod. The posterior wedge is shorter and stouter than the others, and is attached by the anterior angle of its base to the first rod, and by its apex to the anterior margin of the epimeron, by stout cords. This set of sclerites, by virtue of the elasticity of the fibrous cords connecting them with the dorsal and lateral walls of the thorax, and by means of the muscles attached to them, will antagonise the longitudinal muscles, by reducing the vertical diameter of the thorax. The posterior sclerites are directly associated with the wing, and form a series of levers by which the wing can be folded and unfolded. They are five in number, and are of too irregular a shape to be accurately described. Their arrangement is indicated somewhat diagramatically in the figure. (Plate V, Fig. 19.) The costal vein terminates in a round knob, produced downwards into a fibrous cord. The radial vein terminates in a very complex sclerite, which lies upon the upper end of the epimeron, and receives, in its anterior border, the fibres from the costal vein. Co-relation between the two important veins of the wing is thus secured. The posterior margin of the wing terminates in a conical sclerite, which lies behind the radial sclerite but is not connected with it. The squama is closely connected with a curved rod lying in the membrane at its base, and this rod is attached above to the base of the sclerite which terminates the posterior border of the wing. Below these four rods there lies a Y shaped rod, which is the governing part of the mechanism. This rod is horizontal, the fork of the Y being anterior. The lower limb of the fork is received into a little pit in the epimeron; the upper limb is bifid, and interlocks with the bifid lower end of the radial sclerite. The posterior long limb of the Y is attached to the curved rod at the base of the squama. If one bears in mind that when the wings are folded on the abdomen the squamæ are folded on the wings, the mode of action of these levers becomes obvious. When the long arm of the Y is pushed up, the radius, and with it the costa, are pressed backwards, while the squama is pushed in the reverse direction. The Medi-furca is composed of two large lateral expansions, set on a Y shaped stalk. It lies in the angle between the mesosterna, and is attached, somewhat loosely, to the posterior part of the ridge between them. These lateral expansions are formed from two plates of chitin, lying one above the other. The plates are roughly oblong in shape, but with their external anterior angles produced forwards; they are united along their inner and anterior borders, but diverge from one another behind, and are separated posteriorly by a small vertical plate, so that they enclose a boat-shaped cavity. Behind this expansion there is another about
17 one-fourth the size, and formed in the same way from two triangular plates. These are attached in front to the plate representing the stern of the boat, and converge to meet one another behind. The fork of the stalk is much thickened and ridged to resist the strain which falls on it during the contraction of the trans- versely acting muscles attached to the apodeme. (d) The Metathorax. The metathorax is much reduced in size, and the separate segments are diffi- cult to recognise. The mesophragma passes backwards through the metathorax. The Meta-notum is a narrow thickened arched ridge, which lies beneath the scutellum, where it articulates with the tergite of the first abdominal segment. The pleural sclerite is undivided, and forms a narrow plate extending from the insertion of the halter to the middle line. It is attached to the meta-notum above and behind, and to the epimerion of the mesothorax in front. The meta-sternum is a small oval plate, fused with the pleural sclerites. It bears the post-furca, and its posterior borders are deeply excavated for the reception of the coxæ of the hind legs. The Post-furca lies on the metasternum, anterior to the coxæ. It consists of a pair of pointed wing-like expansions, united with one another and supported by stout ribs. It is attached to the median ridge between the two lateral halves of the metasternum. Each expansion is supported by a Y shaped rib, the inner limb of which runs to the extreme tip of the apodeme. These ribs converge inwards and backwards, and those of the two sides are connected by a sheet of chitin. They do not meet posteriorly, but diverge again, and terminate in a pair of stout-hooked processes, which lie between the coxæ, and are closely connected with the median ridge on the metasternum. (e) The Wings. The wings, when in the resting position, extend a little beyond the tip of the abdomen, and are held in a tectile manner. Their general shape is indicated in the figure. (Plate I.) They are light brown in colour, and are mottled with patches of a lighter tint. The inner half of the posterior border of the wing is indented, so that a large anal lobe, a smaller alula, and a still smaller antisquama, can be distinguished. The squama is specially differentiated, and is relatively rather large and conspicuous. It lies in a plane almost at right angles to the wing when the latter is moderately extended, and, as the wing is folded backwards, the squama is folded on it so that it lies in contact with the antisquama. The special mechanism by which this is accomplished has already been described. The squama is some- D
18 what thicker than the rest of the wing, and has a thickened margin, which bears a fringe of fine hairs. The distribution of the wing veins is sufficiently indicated in the text figure. The terminology employed is that of Conistock and Needham (16). The Costa extends to the tip of the wing and is continuous with the thickened posterior border. It bears four rows of small spines, which extend all round the wing. The Radial vein divides into four branches, of which the second represents the fused second and [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062618.tif] Venation of Wing. co., costa; sc., subcosta. r. 1, 2, 3, 4, the four divisions of the radial vein; m. 1, 2, 3, the three divisions of the median vein; cu. 1, 2, the two divisions of the cubital-vein; an., the anal vein; h., the humeral cross-vein; ay., the axillary crossvein; rm., the radial median cross-vein; mcu., the median cubital crossvein; R, R1, etc., the radial cells; M. M1, the median cells; Cu, 1 and 2, the cubital cells; A., the anal cell; an., the anal lobe; al., the alula; as., the antisquama; sq., the squama. third radial veins. The first radial vein, the stoutest in the wing, bears a single row of small spines. At its termination there is a small oval area of dark pigmen- tation, the "stigma." The division between the fourth and fifth radial veins is peculiar. The fourth vein turns forwards and then outwards from its origin, and from the angle so produced a stout spur projects inwards in line with the vein. At first sight it appears as if an adventitious cross vein had been developed, but a comparison of other Tabanid19 (f) The Legs. The legs are composed of five joints, as in other Diptera. The joints differ somewhat in the three legs. The coxa of the foreleg is long and cylindrical, and articulates with the thorax at a comparatively wide membraneous interval external to the presternum. The femur resembles the coxa, but is longer, and is covered with stout black setæ. The tibia is shorter and stouter than those of the other legs, and is covered with setæ. The coxa of the middle legs is much reduced in size; it articulates with the coxal plate which lies behind the mesosternum. The femur resembles that of the foreleg, except that the setæ are restricted to a small area just above the lower end. The tibia of this leg has two stout conical spines at its lower end. The coxæ of the hind legs are broad and oval, and lie almost in contact with one another, on the metasternum. The femur and tibia resemble that of the middle leg, except that the hind tibia does not bear spines. The meta- tarsus is the same in the three legs. There are five joints, the first of which is much larger than the rest. The next three joints are short and conical. The terminal joint bears two large symmetrical curved claws, and three pulvilli with glandular hairs. The fore tibia is coloured yellow in its proximal half; the mid and hind tibia are yellow throughout, except at the lower end, and in small areas about the middle and the upper end. (g) The Halters. These are situated on the anterior edge of the metathorax, just behind the posterior spiracles. Each consist of a somewhat flattened ovoid knob, borne on a slender stalk, which terminates in an expanded base. The upper and lower sur- faces of the halters are pigmented, and are covered by extremely fine hairs. The proximal expanded end of the stalk, and a small elevated cushion lying behind it, have on them a large number of minute shallow pits, on the margins of which there are a few small hairs. III.20 The pleural membrane which unites the tergites and sternites, and which bear the spiracles, is capable of considerable distension, and is conspicuous in a recently fed insect. Under cover of the seventh segment there are several small sclerites, which, with the anal lobes, may be taken to represent four reduced segments. Dorsally there is a plate resembling the seventh tergite, but about one-fourth the size; be- hind this there are two pairs of small pieces, and the two anal lobes. On the ven- tral aspect the several pieces are fused into one, which is roughly square-shaped, with the posterior half of its lateral borders expanded. These sclerites are situated in an arthrodial membrane, and when they are drawn out, it is seen that the ante- rior margin of the first piece is attached to the posterior margin of the seventh segment, so that they form a continuous but retracted part of the abdominal wall. The arrangement probably represents, and functions as, an ovipositor. (Plate VII, Figs. 29 and 30.) INTERNAL STRUCTURE. I.The Alimentary Canal. This consists of the following parts: Pharynx.* 21 The 22 cate interlacing fibrils, in the meshes of which there are many round cells. The duct has the same structure as the thoracic part of the 23 remarkable changes are related to the feeding of the fly, and one of the same nature as those described by Schaudinn (18) in the mosquito. The Mid-gut is the chief digestive part of the alimentary canal and is the only part in which blood is found in a recently fed insect. It lies in the second and third segments of the abdomen ,and is embedded in a mass of fat body, to which, and to the adjacent coils of the Malpighian tubes, it is closely bound down by a rich supply of tracheæ. It is oval or pear-shaped, the narrow anterior end, which is generally a little dilated when the gut is full of blood, merging indefinitely with the proventriculus, while the posterior end is sharply demarcated from the rest of the gut by the insertion of the Malpighian tubes. The wall of the gut consists of a single layer of long cylindrical cells, arising from a thin basement membrane, and two thin layers of muscle fibres, the inner layer being circular, the outer layer longitudinal. The cells, with their basement membrane, are collected throughout the cavity into small villi, so that the mid-gut has a stellate appearance on cross section. The cells lying between the villi are typically columnar and are regularly arranged, while those on the sides of the villus are more elongate, their attached ends being compressed. The appearance of the protoplasm between the nucleus and the free border of the cell varies in different preparations. In some it is clear, hyaline, and eosinophil, while in others it is vacuolated, and the border of the cell is frayed out, the cells having discharged their secretion after the manner of goblet cells. The lumen of the gut often contains large numbers of degenerated free nuclei, evidence of the degeneration of the epithelium. There are many small round cells, by means of which the columnar layer is regenerated, lying between the attached ends of the cells; these are most conspicuous when the large cells have discharged their secretion. The Hind-gut commences at the origin of the Malpighian tubes and is conti- nued backwards as a simple narrow tube. The first part, immediately behind the mid-gut, is somewhat dilated; the succeeding narrow portion is bent upon itself, passing first from left to right, then to the left again, bending upwards. The gut then dilates to twice its previous diameter, and runs directly backwards to join the rectum. The wall consists of a single layer of short cubical cells, on a basement membrane, and a few scattered bands of circular and longitudinal muscle fibres. Although there is no difference in structure, the anterior narrow portion may for convenience be termed the Ileum, the dilated posterior portion the Colon. The dilated anterior portion of the Ileum, in a considerable proportion of cases, has been found distended by two or three large gregarine cysts. The Colon frequently contains many large reddish granules, the remains of blood. The Rectum is separated from the colon by a slight constriction of the gut. It is pear-shaped, the narrow end opening beneath the anal plates. The structure
24 of the wall resembles that of the preceding portions of the hind-gut, except that the circular muscle fibres are more numerous. There are six rectal papillæ inset in the wall. They are small curved, wedge-shaped bodies, projecting into the lumen of the rectum, their apices being directed towards the anus. They are composed of a single layer of large cells arranged around a central lumen, down which there runs a small tracheal twig which enters the papilla from the outside. The Malpighian Tubes are four in number. Each tube, when dissected out, is about the same length as the whole alimentary canal. They are arranged in complicated loops, chiefly in the posterior part of the abdomen, and are closely bound down to the other organs by tracheal twigs. A long loop passes forwards in each side of the mid-gut. The tube is of uniform diameter throughout, and tapers to a blunt point which lies near the rectum. In fresh dissections this end of the tube has an orange-red colour. The tube is composed of a single layer of large flattened cells, with large oval nuclei, which are folded round the lumen and cemented by their edges. They are inserted into small expanded evaginations of the gut, where the large flattened cells become replaced by small round cells. The Salivary Apparatus consists of a pair of glands, a duct, and a reservoir. The glands lie in the thorax, extending to its junction with the abdomen. They lie beneath the proventriculus, and in either side of the duct of the 25 or no function in the respiration of the insect. They serve as elastic cushions to protect the cerebral ganglia from the changes of intracranial tension during feed- ing, and have also a function, as will be seen later, in relation to the mechanism of feeding. The Thorax.26 figures are to be found in most text books on Entomology. The arrangement of the parts in Hæmatopota does not differ materially from that described in Tabanus, but since the works of the above authors are in Danish, and are not readily accessible, an account of the parts will be given here. It will be necessary to go into considerable detail in order to facilitate the subsequent description of the mechanism of feeding. The muscles were studied by dissection and serial sections taken at various planes. Labial Muscles.27 The Protractor of the Pharynx arises from the inner sides of the trabecular membrane, and passes upwards and forwards to the cornua of the pharynx. It is short and stout, and has no tendon. Muscles of the 28 proboscis has only a slight inclination forwards from the perpendicular, it is neces- sary, in order to obtain the greatest mechanical advantage, that the proboscis should be brought more into line with the long axis of the body. This is accom- plished by bending of the neck, and by the elevation of the fly on its hind legs; this man29 the resultant pull, the protractor muscle being the larger, will be backwards. The lower end of the pharynx is meanwhile steadied by the clypeus, against which the labrum-epipharynx rests. During the dilatation of the pharynx the sphincter muscles of the 30 the abdomen. They are white pear-shaped bodies, in which the separate ova can be readily distinguished. The apex of each is produced forwards as a delicate filament, which can be traced to the fat body on the dorsal wall of the abdomen in the second segment. The ovary is invested by a few scattered muscle fibres, continuous with the oviduct and with the apical filament. The rich tracheal supply enters along the rounded posterior border. Each ovary consists of 54 short ovarian tubes, each of which contains a single large oval ovum. Above the ovum there is a small conical cap of undifferentiated cells, the apex of which runs forwards to join the apical filament. Below the ova, the tubes enter a common duct, which runs in the outer and posterior borders of the organ, and which is continuous with the oviduct. This duct is well seen in the transverse sections of the ovary, in which it appears as a narrow slit, extending about one-fourth the circumference of the organ. The oviducts are short, and unite to form a common duct, opening into the genital bursa. They are composed of muscle fibres arranged in circular and longitudinal layers. The fibres are attached behind to the chitin- ous frame work of the genital bursa; above they are continuous with the thin wall of the common duct of the ovarian tubes. The Accessory glands lie between the ovaries, extending as far forwards as the midgut. They are long and tubular, and open into the genital bursa by short constricted necks. In fresh dissections they are a dirty yellow colour, owing to the granular secretion which they contain. The walls of the gland are thrown into four or five longitudinal folds. They are composed of short cylindrical cells, on a thin basement membrane. The Spermathec31 shaped like a short funnel. The whole structure closely resembles a short, hollow and slightly bent screw. (Plate VII, Fig. 34.) The Genital Bursa is the continuation of the common oviduct, and into it open the accessory glands and the spermathecæ. Its wall is supported by an in- complete framework of delicate chitin, consisting of one transverse and two lateral plates. The lateral plates are oblong, and concave upwards, and lie mainly in the horizontal plane, but are inclined towards one another. The transverse plate lies in front of them, and is connected with the lateral plate on each side by a thick rib of chitin, which is continuous with its thickened anterior border, and with a ridge near the inner border of the lateral plate. The anterior plate is also concave, and the three together form a support for the lower wall of the bursa. The posterior end of the bursa is partly closed in by two thick curved ridges of chitin, which arise from the lateral plates, and converge backwards and inwards towards one another. Each of these ridges has a row of peculiar spines (Plate XII, Fig. 26), which project inwards and so further close in the aperture. This arrangement constitutes a sort of valve, and suggests an explanation of the ex- traordinary scarcity of the males of the species late in the season. On anatomical grounds it is unlikely that the males will be able to disengage unharmed after copu- lation, and it may be that as in the case of the bee (19), copulation is fatal to the male fly. VI.32 higher level than the brain, so that the intra-cerebral portion enters the brain towards its upper surface, and passes through with a downward inclination, emerging near the lower surface, just above the nerve cord. The parts are so much fused; that the relation of the ganglia to the 33 The Fat Body is distributed throughout the body in the usual manner. A large mass of it surrounds the mid-gut. References. 1. Rogers, L. The Transmission of Trypanosoma Evansi by Horse Flies, and other experiments pointing to the identity of Surra of India and Nagana or Tsetse Fly disease of Africa. Proc. Roy. Soc., May 4, 1901 2. Sergent, Ed., et Et. Etudes sur les Trypanosomiasis de Berberrie en 1905. Annal. Inst. Past. t. xx, p. 679: correction p. 880, loc. cit., 1906. 3. Fraser & Symonds. Surra in the Federated Malay States. Studies from the Institute for Medical Research, Federated Malay States, Nov., 1908. 4. Leveran & Mesnil. Trypanosomes and Trypanosomiasis. Trans. by Nabarro, 1907. 5. Roubaud, M. E. Fixation, Multiplication, culture d'attente des trypanosomes patho- genes dans la troupe des mouches tse-tse C. R., Acad. Sc. Paris. T. 24, 1908. 6. Gordon Hewitt. The House Fly., Manch. Univ. Press, 1901; also Q. J. M. S., 1907, 1908, 1909. 7. Nuttall & Shipley. The Structure and Biology of Anopheles. Journ. of Hygiene. Vols. 1, 2, and 3. 8. Hendel, F. (Meigen ?) Verh. yool-bat. Gas. Wein. Jahrg. p. 43, 1908. Nouvelle classification des Mouches a deux Ailes, 1800. This is the paper the origin and publication of which is in dispute. 9. Hine, H., Habits and Life History of some Tabanidæ, U. S. Department of Agriculture. Bureau of Entomology. Technical Series No. 12, Part II, 1906. 10. Patton, W. S. The life Cycle of a species of Crithidia parasitic in the Intestral Tracts of Tabanus Hilarius and Tabanus Sp. ? Archiv, Protest, b. xv. 1909, p. 33. 11. Meinert, F. Fleurnes Munddele. Trophi Dipterorum. Kjobonharn, 1881. 12. Hansen, H. J. Fabrica Oris Dipterorum. Naturhist Tidsskrift, 1883. 13. Austen, E. E. British Blood-sucking Flies, B. M., Nat. Hist, 1906. 14. Miall & Hammond. The Harlequin Fly. Oxford, 1900. 15. Berlese, A. Gli Insette, Part 1, Milan, 1901. 16. Comstock & Needham The Wings of Insects. Americ. Nat., Vol. XXXII, p. 43 et seq. 17. Thompson, Miller, T. The Alimentary Canal of the Mosquito. Proc. Bost. Soc. of Hist., Vol. 32, No. 6, 1905. 18. Schaudinn, F. Generations und Wirtswechsel bei Trypanosoma und Spirochete. Arb. Kais. Gesund. B. XX, pp. 425-429, 1904 19. Mæterlink, M. The life of the Bee. Allen, London, 1901. F
34 Plate I. Hæmatopota Pluvialis. X 12 Plate II Fig. 1.35 Fig. 17.36 Fig. 29.PLATE I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062675.tif] G. TAYLOR - DELET. photo - Engraved & printed at the Office of the Survey of India, Calcutta, 1912
PLATE II [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062681.tif] 1 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062681.tif] 2 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062681.tif] 3 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062681.tif] 4 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062681.tif] 5 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062681.tif] 6 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062681.tif] 7 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062681.tif] 8 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062681.tif] 9 F. W. C. DELFT Photo Engraved & Printed at the offices of the survey of India, Calcutta 1912
PLATE III [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062687.tif] 10 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062687.tif] 11 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062687.tif] 12 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062687.tif] 13 F. W. C. DELET Photo.-Engraved & printed at the Offices of the Survey of India, Calcutta, 1912.
PLATE IV [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062693.tif] 14 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062693.tif] 17 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062693.tif] 15 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062693.tif] 16 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062693.tif] 18 F. W. C.-DELET. Photo.-Engraved & printed at the Offices of the Survey of India, Calcutta, 1912,
PLATE IV [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062699.tif] 14 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062699.tif] 17 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062699.tif] 15 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062699.tif] 16 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062699.tif] 18 F. W. C.-DELET. Photo.-Engraved & printed at the Offices of the Survey of India, Calcutta, 1912,
PLATE VI [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062705.tif] 23 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062705.tif] 24 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062705.tif] 25 F. W. C. DELET. Photo-Engraved & printed at the Offices of the Survey of India, Calcutta, 1912.
PLATE VII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062711.tif] 26 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062711.tif] 29 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062711.tif] 28 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062711.tif] 27 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062711.tif] 30 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062711.tif] 31 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062711.tif] 32 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062711.tif] 33 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062711.tif] 34 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062711.tif] 35 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062711.tif] 36 F. W. C.-DELET. Photo.-Engraved & printed at the Offices of the Survey of India, Calcutta, 1912.
CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 8, HASTINGS STREET
