IP|QB.10 m.91.b (NEW. SERIES.) No. 56. SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA MALARIA IN THE ANDAMANS BY MAJOR S. R. CHRISTOPHERS, M.B., I.M.S. Assistant to the Director, Central Research Institute, Kasauli ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL SERVICE [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062739.tif] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1912 Price annas 14 or 1s. 4d.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062745.tif] 3943298
(NEW SERIES.) No. 56. SCIENTIFIC MEMOIRS BY OFFICERS OF THE MEDICAL AND SANITARY DEPARTMENTS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA MALARIA IN THE ANDAMANS BY MAJOR S. R. CHRISTOPHERS, M.B., I.M.S. Assistant to the Director, Central Research Institute, Kasauli ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA BY THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL, INDIAN MEDICAL SERVICE [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062751.tif] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062751.tif] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1912
Agents for the Sale of Books published by the Superintendent of Government Printing, India, Calcutta. IN ENGLAND. Messrs. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, W.C. Messrs. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., 68-74, Carter Lane, E.C. Mr. BERNARD QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, W. Messrs. P. S. KING & SON, 2 and 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster. Messrs. H. S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, and 9, Pall Mall, London. Messrs. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, London, S.W. Mr. T. FISHER UNWIN, 1, Adelphi Terrace, London, W.C. Messrs. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E.C. Mr. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 51, Broad Street, Oxford. Messrs. DEIGHTON BELL & CO., Cambridge. Messrs. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W.C. ON THE CONTINENT. Mr. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Mr. KARL HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. Messrs. R. FRIEDLÄNDER & SOHN, Berlin, W.N., Carlstrasse, 11. Mr. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. Mr. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. IN INDIA. Messrs. TRACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. Messrs. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. Messrs. R. CAMBRAY & CO., Calcutta. Messrs. S. K. LAHIRI & CO., Calcutta. Messrs. B. BANERJEE & CO., Calcutta. The CALCUTTA SCHOOL BOOK AND USEFUL LITERATURE SOCIETY, 309, Bow Bazar Street, Calcutta. Messrs. BUTTERWORTH & Co. (India), Limited, Calcutta. The WELDON LIBRARY, 18-5, Chowringhee Road, Calcutta. Messrs. HIGGINBOTHAM & CO., Madras. Messrs. V. KALYANARAMA IYER & CO., Madras. Messrs. G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. Messrs. S. MURTHY & Co., Madras. Messrs. THOMPSON & Co., Madras. Messrs. TEMPLE & Co., Madras. Messrs. COMBRIDGE & Co., Madras. Messrs. P. R. RAMA IYER & CO., Madras. Messrs. THACKER & Co., LD., Bombay. Messrs. A. J. COMBRIDGE & Co., Bombay. Messrs. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & Co., Bombay. Mrs. RADHABAI ATMARAM SAGOON, Bombay. Mr. SUNDER PANDURANG, Bombay. Messrs. GOPAL NARAYAN & Co., Bombay. Messrs. RAM CHANDRA GOVIND & SON, Kalbadevi, Bombay. Superintendent, American Baptist Mission Press, Rangoon. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid- i-Am Press, Lahore and Calcutta. Mr. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent, Nazir Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. Messrs. A. CHAND & Co., Punjab. Messrs. A. M. & J. FERGUSON, Ceylon. Babu S. C. TALUKDAR, Proprietor, Students and Company, Cooch Behar.
List of numbers of Scientific Memoirs by Officers of the Medical and Sanitary Departments of the Government of India (New Series) published previous to the present issue. No. 1. Standardisation of Calmette's Anti-Venomous Serum with Pure Cobra Venom: the Deterioration of this Serum through keeping in India, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 2. Malaria in India, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No. 3. Some Observations on the Poison of Russell's Viper (Daboia Russellii), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S., and Wm. Hanna, Esq., M.B. Price As. 5 or 6d. No. 4. On the Action of the Venoms of the Cobra and of the Daboia on the Red Blood corpuscles and on the blood plasma, by Captain G. Lamb, I..M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 5. Specificity of Anti-Venomous Sera, by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 3 or 4d. No. 6. First Report on the Anti-Malarial Operations in Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Captain S. P. James, I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 7. Some Observations on the Poison of the Banded Krait (Bungarus Fasciatus), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 8. A Preliminary Report on a Parasite found in Patients suffering from Enlargement of the Spleen in India, by Lieutenant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 3d. No. 9. Second Report of the Anti-Malarial Operations at Mian Mir, 1901-03, by Lieute- nant S. R. Christophers, I.M.S. Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 10. Specificity of Anti-Venomous Sera (Second Communication), by Captain G. Lamb, I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 11. On a Parasite found in persons suffering from Enlargement of the Spleen in India2 No. 20. Serum-Therapy of Plague in India; Reports by Mr. W. M. Haffkine, C.I.E., and various Officers of the Plague Research Laboratory, Bombay, by Lieutenant- Colonel W B. Bannerman, M.D., B.Sc., F.R.C.S., I.M.S. Price As. 14 or 1s. 4d. No. 21. On the Standardisation of Anti-Typhoid Vaccine, by Captain George Lamb, M.D., I.M.S. (Director, Pasteur Institute of India), and Captain W. B. C. Forster, M.B., D.P.H., I.M.S. Price As. 6 or 7d. No. 22. Mediterranean Fever in India: Isolation of the Micrococcus Melitensis, by Captain George Lamb, M.D., I.M.S., and Assistant Surgeon M. Kesava Pai, M.B., C.M. (Madras). Price As. 10 or 1s. No. 23. The Anatomy and Histology of Ticks, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I. M.S. Price Rs. 3 or 4s. 6d. No. 24. On a Parasite found in the White Corpuscles of the blood of Palm Squirrels, by Captain W. S. Patton, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or ls. 2d. No. 25. On the importance of Larval Characters in the Classification of Mosquitoes, by Captain S.R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 26. Leucocytozoon Canis, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 27. Preliminary Report on the Development of the Leishman-Donovan Body in the Bed Bug, by Captain W. S. Patton, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 28. The Sexual Cycle of Leucocytozoon Canis in the Tick, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or ls. 2d. No. 29. Piroplasma Canis and its Cycle in the Tick, by Captain S. R. Christophers,M.B., I.M.S. Price Rs. 2 or 3s. No. 30. The Theory and Practice of Anti-Rabic Immunisation, by Captain W. F. Harvey, M.B., I.M.S., and Captain, Anderson McKendrick, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or 1s. 2d. No. 31. The Development of the Leishman-Donovan Parasite in Cimex Rotundatus-Second Report, by Captain, W. S. Patton, M.B., I.M.S. Price Re. 1 or ls. 6d. No. 32. An Enquiry on Enteric Fever in India carried out at the Central Research Institute, Kasauli, under the direction of Lieutenant-Colonel D. Semple, M.D., and Captain E. D. W. Greig, M.D. Price Re. 1-2 or 1s. 9d. No. 33. The Production of Alkali in Liquid Media by the Bacillus Pestis, by Lieutenant- Colonel W. B. Bannerman, M.D., B.Sc., I.M.S. Price As. 5 or 6d. No. 34. Standards of the Constituents of the Urine and Blood and the bearing of the Metabolism of Bengalis on the Problems of Nutrition, by Captain D. McCay, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 12 or ls. 2d. No. 35. Black-water Fever, by Captain S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S., and Dr. C. A. Bentley. No. 36. Observations on Rabies: with special reference to an Atrophic form of the disease occurring in animals, by Major G. Lamb, M.D., I.M.S., and Captain A. G. McKendrick, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 37. Investigations on Bengal Jail Dietaries with some Observations on the Influence of Dietary on the Physical Development and Well-being of the People of Bengal, by Captain D. McCay, M.B., B.Ch., B.A.O., I.M.S. Price Rs. 2-6 or 4s. 3d. No. 38. Preliminary Report on the Killing of Rats and Rat Fleas by Hydrocyanic Acid Gas, by Captain W. D. H. Stevenson, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 39. The Applicability to Medico-Legal Practice in India of the biochemical tests for the origin of blood-stains, by Lieutenant-Colonel W. D. Sutherland, M.D., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 40. The Destruction of Fleas by Exposure to the Sun, by Captain. J. Cunningham, M.D., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d.
3 No. 41. Quinine and its Salts: their Solubility and Absorbability, by Captain A. C. MacGilchrist, M.A., M.D., M.R.C.P., I.M.S. Price As. 9 or 10d. No. 42. The Cultivation of the Bacillus of Leprosy and the Treatment of cases by means of a Vaccine prepared from the Cultivations, Part I, by Major E. R. Rost, I.M.S. The Cultivation of the Leprosy Bacillus, by Captain T. S. B. Williams, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 43. The Relation of Tetanus to the Hypodermic or Intramuscular Injection of Quinine, by Lieutenant-Colonel Sir D. Semple, Kt., M.D. Price As. 12 or ls. 2d. No. 44. The Preparation of a Safe and Efficient Anti-rabic Vaccine, by Lieutenant-Colonel Sir D. Semple, Kt., M.D., D.P.H., R.A.M.C. (Retired). Price As. 8 or 9d. No. 45. Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta, by Major E. D. W. Greig, M.D., D.Sc., I.M.S. Price Re. 1 and As. 4 or 2s. No. 46. Malaria in the Punjab, by Major S. R. Christophers, M.B., I.M.S. Price Rs. 2 or 3s. No. 47. Dysentery and Liver Abscess in Bombay, by Major E. D. W. Greig, M.D., D.Sc., I.M.S., and Captain R. P. Wells, M.A., M.B., I.M.S. Price Rs. 2 or 3s. No. 48. Investigations into the Jail Dietaries of the United Provinces with some observations on the influence of dietary on the physical development and well-being of the people of United Provinces, by Major D. McCay, M.B., M.R.C.P., I.M.S. Price Re. 1-12 or 3s. No. 49. Epidemic Dropsy in Calcutta, being the final report of an enquiry carried out by Major E. D. W. Greig, M.D., I.M.S. No. 50. Preliminary Report on an Investigation into the Etiology of Oriental Sore in Cambay, by Captain W. S. Patton, M.B., I.M.S. Price As. 6. No. 51. A Streptothrix isolated from the Spleen of a Leper, by Major W. G. Liston, M.D., D.P.H., I.M.S., and Captain T. S. B. Williams, I.M.S. Price As. 14 or 1s. 4d. No. 52. Dysentery in Hazaribagh Central Jail, January 1910CONTENTS. PARA. I. Introduction 1Malaria in the Andamans. I.2 derived a considerable revenue. The extent and general characters of these salt swamp lands will be gathered from the map of the settlement and the photograph accompanying this report. Behind the salt swamp and in almost every valley there are in addition extensive fresh water swamps sometimes entirely, at other times partially, converted into paddy land. On the hill slopes are small mountain streams and an abundance of swampy patches and small pools. Even the tops of hills during the wet season are more or less waterlogged and pools are everywhere present. 2. The few partly civilised Andamanese within the settlement, at most a few score, are supported by Government and live in an isolated position in the Andamanese Home. They in no way influence conditions as regards transmis- sion of malaria among the convicts. Apart from these few aboriginals the population of the settlement is entirely an immigrant one and is restricted to the convicts and those whose work is connected with them. The convicts are of two classes, the labouring convicts still under modified prison discipline, and self-supporters who are ticket-of-leave convicts, allowed, with certain restrictions, to lead a free life on the Island. The former, numbering from 10,000 to 12,000, are housed in large barracks, the various collections of which form the so-called stations of the settlement. These barracks are located at various points around the harbour and for the most part are built on elevated sites, often high bluffs overlooking the sea, which have been chosen with a view to health. The self-supporters numbering about 2,000 live in villages which, owing to the necessities of rice cultivation, are scattered more widely over the settle- ment and are often situated several miles from the shores of the harbour. Some villages, like the stations, are on the tops of low hills, but many are in low-lying situations close to paddy land or swamp. Besides the self-supporters there are about 2,000, free residents either time- expired convicts or the offspring of convicts. These live a life very like that of the self-supporters in the area to the south of the harbour (Eastern District). 3. It is among the labouring convicts, judging from the statistics, that malaria is most prevalent. Also it is among the labouring convicts, more directly under the care of the medical authorities, that we especially wish to ascertain the conditions in regard to malaria. But for several reasons the labouring convicts do not form a very suitable community for determining the facts regarding malaria transmission. Above all the fact that they are liable to frequent movement from one station to another interferes with investigation on this point. The villages of the self-supporters, where there are a certain number of
3 children, all or nearly all born on the spot, and where the whole population is a fixed one, are on the other hand eminently suitable for our purpose. Hence the question of the prevalence and distribution of malaria in these villages will first engage our attention, the more complicated question of infection among the labouring convicts being postponed until we are in a better position to understand the general principles underlying the transmission of malaria in this particular locality. II.4 TABLE I5 The most severely affected village was that of Port Mouat. This shewed a spleen rate of about 60 per cent. and a parasite rate of about 30 per cent. The station close beside the village also has the reputation of being the most malarious in the Settlement. The villages of Bindraban and Kadakachang also shewed a high degree of infection. The situation of these villages is shewn in the map of the Settlement accompanying this report. None of the other villages could be considered as spewing hyperendemic conditions. The villages of Ogra Basaij, Shouldari and Bamboo Flat gave spleen rates of about 25 per cent. These villages like those already mentioned are situated close to the coast or to salt swamps that in certain places stretch a considerable distance inland. Many villages shewed still lower rates. In some of these infection was limited to some particular portion of the village so that if this were excluded the rate was 0 per cent. In the large village of Aberdeen it was only in an outlying group of houses bordering upon the sea that any enlarged spleens occurred. The village of Lamba Lines is another example where the children were negative with the exception of one family living in a house at the extreme end of the village nearest the sea. With one exception (Hobdaypur) all the villages lying inland from the shores of the harbour shewed no indication at all of malaria. Unfortunately Hobdaypur was not visited as the children had come to a neighbouring village to be examined, and it is possible that Hobdaypur was not so far from the influence of salt water as would seem to be the case from the map. Unfor- tunately also the history of the two affected children (length of residence at Hobdaypur, etc.) was not ascertained. With this possible exception, to which too much weight cannot be attached, not a single case of enlarged spleen occurred in an inland village. Some of these inland villages are well situated on spurs of hills and it was thought at first that their situation accounted for their freedom from malaria. But as observations were extended it was found that a number of inland vil- lages, notably those to the south of the harbour, were situated on very low-lying ground, in some cases on the very edge of swamps (fresh water), and that these were likewise free from malaria. The village of Guaracharama, where the examination of 42 children failed to shew any case of enlargement of the spleen, was situated in the midst of low- lying ricefields. Lamba Lines lies along the margin of a large swamp much shot over for snipe and is at the same time close to a heavy growth of jungle. School lines, Austenabad, Protheropur and Manpur are all in situations that one would have expected to be very malarious. Even the altitude of those villages situated on spurs, a few hundred feet at most, was not sufficient in an ordinary way to have been any protection.
6 The village of Aberdeen is situated on low hills about 50 feet above sea level surrounded and intersected by flat fresh-water swamp and paddy land. A large area of deadly looking uncultivated swamp full of pools penetrates even among the houses and lies only a stone's throw from many of them. It was a great surprise under the circumstances to find that none of the children shewed enlargement of the spleen. In the outlying portion previously referred to, two families were found living close together in which four children were found suffering from enlargement of the spleen. At the time this sporadic incidence of malaria could not be explained. Later on, when the relation of malaria to Nsm. ludlowi and salt swamp was ascertained, the explanation was quite simple. These houses were the nearest to an extensive source of Nsm. ludlowi. 5. A number of the most malarious villages were completely shaded by Pithlecobia trees planted when the villages were first laid out and it was thought that this condition might be a factor responsible for an enhanced malaria rate. But it was not difficult to find healthy villages similarly shaded, e.g., Tusanabad. Again porosity of the soil was considered as a possible factor. But Port Mouat, the most affected of all the villages, was situated on more than usually porous soil and no definite connection in other cases could be traced. Some of the villages were older than others, and in some more cattle were kept, a condition which experience has shewn favours anopheles. But neither of these circumstances served to explain the different degrees of prevalence of malaria. The one circumstance which appeared to determine the amount of malaria in a village was propinquity to the sea coast. Considering the circumstances of the different villages it was possible to say that malaria was confined to villages within a distance of not above half a mile from the influence of salt water, and only villages situated within a quarter of a mile were strongly infected. A free aspect, opening upon the sea, seemed to increase this liability. TYPE OF PARASITE ENCOUNTERED. 6. The frequency with which the different types of parasites were met with is shewn in Table VI. It will be seen that at this time of the year the bulk of infections among the native children in the villages were those of Simple Tertian. III.7 Nyssomyzomyia rossi (Giles). (Variety). Nyssomyzomyia ludlowi (Theobald). Neomyzomyia elegans (James). Neomyzomyia punctulata (James and Liston). Nyssorhynchus nivipes (Theobald). (Variety). Myzorhynchus barbirostris (Van der Wulp). Of these species Nsm. rossi, Nsm. ludlowi and My. barbirostris were the commonest. As the total period during which anopheles were collected did not exceed two months it is more than likely that still other species occur. The zoological isolation of the Andamans has not therefore led to a restricted. anopheles fauna in the Settlement. 8. Ns. aitkeni.8 as M. brahmachari. Since then I have been able to examine specimens of M. albirostris from Malay and have satisfied myself that M. brahmachari is identical with this species. At the time of my visit the species was too rare to be an important agent in the transmission of malaria. 13. My. barbirostris.9 healthy villages Tusanabad, Manpur and Wimberleyganj. It was also found at Maymyo, a newly opened and remote inland village where the land was still in process of being cleared. The species was found breeding as a rule in very small and temporary col- lections of water in among the houses. A certain number of specimens were also found breeding in small clay puddles on the tops of hills both near and at some distance from villages. As a rule the restriction of breeding places to the village area was very noticeable. Larvæ were never found in ricefields and innumerable pools that in ordinary circumstances one would have expected to find used as breeding places were entirely free from larvæ. About a hundred specimens caught in huts in Port Mouat were examined for zygotes and sporozoites but with negative result. 15. Nsm. ludlowi.10 malaria to some extent there can be little doubt that this species is the impor- tant carrier in the Settlement. It is interesting to note that though Nsm. ludlowi rather closely resembles Nsm. rossi the eggs of the two species are quite distinct; those of Nsm. rossi having a very broad frill, whereas those of Nsm. ludlowi have a narrow frill and rather resemble in general appearance the eggs of N. fuliginosus. CHARACTER OF THE ANOPHELINE FAUNA. 16. In view of the evidence of isolation shewn by the mammalian fauna ôf the Andamans one might have expected that the species of anopheles would be few in number. One would also not be surprised to find a number of local varieties or even distinct species. The question of the recent introduction of species from the mainland is also important. We have already seen, however, that the number of species represented is quite large and consideration will show that the anopheline fauna of the Andamans is practically that of the Malay peninsula. The differences between the anopheline fauna of Port Blair and that of the Indian peninsula is on the other hand very marked. The occurrence of N. nivipes in place of N. fuliginosus, of M. albirostris in place of M. listoni and the relative frequency of Nm. punctulata are especially noticeable. The only instance of a local variety is the possible occurence of a variety of N. nivipes. Had recent introduction of species much influence the fauna one would have expected to find the ordinary Indian Nsm. rossi and the very common Indian N. fuliginosus. The presence of Malay forms suggests that the anopheline fauna is an indigenous one since the only direct communication with the Andamans is from Calcutta, Madras and Rangoon. NUMERICAL PREVALENCE OF ANOPHELES. 17. In spite of apparently ideal conditions for the breeding of anopheles, they were, with the exception of My. barbirostris in the forest, by no means numerous. The huts in the villages, each with an enclosed verandah used as a cow shed, were peculiarly suitable for the detection and capture of adult anopheles. But except at Bamboo Flat and Port Mouat during the first fort- night of my stay the catches made were not at all large. As a rule specimens were to be obtained only as a result of close search. Within the barracks it was even difficult to find adult anopheles at all. At Dundas Point traps were made by hanging up blankets, etc., in suitable
11 corners overnight, but even with this assistance the numbers caught were small. 18. Equally striking was the difficulty in finding larvæ. The ordinary pools of the countryside, though apparently most suitable for breeding, practi- cally never contained larvæ. Contrasted with my experience of conditions in the Punjab this was especially remarkable. 19. Whilst one was struck with the paucity of larvæ in situations where these might have been expected to occur, one was impressed with the great prevalence of fish of the genus Haplochilus. These were especially abundant in the little pools formed by trickling streams; but they also occurred in almost all water of a permanent character or which was sufficiently permanent to shew any growth of aquatic weeds or algæ. It seems very probable that this prevalence of Haplochilus is concerned in preventing many pools, other- wise suitable, from being made use of as breeding places. Haplochilus and larvæ of My. barbirostris were nevertheless several times found together. IV.12 TABLE II. Serial num- ber. Work. Condition of spleen. Anæmia. Tempera- ture. Species of parasite. Number of parasites per 100 microscopic fields. Percentage of large mono-nuc- lears. Pigment. Number of fields examined. Probable disease. REMARKS. 1 Grass cutting Nil Yes 101 Nil 13 TABLE II14 TABLE II15 TABLE II16 TABLE II17 TABLE II18 TABLE III. Serial No. Spleen. Anæmia. Parasite. Number of parasites per 100 fields. Percentage of large mononuclears. Number of fields examined. Probable disease. 1 To umbilicus Marked Nil ... ... ... ? 2 To umbilicus Intense Nil ... 6 1,200 ? 3 Handsbreadth Yes Nil ... ... 200 ? 4 Nil No Nil ... ... 200 ? 5 Nil Slight Nil ... ... 200 ? 6 Palpable Yes Nil ... ... 200 ? 7 Handsbreadth No Nil ... ... 200 ? 8 Palpable Slight Quartan 110 ... 50 Malaria. 9 Nil Yes Nil ... ... ... ? 10 4 fingers Slight Tertian 2 ... 200 Malaria. 11 Handsbreadth Marked Quartan 1 ... 200 Malaria. 12 Nil ? Tertian 8 ... 200 Malaria. 13 Palpable Yes Nil ... ... 200 ? 14 To umbilicus Yes Nil ... ... 200 ? 15 Nil ? Nil ... ... 200 ? 16 Handsbreadth Slight Tertian 1 ... 200 Malaria. 17 Nil Yes Nil ... ... 400 ? 18 Handsbreadth Slight Nil ... ... 200 ? 19 Handsbreadth No Nil ... ... 200 ? 20 Nil No Nil ... 17 600 Malaria. 21 ... ... Nil ... ... 200 ? 22 2 fingers Marked Quartan 6 ... 100 Malaria. 23 Nil No Nil ... ... 200 ? 24 Palpable No Nil ... ... 200 ? 25 Nil Slight Nil ... ... 400 ? 26 Nil ? Nil ... ... 200 ? 27 Handsbreadth Slight Nil ... ... 200 ? 28 Nil No Nil ... ... 200 ? 29 Palpable No Nil ... ... 200 ? 30 Palpable Yes Nil ... ... 200 ? 31 Nil Yes Nil ... 2.5 600 ? 32 Nil No Nil ... 5 400 ?
19 TABLE IV. Total number examined. Number shewing parasites. Not shewing parasites but with pigment or mononuclear increase. Not shewn in other headings but with marked enlargement of spleen, and anæmia. Percentage of certain malaria. Percentage of probable malaria. Consecutive admis- sions to hospital. 101 42 12 11 43 61 Convalescent gang 32 6 1 8 19 47 It will be seen that parasites were detected in 43 per cent. of the admis- sions. Taking into consideration the presence of pigmented cells and a markedly raised percentage of large mononuclears an additional 11 per cent. shewed evidence of malaria. Considering also marked enlargement of the spleen associated with anæmia and fever a total of 61 per cent. of the admis- sions must be considered as certain or probable cases of malaria. 22. In addition to cases examined on admission to hospital 32 men taken at random from among the convalescents (Convalescent gang) also shewed a considerable degree of infection. Vide Tables III and IV. 23. In spite of the high percentage of positive malaria cases the numeri- cal value of the infections was on the whole very low. Table V. TYPE OF PARASITE ENCOUNTERED. 24. The relative proportion of the different species of parasite met with in the case of admissions at Viper Island and at Haddo and among the convalescent gang at Viper Island is shewn in Tables V and VI. If we consider the proportion of quartan usually found in an infected community it is evident that among the labouring convicts there is a remark- able relative preponderance of this form of parasite. This relative prepon- D 2
20 derance is not shewn by the children in the villages. The significance of these facts will be dealt with in a later section. TABLE V.* Under 10 parasites per 100 fields. Ten and under 20 parasites per 100 fields. Twenty and under 50 para- sites per 100 fields. Fifty parasites and over per 100 fields. Under 10 parasites per 100 fields. Ten and under 20 parasites per 100 fields. Twenty and under 50 para- sites per 100 fields. Fifty parasites and over per 100 fields. Under 10 parasites per 100 fields. Ten and under 20 parasites per 100 fields. Twenty and under 50 para- sites for 100 fields. Fifty parasites and over per 100 fields. Children 3 1 3 0 4 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... Admissions to hospital 20 1 1 0 17 2 3 2 1 ... ... ... Convalescent gang 3 ... ... ... 2 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... Labouring convicts 2 ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... Total adults 25 1 1 0 22 2 3 3 3 ... 1 ... TABLE VI.* Number of infections. Children Simple tertian 12 Quartan 4 Malignant tertian 1 Adults Simple tertian 27 Quartan 30 Malignant tertian 3 * NOTE.21 TABLE VII22 TABLE VII23 TABLE VII-SHOWING MONTHLY ADMISSIONS FOR MALARIA, 1907-1911-concld. VIPER. HADDO. BAMBOO FLAT. Admissions, total. Admissions, Fever. Rainfall. Admissions, total. Admissions, Fever. Admissions, total. Admissions, Fever. 1911. January 352 189 ... 341 142 ... ... February 354 190 0.54 347 147 ... ... March 326 155 ... 286 133 ... ... April 316 161 4.84 288 117 ... ... May 430 278 11.96 334 147 ... ... June 483 373 34.15 550 368 ... ... July 410 292 12.64 570 348 ... ... August 283 210 7.70 ... ... ... ... September 254 185 ... ... ... ... ... Total 3,298 2,033 2,659 1,402 ... ... Perc. of malaria to total 61% 53% ... In each of these years the number of admissions is smallest during the period October to March. There then occurs a sharp rise in the number of admissions usually first evidenced in the numbers for May and reaching a maximum in June or July. At this time the number of admissions is from two to four times that of the non-malaria season. During the months of August and September the number of admissions gradually diminishes till the low level of the succeeding non-malaria season is reached. 26. Considerable variations in the intensity and continuance of the fever rise occur in different years. Some years, e.g., 1907, are especially malarious, others, as was the case in 1911, are especially healthy. RELATION OF THE MALARIA SICK RATE TO RAINFALL. 27. In Table VII opposite the number of admissions in the month at Viper are given the number of inches of rainfall. It will be seen that the period of least malaria prevalence is characterised by a low rainfall and that the onset of the rains and the rise in fever admissions are almost synchronous. It will also be noticed that the much prolonged fever season of 1907 was
24 associated with an unusual continuance of the rains. On the other hand, in most years the fever rate decreases before there is a cessation of the rains. The reason for the latter relation is not clear but the simultaneous onset of the rains and fever season supports the view discussed later that relapses play a large part in the fever season of the Andamans as has been noted by Deeks and James(2) in the case of Panama. RELATION OF MALARIA SICK RATE TO OCCUPATION. 28. It is the common experience in the Andamans that certain kinds of convict labour are more associated with malaria than others. The type of labour most associated with a high prevalence of fever is excavation work, repairing of embankments, road making and certain kinds of jungle work. At the time of my stay quite a number of cases were admitted from among those employed in cutting canes in the jungle. All the types of work mentioned are especially associated with exposure to sun and rain and with severe bodily exertion. The relation of arduous physical exertion to the malaria of excavation has not been previously noted. It is possible, however, that this factor by favouring the occurrence of relapses plays some part. In regard to the cane cutters, whose work would not seem to be so arduous, I afterwards discovered that, as canes were becoming increasingly scarce in the neighbourhood of the barracks, the men cutting them had to walk long distances in order to find them. I believe at that time cane cutting was in fact an unusually arduous occupation. The following table taken from the 1901 census shews the relation of labour to malaria admissions in actual figures :25 The same relation to occupation is shewn in the following figures also taken from the census:26 tion becomes reduced crescents are still numerous but infections with malignant tertian ring forms are scanty. Still later in December and January in certain places which had been very intense foci of malaria (parts of Amritsar and Delhi) a high relative prevalence of quartan was encountered, apparently due to the greater relative reduction of other forms of parasite. In such cases though, at the time, the parasite rate was not very high there was a very high spleen rate (approaching 100 per cent). 31. A relative preponderance of quartan is also seen over quite large areas in certain parts of India. A high quartan rate prevails throughout the Duars, an area in which, as shewn by Christophers and Bentley,3 factors favouring residual infection prevail and in which the number of anopheles was often disproportionately small as compared with the amount of fever present. In the highly endemic Jeypore Agency Tract in the dry season, associated with scanty anopheles and a high spleen rate, Major Perry informs me that quartan is the predominant type of parasite. It seems possible that a high relative quartan prevalence in these large areas may be due to conditions some- what similar to those clearly seen at work in the small Punjab foci described above. 32. A relative increase in the proportion of malignant tertian associated with the period of greatest infection is also shewn by Mathis and Leger4 for the parasite rate in different seasons and for different localities in Tonkin (Tables VIII and IX). TABLE VIII. MAY TO SEPTEMBER. OCTOBER TO APRIL. Number infected. Percentage propor- tion. Parasite rate (Haut- Tonkin.) Number infected. Percentage propor- tion. Parasite rate (Haut- Tonkin). Children Malignant tertian 48 27.9 8.1 53 41.4 17.5 Simple tertian 95 55.23 55 42.96 Quartan 29 16.86 20 15.62 Adults Maliguant tertian 71 54.6 ... 212 71.6 ... Simple tertian 53 40.7 69 23 Quartan 6 4.6 15 5
27 TABLE IX. Delta. Hoabinh. Tuyen- Quang. Hagiang. Sonla. Laokay. Number of infected children 66 29 30 25 60 51 Endemic index 3% 19% 16% 33% 37% 14% Percentage proportion of Simple tertian 80 90 60 40 22 16 Percentage proportion of Malignant tertian. 20 7 17 26 72 41 Percentage proportion of Quartan ... 3 23 24 7 43 The very high quartan rate at Laokay it may be noticed is associated with a low parasite rate though the other hilly parts of Tonkin shew a high rate. It is possible that this is an example similar to those already mentioned in India of a temporary reduction of the total index and a relative preponderance of quartan. INFLUENCE OF THE HUMAN HOST. 33. In the Duars and other malarious areas one often finds that though the native children shew a considerable proportion of each of the three types of parasite, Europeans living in the neighbourhood when they suffer from fever generally shew malignant tertian infection. Dr. Bentley has informed me that he has had a similar experience. Such a relation is shown on a large scale in the Punjab where among British troops infections with malignant tertian are much more frequently seen in the cases admitted to military hospitals than in infected native children. The excellent figures of Mathis and Leger for Tonkin also show this relation very clearly. It will be seen from the following abstract of their results that whilst in adults (both native and European) the malignant tertian incidence is very high it is much less so in the case of native children. (Table X). TABLE X. Malignant tertian. Simple tertian. Quartan. Children 0 to 5 28.57 55.84 15.58 " 5 to 15 50.72 30.43 18.84 Indigenous adults 70.04 11.52 18.43 European adults 66.42 28.63 4.92 E 2
28 PECULIARITIES IN THE BEHAVIOUR OF THE DIFFERENT SPECIES OF PARASITE. 34. The number of crescents produced and the length of time crescent out- put continues is a very marked feature of malignant tertian infection. In the case of quartan on the contrary several observers, e.g., Marchiafava and Big- nami,5 have noted the rarity with which flagellating forms are seen. Stephens and Christophers6 when working at transmission through different species of anopheles found it very difficult to get cases skewing quartan flagellate forms. More recently James7 studying the quartan parasite at Panama notes that he very rarely saw flagellation in this type of parasite. Simple tertian produces gametes readily but my experience would suggest that these are neither so numerous nor so continuously produced as in malignant tertian. 35. If such a relation regarding gamete output does hold good then a greater proportion of anopheles will be infected, other things being equal, with malignant tertian than with either of the other forms of parasite. Also new infections will be in a greater proportion those of malignant tertian. And the larger the number of anopheles carrying, i.e., the greater the predominance of new infections, the more the malignant tertian parasite will be represented in the blood of a community. 36. Again the fact that malignant tertian disappears more rapidly than the other forms of parasite from the blood of communities when these are no longer exposed to reinfection suggests that the relapsing power of malignant tertian over long periods is less than that of the other two types of parasite. In quartan the power of the parasite to maintain itself in the human host in the absence of treatment has often been commented upon. Marchiafava and Bignami8 say " while in quartan fever the groups of attacks follow each other with the greatest obstinacy separated by longer or shorter intervals of apyrexia29 37. It is on considerations of this kind that I explain the conditions at the Andamans. The native children in the villages shew very much the conditions seen elsewhere in India. The labouring convicts being less exposed to anopheles but subject to factors greatly favouring relapses shew the remarkable incidence of quartan noted. In this case we can exclude the possibility of species of anopheles determining the type of infection because the same species acts as the carrier in both cases. It is possible that the year of my visit being an unusually healthy one the relative preponderance of quartan was greater than usual and that in severely malarious years malignant tertian may be relatively more in evidence. If, on the other hand, cases occurring in the fever season are largely due to increase in the number of relapses the relative prevalence of quartan seen in 1911 may be a permanent and characteristic feature of infection in this community. Only further observations can determine this point. 38. In Panama, Decks and James2 refer to malignant tertian as pre- eminently the relapsing type. This would seem to be adverse to the view taken above. But it is necessary to take into account the relative frequency of relapses at longer or shorter period after primary infection. If relapses in malignant tertian were especially frequent for a comparatively short period after the initial infection, this parasite might be responsible for the majority of relapses at Panama where anopheles are fairly numerous. And if a characteristic of quartan is the power of producing more relapses after long periods than is the case with other parasites, quartan might be the most important in the Andamans where anopheles are less numerous. The fact that treatment is more readily effective in some forms than others of parasite has also to be taken into account when comparing treated with untreated communities. In a private communication recently received Dr. James informs me that experience at Panama does not in his opinion in any way contradict my conclusions, as owing to the climatic conditions at Panama there are no long periods during which infection is in abeyance. VI.30 example exactly how malaria kills in the case of those terrible epidemics which from time to time visit the Punjab and certain other parts of India, or the exact natural history of its action upon the death rate in highly endemic areas. The conditions in the convict settlement are from this point of view unique since not only is every member of the community under close observation, but in the case of death an autopsy is performed as a routine practice. I have therefore taken some pains to make what use I could of these unique conditions. RELATIVE EFFECT OF MALARIA AND OTHER DISEASES ON THE SICK RATE. 40. From Table VII it will be seen that at Viper hospital malaria admis- sions account for from 60 per cent. to 80 per cent. of the total admissions in the different years given. At Haddo hospital which draws its inmates largely from Aberdeen and stations to the south of the harbour (relatively healthy area) the proportion of admissions for malaria is from 51 per cent. to 64 per cent. of the whole. At Bamboo Flat the proportion is from 55 per cent. to 66 per cent. From the results of blood examinations given in Tables II and III it may be assumed that at least 40 per cent. of the admissions are cases showing para- sites (positive malaria of Deeks and James) whilst another 20 per cent. are probable cases of this disease (clinical malaria of Deeks and James). Again from Table VII it will be seen that the total number of admissions for diseases other than malaria does not show as a rule any great variation. Whenever any large increase in admissions takes place it is due to an increase in the number of fever cases. By far the most important cause influencing the admission rate is therefore malaria and we may for all practical purposes when considering vari- ations in the sick rate take these as being due to malaria. 41. In addition to the direct effect of malaria which these figures indicate it is also possible that malaria is responsible for an increased rate among certain other diseases, e.g., pneumonia. This effect of malaria will be discussed more fully under the action dealing with the death rate. 42. It is also necessary to note the effect of malaria in bringing about a condition of more or less permanent invalidism. At each of the large hospitals there are what are known as " Convalescent " and " Light Labour " gangs. The former is made up of patients who have been discharged from hospital but are not yet fit to return to labour, the latter are convicts not considered fit for ordinary labour but able to do light tasks. Both groups must be considered as a permanent addition to the sick list; not only are convicts in these gangs
31 " ineffectives " but they are a source of increase to the admission list since they are liable to frequent readmission to hospital. In Table III it will be seen that out of 32 men taken at random from the convalescent gang 6 or 19 per cent. spewed parasites. In Table XI are given the spleen rates for men in these gangs, for the non-sick labouring convicts and for the self-supporters. It will be seen that a greatly enlarged spleen is present in a very high proportion of the men in the convalescent and light labour gangs and there is little doubt but that these gangs are largely swelled through the effect of malaria. TABLE XI. Number examined. Very large spleen. Moderately enlarged spleen. Total spleen. No. Per cent. No. Per cent. No. Per cent. Cases admitted for fever 101 18 18 22 22 40 40 Convalescent gang 32 11 34 6 19 17 53 Light labour gang 32 8 25 6 19 14 44 Convicts at labour at Dundas Point and Port Mouat. 146 18 12 24 16 42 29 Adults (self-supporters) in unhealthy villages. 121 10 8 16 13 26 21 43. Even the numbers of sick shown by adding together those in hospital and in the convalescent and light labour gangs does not fully exhibit the true prevalence of malaria among the labouring convicts. At Dundas Point among a batch of men at work on excavation in addition to two out of a total of 35 who showed parasites five were obviously more or less sick (anæmia, spleen to umbilicus, etc.). Similarly at Port Mouat and to a less extent at other un- healthy stations examined there was a considerable amount of this kind of un- fitness. 44. The aggregate effect of malaria in producing sickness among the labouring convicts in the Andamans is therefore very considerable. The degree to which this community suffers is also greater than that to which the self- supporters in the villages are subject though as regards number of anopheles and conditions apparently suitable for malaria the villages should be more unhealthy than the barracks.
32 LENGTH OF STAY IN HOSPITAL. 45. An analysis of the lengths of detention in the Viper Hospital during the period 1st January to 19th February (healthy period) and during the period 1st to 19th July (severe malaria prevalence) gave results as follows :33 FREQUENCY OF READMISSION. 46. In the last section it was seen that a very large proportion of cases admitted to hospital remain in the wards only a very short time. It becomes important to know to what extent these admissions are independent of one another. Analysing 647 admissions for fever during the months January to March 1909 the following information was obtained:34 among the convict community in the Settlement to form the basis on which such relapses as occur are founded. VII.35 A more detailed statement for certain recent years taken from the admi- nistration reports is given below. Length of residence. Average number of convicts. Number of deaths. Death rate per mille. 1906. 1907. 1908. 1906. 1907. 1908. 1906. 1907. 1908. Under 6 months 699 309 382 17 2 3 24.3 6.4 5.2 Over 6 and under 12. 1,303 837 694 39 5 3 29.9 6.0 4.3 Over 1 year and under 2. 1,566 1,223 764 69 28 14 44.0 22.9 18.3 Over 2 years and under 3. 1,391 1,279 1,192 68 33 29 48.8 25.8 24.3 Over 3 years and under 7. 3,094 4,435 4,791 156 97 124 50.4 21.8 25.9 Over 7 6,303 6,317 6,202 210 175 202 33.3 27.7 32.6 In these years therefore the highest rates are not among new comers but in convicts who have been a number of years in the Settlement. Without more elaborate enquiry than I was able to undertake it is not possible to do more than surmise that the change is due to the increasing attention given to the medical aspect of the treatment of convicts, especially the attention now given to the conditions affecting new arrivals. PART PLAYED BY MALARIA IN THE DEATH RATE. 50. From what has been said regarding the effect of malaria on the sick rate it might be expected that in the death returns this disease would also figure largely. Such is not the case as will be seen from the following statement:36 51. That malaria should have so small a direct effect upon the death rate is in keeping with what has already been said regarding the comparative mild- ness of the average attack of this disease among the convicts. It seemed prob- able, however, that the real effect of malaria in enhancing the death rate is greater than is indicated by the number of deaths directly due to this disease. To determine the existence and nature of any such indirect effect the records of autopsies were examined. These are of special value in the Settle- ment since with very occasional exceptions an autopsy is made upon every case of death among the convicts. These records show conclusively that as regards the returns made under dysentery, phthisis and pneumonia, diseases to which the bulk of deaths are ascribed, there is no question but that death has been due in the great majority of cases to the disease returned. Neverthless one was impressed with the much greater importance of " Pneumonia, " as a cause of death than is gathered from a perusal of the tabulated statistics. 52. The number of deaths returned as pneumonia in the post-mortem records of the three large hospitals Viper, Haddo and Bamboo Flat are shewn in Table XII. TABLE XII.37 (Out of 131 consecutive records of autopsies 53 were cases returned as pneumo- nia and another 14 were cases with post-mortem evidence of this disease or due to its common sequelæ). The total effect of pneumonia as an actual cause of death is therefore very considerable. Viper draws its patients from what is undoubtedly the most malarious part of the Settlement (Western District). Haddo, on the other hand, draws most of its cases from the comparatively non-malarious stations about Aberdeen. It will be seen that the proportion of deaths from pneumonia in Viper is remark- ably high compared with those for any other disease whilst at Haddo dysentery becomes a more prominent cause of death. The following tables (Tables XIII and XIV) give the average weight of the spleen for different diseases and areas compiled from the post-mortem records. It will be seen that the size of the spleen in pneumonia deaths is even greater than that in cases returned as deaths from malaria (mostly chronic infections). This disease in fact holds quite a unique position in regard to the increase in weight of the spleen. That this increase in the average weight of the spleen is not an effect of pneumonia per se is shewn by the figures given in the last lines of the tables. These are the rates shewn in cases of lobar pneumonia in the records of the Calcutta Medical College obtained from information very kindly abstracted for me by Major L. Rogers, I.M.S. TABLE XIII. Pneumonia. Dysentery. Phthisis. Chronic malaria. Fever with jaundice. Other causes. VIPER No. of cases 112 46 29 27 18 108 Average weight spleen in ounces. 20.1 12.8 14.2 17.3 17 15.4 HADDO No. of cases 75 111 34 14 6 112 Average weight spleen in ounces. 24 12.9 10.7 22.1 19.5 14.6 BAMBOO FLAT. No. of cases. 70 67 196 34 17 59 Average weight spleen in ounces. 22.9 11.5 14.3 21.4 15.6 16.4 CALCUTTA No. of cases 60 ... ... ... ... ... MAJOR ROGERS Average weight spleen in ounces. 10.7 ... ... ... ... ...
38 TABLE XIV. Under 1 lb. Over 1 lb., and under 2 lbs. Over 12 lbs., and under 3 lbs. Over 3 lbs. Viper Pneumonia 46 51 12 3 Dysentery 34 9 2 1 Phthisis 21 6 1 1 Malaria 13 11 3 0 Other causes 74 34 15 3 Haddo Pneumonia 15 39 16 5 Dysentery 73 37 0 0 Phthisis 28 6 0 0 Malaria 2 9 0 2 Other causes 62 42 12 3 Bamboo Flat Pneumonia 21 30 17 2 Dysentery 54 10 3 0 Phthisis 125 65 3 3 Malaria 14 12 7 1 Other causes 40 28 5 1 Calcutta Pneumonia 45 12 1 2 It is difficult to see what other conclusion can be drawn but that there is a close association between malarial infection and the incidence of fatal lobar pneumonia. My clinical experience in the Settlement upholds this view for among the cases admitted to hospital with parasites (Table II) two later deve- loped a fatal pneumonia. One other severe malaria case was admitted for bronchitis. Neither dysentery nor phthisis shews any enhancement of the average spleen weight and the former disease even shews a distinct lowered average weight, a fact which is explained in the next section. EFFECT OF DIFFERENT DISEASES IN RELATION TO LENGTH OF RESIDENCE. 53. The results of a determination of the average spleen weight for differ- ent diseases at different periods of residence are given in Table XV.
39 TABLE XV. Convict numbers in groups of thousands. Over 30,000. 28,000 to 30,000. 26,000 to 28,000. 21,000 to 26,000 15,000 to 21,000 10,000 to 15,000. 1 to 10,000 Approximate time of deportation. 1908 on wards. 1906 and 1907. 1904 and 1905. 1901 to 1904. Prior to 1901. Number of autopsies, 1910 and part of 1911. 73 81 55 76 78 71 22 Average weight of spleen of autopsies in 1910 and 1911 (in ounces). 14 15 16 19 19 18 14 Percentage of deaths due to Pneumonia. 11 24 28 32 27 15 Percentage of deaths due to Dysentery. 38 27 7 9 4 0 Percentage of deaths due to Phthisis. 15 15 25 23 28 31 Percentage of deaths due to other causes. 36 34 41 36 41 54 Number of autopsies in 1909. 26 43 35 43 36 27 7 Average weight of spleen in autopsies in 1909 (in ounces). 12 16 17 18 20 24 16 Percentage of deaths due to Pneumonia. 0 14 23 27 16 26 Percentage of deaths due to Dysentery. 61 31 20 9 5 13 Percentage of deaths due to Phthisis. 11 18 22 24 24 22 Percentage of deaths due to other causes. 28 37 35 40 54 39 This table is compiled on the basis of the serial numbers which are given to convicts on their arrival at the Settlement. These numbers enable one to judge of the length of residence with sufficient accuracy for our purpose.
40 It will be seen that the spleen weight in the case of those dying increases during the first few years rather rapidly, and then more slowly to a maximum of about 18 oz. It will also be seen that whilst pneumonia, phthisis and other causes reach their maximum percentage in those who have been a number of years in the Settlement, dysentery exhibits a remarkable relative prevalence in the first few years. Pneumonia especially shews a small relative effect on new comers and a maximum effect in those who have been about ten years in the Settlement. This corresponds with the period of greatest average spleen weight. Early corners are chiefly resident in the comparatively non-malarial Aberdeen area and the low average spleen weight in dysentery may be partly at any rate due to this fact. Phthisis, however, shows a delayed incidence as great as that of pneumonia though the average spleen weight is only about half w hat it is in this latter disease. The relation of pneumonia to malaria therefore seems quite a definite one. Judging by the results of the enquiry dysentery shows very little relation to malaria. SOME SPECIAL DISEASES THE CONNECTION OF WHICH WITH MALARIA IS. UNCERTAIN. 54. In the annual sanitary reports of the Settlement mention is frequently made of a fatal fever of short duration associated with jaundice. Unfortu- nately no cases of this fever occurred during my stay in the Andamans and the following information regarding its nature are based only on information contained in hospital reports and upon some films of blood and organs kindly furnished me by Major Woolley, I.M.S. The symptomatology of the disease is that of a severe fever of short duration associated with jaundice and most frequently fatal. It occurs especially among the self-supporters of certain villages, the most notable being Port Mount and old Namunagahr (very malarious site since abandoned). It has also occurred at Dundas Point presumably among labouring convicts. Cases picked out for me from the admission books as special cases by the Senior Medical Officer had. the following seasonal distribution. In 1907 two cases occurred in July, in 1908 four cases occurred respectively in July, August, October and November. In 1909 one case occurred in June, three in July and one in August, September and November, respectively. Two cases had occurred in July 1911 shortly before my arrival. It will be seen that the local seasonal distribution closely follows that of malaria. But the average spleen weight in these cases works out at 13.7 oz. which is not above the average.
41 In films of the organs of one case, which had deteriorated greatly in the moist damp atmosphere, I found a small amount of what might have been malarial pigment, but the appearances were not those of a fatal and acute malaria. Similarly in some excellent blood films of a recent case (a European living near Port Mouat) sent to me by Major Woolley, I found after long search only one small malignant tertian ring and no evidence of a severe and fatal malarial attack. The question of Blackwater fever occurred to me but in the notes accom- panying the last mentioned case it is definitely stated that hæm oglobinuria was not present. Nor could I find any of the usual evidences of this disease (engulfed red cell shadows, etc.) It is useless to theorise regarding this disease the nature of which still requires elucidation. 55. Cases of severe anæmia resulting in many cases in death are not uncommon among the labouring convicts. The nature of these cases is often very uncertain. They have been returned as malarial anæmia. The average weight of the spleen in such cases is not high (13.3 oz.) and. in one typical case seen by me post-mortem this organ was normal in size and appearance, and there were no parasites or malarial pigment in the organs. Prolonged search in four severe cases in hospital failed to shew malarial parasites and the leucocyte values were not those of malaria. A very charac- teristic feature of the blood picture in all four cases was the large size of the red cells and the presence of immense polychromatic cells such as I have not seen either in malaria or following Blackwater fever. The nature of these anæmia cases is uncertain and their relation to malaria doubtful. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS ON THE DEATH RATE. 56. It seems clear that whatever effect malaria may have in an indirect way upon the death rate among the labouring convicts it is by no means the essential reason of the high mortality. The death rates for phthisis and dysentery diseases which we have seen do not shew any special relation to malaria, give rise to about half the total deaths. When the amount of care taken in regard to feeding, housing and sanitary matters is considered it seems very probable that the most fundamental cause of a high mortality is the profound effect upon men of imprisonment and. transportation. In addition there is the fact that a very large collection of men have been congregated under very artificial conditions within a small area. The problem of malaria among the labouring convicts from what has been shewn in this report would seem to be bound up very closely with the general G
42 conditions affecting the health of the community. Over and above any direct attack made upon this disease there is therefore the necessity of attending to everything affecting the general condition of the convicts. Such a view is important since it enables one to see that an abundant dietary and comforts are not altogether a matter of mere luxury, but under peculiar conditions may be a medical necessity if a reasonable death rate among the community is aimed at. Economy under these circumstances should not be short-sighted and a saving made on a dietary, estimated to be just sufficient, may well lead to ultimate loss when hospital expenditure and labour efficiency with all that this means is taken into account. VIII.43 Suitable conditions for breeding were unlimited but fish of the genus Haplochilus were very common and were found in all waters but those of a very temporary nature. 61. The predominating type of parasite among the children in the villages was simple tertian. Among convicts admitted to hospital and among the convalescent gang quartan infections formed 50 per cent. or over. The carrier was the same and there is little reason to doubt that the quartan parasite predominated in the case of the labouring convicts because circumstances favoured relapses whilst actual transmission of the disease was not very active. It is interesting to note that though infection with malignant tertian at the time of my visit was very little in evidence yet the only two infected anopheles encountered were infected with this type of parasite. 62. There is some reason to believe that proportionate prevalence of the different forms of parasites in any community is dependent upon44 exact parallel to the conditions at Panama which Deeks and James explain by ascribing the fever season mainly to relapses. 65. The direct effect of malaria on the death rate as shown in the returns is small. The bulk of the deaths are due in order of frequency to phthisis, dysentery, and pneumonia. Pneumonia is definitely associated with malarial infection and its incidence among the convicts in the unhealthier western district assumes especial importance. 66. Any relation of malaria to phthisis and dysentery is not easily traced. It is possible that the same causes which lead to a high prevalence of these diseases are also at work in increasing the prevalence of malaria. (Mental effect of transportation, etc.) 67. Under the conditions present among the labouring convicts (moderate fresh infection with a high prevalence of relapses and continued infection) everything relating to food, clothing, shelter and the conditions of labour are of immense importance. 68. So far I was able to judge the care taken of the convicts and the amount of thought and care expended upon their proper feeding, etc., is very noticeable. Also the medical arrangements are excellent. If improvements are possible in these matters they are of a kind that can only be brought about as the result of careful scientific investigation of details as they affect in dividual convicts. (Vide Report by Dr. Bentley and myself on conditions among labour on tea gardens). 69. The treatment of cases of malaria in hospital for malaria is nevertheless deficient. This is partly due to the short periods of detention in hospital and partly to the absence of a policy of thorough and effective treatment of all admissions for fever, a policy the rationale of which depends upon the relative importance of relapses and fresh infections among this community. The relative importance of relapses has been clearly shown in this report. It has also on general grounds been previously pointed out by Major Waters.9 IX.45 Since the inhabitants are directly under the orders of Government (there are no very malarious free villages) the only difficulty is that of arranging for cultivable land. In this respect the further opening up of areas in the direction of Templegunj where malaria is at a minimum, would seen to be a very desir- able procedure. Such an extension has been already foreshadowed in the Lyall and Lethbridge Report on the working of the Penal Settlement of Port Blair.10 In this report, dated 1890, Major Lethbridge says :46 dealt with was small and close to important stations this might be undertaken. Such a case might be the present Female Jail which is very malarious and. situated near a comparatively small swamp. Whether the swamp should be filled or the Jail moved would depend upon the relative cost of the two measures. I was led to understand that it would be easier to move the Jail, but whether this would actually be so or not I do not know. Ordinarily the fact that most of the water of the Settlement is free from larvæ, or very nearly so, and that the rainfall is heavy would make this method of combating malaria in the Andamans not one to be recommended without some special object in view. 74. Dietary47 75. Quinine prophylaxis and treatment.48 References. 1. Brahmachari On an Anopheline allied to Myzomyia Listoni. Indian Medical Gazette, July 1911. 2. Decks and James Hæmoglobinuric Fever in the Canal Zone. Isthmian Canal Commission, 1911. 3. Christophers and Bentley . The Human Factor in Malaria. Proceedings of the Bombay Medical Congress, Feb. 1909 4. Mathis and Leger Recherches de Parasitologie et de Pathologie humaines et animales au Tonkin, Paris, 1911. 5. Marchiafava and Bignami Twentieth Century Practice of Medicine, Vol. XIX, 1900, p. 74. 6. Stephens and Christophers Relation of species of anopheles to malarial endemicity. Reports to the Malaria Committee of the Royal Society, Seventh Series. 7. James, W. M. Quartan Malaria and its Parasite. Proceedings of the Canal Zone Medical Society, Vol. III, April to Sept. 1910. 8. Marchiafava and Bignami . Twentieth Century Practice of Medicine, Vol. XIX, 1900, p. 142. 9. Waters Malaria as seen in the Andamans Penal Settlement. Indian Medical Gazette, 1904, p. 419, also Lancet, 13 June 1903, p. 1657 10. Lyall and Lethbridge Report on the working of the Penal Settlement of Port Blair, 1890, p. 51. SUPDT. GOVT. PRINTING INDIA, 8 HASTINGS STREET, CALCUTTA.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062919.tif] Photo-Engraved & Printed at the Offices of the Survey of India. Calcutta. 1912 Salt Swamp, Andamans. Home of Nyssomyzomyia ludlowi.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062925.tif]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of 75062928.tif] Reg. No. 1633 E., 12.