Indian Hemp Drugs Commission. VOL. V. EVIDENCE OF WITNESSES FROM NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND OUDH AND PUNJAB TAKEN BEFORE THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1894. Price Two Rupees Eight Annas.
Indian Hemp Drugs Commission. VOL. V. EVIDENCE OF WITNESSES FROM NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND OUDH AND PUNJAB TAKEN BEFORE THE INDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CALCUTTA: OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA. 1894.
QUESTIONS FRAMED BY THE COMMISSION. Evidence before the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission, 1893-94. CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTORY. 1. What opportunities have you had of obtain- ing information regarding the matters connected with hemp drugs in regard to which your answers are framed ? 2. In the most recent work on ganja (Dr. Prain's report of 21st June 1893) it is stated that "in India three narcotic articles are obtained naturally from hemp. These are, siddhi or bhang, charas, and ganja." They are thus defined, by Dr. Prain : " Siddhi, bhang, subji or patti are different names applied to the dry leaves of the hemp plant, whether male or female and whether cultivated or uncultivated. " Charas is the name applied to the resinous matter which forms the active principle of the plant when collected separately. " Ganja consists of the dried flowering tops of cultivated female hemp plants which have become coated with resin in consequence of having been unable to set seeds freely. The formation of seeds is prevented by the destruction of all the male plants. "Three varieties of ganja are sold. Ganja is usually manufactured by being trodden under foot, so that the agglutinated flower-tops assume a flattened shape. This is ' Flat ganja.' The other sort of ganja is not trodden, but rolled under loot, so that the agglutinated flower-tops are less closely adherent, and assume a rounded shape. This is ' Round ganja.' The flower-tops of ganja detached from the. twigs, whether of flat or of round ganja, and whether the detachment has been accidental or deliberate, form ' chur' or ' Broken ganja.' " May these definitions be accepted for your pro- vince ? By what name is each of these products locally known ? CHAPTER II. CULTIVATION OR GROWTH OF HEMP. (Cannabis sativa.) 3. In what districts of which you have know- ledge does the hemp plant grow spontaneously? Mention any in which it is abundant. .4. By what different names is it known? Do these refer to exactly the same plant ? 5. What special conditions of climate, soil, rainfall, elevation above sea level, etc., are necessary to the growth of the wild hemp ? 6. Is the growth of the wild hemp ordinarily dense, or scattered? 7. Is there any cultivation of the hemp plant in your provinceii it quite lose its effect in time? How long does it keep good with ordinary care? What are the causes of deterioration ? What special measures can be taken to prevent deterioration ? CHAPTER IV. TRADE. (Statistics to be obtained from Government offices.) CHAPTER, V. CONSUMPTION OR USE. NOTE.iii 38. Have the three different preparations of ganja (round and flat ganja and "chur") any different effects in kind or degree on consumers ? 39. Is the smoking of any preparation of the hemp plant in any way a less injurious form of consumption than drinking or eating the same or any other preparation ? Give reasons for your answer. 40. (a) Is the use of any of these drugs prescribed on account of its medicinal qualities by any school of Native Doctors ? (b) Are any of them used in the treatment of cattle disease? 41. May the moderate use of charas, ganja, or bhang be beneficial in its effectsiv 60. If ganja is produced in your province, do you think that the cultivation of the ganja-bear- ing plant and the process of its preparation are sufficiently controlled, or that the system requires modification in any respect? If so, in what respects and why? 61. If charas is produced in your province, do you think the cultivation of the hemp plant for its production and the process of preparation are sufficiently controlled, or that the system requires modification in any respect. If so, in what re- spects and why? 62. Do you think that the cultivation of the hemp plant for the production of bhang should be in any way controlled? Would this be feasible? If so, indicate the method by which such control could be exercised. 63. Have you any objection to the present system of INDEX TO N.-W. PROVINCES AND OUDH AND PUNJAB WITNESSES. No. Name. Designation. Page N.-W. PROVINCES AND OUDH. 1 Hon'ble A. Cadellvi No. Name. Designation. Page N.-W. PROVINCES AND OUDH- contd. 34 John Cockburn *. . . . . . Assistant Sub-Deputy Opium Agent 41 35 Khan Bahadur Syed Ali Husan* . . . Deputy Collector (on deputation as Re- venue Member, Council of Regency, Rampur State) . . . . 49 36 Sirdar Ganpat Rae . . . . . . Deputy Collector . . . . 51 37 Babu Chandu Lal* . . . . . . Ditto . . . . . . 52 38 Dila Ram * . . . . . . . Ditto . . . . . . 55 39 M. Zainulabdin, Khan Bahadur . . . . Ditto . . . . . . 57 40 Salehdi Singh . . . . . . Ditto . . . . . 58 41 Ganga Narain . . . . . Excise Deputy Collector 59 42 Thakur Hardhan Singh . . . . . . Deputy Collector 61 43 Thakur Ganesh Singh . . . . . . Ditto . . . . . . 63 44 M. Mohamed Wasi * . . . . . . Ditto . . . . . . 64 45 Chaudhri Maharaj Singh . . . . . Ditto . . . . . . 69 46 Pundit Bishambher Nath* . . . . Ditto . . . . . . 70 47 Mirza Irfan Ali Beg . . . . . Ditto . . . . . . 72 48 Pundit Raghober Dyal Misra . . . . Offg. ditto . . . . . . 73 49 Dharma Nand Joshi * . . . . . . Ditto (on Settlement duty) 76 50 Munshi Kamta Prasad . . . . . Offg. Deputy Collector . . . 81 51 Thakur Tukman Singh* . . . . . Ditto . . . . . . 82 52 Bholanath Chatterji* . . . . . . Ditto . . . . . . 85 53 K. Kampta Pershad . . . . . . Ditto . . . . . . 87 54 Thakur Jaggannath Singh . . . . Ditto . . . . . . 89 55 Munshi Ujagar Mal . . . . . Retired Deputy Collector . . . 91 56 Pandit Gunga Dutt Upreti . . . . Ditto . . . . . . 92 57 Pundit Mewaram . . . . . . Ditto . . . . . 94 58 Kasim Hassan Khan . . . . . . Tahsildar . . . . . 98 59 Munshi Salamatulla . . . . . . Ditto . . . . . . 99 60 Chaudri Sital Pershad . . . . . . Ditto . . . . . . 100 61 Jaideo Sahay * . . . . . . Offg. ditto . . . . . . 101 62 Dwarka Prasad . . . . . . Excise Naib Tahsildar . . . 104 63 Birgnath Sahai* . . . . . . Ditto . . . . . 106 64 F. Porter vii No. Name. Designation. Page N.-W. PROVINCES AND OUDHviii No. Name. Designation. Page. N.-W. PROVINCES AND OUDH ix No. Name. Designation. Page. N.-W. PROVINCES AND OUDHx No. Name. Designation. Page. N.-W. PROVINCES AND OUDHxi No. Name. Designation. Page. N.-W. PROVINCES AND OUDHxii No. Name. Designation. Page. N.-W. PROVINCES AND OUDHxiii No. Name. Designation. Page. PUNJABxiv No. Name. Designation. Page. PUNJABINDIAN HEMP DRUGS COMMISSION. EVIDENCE OF NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES & OUDH WITNESSES. 1. Evidence of the HON'BLE A. CADELL, Member, Board of Revenue. Oral evidence. I am Member of the Board of Revenue in charge of Excise and Member of the Provincial Council. I was eighteen months Commissioner of Excise in 1883-84. My experience has been largely in settlement work: about fourteen years in various districts, chiefly Allahabad, Muzaffarnagar, Banda and Hamirpur. I have also been Collector in three districts and Commissioner in two divisions. I think our information regarding the extent of consumption is very defective owing to our system; and I am generally prepared to accept the figures given in Mr. Stoker's memorandum, paragraphs 37 to 39. But I think that his esti- mate of the average consumption per man is high, and that the number of consumers is probably much higher than he puts it. When ten years ago I made inquiries about opium-smoking, one of the great objections to the vice urged was that it was so expensive that it almost drove its vota- ries into crime. I have never heard that urged against hemp drugs. I think then that Rs. 11-6-6 per annum is a figure far above the average of expenditure on these drugs by consumers. I do not think our statistics are sufficient to enable us accurately to estimate the increase in consumption. But it is generally felt that when there is restriction in one intoxicant, it leads to increase in another. That is admitted in the Bengal report, and has been again and again ad- mitted in this province. I think, therefore, that since the great increase in still-head duty there has probably been considerable increase in hemp- drug consumption, just as there was said to be decrease when the extension of the out-still sys- tem gave increased facilities for obtaining liquor. I think that the two habits are to some extent interchangeable. The raising of the still-head duty, more careful excise, and the abandonment of the out-still system except in frontier and jun- gle tracts are all causes pointing to the probabi- lity of increase in the consumption of drugs. I may mention in this connection that in 1882-83 the total excise on spirits was Re. 1-8-6 per gallon, and in 1890-91 Re. 1-13-11 per gallon, and in 1891-92, after the increase in still-head duty Rs. 2-13-8 per gallon on London proof. The first two were on unascertained strength, but it was to the advantage of the contractor to take out as high strength as possible, as the duty was irre- spective of strength. The districts of most con- sumption were the districts of greatest skill, and there the strength was generally well above proof. Perhaps the figure for 1891-92 may be abnormal, owing to the bids for contracts being sometimes made under mistake as to the system, but the permanent increase is doubtless enormous. The statistics have been defective, because there was no revenue reason for having them, only statistical reasons. We have only statistics of revenue, not of consumption. There is a very great increase in revenue, vide Mr. Stoker's me- morandum, paragraph 42; but my opinion is that this is more due to improved administration than to increased consumption, especially in Oudh. Apart from the above considerations, I have no opinion based on actual observation regarding the increase. Drugs do not obtrude themselves on observation. I should say that if there has been increase at all, it is probably among the poor classes principally, as prices affect them most. I have said that the effects of drugs obtrude themselves very little on observation. As I said ten years ago, bhang is practically harmless. As to charas and ganja, I think the only harm observ- able is the apparent tendency to insanity from excessive consumption. Moderate consumption is less hurtful than opium-smoking or (in regard to the people of this country) English spirits. I specify English spirits, because the people who use them can more readily go to excess than those who use native spirits. I would add that the great indictment against hemp drugs is the asy- lum statistics which were quoted at page 6 of the Board's last review of the Excise Report. These figures were quoted not so much with a view to advocate restriction of drugs as to show that spirit as used in India is a comparatively harmless intoxicant, and that to make it too dear for general consumption and to drive people to the use of drugs is in the interests of the people a very undesirable change in our excise adminis- tration. I do not think I have ever come across the evil effects of the drugs in any form, except as visitor of lunatic asylums. In regard to lunacy, I am not prepared to say that the effects of the drugs have been accurately gauged. I am in hopes that the labours of the Commission may help us in this matter. My only knowledge of the matter at present is based on the statistics of the asylums I did not form opinion as to cause in any special cases. I may add that ten years ago I endeavoured to conduct an inquiry into this question, but I found the statistics so vague that I could arrive at no satisfactory conclusion. Since then the statistics have been compiled in the form in which we now have them. They are clearer and more intelligible; but I cannot say anything as to their basis. I know nothing of that. As to crime, I do not think that any intoxicant
2 has among the Indian people any serious connec- tion with crime. I have never come across a case of running amuck in my experience; from whatever cause, such cases are hardly ever heard or read of in these provinces. I have heard that people are sometimes primed to commit offences; but their minds are made up beforehand. I have no recollection of such a case. I speak here of all intoxicants generally. I do not think there is any such connection between intoxicants and crime in this part of India as there is in England. The consumption of charas and ganja is looked upon as a more or less disreputable practice. It is natural then that the proportion of bad charac- ters who use these drugs should be large. That is the only connection I see between them and crime. I certainly do not recommend prohibition. It is not required. I think it would be a moat tyrannical measure and would lead to a great deal of artificial crime. I think our object should be not to make intoxicants unnecessarily cheap and not afford inducements to indulgence. And I think it is extremely likely that the system at present in force is capable of very great improvement with a view to acting up to these principles and also to getting increased revenue. Thus in 1882- 83 there were 4,799 shops, or one to every 9,191 of population: now there are 3,673, or one for every 12,770 of population; and I think that even allowing for necessary extension of shops in cer- tain districts, the total number may be consider- ably decreased. Extension is necessary in such a case as Bahraich, where there are only 19 shops to a million of inhabitants and where consumption is known to be great. The legal facilities for obtain- ing the drug are insufficient in such a case. In towns, on the other hand, the number of shops is capable of reduction. In Jalaun there are 170 shops to under 400,000 inhabitants: this is a case where the number of shops in the district might be reduced. This is the policy on which we have been generally proceeding of late years. The matter is now under special consi- deration, and special inquiries are being conducted this cold weather. Then in regard to taxation I agree with Mr. Stoker that the present system, though it has worked moderately well, is not worthy of main- tenance. We ought to be authorised to levy either directly ourselves or through other Govern- ments a direct tax on all ganja and charas that comes into the provinces. I also think that there should be inter-provincial agreement with other provinces in this matter. I object to the system under which the alteration of rates of taxation in Bengal affects this province ipso facto without our having anything to say regarding that which is consumed here. The result is that Bengal ganja is being excluded, while the other kinds of ganja are still practically untaxed, The last Bengal report refers to this, I think that we should be empowered to levy import duty on ganja coming from the south and charas coming from the west, either ourselves or through other Governments. I also think that the revenue on drugs should go to the province where they are consumed. It is a better and more equitable prin- ciple, and saves a lot of dicussion. Rates require often also to be arranged in discussion between Governments so as to secure something like uni- formity on the borders and to prevent conflict of interests. I think generally that Provincial Governments should not alter rates of taxation where other Governments are affected without consulting these other Governments. But the most important point for us is to have the right to tax the Pathar ganja and other imported hemp drugs. I do not think that the duty should be too high at first. There is a considerable margin in the comparative prices of Baluchar and Pathar to allow of taxing the latter. At present the local production of charas is so small that we should be able to ignore it; but if the production were greatly to increase, we should have to reconsider this. I cannot say what the amount of local production is, but I think that even in Garhwal it is very small indeed. It need give us no anxiety at present in connection with taxing imported charas. It would be easy to tax charas-growing as poppy-growing is taxed in the Punjab. Of course, we must leave the wild plant and bhang. The production in Garhwal is from the cultivated plant. I think we may have to license and tax bhang cultivation, because it may lead to the manufac- ture of ganja; but the question is at present un- important. There is at present no prohibition of cultivation. Before the hill districts are thus taxed, full enquiry would have to be made. I may say that I generally endorse the proposals made by Mr. Stoker in paragraph 48 of his me- morandum. The bonded warehouses would be of advantage in making the trade accessible to small capitalists and so increasing revenue, and also in systematis- ing distribution. I therefore support this propo- sal. I also support the proposal to dissociate differ- ent forms of the drug. I made this proposal in the Excise Report of 18855-83, paragraph 86. In regard to local option, I may say that I have never heard of any objections to drug shops. I have heard such objections regarding spirit shops. The wishes of the community should be consulted. Hitherto the objection to drug shops has always come from above, viz., from the Board, the Commissioner or the Collector. I was asked to inquire into the matter of smug- gling from Native States of Bundelkhand into the neighbouring districts. The result of the en- quiry is that there is some petty smuggling, but not on any large scale. Or course, if there were a direct duty, the smuggling might increase, and we might have to employ special preventive establishment. We have none at present. I do not think the smuggled stuff gets beyond the border districts. 2. Evidence of Mr. J. B. THOMSON, Magistrate and Collector, Allahabad. Oral evidence. Question 1.3 consumed by the people. I think, however, that the consumption must be on the increase, judging from the rise of the price of the monopoly, and the general information I have gathered as Collector. I think the rise of the price of liquors has had the effect of stimulating the consumption of the drugs. I do not regard the habits of hemp and liquor consumption as impossible of interchange. I do not think the rise of revenue can be account- ed for solely by the improvements in administra- tion which have taken place in recent years. Religious restrictions also, I believe, favour the consumption of drugs as compared with liquor. I have heard of Kayasthhs abandoning liquor, but cannot say definitely that they have taken to drugs. Question 45.4 bhang. Mathura is the great home of bhang con- sumption. 25. The consumption of all drugs is on the increase owing to clearness and badness of liquor. 29. Pepper, cardamoms, and aniseed are ordi- narily mixed with bhang. Dhatura is sometimes used for the sake of strength. In large cities, such as Delhi and Agra, a special preparation is sold; melon and cucumber seeds are stated to be among its ingredients. 30. All three drugs are consumed in company. Consumption is ordinarily confined to male adults. 31. The consumption of these drugs is a habit not very difficult to give up. There is little danger of excess in bhang, but in the other drugs there may be. 32. Bhang is offered to the god Shiva. 33. The consumption of bhang is not looked upon with disapproval; that of the other drugs is. The hemp plant is worshipped in Mauranipur in the Jhansi district. 34. It would be a most serious grievance to de- prive the people of bhang. It would be equiva- lent to depriving sailors of tobacco. 35. Total prohibition of any of these drugs would be impossible: a possible consequence would be the use of dhatura. 37. Charas is the stronger drug. 38. All kinds of ganja are very much the same in effect. 41. Bhang is very useful as an appetizer, to give staying-power, and also as a febrifuge. 42. The moderate use of bhang is certainly harmless. There is a consensus of medical opinion that no illness or bad effects of any kind have ever been traced, either directly or indirectly, to the use of this drug. 47. There is no proof of hereditary effect pro- duced by these drugs. 59. What is wanted in excise administration is differential taxation, the duty on the more deleter- ious drugs being made higher. 60 and 61. The hemp plant not being culti- vated for trade in the plains of India, might be usefully subjected to restriction. 69. Local public opinion ought to be generally considered. 4. Evidence of MR. D. F. ADDIS, Magistrate and Collector of Muzaffarnagar. 1. My experience is in the Muzaffarnagar dis- trict. 3. The hemp plant grows wild in all parts of the district, particularly in the low lands near the rivers and near the canals. 7. There is no cultivation. 19. Charas and bhang only are used in this district. Charas is smoked. 20. Drugs are consumed chiefly by Brahmins and fakirs. 22. Charas is imported from Yarkand through the Punjab. 23. Bhang is not smoked. It is pounded up and mixed with black pepper and drunk with water. 25. I do not think that the consumption of bhang and charas is on the increase. The average amount sold in the district by the drug contractor is 60 maunds of bhang and 34 maunds charas. This amount does not tend to increase, and the revenue is stationary, 33. Public opinion is strongly against the use of hemp drugs, because they are thought to be hurtful. Drugs have no connection with religion. 35. It probably would be feasible to prohibit the use of all these drugs. Public opinion is against their use, and the people are very obedient to authority. The prohibition would certainly lead to an increased use of alcohol and opium. 39. Bhang is considered much less hurtful than charas. Bhang in moderation is supposed to pro- mote appetite. 51. I do not think that there is any necessary connection between the use of hemp drugs and crime. 54. I have known of no case in which a crimi- nal has fortified himself with hemp drugs in order to commit a crime. Men about to commit a crime need all their wits about them. 5. Evidence of MR. A. W. CRUICKSHANK, Magistrate and Collector, Agra. 51. I have no reason to think so. Moderate use of drugs has not (that I have any knowledge of) connection with any crime. 52. The excessive use of all or any of the hemp drugs produces mental alienation. Ganja used in excess is particularly likely to produce utterly reasonless violence, and even homicidal mania. 53. Yes. I cannot recall any particular case within my own experience. N. Chevers, Medical Jurisprudence, quotes instances, and Superintend- ents of jails and lunatic asylums could quote many cases. 54. I have no personal knowledge of any such case, but have read of persons acquiring Dutch courage from bhang. 55. I have no personal knowledge of any such case. The question as to complete stupefaction is one which I cannot answer from experience. It seems a question for a medical expert.
5 6. Evidence of MR. T. STOKER, I.C.S., Excise Commissioner. Oral evidence. I was twelve years an Assistant Magistrate and Joint Magistrate and Collector, and constantly in charge of the district excise. I was three and a half-years in settlement work. I have been two years in charge of the Excise Department. I have served in most parts of the North-Western Provinces and have travelled through Oudh. I have held charge of districts for short periods; but my settlement work took me away from that line. I am not prepared to say that any such injury has been or is being done by hemp drugs as to necessitate any serious change. I think our system is, perhaps, capable of improvement, but more especially from a revenue point of view. I say this because the people have been using the drugs for centuries; and there is no national deterioration generally or among the people who particularly use the drug. I understand that the plant was not indigenous in India, but was im- ported. Now it is practically indigenous. It is, however, a matter of centuries in any case. It is alleged, I know, that insanity is due to these drugs. I was a visitor in the Bareilly Lunatic Asylum. I think there is a general tendency to set down insanity to the use of hemp without ascertaining fully whether the drug was the cause or a concomitant. I do not know a case myself, and I believe that there is great exaggeration. I think that, perhaps, the similarity between the effects of excessive doses of hemp and insanity may account for this in some degree. I also think that prolonged excessive use may weaken the mind. I think that any mental derangement or weakness caused by hemp would be of a temporary charac- ter, unless there were constitutional weakness. It would pass away on the cessation of use of the drug. I have seen in cases of excessive consu- mers a slowness of intelligence and defect in memory; but I am not prepared to say that this state would have continued had the drugs been abandoned. I did not observe them long enough, I think that hemp drugs may be the exciting cause of insanity where constitutional tendency exists. I speak, however, as an unscientific ob- server. I can hardly say whether hemp drugs or alcohol would be more potent in this way. I can- not form an opinion. I also think that bhang would probably have no such effect; but charas or ganja might; charas more readily, perhaps, than ganja, which is weaker. In all this I refer to the excessive use. The moderate use is what prevails. The excessive use is quite exceptional. The moder- ate use has, as far as my experience goes, no tend- ency to produce insanity. In regard to crime, my belief and experience as a Magistrate and Excise Officer is that the use of hemp drugs is not a direct cause of crime. In cases where persons are going to commit a crime of violence already arranged and determined, I believe they undoubtedly use hemp drugs as they might any other stimulant to fortify themselves. I have known such cases. It is also a common belief that the Bandelkhand dacoits do so fortify themselves with either liquor or bhang. Those who use hemp drugs on such occasions belong to the classes who ordinarily consume the drug, and are probably ordinary consumers. They would probably fortify themselves for any arduous work in the same way. Unpremeditated crime resulting from the use of hemp drugs has not come within my experience. I have never beard of a case of a man under the influence of intoxi- cants committing a murder or any crime of vio- lence without motive. In all my thousands of cases I have never had such a case. Of course those who fortify themselves as above indicated do not stupefy themselves, I remember catching dacoits red-handed who were said to have used hemp drugs. They were all in their senses. I think too that, as in the case of alcohol in Eng- land, a man might go much further in crime under the influence of drugs than he would have done had be not been excited by their use. But such effects of the drug have never come before me. I have observed no evil effects of a physical character from the moderate use. I cannot dis- tinguish the moderate consumer (either habitual or occasional) of ganja or charas from the non- consumer. The occasional smoker is rare, I have sat for hours at drug shops watching the people who came to buy, and questioned them as to use, and have come to the conclusion that the moderate consumer is not injuriously affected. I think that in certain cases I have observed the appearance of physical deterioration from excess- ive use of these drugs. I am not prepared to say that this may not have been due to other causes or other vicious practices; but my opinion, based on such observations, is that they were due, in some of these cases at least, to the use of these drugs, specially charas. By physical deterioration I mean weakness, emaciation, absence of healthy colour, etc. Such cases, I should add, are ex- tremely few. Of course these characteristics are present also among moderate consumers as well as in the body of the people. But they are present to a greater extent among the excessive consumers, so far as my observation goes. These observations, of course, were mainly in towns and larger villages. As a District Officer and Settlement Officer I got into intimate contact with all classes. I be- lieve that these drugs are comparatively little used among the agricultural classes as compared with the town population, and that excess is still rarer. I have observed no ill-effect at all. And I think that there may be physical advantage. I think the drugs do give additional physical power, and also afford refreshment under conditions where food cannot be taken. In this I include ganja and charas. In respect to bhang, any evil effects that it produces are, as I have already said, less than those which may be produced by ganja or charas. Under ideal diet, the use of drugs might be exclud- ed like any other stimulant; but under the sys- tem under which we actually live I see no reason to regard the moderate use of these drugs as in- jurious or to treat them as poisons. If I were asked whether the man who did not take hemp drugs is better off physically, morally, and pecu- niarily, I say yes. I should say the same in re- gard to all intoxicants. But I should not answer in the affirmative if I were asked whether he should be interfered with and refused the use of drugs or other similar intoxicants. Memorandum. Paragraph 7.6 I believe that to be undoubted. I would advocate the imposition of a duty. I should not regret the restriction of charas as compared with ganja. I should advocate it. As shown in paragraph 32 of my memorandum, I fear that any attempt to impose a very heavy duty would be thwarted in a greater or less degree by the manufacture of charas locally. J put in specimens of charas made in Gwalior. I believe it can be made anywhere where the plant grows. If the demand increased, if a scarcity price prevailed, the local supply would greatly increase. The only figures as to local pro- duction, on which I can really rely, are contained in paragraph 31. The contractors admit that five or six maunds of British Himalayan charas annu- ally pass into their hands. It is probably more. Any how, the mass of the stuff produced does not pass into their hands, but passes from hand to hand among consumers. I should say that not less than about twenty-five maunds are manufac- tured at present in the hill districts; and that is pure. It represents more charas, weight for weight, than the imported charas. The Himala- yan charas could only be taxed on import to other districts with very great difficulty. Paragraph 11.7 lieve, largely increasing, as shown by the follow- ing figures of imports:8 ruined by liquor are people of the higher classes, and that by European liquor. I have stated in a later answer that in my opinion liquor does ex- ceedingly little harm in explanation of the phrase that it is harmless. Lunatics whose insanity has arisen from hemp drugs are not necessarily criminal. I am not aware of the duration of intoxication from the hemp drugs. When people appeared before me apparently under the influence of the hemp drugs, I accepted the explanations given me at the time as to the cause of their condition. I could not myself distinguish between alcoholic and ganja intoxication. I cannot say if a hemp drug con- sumer is more looked down upon than a drunkard or the reverse. Question 53.9 but the most moderate amount. Some prefer ganja and some charas. Both drugs are occasion- ally, but rarely, mixed. 21. The flat ganja only is used here. 22. Foreign, imported from the Punjab. The local variety made in Gwalior does not appear to be exported. 23. Not to my knowledge. 24. Bhang-eating is said to be confined to fakirs. Bhang-drinking is confined to no caste. Every Bundela Thakur uses his bhang with the same regularity as an Englishman his alcohol. The habit appears to be less pronounced among other castes, but is still widely spread, though, as I said before, the immoderate use of the drug is the exception. 25. My impression is that it tends to increase, as the price of alcoholic stimulants is forced up by excise measures. 26. I can give no definite statistics, but in this district, where the habitual moderate use of hemp drugs may be regarded as universal, I have met singularly few examples of excessive consumption, at any rate of such excess, as loads to distinct and recognisable physical or mental deterioration. 27. The habitual moderate consumers comprise representatives of all classes, the Bundela Thakurs preponderating. Habitual excess is chiefly seen, on the one hand, among nobles and wealthy zamin- dars, who are in other respects evil livers, and on the other hand, amongst the dregs of the town population, such as the keepers and hang- ers on of prostitutes. In both cases the exces- sive use of hemp drugs seems to be an attempt to counteract the effects upon the system of other vices. 28. An habitual moderate consumer may use about a pice weight, say 1/4 of a tola, of ganja daily, for which he will pay one pice or its weight in copper. An excessive consumer may use 20 times as much. I should regard anything over a tola per diem as distinctly excessive. I cannot speak as to bhang or charas. 29. Tobacco may be added to ganja and cha- ras. Pepper and other spices are used with bhang. The admixture of dhatura is rare, and is confined to persons who are habituated to excess, and find it necessary to increase the potency of the drug. There are various kinds of bhang massala. Car- damoms, aniseed, almonds, dried rose leaves, and other ingredients are used according to the flavour required. 30. Ganja and charas are used socially much after the manner of tobacco. Bhang is more usually drunk in private. I am not aware of any cases in which respectable women use any of these drugs, and children certainly do not. The habit, like that of tobacco smoking, appears to be acquired at adolescence. Prostitutes, I am in- formed, both smoke and drink hemp products. 31. I am informed that the habit is easily formed, but that it is not nearly so difficult to break off as the opium habit. From my own observation, I am of opinion that the moderate use of the drug does not tend to develop into the excessive unless the habit is associated with other forms of self-indulgence. 33. Practically there is no public opinion against it in Bundelkhand. The Arya Samaj people, how- ever, forbid the use of all intoxicants; but, with this exception, there is no religions propaganda on the subject locally. 34. Yes. From enquiries I have made through one of the native Magistrates here, I think it may be said that the loss of his pipe of ganja or charas would be as keen a deprivation to the labouring man here as the stoppage of his tobacco or his beer would be to a European accustomed to them. My native informant thinks that about 60 per cent. of the male population of the district use hemp in one form or another. In spite of recent large reductions, there is still a drug shop to every 8,250 of the population. 35. I do not believe it would be possible, unless possibly in the case of imported charas. Ganja, and eventually bhang, could and would be illicitly made all over the country. The prohibition could only be enforced by a most vexatious system of espionage, and the temptation on the part of the police to corruption would be irresistible. I believe that prohibition would be resented by the people as an unwarrantable interference with their liberties, and that this resentment, together with the friction which preventive action would cause, might, and probably would, amount to a politi- cal danger. Men will have their intoxicants in one form or another, and recourse would certainly be had to alcohol or some other substitute. 36. Not here. Hemp is at present the cheaper stimulant, and among most classes the more popular. 40. They are said to form an important item in the kabiraj's materia medica. They do not appear to treat cattle disease at all in Bundel- khand. 41. They are universally regarded by their users as valuable in the direction of points (a), (b), and (c). 42. I have come across no instances of harm from the moderate use of hemp. The Bundela Thakurs, who use it habitually, are a race distin- guished by much physical vigour and power of endurance. The jail population, amongst whom one would be disposed to think a larger portion of excessive consumers would be found, affords at present no example of the ill-effects of hemp, though there are several opium ruins there. The sudden cessation of the indulgence on entering jail does not appear to have any ill-effect. 43. Perfectly so; there is nothing in their ap- pearance or habits to distinguish them from those who abstain. 45. I have seen repeatedly cases of insanity which are attributed to over-indulgence in hemp drugs, but I have no means of knowing whether this was the true cause. But I have observed that in the majority of cases of excessive use which have come under my notice, the hemp habit has been associated with other forms of debauch- ery, and I am disposed to think that the excess in hemp results from an attempt to stimulate the already weakened vitality rather than that it is itself the cause and incentive to other vices. And when a man gets so far as to mix dhatura with his ganja, he is bound to ruin himself mentally as well as physically. 47. No; there is no evidence to that effect. 49. It is said that this is the case, and that this particular use of hemp is, as would be supposed, particularly injurious. 51. I have observed no facts tending to show any connection between the ordinary use of hemp drugs and crime. 53. It is said that the eating of bhang to excess may have these results, but no case has come under my experience. vol. v. F
10 55. I have not met with any such case in my experience. Dhatura is the universal drug for this work. 56. Dhatura, as I have said before, renders anything it is mixed with intensely noxious. None of the other admixtures appears to act ex- cept as flavourers or condiments. 58. The present system works smoothly and well from a district officer's point of view. 59. I have no improvements to suggest. 63. No objections occur to me. 64. No. A defect observed in the Excise Act, which provided no penalty for petty smuggling of hemp drugs, is about to be rectified. 65. I am disposed to think that in comparison with alcohol, hemp would bear a somewhat higher rate of taxation. Eight annas a month will at present keep a moderate ganja smoker very well supplied 11 ments are possible unless by raising the price of drugs. There are only two possible courses to adopt: (i) absolute prohibition, (ii) the present system, which represses consumption as far as practicable by high duties. No. (i) I consider absolutely im- possible. Such a prohibition would not carry along with it the sympathy of the people, but on the contrary persons who broke the law would certainly have the aid and protection of the lower classes. When it is possible in England to make the excessive use of alcohol a criminal offence, it may be possible to forbid the use of drugs in this country. It would be a real mistake to take any action in this direction. If thought desirable, the existing duties may be enhanced on ganja and charas. 62. It is absolutely impossible in my opinion to control the production of bhang. 63. No objections. The present duties might be raised, but the system is unexceptionable. 64. No objections. 69. I do not think there is any need for con- sulting local public opinion, nor do I know if it is done anywhere. I always consult local public opinion as far as possible before opening a liquor shop, for objections to this are often rife, but I never come across such objections to a drug shop. Drugs are used openly and with popular approval by the holiest of devotees and temple attendants, and their use stands on a wholly different footing from that of alcohol. The use of drugs does not lead to scenes of riot and disorder as does liquor, and hence the people make no objection to a drug shop while they oppose a liquor shop which disturbs the village. Oral evidence. Question 1.12 7. I have only seen it cultivated for its fibre (san) in all districts where I have been, and to a Hair amount. 10. No special class, as far as I know. 11. Yes; I think so. 12. I believe permission to cut the wild hemp plant is leased out in the submontane tracts. 14. Yes; all these I believe. 16. Not generally prepared in houses. 18. Yes; all deteriorate. 19. Only for smoking. 20. Kahars, chamars, etc., smoke ganja exten- sively. It is smoked in malarious places. 22. Foreign, Afghanistan. 23. Not as far as I know. 24. All classes as far as I know. 25. Increase; in same places have a tendency to supersede liquor. 30. (a) In company. (b) Mainly male sex. (c) No. 31. I am told easily formed. Tendency is to become excessive only in special cases. In fact, people who become excessive consumers would probably, if there were no drugs, be drunkards. 34. Yes. 35. It would not be feasible. If prohibited, illicit consumption would be common. Serious discontent would be occasioned. The prohibition would be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimu- lants and to opium drugs. 86. No; the contrary, I think. 51. No; not as far as my experience goes. 52. No. 53. It causes insanity in some cases. 54. No; I have not heard of any such cases. 55. These drugs are not used as a rule by criminals for stupefying their victims. 58. I consider the present system to be work- ing well, and that there is no necessity whatsoever for any interference. 63. No objection. 64. No. 65. Reasonable. 67. No. 69. Objections are always considered when made. 12. Evidence of MR. F. W. BROWNRIGG, Officiating Deputy Commissioner, Sultanpur. 1. The experience of nearly twelve years in district work. In submitting these answers I have consulted13 Inferior castes are said to prefer ganja, and not resort much to bhang. The following usually eat it : Gangaputrs, the Chaubes of Mathra, about 20 per cent.; perhaps 10 per cent. of them drink it. Bhang is said to be consumed extensively in the following districts: Benares, Muttra, Allahabad Cawnpore, Unao, Rai Bareli. 25. On the increase. In recent years Kayasths have almost everywhere banned liquor. Those who used to drink liquor have accordingly begun to take bhang instead. The high price of liquor has driven the drinking castes to ganja and bhang. The imports indicate larger sales than formerly. 26. Bhang, Ganja. Charas. (a) 75 per cent. 75 percent. 30 per cent. (b) 10 per cent. 15 per cent. 2 per cent. (c) 35 per cent. 10 per cent. 68 per cent. (d) Blank for all. 27. Nanakshahi and Udasi fakirs and in large cities like Lucknow and Benares Shukdas (viz., debauchees, a separate recognized class including people of different religions and castes) usually drink to excess. 28. Bhang. Ganja. Charas. (a) 1 pice worth. 2 pice worth. 1 anna worth. (b) 2 pice worth. 1½ annas worth. 2 annas worth. 29. Bhang14 68. There is no prohibition to consumption on the premises that I am aware of, nor is any necessary. 69. The wishes of the people are not consulted. They would not be slow to object if they had reason to do so; and if they objected, the matter would be enquired into. There is no need to consider public opinion in such a matter. It does not exist; and such shopsiare practically never a nuisance. Oral evidence. Question 1.15 54. Yes; bhang particularly is often taken by bad characters to fortify their courage to commit acts of violence; but liquor is generally preferred. I have known instances of men about to commit murder fortifying themselves with ganja. 55. No; not ordinarily; charas is the only drug that would be likely to have a stupefying effect. There is a preparation called majun, which is sometimes used, and has strong intoxicating quali- ties; but this is a very strong extract of bhang. Dhatura is generally mixed with the drug when it is intended to induce stupefaction. In conclusion, I am of opinion that drugs have nothing whatever to do with furthering crime, but are simply used by criminals to keep up their courage, just as liquor is used in England for a similar purpose. 14. Evidence of MR. J. S. CAMPBELL, Officia ting Magistrate and Collector, Saharanpur. 1. I have been an Excise Officer or Officiating Collector during the greater part of my ten years' service. 2. Yes, for bhang and charas. I know nothing about ganja. 3. Garhwal, Kumaon, Naini Tal, Bareilly, Moradabad, Bijnor and Saharanpur. 4. Bhang. 6. Scattered. 7. There was considerable cultivation of the hemp plant in Garhwal from 1886 to 1890, when I was there, mainly for the fibre; but a little in- ferior charas was also produced. 9. In Garhwal it was grown in the rains, always near the village site, as it needs heavy manuring. 10. The cultivators used to extract charas, when it was extracted at all. 16. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. (c) I think not. 19. In Garhwal charas was sometimes used as a condiment. 25. I believe the use of these drugs to be on the increase. The license fees have risen considerably, and the natives also usually say that more drugs are now consumed. It is to a certain extent due to restrictions in the liquor trade. 20. I have not heard of such admixtures. 31. Like any other stimulant, even tobacco, it is difficult to discontinue even a moderate consump- tion, and this difficulty increases with excess. 35. It would not be feasible to prohibit the use of bhang in the submontane districts. As charas is not a bulky article, it would probably be smug- gled. The prohibition would in my opinion be followed by recourse to other drugs. The con- sumer of these drugs has as a rule no taste for alcohol. 36. No: drugs are supplacing alcohol, owing to recent alterations in the liquor trade. The drug consumer is said to derive no pleasure from the stimulation of alcohol. 41. I belive charas among moderate consumers is used as a pick-me-up after a hard clay's work. Bhang is certainly largely consumed as a feb- rifuge all through the Tarai and Bhabar. 43. Yes; I think so. 46. There can be no doubt that the excessive use of charas produces insanity. The Bareilly Lunatic Asylum was full of charas-smokers. They were in many cases discharged as cured in a few months, but unfortunately the lesson seems to have but little effect, and as often as not the same men turn up again having brought on a fresh attack of insanity by another debauch on their favourite and irresistible drug. 55. I never knew of such a case. 58. The contract for drugs is generally farmed to one man for the whole district, and he makes his own arrangements for sub-contracts, a limit usually being put on the number of shops he may open. I think more might be done to supervise his arrangements, to see that the sub-contractors are respectable men, and that the excise rules are not infringed. I think the contractor often has too much of a free hand. 62. I believe it to be impossible. Bhang is one of the commonest weeds in the sub-montane tracts. 68. I believe that as a rule charas is bought from the licensed vendors, and taken away for home consumption. 69. I think this is as a rule left to the discretion of the contractor who opens a shop where he finds a demand. I have never heard objections to the opening of a drug shop, except from a rival con- tractor, who thought his business might be in- jured by its propinquity. 15. Evidence of MR. H. C. FERARD, Officiating Collector and Magistrate, Banda. 1. I have been brought into contact with the subject of hemp drugs in my capacity of Civil Officer, but have made no special study of the ques- tion. 10. I am told that they are of the same classes as other agricultural cultivators. 12. I am told that in the Sultanpur districts ganja and bhang grow spontaneously in villages near the river Goomti, and that although police supervision is kept close, nevertheless the people continue to keep some plants and leaves and prepare drugs from them. In such cases the male and female plants are kept separate. The male plant, I am told, is cut down when young and dried, and its leaves form "bhang." Ganja is made from the female flower and petals when almost ripe, The plants can grow together until the period of fertilization. 16. Ganja, at any rate, can be prepared from the wild plant wherever grown, but is reported of inferior quality. 17. The local dealers state there is no class of
16 people who make a speciality of preparing the respective classes of drugs in the districts from which the said local dealers export, viz., Khandwa, Bahraich, etc. 18. The best quality of ganja is here known as baluchar. It is said not to spoil by keeping. Other varieties are said to be useless after three years. With care they keep their quality for one year. The cause of deterioration is moisture. Any measures for keeping the drug dry will pre- vent deterioration. The amount of ganja, charas and bhang import- ed into this district last year was17 54. Bhang, I am told, is used as such. 55. I am told not, unless dhatura is admixed. 55. bhang massala is used to moderate the ac- tion of bhang. Dhatura is used to increase the intoxicating effect of bhang. 58. The drug contracts are now sold to the highest trustworthy bidder. Thus it may be taken that the present price of the drugs is the highest which a consumer will pay in the open market; if it be raised higher, then he will go elsewhere, i. c., will purchase or otherwise obtain illicitly. This being so, I can propose no alteration of the present excise administration as regards hemp drugs only. Experience shows that intoxicants are a necessary evil. I am not aware that hemp drugs are worse in their effects than other intoxi- cants, and their total prohibition will only direct pre- sent and future consumers of intoxicants to other drugs18 Garhwal. I have not examined the relative cost of intoxication by liquor and drugs. I quote the general opinion regarding the bad effects of the drugs. My experience is that alcohol ii not pro- ductive of much harm in this district. I contrast the intoxicants on these grounds. My service since I came out has been principally that of a City Magistrate, and I have not. had a single case come before me in which intoxicants were concern- ed, except one of alcohol. I don't think the cheapen- ing of liquor would do harm. Drinking is against the feelings and habits of the mass of the people. Question 69.19 30. The consumption is usually in solitude. It is confined principally to grown up males. 31. I have not known of much excess. 32. It is the custom among many classes who do not drink liquor, to take and offer bhang made into majoon to their friends at the Holi. This is generally taken in moderation and does not appear to lead to a habit of taking it in excess. 33. In small quantities on occasious specially bhang is not discountenanced by the public, but in excess it is. 34. I do not think the privation in most cases would be serious. 35. It would not be feasible to prohibit the use of bhang and ganja. That of charas might be more restricted as it is in this district. If prohi- bited, the drugs would be got illicitly, and where it grows spontaneously it would be impossible to prohibit its use. It would cause serious dis- content and other stimulants would be taken. 36. I have no reason to think so. 40. Bhang is given to cattle. 41. (a) It is said to be so. (b) There is no doubt bhang is good fo thirst. (c) It is largely used by lower classes for this purpose in malarious tracts. 42. The moderate use of bhang would appear to be harmless, as one never hears of bad results in consequence. 43. Yes. 53. It does no doubt sometimes, as liquor would. I am unable to cite a case at present. 57. Only smoked in this district. 58. Yes. It works well. I am unable to suggest any improvement. 63. Can suggest no improvement. 65. Reasonable. 66 and 67. No. 68. In this district drugs are not consumed at the shops. 69. If an objection is raised, it is duly consi- dered and measures taken to prevent the shops being objectionable to any one as far as possible. 19. Evidence of LIEUTENANT-COLONEL F. BARROW,* Deputy Commissioner, Gonda, Oudh 1. The experience of a District Officer since 1869. 3. Gonda district in Oudh. 4. Bhang. 6. Scattered. 7. In the north of the Gonda district the plant called here "bhang" is often allowed to grow in large patches, and especially around the sites of villages. Villagers say they have no use for the plant, and that they treat it as a weed and burn it. There can be no doubt that the plant so grown is sold as bhang to bhang contractors. 10. No special class. 12. No. 14. The wild bhang plants are collected and sold. 23. Yes. 27. The wandering "fakir" is the most habitual consumer. 33. Public opinion is against the consumption. 34. No. 35. The bhang plant is useful as a tonic for horses and cattle according to native opinion, and is said to be often used for cattle. I do not know how far this is true. The drug would certainly be consumed illicitly, and could easily be obtained from Nepal for this district. No political danger if use prohibited, but of course prohibition would be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants or other drugs. 51. I have no experience of moderate consumers, but I have seen persons intoxicated with bhang, and the effect of such intoxication has been to ren- der them unable to understand what was going on around them or to answer questions intelligibly 53. It is popularly supposed to do so. 54. It is often said that this is done. 58. I think the hemp plant should only be grown or cultivated under a license. 59. See under 58. 62. It should be controlled by compelling per- sons, who allow the plant to grow spontaneously, or who cultivate it, to take out licenses. These persons should then only be allowed to sell to licensed purchasers and for consumption of cattle only. 63. Sales should be allowed lor use of cattle only. 64. I would not allow import of ganja and charas into provinces where these do not grow. 68. None, and noue such should be allowed. 69. No to first part of question. The Collector of the district usually restricts the number of shops under orders of the Commissioner of Excise and the Board of Revenue. 20. Evidence of MR. W. R. PARTRIDGE, Deputy Commissioner of Garhwal District, 1. 1 have been ten years in the Civil Service in the North-Western Provinces and Oudh, and have held charge of the Excise Department in three Districts20 the hemp plant is grown in Garhwal district for the fibre, which is used chiefly for making hemp- clotb (vernacular, name bhangela). A little charas is made from the female hemp plant, but this is a purely subsidiary product; the seeds are said to be sometimes fried and eaten. Oil is said to be extracted from them, which is used in cooking. In the central tracts of this district hemp is culti- vated more commonly than elsewhere. It is impossible to give the area under cultivation, no figures being available. 8. The area under hemp cultivation in this district is probably very constant, neither increas- ing nor decreasing to any perceptible extent. 9. The description of the mode of cultivation given on the lower part of page 800, Volume X, North-Western Provinces Gazetteer, is, I believe, correct, so far as Garhwal district is concerned. 10. Khasia Rajputs, i.e., Rajputs in whose lineage there is supposed to be some flaw and who are therefore somewhat looked down upon by Rajputs of higher degree, and Doms (a collective term embracing all the lower castes) are the only castes in this district who grow hemp that I am aware of; they do not grow hemp for its narcotic properties, but as remarked above (answer 7) for the fibre. 11. Ganja is not manufactured in this district from either the cultivated or the wild hemp, so far as my knowledge goes. 12. It is certainly not specially cultivated in this district for the production oil ganja. 13. (a) Not that I am aware of. I cannot say whether the cultivation is common to all districts as I only know four or five districts. (b) and (c) I cannot answer this. 14. I have altered the question, as I cannot an- swer for the North-Western Provinces and Oudh as a whole. In the Garhwal district no ganja is produced that I am aware of. A little charas is produced in those tracts where hemp is cultivated. The annual production is not. large. Exact figures are out of the question. Only a very vague guess is possible. If I had to make a guess, I should say that a few maunds of charas were produced every year. A little bhang is made and consumed locally. Any figures cannot be given. 15. In this district neither ganja, nor charas, nor bhang is prepared from the wild plant. From the female cultivated plants charas is produced by rubbing between the hands the leaves at the end of the twigs and the stalk to which the leaves are attached. A sticky substance adheres to the hands which is scraped off. This is charas. It is smoked in a chillam. Bhang is simply the leaves and stalk of the hemp plant. They are simply dried, nothing else. Pounded up, they are mixed with water and the infusion drunk. 16. (a) In this district, those of the growers of hemp who prepare bhang prepare it in their own houses. (b) In this district it is only prepared from the leaves of cultivated hemp, out in other dis- tricts it is prepared from wild hemp. (c) What can be done I don't know. Nothing of the sort is done in this district. 17. By the growers of the plant in this district. 18. Cannot answer this. No ganja or bhang imported into Garhwal District in 1890-91 or 1891-92. Mds. Secrs. In 1890-91 .. 23 18 charas imported into Garhwal. In 1891-92 .. 21 21 Ditto ditto. This was Yarkand charas. No figures for other years available. 19. I never heard of them being used in any other way. 20. This is a very large question. I imagine that an enormous number of people in these pro- vinces smoke ganja and charas, but I am not able to give any figures. 21. Don't know; never inquired. 22. In the North-Westorn Provinces and Oudh generally. I believe almost all the charas consumed comes from Yarkand or regions in that direction. But little charas is consumed in Garhwal district, and the bulk of that comes from Yarkand or that region. The charas produced from hemp plants grown in Garhwal is said to be dearer and less intoxicating than Yarkand charas. 23. I never heard so. 24. This question, like No. 20, is one which I do not feel in a position to answer. I should say generally that in these provinces a very large number of persons drink bhang. 25. In these provinces, I believe the use of these drugs, and specially of ganja and charas, to be on the increase owing to the dearness of coun- try liquor, and to the fact that the liquor being distilled generally at comparatively high strength and watered down very considerably afterwards is not palatable. In Benares I have had these reasons given to me by men who stated that .they had taken to ganja smoking only of late years. 26. Any answer I give would only be a guess, and therefore worth nothing. 27. I imagine that all classes of the people in these provinces consume hemp drugs. Bhang is probably most widely consumed. Kahars noto- riously take ganja as a stimulant when they have a long journey before them. Others no doubt take one or other of these drugs as a stimulant or to get a little exhilaration. Others no doubt get into the way of taking them because their friends take them. Some again no doubt take them simp- ly to get intoxicated. 28. I have no time, I regret to say, to enter in- to elaborate calculations so as to answer this que6- tion completely. Moreover, everything depends upon what you call "excessive" and what "mode- rate." In this district a man could get a little 'nasha' on one pice worth of charas daily=about 8 annas a month. He might be called an habit- ual moderate consumer. An habitual excessive consumer ordinarily might take lour or five times as much. 29. Tobacco with charas and ganja; occnsional- ly spices of various sorts, I believe, with bhang. Never beard whether dhatura is used. Charas and ganja would, I presume, be too potent to smoke unless mixed with some thing, and tobacco would naturally be the thing chosen, as every- body smokes it. I know of no preparation such as bhang mas- sal a. 30. (a) Nearly always consumed in company, I should say. (b) In my opinion mainly confiued to the male sex and to men of over 20 or so. (c) Not in my experience. 31. (a) Yes; I think so; especially with bhang. (b) It probably is when the habit is thoroughly formed. (c) I fear that there is with ganja and charas.
21 32. I understand that at convivial meetings among lower castes in the plains bhang is occa- sionally provided or a pipe of ganja. But I am not in a position to describe in detail any custom. On such occasions the use of the drug is probably generally temperate, but I should fay it was likely to lead to the formation of the habit where not already acquired. 33. (a) Without any disapproval by a man's equals, so far as I know. (b) I know of nothing of the sort. (c) Never heard of it. 34. 1 think it would be too many, and I don't see why we should inflict the privation on them. Bhang is very harmless, I believe. 35. (a) I think not. (b) Yes; I think so. (c) Only by an army of informers and spies. (d) I should think so. (e) Very possibly. (f) Yes; this would be probably the result in very many cases. 36. No; on the contrary, I believe the re- verse to be the case in these provinces22 believe, and in very large quantities in the hills and along the foot of the hills. I think it would not be feasible to control cultivation. 63. I have no such objections. 64. No; the present regulations seem to me to work well enough. 65. I would certainly not reduce the taxation on hemp drugs, but I think that country liquor in these provinces is too expensive under the present distillery system, and that the late of taxation on country liquor should be reduced so as to check the strong tendency for liquor consumers to turn to these hemp drugs owing to the enor- mous difference between the cost of, say, half a bottle of country liquor (say 4 annas) and a pipe of ganja or charas (a pice say, at the outside). 66. I don't know enough about the extent to which these three kinds are at present produced, or the reasons why three sorts are produced, to be able to answer this question. 67. No; beyond what I have said in my answer to questions 58 and 59. 68. I am not aware that in the licenses issued in these provinces for retail vend of hemp drugs there is any condition that they are not to be con- sumed on the premises. At the same time I know numbers of shops where none is consumed on the premises. I see no harm in the absence of any restriction to the effect that they are not to be consumed on the premises. 69. I have never been in a district so far as I remember when a new drug shop has been opened, so have no personal experience. But I do not expect that the people of the neighbourhood are con- sulted very often as to whether they would like a drug shop established in their midst. If they formally petitioned against it, no doubt their arguments would be duly considered. I think that local public opinion should be considered before a new shop is opened. If the people ob- jected and their objections seemed reasonable, they would he allowed: if their objections were worthless, they could be overruled. 70. There are no facts regarding smuggling or importation of hemp drugs from Native States to which I wish to draw attention. I expect duty is really paid. Doubtless a good deal of bhang is used which has been made at homo and paid no duty. This seems unavoidable. A little charas is very likely used in this district which has paid no duty, being consumed by the producers, over whom no cheek is exercised as to how much they produce or what they do with it. 21. Evidence of MR. R. W. GILLAN, Officiating Deputy Commissioner, Moradabad. 1. I have been Excise Officer in this district for three years. 2. Ganja is practically unknown in this district. The definition of charas is correct. The only other name I know for it is sulfa. Bhang is also called, chiefly by brahmans and fakirs, buti and sabzi, and in medicine warq-ul- kheyal. There is no cultivation of the hemp plant here: of the wild form there are two very distinct forms, which I believe to be male and female. The tirst is a plant with slender and lightish green leaves, with flowers, which, after inspection, I have no doubt are male. The second or female is a stronger growing plant with stouter and darker leaves. The natives here call the first or male plant, bhang: the second or female, they call ganja. It is from the first only that bhang is here prepared. 3. In Bijnor and the Terai abundantly, in Saharanpur, parts of Rampur and here and there in this district. Though it is not cultivated, there are special plots of waste land which are always reserved for its production. 4. The only names used in this district are bhang and ganja, for the difference between which see (2) above. 5. These must differ for the different pre- parations of the plant. For charas apparently a considerable altitude and cold atmosphere is re- quired. For bhang a low damp situation is neces- sary, e.g., alluvial tracts near rivers and the Terai. Bhang growing on higher and dryer groundis nearly useless, and though the plant grows here and there about Moradabad city, it is never cut. The bhang used here comes from the damp tracts of Bijnor and Terai. 6. In suitable soil the growth is very dense. 7. For the production of bhang no cultivation is required. The plant is cultivated for charas in Garhwal and Kumaon, but only to an extent sufficient to supply the local demand. The seeds are eaten as a relish with pulse or vegetables, and the bark is extensively used in making sacks, etc. 8. I believe there has been a considerable increase, and that this is due to the higher prices now paid for the charas. 10. They are of no special class. 12. Nowhere in this neighbourhood. 14. Charas is prepared in Kumaon and Garhwal sufficient for local purposes. Bhang in Saharan- pur, Bijnor, and the Terai, sufficient tor the supply of Rohilkhand. 15. (a) From the cultivated plant charas is manufactured in Kumaon by rubbing the leaves between the hands, or even, it is said, by running through the fields in the early morning. The exudations adhering to the skin are rubbed off and made into little balls or rolls. (b) From the wild plant bhang. The plants are cut and allowed to dry, when the leaves are simply stripped off. If dried in the open, the colour is green: if in straw or some similar cover- ing, yellow. 16. Bhang can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown. It is, as a matter of fact, generally prepared in the juugle where it grows, not at any house. 17. The preparation is not confined to any class. 18. Bhaug, if left open, spoils in a year, being affected by damp; if kept shut up, it lasts two years. Bokhara charas keeps good for three or four years. Yarkand charas loses half its intoxicating proper- ties in a year, and after that rapidly becomes absolu- tely worthless. In this climate, nothing can preserve it; it keeps much better in a colder atmosphere, e. g., in the hills. 19. So far as I know, they are only smoked. I have heard that fakirs sometimes, though very rarely, eat charas, but I have no confidence in the truth of this statement. 20. Ganja is practically unknown here. Charas is smoked (1) by fakirs, (2) by the lower hard- working castes, kahars, mullahs, pasis, malis, barwals, chauhans, jats; among other castes its use is exceptional. With regard to locality, it can only be said that in the city the castes named
23 smoke it to a man, while in the country its con- sumption is much less general. The total of the charas-consuming castes in this district is 1,60,000 (men and children, not women). 21. Not used here. 22. Previously Bokhara charas was much used, but it has now been almost entirely superseded by Yarkand, which is imported through Hoshiarpur and Amritsar. The Kumaon charas (called hattu or chauwarqa) is preferred by the hill people, but is not known here. 23. Never. 24. By far the largest consumers of bhang are the chaube brahmans (e.g., in Muttra); after them, Khatris, banniyas, Rajputs, chauhans. Lower castes use it much less, and it is much more frequently drunk than eaten. The total of the bhang-consuming castes in this district is 81,000 (including men and children, not women); quite a half of this must be consumers. 25. The answer to this is two-fold. The drug habit may be said to be confined to Hindus. It is certain that many of the higher Hindu castes, though it is lawful for them to drink bhang and unlawful to drink spirit, are taking to English wines and spirits, and amongst them the consump- tion of drugs has diminished. Among the lower castes, on the other hand, many of them spirit-consuming, the greatly increased price of native liquor has certainly given an impetus to drug consumption. The prices paid in this district for the drug contract would show that, on the whole, there has been an increase. 26. For bhang I should say24 42. The moderate use of charas is harmful, as it is bound in the end to produce certain diseases. The moderate use of bhang I do not consider to be injurious, as it has no such effect. 43. Bhang consumers certainly are; charas consumers may to some extent be offensive, as they sit two or three together and their conversation is unpleasant. 44. Bhang produces exhilaration, not intoxica- tion, 15 or 20 minutes after it is drunk, and the effect lasts one to two hours. It is not followed by any longing or uneasiness. Charas produces an immediate and powerful intoxication, which lasts perhaps an hour. It allays hunger. It is followed by a certain desire for more, but not so strong as in the case of opium. 45. The habitual moderate use of charas impairs the constitution, injures the digestion, infallibly causes asthma, and induces laziness and immo- rality. Insanity is generally due to immoderate use. Up to 20 such insanity can be cured; after 30, with difficulty; and after 50, not at all. Charas is undoubtadly used to obtain relief from mental anxiety, etc. I know a man suffering from occa- sional insanity (hereditary, not due to use of the drug) who smokes charas only when insane and leaves it off as soon as he recovers. 46. The habitual excessive use of charas pro- duces effects which differ only in intensity from those given above. The habitual excessive use of bhang has similar effects; at first it is an aphro- disiac and increases hunger: in the end it is injuri- ous to the very powers which it began by stimu- lating. It produces asthma, bronchitis, dropsy, cholic, injures the eyesight and the brain, and induces cowardice and laziness. The effect it has on the disposition may be gathered from the word "bhangur." 47. The habit does not appear hereditary, but it may affect the children, especially in the case of excessive charas consumers. 49. Bhang is frequently so used; for its effect see No. 46; in the end it tends to produce im- potence. Charas has the same effect and more rapidly, but it is largely used by prostitutes. 51. The proportion of charas consumers is cer- tainly larger among bad characters than among the general population, but I do not think there is any necessary connection between the charas habit and crime. 53. No. The natives say "Sharab ka nasha bahadur, bhang ka nasha hiz." 54. No. 55. Both charas and bhang are so used: even fakirs are said to rob people by giving them charas. Charas is certainly sufficient without ad- mixture to stupefy a person unaccustomed to its use, but bhang is scarcely sufficient. 56. See No. 29. 57. Charas is said sometimes to be eaten by fakirs. In medicinal works it is said to produce flatulence and grumbling of the bowels. 58. I know of no improvement necessary, un- less it is proposed to cheek the consumption by raising the price. Bhang is not in general injuri- ous; its growth is so widely diffused that I think any control of its production would be as impossible as it is unnecessary. 37. Charas is certainly injurious, and it comes from only one or two places. Its control is more necessary and easier. I have heard that it was already in contemplation to impose some duty on it in the Punjab. I am not in a position to judge i if this is feasible; but if it could be done, it would most probably lead to a decrease in the consump- tion, while not causing any pecuniary loss to Government. 65. The only tax is the amount paid by the contractor for his license; and as this includes bhang and charas, it seems impossible to differ- entiate the taxation of one from the other. The taxation of drugs is, I think, light compared with that of spirits. 68. There are no such houses or shops in this district. 69. No new shop has been opened here for years. Generally it is the contractor who applies for a license to open a shop, and he will apply only where there is a sufficient demand. Local public opinion in favour of or against the setting up of a new shop simply does not exist. 70. The only tax is the amount paid by the drug contractor for his license. The only drugs untaxed, therefore, are those brought in and sold by others than the contractor; and as this is against his interest, it is pretty certain that no very large quantity is brought in this way. I should point out, however, that if any steps were taken to enhance the price of charas in British territory, while leaving it unchanged in Native States, an immense impetus would be given to smuggling, and nothing could stop its import in large quantities from Rampur to this district. 22. Evidence of MR. C. W. W. HOPE, Settlement Officer, Bara Banki, Oudh. 1. Was Excise Officer at Meerut for a year in 1889-90, and at Bulandshahr for six months in 1892-93. Have served 7½ years as Assistant and Joint Magistrate in Allahabad, Mirzapur, Benares, Meerut, Lucknow, Unao, and Bulandshahr. Was in charge of Benares City-for a year, and was City Magistrate at Lucknow for about four months. 2. The definitions of bhang and charas may be accepted for the North-Western Provinces and Oudh. The first product is known in these prov- inces as bhang, not siddhi. 14. No. 18. Charas deteriorates by keeping. 20. In Meerut and Bulandshahr charas is smoked, not ganja. 22. In Meerut and Bulandshahr charas is im- ported from Native States in the Punjab. 25. As regards Meerut and Bulandshahr, the use of charas and bhang is, I think, not on the" increase or on the decrease, as there is little differ- ence in the amount consumed from year to year. 30. I have never come across a case of consump- tion of any of these drugs by children. 33. I think that public opinion (social) is de- cidely against the practice of consumption of ganja, charas, and bhang, owing to the fact that intoxication is caused thereby. I think that a
25 man who indulges in drugs is looked on much as a drunkard would he in England. 68. No; in my opinion such shops should not be allowed. 69. Yes; a local enquiry is made through the Tahsildar. Local public opinion ought most cer- tainly to be considered. 23. Evidence of RAJA CHHITPAL SINGH, Assistant Commissimer and Excise Officer, Fyzabad. 1. My information is derived as an excise offi- cer as well as from the experience of persons who use hemp drugs, and partly from my own per- sonal experience of the use of bhang. 2. Yes; bhang is locally known by its own name; but its preparations are called by the consumers thandai, dodhia, majum, etc. Ganja is also known by its own name. Consumers call it sulpha sometimes. Charas is known as charas. 3. In Bahraich, Gonda, Fyzabad, Gorakhpur and Basti. In Gonda it is found in abundance, especially in the Bulrampur Estate. 4. The names are everywhere the same, and the plants also the same. 5. The soil must be wet and the climate moist. 6. It grows very dense. 7. No. 8. No cultivation of hemp drugs in Oudh province, 9. Unknown. 10. Hemp is not cultivated at all in the province of Oudh. Landholders on whose land it grows spontaneously sell it to drug contractors without regard to race or religion. 11. No. 12. Not in this province. 13. There is no cultivation of ganja at all in this province. Where bhang grows spontaneously, ganja can there be cultivated; the soil must be wet and the climate moist. 14. (c) Refer to answer to question No. 3. 16. Yes 17. By none in this province. 18. Yes, they deteriorate after three years. They do not quite loss their effect in time, but intoxication becomes less. They keep good for a year. Exposure, moisture, and length of time cause deteripration. No special measures can be adopted. 19. Yes; in this province for smoking only. Sometimes they are used for external application in gout, rheumatism, etc. 20. They are not confined to any particular class of people. Persons who smoke huka can smoke ganja and charas. Muhammadans and Chris- tians as a rule avoid them. The labouring class of people use them most. Charas is used more than ganja in places which are in the west of this province, and ganja is used more than charas in places to the east. For example, Lucknow being to the west of Fyzabad, charas is consumed more there than in Fyzabad itself; while in Jaunpur, which is to the east of Fyzabad, ganja is consumed in larger quantities than in Fyzabad it self. 21. Flat ganja (baluchur) is generally used in this province. 22. Foreign charas is used. Charas is imported in this province from Hoshiarpur, Amritsar and Mian Mir (in the Punjab), 23. Bhang is never used for smoking, 24. Fakirs, bairagis, and Hindus generally drink bhang, and sometimes eat it, everywhere. 25. On an average the same as before. 27. Ganja and charas consumers are labourers; bhang eaters are fakirs, etc., who lead a mono- tonous life. 28. (a) Bhang, 6 mashas, half a pice. Charas 6 rutties, one pice. Ganja, 5 rutties, one pice. (b) Bhang, 3½ tolas, one pice worth. Charas, 24 rutties, one anna. Ganja, 20 rutties, one anna. 29. The ingredients mixed with bhang are cardamoms, almonds, pepper, milk, and sonf, etc., to flavour it. Ganja and charas are mixed with tobacco leaves or prepared tobacco, to last long. Dhatura is very seldom used. Black pepper is the only bhang massala, without which it is very rarely used. 30. (a) Sometimes alone and sometimes with friends. (b) Some women also use them. It is not confined to any particular age. (c) No; on very rare occasions. 31. Continual use of these for a fortnight or so would bring on the habit. Bhang can easily be given up, hut not charas or ganja. Yes, ganja and charas consumers, and not bhang consumers, contract the excessive use of these drugs. 32. (a) Bhang is offered to Shiva generally on the Shivaratri festival. These are also largely used in the Holi festival. (b) It is very essential that bhang should he offered and drunk on these festivals. (c) Temperate. (d) No; not necessarily. Not injurious. 33. (a) Those who do not take it regard it in a bad light. (b) None, as far as religion is concerned. Socially, it is not considered as an evil by the Hindus. It is not in disrepute, except among Muhammadans and Christians. (c) No such custom exists in this province. 34. Yes; it would. It would be in fact taking away the liberty of the people as far as eating or drinking is concerned. Labourers and fakirs would suffer the most, who have no money to spend on liquor. 35. (a) No. (b) Yes; if procurable. (c) Not necessary. (d) Yes. (e) If not danger, the mind of the people would be disaffected. vol. v. II
26 (f) Yes; most naturally. 36. No. On the contrary, those who used alcohol have now recourse to these drugs because of their cheapness. 37. Yes; charas is milder than ganja. 38. Flat ganja is milder than round ganja, which produces heat and headache. 39. Ganja and charas are more injurious than bhang, which is drunk or eaten. Smoking affects sometimes the lungs. 40. Bhang is generally prescribed for piles, etc., and is given to cattle in general after a day's hard labour. 41. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. (c) Yes; ganja and charas especially. (d) Bhang is used in hot weather as thandai, to keep one cool and comfortable. Bhang is used by all classes of Hindus, while ganja and charas are mostly used by the labouring class of people. I refer to the moderate habitual use in all cases, but to occasional consumers in cases (a), (b) and (c) alone. 42. If taken moderately, each of these drugs is harmless for reasons given in answer to question No. 41. 43. Yes. 44. (a) Bhang produces hilarious effect, and concentrates the attention and produces and en- genders appetite. Ganja and charas increase the appetite and incline one to eat sweet things. (b) Bhang is refreshing when used with milk. (c) Yes. (d) When excessively used it allays hunger. (f) The effect of intoxication from taking bhang lasts for nearly six hours, and that from ganja and charas for one hour. (g) Yes; bhang produces, when taken excessively, slothfulness: the eyes get red and tongue remains parched. Ganja and charas produce headache. (h) It does to those who are in the habit of taking these drugs every day. 45. (a) None whatever. (b) and (c) No. (d) Bhang produces dysentery, and ganja and charas bronchitis and asthma in old age. (e) It makes one slothful. (f) The use of these drugs weakens the intellect. 47. It is not hereditary. The children are in no way affected. 48. As above. Ganja and charas consumers beget weak children, 49. (a) It is not used as aphrodisiac. (b) No. (d) No. 50. The excessive use prostrates one down and creates impotency, or makes the semen thin. 51 and 52. No. 53. No none. 54. No. 55. Complete stupefaction cannot be had unless dhatura or arsenic is mixed. 56. Dhatura is administered to others in betel leaf and other edihles, and not with hemp drugs. 57. Ganja and charas are always smoked. 58. The present system works well and meets the wants and requirements of the people in general. 68. None. 69. No. Not necessary. 70. Duty is always paid. 24. Evidence of MR. E. ROGERS, Assistant Commissioner, Sitapur. 1. I have been Excise Officer in Hamirpur, Meerut district, and for a short time in this district. 2. The definitions in Dr. Plain's report are correct. 18. Ganja and bhang deteriorate by keeping. Damp is the chief cause of deterioration. 19. Ganja and charas are used for smoking only. 20. Gauja is used more extensively than charas, but I am unable to state in what proportion. 21. Flat ganja is preferred by those who can afford it, but the poorer classes smoke 'chur,' because it is cheaper. 22. Chiefly imported. The greater part comes from the Central Provinces. 23. Not to my knowledge. 25. The use of these drugs is affected by the seasons. Intoxication by drugs is cheaper than intoxication by liquor, and hence in bad seasons there is a tendency towards increased consumption of these drugs. 27. The practice is more common among the lower classes. 29. Dhatura is sometimes mixed with ganja to increase its intoxicating properties. I know of no such preparation as 'bhang massala.' 30. These drugs are generally consumed in company. It is mainly confined to the male sex. Children rarely consume these drugs, with the exception of bhang, which is sometimes adminis- tered medicinally. 31. The habit of consuming these drugs is easily formed and difficult to break off. The habit of excessive consumption is naturally deve- loped from the habit of moderate consumption, but the proportion of excessive consumers to moderate consumers is small. 33. The consumption of these drugs is con- demned by the higher classes. Among the lower classes the consumption of these drugs is not ap- proved of, but the feeling against their consump- tion is not very strong. 34. It would be a serious privation for habitual consumers of any of these drugs to forego the consumption of the drug they use, but the priva- tion would be most felt among the poorer classes. 35. I do not consider that it would be feasible to prohibit the use of any of these drugs. The hemp plant grows wild in many places, and the
27 preparation of these drugs is not a difficult process. A very large preventive establishment would have to be entertained, and even then I do not believe that the consumption could he stopped. Any attempt at prohibition would lead to a good deal of oppression on the part of corrupt underlings, and would cause very considerable discontent. Prohibition would certainly be followed by in- creased consumption of alcoholic stimulants and other drugs. 36. None that I know of. 40. Bhang is sometimes prescribed medicinally. 41. All these drugs have the effect of giving staying-power and alleviating fatigue, but bhang is the least injunious. 42. I consider the moderate use of bhang to be beneficial. The moderate use of ganja and charas is not quite harmless, but the harm done is small. 43. Yes. 44. The moderate use of any of these drugs on a habitual consumer does not produce intoxication. It allays hunger, but does not create appetite. 47. Not hereditary. 49. Not that I know of. 51. As far as my observations go, I have not detected any connection between moderate use of any of these drugs and crime. 52. Intoxication from these drugs, and more especially from ganja, raises a man to a high pitch of excitement; at times leads him to commit violent crimes that he would shrink from commit- ting in his saner moments. 53. Unpremeditated crimes are often committed by men while under the influence of these drugs, but 6uch crimes are generally of the nature of revenge for some slight or injury. I know of no case in which it has led to temporary homicidal mania. 51. Not that I know of. 55. No. Dhatura is more commonly used, but this is sometimes used mixed with ganja. 57. I know of no case. 58. The location of shops on the borders of districts might receive more attention. I have known of eases of rival contractors in adjoining districts trying to undersell each other, and to attract customers from the neighbouring district, thus tending to unnecessarily increase the con- sumption. 59. I have no other suggestion to make under this head. 60 and 61. Yes; I think the present system is sufficient. 62. I don't think any further control is required. 63. I consider that the best method is to sell the drug contract for the whole district to one man. If the contract is split up, the contractors endeavour to unduly foster their own sales, and the consumption of these drugs tends to increase. 64. No. 68. Consumption of these drugs on the premises should be forbidden. 69. Not as a rule. The contractors' wishes are more usually consulted than those of the con- sumers. I have not much faith in local public opinion. 70. No. 25. Evidence of SYED HABIBULLAH, Joint Magistrate, Orai, Jalaun. 19. Only for smoking in the districts where I have been (Aligarh, Jaunpur, Basti and Jalaun). Oil is made of ganja seeds, which is good for rheumatism. 20. Nearly all classes of people smoke ganja and charas. Possibly the higher classes of Muham- madans do not use them. Nearly all the Hindu fakirs (sadhus) use ganja and charas. 21. In Jalaun district only Pathar ganja is used. 22. Foreign charas is used in this district. The contractor gets it from Amritsar. 23. I have never heard of bhang being used for smoking. 24. All classes of Hindu community use bhang. 25. It is on the increase. Ganja and charas are always used by the excessive consumers of tobacco. The use of tobacco is admittedly on the increase, and therefore the use of charas and ganja must also be on the increase. 27. Habitual excessive consumers of ganja, charas, and bhang are sadhus (Hindu fakirs). 28. Bhang, charas, ganja:28 37. Yes, charas is much more intoxicating than ganja. 40. Bhang is sometimes prescribed by Baids on account of its medicinal qualities. I do not think any of these drugs is. used in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. The moderate use of bhang is beneficial, as it gives appetite and is digestive. It keeps off the cold and keeps the body warm. The moderate use of ganja and charas gives staying-power under severe exertion or exposure. They keep off the sleep, and for this reason the chowkidars who have to be up all night and the fakirs who want to pray all night use these drugs. 42. The moderate use of these drugs is harm- less. The reason for my saying so is simply this, that I have not yet come across a single moderate consumer of these drugs who had in any way suf- fered on account of the consumption of these drugs. 43. Yes, they are inoffensive to their neigh- bours, because they never make any row and always keep quiet. 44. Bhang is refreshing and slightly intoxi- cating. Ganja and charas are not refreshing, and more intoxicating than bhang. The use of these drugs creates appetite. The effect of bhang lasts for about 8 or 10 hours, while the effects of ganja and charas only last for about one hour. 45. The moderate consumption of these drugs does not in any way injure the digestion or impair the constitution or moral sense. It does not induce laziness. On the other hand, it makes a person more active. It does not cause dysen- tery, bronchitis, or asthma. It never deadens the intellect or produces insanity. 46. The excessive use of these drugs is most injurious. It causes dysentery, bronchitis, and asthma. It encourages habits of immorality and weakens a person and deadens intellect. It makes a person absent-minded, and in some cases produces insanity. 47. The habitual moderate use of any of these drugs is not hereditary, and does not in any way affect the children. 48. The same of No. 47. 49. The moderate use of hemp does not tend to produce impotence. 50. The excessive use of hemp tends to produce impotence. 51. The greater number of bad characters are habitual moderate consumers of these drugs. The use of these drugs enlivens them and makes them more active. They can exert themselves more in their pursuits and can keep off the sleep and fatigue. 52. The habitual bad characters are never ex- cessive consumers, as the excessive use produces cough, which would interfere with the commis- sion of those offences which are committed secretly. 53. I do not know of any case in which the excessive use has led to homicidal frenzy. 54. Ganja and charas are invariably used by dacoits before they commit dacoities. These drugs make them more active and enable them to walk long distances. 55. I have not heard of a single case where any criminal induced his victims to partake of these drugs and stupefied him. I remember a case where a criminal gave some ganja mixed with dhatura to two or three persons who became in- sensible. 58. The excise administration in these Provinces is working well, but is capable of slight improve- ment. 59. In my opinion there should be a clause in the License Form for the retail vend of intoxi- cating drugs to the effect: "That in no case drugs shall be sold to any person below the age of 16." The bad habits of smoking are generally formed when a person is between 12 and 16, and if in this period of life a person does not take a liking to drugs, it is very likely that he would not take them in after-life. 63. The present system is working well, and there is no objection of any kind. 64. There is no objection to the existing re- gulations. I have been in charge of the Excise De- partment for over five years in three districts, and I never experienced any difficulty or heard any complaint in this connection. 69. The wishes of the people are not consulted before a shop is opened in any locality. There is no necessity to consult the local public opinion in this matter. The sale of drugs is not offensive to any class of the community, and I do not re- member a single instance where the local public opinion was. against the opening of a drug shop. Oral evidence. Question 7.29 Question 35.30 tempted to do so by their cheapness. With a few contractors, dividing the province between them, the equilibrium in prices is generally maintained. 63 and 64. No. 65. Yes. 69. Yes. Enquiry is made through the Tahsil- dar to ascertain the wishes of the people. In the camping season the sub-divisional officers also, when an objection is raised, enquire into the actual state of people's wishes and feelings. 27. Evidence of MR. W. H. MORELAND, Assistant Collector, Agra. 1. About three years', experience as Excise officer in various districts. 1. These definitions may be generally accepted. I have, however, found that the hemp plant is commonly spoken of as "ganja" and the same name is applied to the leaves of the plant when roughly prepared for consumption, i.e., to " bhang " made for home use from plants which have grown spontaneously. 3. The only district in which I have found it is Fyzabad. It cannot be said to grow abundantly there. 4. I only saw one species of the plant in Fyza- bad. It was generally spoken of as "ganja." 5. In Fyzabad it was generally found growing in the margins of water-holes near village sites, on waste patches of ground, near the outlet of house drains, etc. 16. In Fyzabad I found it was common to prepare the drug at home. I may be permitted to refer to the half-yearly excise report of the Fyzabad district for March 1803, which contains the results of my observations on this point. 35. Where the plant grows spontaneously, it would bo impossible to prohibit the consumption of bhang ; and the bulk of the various drugs is so small that in any case smuggling must ensue, and would be almost impossible to detect. When the contractors of adjoining districts are hostile, they constantly smuggle drugs for sale into their enemy's district, though the enemy be much more vigilant than Government preventive agen- cies are likely to prove. 36. There is undoubtedly a class who will lake either hemp drugs or alcohol, whichever is more easily to be had. At present it is argued, in the last provincial excise reports, that this class is moving towards drugs. There is no reason here to suppose that a contrary tendency exists. 40. I have heard this asserted. Cattle are often given a branch of the wild plant when special exertion is required of them. 58 and 59. I do not think the system works altogether well. The province is really divided between three or four large contractors, and conse- quently the revenue (derived entirely from license fees) is diminished by lack of competition. If convenience of consumers is considered, the system works well, as I have never heard complaints that, persons were unable to get a good supply. Until it is decided whether the consumption is harmless or not it is difficult to say whether the system works well, this depending on the object in view; but the improvement I should desire to see is one to raise more revenue from fixed duties and less from license fees. An import duty might bo imposed on charas, the duty being deposited before the pass is issued. The production of ganja is already heavily taxed in lower Bengal; and I am unable to say whether it would hear any import duty here in addition. This proposal is in accord with the prevailing tendency in excise administration, as shown by the recent rise of still-head duty and sale-price of opium. 63 and 64. None. 68. Consumption on the premises is not pro- hibited by the terms of the license ; but so far as I know, is not a common practice. Where it ob- tains I have heard no complaints against it, except that it tends to collect bad characters. In the particular instance this complaint was quite un- founded. 69. It is a rule to consult landowners and the principal residents before permission is given to open a new shop or to move an existing one. I believe that in general this enquiry, made through the Tahsildar, is nominal, hut any one can object, especially in the camping season; and such objec- tions are always considered. Those which I have enquired into myself were generally found to have been brought out of spite, or in order to black- mail. I think the power of raising objection is quite sufficient safeguard for the public. 28. Evidence of MR. A. B. BRUCE, Joint Magistrate, Ghazipur. 1. As Excise Officer, etc. 2. These definitions may be accepted for the North-Western Provinces. The usual local names are ganja, charas and bhang. The usual method of preparing ganja is to apply pressure by weights. Sabji31 plant is needed. For ganja the female plants are used. It is probable that the inferior quality of the illicit ganja made here is due to ignorance of the proper mode of weeding out the male plant 32 29. Evidence of S. MAHOMED ALT, Joint Magistrate and Excise Officer, Fatehgarh. 1. I have been in charge of the Excise adminis- tration for several years. 2. The definitions may be accepted for this part of the province. The drugs are known by the names of ganja, bhang, and charas. 7. Hemp plant is cultivated for production of bhang in this district. The approximate area under cultivation is33 with other things. As regards the question "if it can be prepared on the spot of its growth," it depends on the facilities at hand, though it is seldom done. I do not know if ganja or charas can be prepared from the wild plants wherever they grow. 17. There is no restriction for the classes that prepare hemp drug. 18. Yes, ganja, charas and bhang deteriorate by keeping ; so much so that after three or four years it is practically of no worth. It loses its effects in the course of time after full chemical decomposition. Ordinary care can preserve it for three years. As established in botany, every vegetable life begins to decay and decompose after its separation from nourishing soil. This drug being a preparation of flower and leaves is no exception. It begins to lose its molecular cohesion, and hence medical efficacy. As soon as the external supply of moisture and carbon ceases, the internal vital energy goes on losing its hold till it becomes dead rubbish. Deterioration can be prevented as far as it re- sults from climatic exposure by careful deposit in some pucca and safe places beyond the ap- proach of rain and moisture ; but there is no help to elementary decay and decomposition. 19. Ganja and charas are used for purposes other than smoking. Oil is obtained from ganja for cattle and rheumatic complaints ; charas is mixed up with other medicines for medical pur- poses as well as to be used as an aphrodisiac, such vises are not confined to any particular place, but in marshy places it is more in use. 20. Ganja and charas find no favour with Isla- mic communities. Hindu lower labouring classes alone take ganja and charas as a rule. It is used in no district as a rule or as an exception. 21. Baluchar is the best ganja for smoking ; flat and round is a common thing, and chur the cheapest. No locality is an exception to this rule. 22. Yarkand, from Amritsar, and Bengal charas are chiefly used. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking. 24. Higher classes of Hindus generally drink bhang and eat it with sweets. Very few Muham- madans. No distinction of locality can be made. 25. The use of ganja and charas increases with population and rises with the duty on liquor. Poverty is the only check. Reasons are self- evident. 26. No precise proportion can be given of the consumers, but so much can be safely advanced, that what habitual excessive consumers are to habitual moderate consumers so occasional exces- sive consumers are to moderate consumers. 27. All the above four varieties are traceable in the same low labouring classes of Chamars, Passis, Ahirs, etc. Rich men in the beginning take them as a luxury, and their offspring inherit the tenden- cy, and learn it from the example of their fore- fathers. Poor men are tempted to their use by false tradition and encouragement of bad com- panions. 28. The average allowance and cost per diem of habitual moderate consumers in the case of charas is about two pice, and of ganja one pice, and in the case of habitual excessive consumers it amounts to several annas. Bhang is generally taken by well-to-do men as cooling draught in summer and warming one in winter with necessary changes in the ingredients. It is taken in company, and the limit is co-exten- sive with means, but it is not very expensive as a rule. 29. Nothing is added to charas. Tobacco is added to ganja. To bhang are added almonds, zafiran, sweets in winter, and cardamom (illachi), seeds of cucumber, and kakri in summer. Dhatura is never so used. Bhang massala is often sold in the bazar. It contains the aforesaid ingredients. 30. Labourers take these drugs in their fields after fatigue ; rich men generally in their com- pany at home. Loafers always in company. It is mainly confined to the male sex, and to a period from 25 to 60. Children are not allow- ed to consume these drugs. 31. The habit of consuming any of these drugs depends on the constitution of the consumer. However, it may be safely advanced that it is not a very strong drug. The habit takes some time to be formed, say a month; so an attempt to give it up. Those who have an equable constitution and tenacious will can easily give it up. Every drug, every stimulant, and every sedative has a tendency to develop into extremes, for by constant use one gets used to a fixed quantity, and the same quantity, which produces a certain effect in the beginning cannot produce an equal effect after a certain time. 32. No custom, social or religious, may be men- tioned in regard to the consumption of any of these drugs. High prices of liquor of course have driven people to resort to the use of bhang and gur. Use of the drug is in no way essential in regard to any custom. The use of such drug on occasions such as panchayats or marriages is not excessive nor sufficient to form the habit, but is liable to initiate one into the way. Such occasional use is decidedly demoralizing, if not palpably injurious. 33. Consumption of such drug is always held an abomination among sober classes. There is a strong current of public opinion against the prac- tice. A bhangari or charasi is a watchword for- low and stupid characters. The use of narcotic drugs is held in disrepute because of its stupefy- ing effect and demoralizing results. No custom of hemp worship. 34. To forego the consumption of the drug would be decidedly a serious, though temporary, privation. No idea of the probable number of each class can be given. The reason of privation is evident enough. Habits formed in early age cannot be easily given up. 35. It is feasible to prohibit the use of all these drugs, but not suddenly and absolutely. If prohi- bition is absolute and sudden, illicit use of it is certain. Prohibition may be enforced by making it clear to all those who already use it, and making it criminal for young men under 25 to use it or to be sold to or for them. By this means old men shall be obliged to diminish the use and young men afraid to use it. Sudden prohibition would undoubt- edly occasion serious privation, but no discontent. Of political danger there would be none. Prohi- bition would reasonably be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants or other drugs, if no such difficulties yawn them in the face in that case. 36. This is a fact, that poor men, in their social gatherings, are driven to the use of bhang on account of the dearness of spirits. I have made personal enquiries from those who have given up one for the other. vol. v. I
34 37. Charas is a stronger intoxicant narcotic than ganja. 38. Round, flat, and chur are mentioned in descending degrees of effects. 39. The effects of smoking of any of these drugs affects lungs, heart, brain and eyesight owing to the direct effect of the smoke. Such is not the effect of eating and drinking. In the latter case the drug stays for a longer time in the stomach and affects it directly and is not so much injurious, because it is eaten or drunk generally with, antidote. 40. The schools of native doctors are unani- mous in attributing to them hypnotic, anodyne, and antispasmodic properties, less certain than opium, but involving no constipation, nausea, or headache. They are used in the treatment of cattle-diseases, such as horses and oxen, for malarious fever and rheumatism. When taken moderately these drugs are to some extent beneficial as digestive, bracing and preventive in malarious tracts. 41. Charas and ganja are generally used for the above purpose by villagers of low class, and bhang by well-to-do men. Some use it moderately and habitually ; others moderately but occasion- ally. 42. Answered above. 43. Moderate consumers are inoffensive to their neighbours. 44. Moderate use of these drugs is refreshing, intoxicant, and creative of appetite. The effect lasts for two or three hours. Want of subsequent gratification produces longing and uneasiness. 45. It impairs constitution in various ways. Ganja and charas lead to unpleasant dryness in the system, which makes a man thin and lean and often fretful. All the senses get blunt. Sound, distance and time are perceived indistinctly. Both lead to chronic bronchitis and dryness in brain. Bhang, when mixed with other antidotes, brings fatness and gives appetite. It produces causeless merriment, and subjects the user to mental hallucinations. In the beginning they help digestion and appetite, but subsequently they act otherwise. These things, when taken unmixed, bring about bronchitis and asthma. In the inception they excite passions, but afterwards weaken the vital energy. It is difficult to restrain one to moderate use of these drugs, and excess naturally deadens intellect and produces mental derangement. They have, when taken moderately, no injurious effect on phlegmatic constitutions, but produce mania and cowardice on melancholy constitutions. Their victims are subject to reverie, and as distemper is the result of long established habits, the malady is generally of a permanent nature. In cases where it is temporary, reinducement of symptoms depends on the strength of the sufferer. They may not return if he is sufficiently strong, otherwise relapse is more probable. There are three typical symptoms, constant and causeless smiling or weeping, and thirdly a dull impenetra- ble indifference. As insanity in such cases is the consequence of dryness of brain and want of normal energy, such insane persons are not prone to revert to the use of such drugs, so contrary to iusanes from drinking. I had no opportunity of considering as to what happens in cases detailed further in the question. 46. In the case of excessive use the difference is of degree. 47. The habitual moderate use leads to heredit- ary habit and affects the children. I have had personal experience of seeing children of those who were habitual drinkers or opium eaters or these drug users immediately restored to full energy with the administration of a moderate dose of these drugs in cases of general debility or indisposition, while the children of parents who are not habitual users get nausea and headache. 48. The same rule holds good in the case of excessive habitual users in a more marked manner. 49. These drugs are used very often as aphro- disiacs. Prostitutes of lower classes learn to use them by dint of company, but regardless of any effect. Their use for this purpose is more injurious than its use as an ordinary narcotic. In the first place, because it brings about impotence ; in the second place, the longer a man is busy in sexual inter- course the more he loses in muscular strength subsequently ; in the third place, the brain in such a ease is subject to double heat,35 do not personally know of a case in which any of these drugs has led to homicidal frenzy; but it as quite possible. 54. Criminals who are habitual consumers very often fortify themselves to commit a premeditated act of violence and other crimes, because timely use of these drugs puts them in full swing of energy. An example may be found among wrest- lers. When they have to go in against a very strong adversary, they fortify themselves by the use of bhang for an extraordinary exercise of energy to a desperate extent. 55. Victims are now and then administered these drugs to stupefy them, where dhatura is not available. Complete stupefaction can be induced by these drugs barely in the case where the victim does not happen to have been using them. 56. The injurious effects of these drugs, when taken moderately and in an admixed state, are nearly neutralized, but excess works in debility and injurious effects, because these drugs are poi- sonous in the fourth degree. Nothing can nullify their chronic effects in the long run. Dhatura is often admixed with these drugs for their personal use by the asthmatic patients and with tobacco for the use of those unfortunate victims that are in- tended to be looted or killed. 57. I have heard Madrasis eating heated ganja and charas with ghee and with no harm. It must be noted that ghee is an antidote for these drugs. I cannot say for certain what is the full effect of these two drugs when eaten or drunk. 58. 1 am acquainted with the present system of excise administration, and have only to suggest that the present system can be improved. In the first place I do not see any reason why the import and export of these drugs should be left to musta- gers. The precautions may be taken in reference to it as in the case of liquor with necessary change. It is never safe to leave things in the full control of selfish thekadars, where it is intend- ed not to encourage a free use of any injurious thing. No community allows young men under 25 to use these drugs, but they secretly learn to use them. Sale to or for such persons should be made criminal. This restriction cannot alto- gether put a stop to it ; but it would be a great block in the way of future increase. Sepoys, who are generally enlisted under 25 years of age should be distinctly told not to get into the habit. During my experience of two years, I found that in nearly each case of illicit possession of these drugs some sepoy was concerned, and the little they could save after years of honest toil was for- feited in the shape of fines. This was very hard, but could not be helped. This is an open stain on discipline and morality. It is a mistaken policy to expect extraordinary work from an intoxicated person, and still more to think that it is in the power of every man to keep to moderation. It is against the very nature of drugs in general. Those that are addicted to their use difficulties should be thrown in their way, so that they may not jump or slip into ex- tremes. Those that are not initiated should not be allowed to get inte the way with as much ease as now. After 25 or 30 men get their habits generally confirmed, and when they are served up to this age, their future temptation is improbable. It must be borne in mind that this, like other bad habits, is contracted in tender age, and bad com- pany, and then in advanced age excuses are sought and found for indulging in it. 59. These drugs should be taken directly in hand as liquor, and sold at high prices in the same way as liquor. They should not be sold to or for young men under 25, except under prescribed conditions. None but regularly constituted license-holders should be allowed to sell them. 60 and 61. Cannot answer. 62. Cannot answer for want of adequate inform- ation as to the extent and places of groves. 63. I object to these drugs being dealt freely by thekadars to their sub-lessees. These drugs should be deposited in abkari like liquor and sub- jected to the same procedure. Hitherto sub-less- ees think themselves as mere agents of thekadars or mustagers, and are subject to no control. 64. No objection. 65. Taxation in such cases is always more or less on an arbitrary scale, and it is difficult to lay hands on a fixed ratio, but there are always two things to be kept in view: (1) if the taxation is for the encouragement or discouragement of the traffic ; (2) if it is feasible. As regards the rela- tive propriety of taxing these drugs and alcohol there are two things to be borne in mind : (1) comparative means of the classes that use each of the two things ; (2) comparative worth of a dose. Not less than two annas worth liquor can satisfy a drinking man, while two pice worth drug is enough to satisfy an ordinary consumer. It must be noted that none of these things is an absolute necessary of life. 66. It stands to reason that taxation of things of different value and worth should be separately and differently made; but if there is not much difference, there is no use complicating the machi- nery and putting the people to unnecessary trouble. There may be some political necessity for separate taxation ; but, as far as traffic is concerned, it matters very little whether a thing comes from one province or another, for a thing is taxed for permission of import or export only. There are various questions concerning it ; but they arise only in the ease of severality of States, and are hence of international importance, take, for in- stance, the length of way prepared by the State over which a merchant has to travel one traveller may have to travel a few miles and another a hundred fold. Over the preparation one Govern- ment has spent a few hundred only, while on the other thousands. As the chief traffic of these drugs is by rail, this element, should be discarded. Now remains only the question of duty on export and on leases or licenses. If it is intended to put down the use of these drugs, either duty should be raised. 67. The present system of taxation was formu- lated in time when the use of these drugs was not deemed objectionable, and would hold good if the same policy goes on, but it is certainly low in the other case. As regards a poor labourer's income, each incidence is high when it is not for necessa- ries of life. 68. There are shops licensed for sales of these drugs in each city and town, and they are con- sumed now and then on the premises. Crowds in such places are always objectionable. As the use of a stimulant or sedative in a company gives always a peculiar acceleration to the evils, which cannot be generated in solitude. 69. Nothing but convenience of sale and of people is considered by a thekadar when a shop is opened. The local public are generally indifferent on such questions, excepting those who are incon- venienced in any way by a crowd of filthy or vol. v. 12
36 tumultuous men who come round now and then, or when their females are vexed by their obscene songs or passing jokes. Such crowds are seldom seen without men of questionable characters. 70. There is no doubt that, owing to absence of due restrictions or laxity of superintendence, there is constant smuggling, but to what extent and by whom, it is difficult to point out. I. have personal knowledge of individual but cannot hazard a general guess. 31. Evidence of MR. P. HARRISON, Joint Magistrate and Officiating Collector, Pilibhit. 1. Have been Excise Officer in various districts, and have frequently had conversations with drug contractors and consumers. 2. I think these definitions may be accepted. 3. Spontaneous growth in Pilibhit. It is, I believe, also abundant in Kheri, a neighbouring district. 4. I know of no other names but the ganja or bhang plant. 5. Damp gravelly soil appears to be most suit- able. 6. Scattered as far as I have seen. 7. I have heard of none. 14. Ganja and bhang are prepared in this prov- ince. In this district and in some of the eastern districts. 16. I believe ganja and bhang can be prepared from the wild plant wherever grown. As to charas, if the process of manufacture were gene- rally known, which it is not, I believe it might be universally prepared. 18. Age does not improve any of the drugs. Charas becomes valueless after four or five years. 19. I know of no other use. 20. Mendicants and low caste Hindus are the principal consumers. No particular locality, 21. Flat ganja I believe to be most appreciated. It is however more expensive than the other kinds, and is not always obtainable in rural shops. 22. Afghans and the like are said to import charas from Bokhara and Yarkhand. I know of no native charas wherever I have made enquiries. I believe the charas to have come as above stated through the Punjab. 23. Not to my knowledge. 24. The moderate use of bhang is almost uni- versal, in the sense of not being confined to parti- cular classes. 25. I believe the use of charas to be on the increase. 29. Nobody with whom I have talked on this subject has heard of dhatura being used. I know of no preparation such as bhang massala. 30. Among the poorer classes consumption is generally practised in company (ganja and charas). Bhang is not to so great an extent consumed in company. 31. I do not think the habit very difficult to break. 33. The consumption of ganja and charas is generally looked down upon as somewhat disreput- able. Bhang-consumers are not despised to the same extent. 34. I think only temporarily, 35. I think it is not possible to prohibit the use of drugs. The consumption of charas might be reduced by Government taking over the sale of it, as in the case of opium, and prohibiting sale by other persons. I do not think any danger need be apprehended from the small amount of discon- tent likely to be caused. I should say that neither alcohol nor other drugs would be resorted to. 36. 1 know of no such reason. 37. The effect of* either drug is apparent in the dryness of the lips and a peculiar voice. The effect of ganja is more pronounced in this respect than that of charas. Ganja produces asthmatic cough too. 38. Not to my knowledge. The best of the three kinds may have a quicker effect. 40. Bhang is occasionally prescribed by native doctors. Bullocks, goats and horses are also treat- ed with it for certain ailments. 42. Moderate use of bhang is harmless. 43. Not in the least except in so far as smoking in company is likely to collect bad characters of low castes. 44. Bhang is said to produce appetite. 45. The effects of ganja and charas, as far as I know them, are described in my reply to question 37. I cannot say whether the moderate use of the drugs would induce those effects. 49. Fakirs are supposed to use these drugs to induce impotence. 51. I have never heard of the drugs being used by criminals except at gambling parties. 53. No instance has come under my observation. 54. Probably not. The effect is more to deaden the intellect than to increase courage or allay fear. 55. No instance known to me. 58. It works fairly well. 59. Charas might be taken under Government control like opium. Great trouble would be saved when the present large contracts changed hands. 60. I think cultivated ganja is comparatively rare and does not require control. 63 and 64. None. 65. Taxation does not appear excessive. There is no fixed taxation. It regulates itself with re- gard to demand and the minimum profit which satisfies contractors. 66. I think varying rates would be unworkable and give rise to endless disputes. 67. None. 68. There are none such. 69. Objections to the situation of an establish- ed or proposed shop are sometimes considered.
37 32. Evidence of MR. H. O. W. ROBARTS, Officiating Joint Magistrate and Excise Officer, Jhansi. 1. I have been in charge of the Excise adminis- tration of the Jhansi district for upwards of two years, during which time I have made enquiries regarding the hemp drugs from dealers and others. 2. These definitions may be accepted. 1 am not aware of any other local name beyond those quoted. 7, There is none in this district. It is possible there may be a few plants grown by temples, etc., but I have never seen the hemp plant growing within this district, though it is abundant in some of the neighbouring Native States. Thus in Gwalior it is grown (a) for ganja, (b) for pro- duction of a spurious form of charas, (c) for bhang ; it is grown for production of ganja at Chatarpur State, also in Rewa, in the Central Provinces, particularly near Khandwa. (d) The village of Antri in Gwalior grows the plant almost en- tirely for its seeds, and almost the whole of the seed for ganja used in Gwalior State is said to come from this village. 10. They are mostly "Kachhis," but this only because the other cultivating classes in this neighbourhood are all too lazy to give the atten- tion required for the successful production of ganja. For bhang, all castes grow it. There is certainly no special class. 14. No. 16. Bhang can be prepared by any one. Ganja and charas cannot. Ordinary people are unable to distinguish between the male and female plants, hence it is impossible for them to produce ganja. Charas also requires special manufacture. 18. The three drugs can with proper care be kept in good condition for three or four years. If left lying about exposed to sun and air, they will lose their qualities more rapidly. After three or four years the drugs lose their colour and intoxi- cating power gradually. Probably after five or sis years they would entirely lose this power. The contractors who have been at times my informants on this point have not been able to assign any special reason. The only measures to be taken to prevent deterioration are to keep the drug shut up and not expose it. The most usual method is to keep some pressure on the drug by weights. 19. As far as I can gather they are never used in any other manner. 20. Ganja and charas are smoked by the labouring classes, rarely by the higher castes or well-to-do people. The poorer classes of labourers like to smoke a whiff or two of ganja or charas. There is nothing to show that any particular class confines its attention to ganja or to charas. It is unusual for a smoker to change from one to the other. Charas, however, is frequently smoked in the middle of a pipe of ganja to add a piquancy to it. 21. The only ganja used here is flat. No ganja is imported from Bengal as it is too expensive, and the round ganja is not manufactured in the Native States from which the drugs for this district are imported. 22. The charas used is imported through Gwa- lior and from the Punjab. It is the Himalayan charas. An inferior quality is manufactured in Gwalior, but is not exported. 23. No ; bhang is never smoked. 24. (a) It is mostly eaten by fakirs ; other classes rarely eat it. (b) Bhang is drunk by all classes, Brahmans, Thakurs and lower castes. Its use is very common in this district. It would not, I think, be going too far to say that its consumption is universal amongst the Thakurs of this district. Among other classes it is undoubtedly less common, but it is not possible to give exact proportions. 28. (a) The consumption for moderate consum- ers is about ¼ tola. (b) Excessive consumers take up to as much as five tolas per diem. The cost of the former would be one pice, of the latter five pice, the drugs in this district being, as a rule, sold retail against equal weights of copper coin. The above details have been furnished to me by vendors of the drug at different times. They have not been checked by enquiry from consumers themselves, but I give them for what they may be worth. 30. Ganja and charas are more usually smoked in company. Bhang in private. It is chiefly confined to the male sex. I am not aware of any instance where a woman has become a consumer of these drugs. It is not usual for children to consume them, at any rate under the age of about 14 years. Many appear to take up the habit at the age of 16 or 17. 31. There does not, so far as I am aware, appear to be any tendency for moderate consumers to become excessive. Considering the very large numbers of moderate cousumers of bhang in this district, if there were such a tendency it would probably be well marked. The very large majority, how- ever, of consumers appear to smoke their ¼ or ½ tola to the end of their lives without increasing the amount. 33. I do not think that in this district there can be said to be any* public opinion upon the matter. The consumption is common, and is certainly not looked upon with disfavour. 34. It would, I think, be a privation to the very large numbers of the poorer labouring classes who consume the drugs. The hemp drugs are mostly cheaper, value for value, than country spirit. The poorer labouring classes who cannot well afford liquor often like to take a few whiffs of ganja after a hard day's work. If the consump- tion were prohibited and liquor remained at its present price, the poorer classes would undoubtedly be seriously affected. It is impossible in the short time at my disposal for answering these questions to give the numbers, but they undoubtedly are large. The richer classes would not be affected as they could afford liquor. 35. It would in my opinion be absolutely futile to prohibit the consumption of the drags in this district. They would undoubtedly be consumed illicitly, and such consumption could not be pre- vented without a degree of interference with the liberty of the subject which would be absolutely in- commensurate with the benefits to be obtained thereby. Surrounded as this district is by Native States smuggling would become universal. Even at the present there is no question, but that smug-
38 gling in small quantities at a time is extremely common. Any further prohibition would only lead to further smuggling, and it would be impossible to stop it. Such smuggling would probably not be in large quantities at a time, but in small quanti- ties, brought in by practically every person who had occasion to go into any of the adjoining Native States. As probably all the residents of this district have relatives in some of these Native States, they would have the greatest facilities for smuggling the drugs. Quadrupling the police force of the district would be unavailing for the suppression of such smuggling. Serious discontent would undoubtedly be caused, but not in this district sufficient to amount to a political danger. Among the more well-to-do classes such a pro- hibition would probably be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants ; among the lower classes it would undoubtedly be followed by recourse to alcohol as far as consistent with their means. Unless, however, the price of liquor was lowered, they could not afford to take so much stimulant in the form of alcohol as they can in the form of hemp drugs. The simplest way of lessening the consumption of these drugs would be to lower the price and improve the quality of country spirit. In this district, it being under outstills and not under the distillery system, the liquor is fairly cheap and of good strength ; there has therefore been no tendency to replace country spirit by hemp drugs. There is, however, I think, very little doubt that such a tendency has appeared in other districts where liquor is dearer and weaker. Cheapening the country spirit would no doubt put an end to this tendency, and would in my opinion considerably lessen the consumption of hemp drugs. 86. The tendency, if anything, is the reverse. The cost of liquor being far more in comparison with its intoxicating power than that of the drugs, the tendency, if anything, is for drugs to replace liquor. Lower the price of alcoholic liquor and the consumption of hemp drugs will be reduced. 51. I have seen no such connection. A large proportion of bad characters in the slums of larger towns undoubtedly consume madak and chaudu. There is nothing, however, to show any such con- nection between the hemp drugs and crime. 53. I have met with one case in which a police constable under the influence of bhang threw small stones at his comrades who were drilling, and 6at at the door of his quarters with his rifle threat- ening to shoot any one who tried to take it from him. The rifle was, however, got away from him without difficulty or accident. 58. On the whole it works well. 59. There is one point, which has, I believe, been amended or will shortly be so. There is (or perhaps was) no provision in the Excise Act awarding a penalty for importing these drugs in quantities below that which a person is entitled legally to possess. This has been pointed out, and, I believe, the Excise Act is being amended so as to cover such cases. 63. None. 64. See answer to question 59. 65. (a) I think the taxation is reasonable with regard to one another. (b) I should like to see the taxation higher in comparison with alcoholic liquors ; at present the incidence of taxation encourages the consumption of hemp drugs at the expense of alcohol ; and as the former are undoubtdly the more harmful, such an incidence is mischievous. 69. The shops have mostly been open for years and no new ones are now being licensed. There is nothing to show what measures were taken when they were first opened. Occasionally a shop is transferred from one village to another. If any inhabitant of the new village were to object (I have not yet met with 6uch a case) the transfer would not be permitted. I should say it would not be of the least value to consult local opinion. If it were suggested to open a shop in any locality, local opinion would invariably say there was no objection. The consumption of hemp drugs not being looked down upon in any way, and con- sumers not being harmful to their neighbours, it can hardly be expected that local opinion should oppose the opening of a shop. ?0. No import duty is paid on drugs brought from Native States, the revenue being raised by letting the right of sale by auction. Smuggling is undoubtedly extremely common throughout this and the neighbouring districts. The quantities smuggled at a time are small, and it is quite im- possible to prevent it. The district is so cut up by Native States that it would be absolutely im- possible to guard the borders adequately. Such cases as are brought up are usually more the re- sult of accident than of anything else. This is casting no reflection on the police; it is simply due to the irregularity and extent of the border line. All classes bring over small quantities of the drug when they happen to pay a visit to Native States and consume it in private. It is to the interest of the lessees to stop this practice but even they rarely succeed in getting informa- tion on the subject. 33. Evidence of PANDIT SRILAL, Offg. Joint Magistrate, Bareilly. 1. As Secretary to the Bijnour Agricultural Society from 1880 to 1884 and as a student of the Royal Agricultural College, Cirencester, from 1885 to 1887, I had opportunities to study the hemp plant agriculturally, while as an. Excise officer off and on for about a year, I had to deal with the hemp drugs in the Etah and Bareilly districts. 2. These definitions may be accepted for this province. Bhang is also locally known as sabzi, patti, zarda, bijiya, and bunti. Charas also goes by the name of sulfa. Ganja has no other local name. 3. The hemp plant grows spontaneously and abundantly along the Himalayan Terai. It is also found here and there in those portions of the districts of Pilibhit and Bareilly which lie imme- diately adjacent to the Terai. 4. The plant is locally known by the name of bhang. 5. The plant is grown in the Himalayas on elevations between 3,000 and 7,000 feet. It requires moist climate and rich soil for its growth. 6. The growth of the wild hemp is ordinarily dense. It forms, as a rule, small patches at the
39 corner of villages in the inner valleys of the Himalayas, which the daily offices of the people provide with a plentiful supply of manure. 7. The hemp plant is cultivated for its fibre and seeds in the inner valleys of the Himalayas. 9. The seed is sown in May at the rate of 30 seers to the acre, and the plants are kept carefully weeded. By September they usually attain a height of 12 to 14 feet. In the hemp the male and female organs are contained in separate flowers and borne on separate plants. The male plants, called phul bhang, yield the best fibre, and they are cut a month or six weeks before the female plants (gul bhang), which are allowed to stand until their 6eed ripens. The stalks are laid in water to promote fermentation, which allows the bark to strip easily. On being taken out they are beaten with mallets to loosen the bark, which is then detached by hand in strips, and after a second beating breaks up into a fibre, which is made up into hanks for sale. In some places the fibre is boiled in potash and bleached before spin- ning. 10. The cultivation of hemp is confined to the lowest class of cultivators. The higher castes consider it beneath their dignity to grow hemp. It is this prejudice which has made the phrase "May hemp be sown in thy house" as one of the commonest abusive imprecations. See "Kamaun Gazetteer," Volume I, page 801. 11. The plants cultivated for the production of ganja are seldom raised from the seed of the wild hemp. 12. 1 am not aware that the wild hemp is any- where specially cultivated for the production of ganja. 14. Charas is preparad from the hemp plant frown in the Himalayas in the locality where its fibre is found to repay extraction. In the plains of India the plant will not produce charas, and in order to obtain its intoxicating secretion it is necessary to gather the parts of the plant which contain it. When these are immature female flowers and floral envelopes the product is known as ganja; when they are the leaves, it is the bhang. A gummy exudation appears on the flowers and the leaves, which, when rubbed or scraped off, forms the drug known as charas. 15. The method of preparation from the culti- vated and wild plant are practically the same. 16. Bhang is not generally prepared by the people in their houses. Ganja as well as bhang can, however, be prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown. Charas cannot be prepared from the wild plants in the plains of India. 17. The preparations of the hemp drugs are made by the lowest classes of cultivators for excise contractors. 18. All the three drugs deteriorate by keeping, and quite lose their effects after some time. Ganja and bhang keep good with ordinary care for two years, and charas for four or five years. Damp atmosphere causes deterioration. To prevent this the drugs should be kept in a warm and dry place. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smok- ing. 20. Generally speaking it is only the lowest classes of people and religious mendicants that smoke ganja and charas. Labouring classes and boatmen also consume them. The consumption is not confined to any particular localities. Roughly speaking, 5 per cent. of the male population smoke ganja and charas. 21. Chur ganja is the most favourite variety. 22. Foreign charas is chiefly used. It is import- ed from Central Asia, Yarkand, and Bokhara. 23. To the best of my knowledge bhang is never U6ed for smoking. 24. Generally speaking the Brahmins (pandas) and religious mendicants use bhang, but it is con- sumed more or less by all castes of the Hindus. The proportion of consumers may be roughly put down as 5 per cent. of the male population, viz.:40 anniversary of the marriage of Shiva), and the four Mondays in the month of Shravan, when Hindus keep fast in honour of Shiva. It is also a social custom among the Hindus to drink bhang or eat majun (a sweetmeat containing bhang) on the occasion of the Holi festival. The use of the drug in connection with these customs is, however, not regarded as essential. It is generally temperate and is not likely to lead to the formation of the habit nor is otherwise injurious. There is no custom, social or religious, in regard to the con- sumption of ganja and charas. 33. The consumption of each of these drugs is generally regarded with disfavour by the respect- able portion of the community, but it is really the use of ganja and charas that is held in most disrepute. This is due partly to the more injur- ious effects of these drugs and partly to the fact that their use is chiefly confined to the low classes of people. I am not aware that the hemp plant is anywhere worshipped. 34. It would, in my opinion, be a serious pri- vation to the religious mendicants, boatmen and labouring classes to forego the consumption of the three drugs, as these people use them because they are supposed to give staying-power under severe exertion or exposure, and to alleviate fatigue, and also regarded as a preventive of dis- ease in malarious and unhealthy parts. I should say that at least 50 per cent. of the above classes of people consume these drugs. 35. 1 do not think that it would be feasible to prohibit the use of any of these drugs. Even under the most stringent measures, which would be needed to enforce prohibition, the drugs are likely to be consumed illicitly. To enforce pro- hibition it would be necessary (1) to put a stop to the importation of charas from Central Asia; (2) to render penal the cultivation of hemp plant in India, except for its fibre. The prohibition would occasion serious discontent among the consumers, which will assuredly amount to a political danger. Even at present there is a notion prevalent among the consumers that the Hemp Drugs Commission is appointed in the interests of wine merchants and brewers of England, and that its object is to provide increas- ed facilities for the sale of foreign liquor. In my opinion the prohibition would be followed by recourse to (a) alcoholic stimulants in the case of lower castes and (b) by strychnia and arsenic in the case of religious mendicants. 36. No. 37. Charas is a more deleterious drug than ganja. 38. The effects of flat, round, and chur ganja vary in degree. Chur is the strongest kind, round comes next in order, and flat is the weakest variety. 40. Charas and bhang are prescribed by hakims in cases of dysentery and diarrhoea. Bhang is also used in cases of cattle disease. 41. The moderate use of bhang is regarded as a food accessory or digestive, and that of charas and ganja as giving staying-power under severe exertion or exposure or to alleviate fatigue, and as a febrifuge or preventive of disease in malarious and unhealthy tracts. It is only the labouring classes and religious mendicants that use the drugs for the above purposes. Fifty per cent. of such classes use them. In such cases the people are moderate habitual consumers. 42. Under the circumstances mentioned in question 41, the use of the drugs in moderate quantities appears to be beneficial. 43. No. 44. The immediate effects of the moderate use of each of these drugs on the habitual consumer is said to be refreshing. Charas and ganja pro- duce immediate intoxication, Bhang takes about an hour or so to produce its intoxicating effects. Ganja and charas allay hunger, but bhang creates appetite. The effect lasts from an hour to three. The after-effects are low spirits and uneasiness. The want of subsequent gratification does produce longing or uneasiness. 45. I am unable to give any definite answer to these questions, which only a medical man can fully deal with; but from what little 1 know, I am inclined to think that the habitual moderate use of these drugs does not produce any noxious effects. It is the habitual excessive use of charas and ganja that impairs constitution, injures digestion, causes loss of appetite, impairs moral sense, and induces laziness. The excessive use of ganja and charas also causes dysentery, bronchitis and asthma. It is also said to deaden the intellect, and in some cases to produce insanity. 47. No. 48. Where the parents are habitual excessive consumers of any of these drugs, their children are likely to contract a habit for their use. 49. I am not aware that the use of any of these drugs is practised as an aphrodisiac. The continual excessive use of bhang is believed to produce impotency. 51. A large proportion of bad characters are habitual moderate consumers of charas and ganja. They use it to keep themselves in cheerful spirits, oblivious of their evil habits ; but I am not pre- pared to say that the use of any of these drugs has any special connection with crime in general or with crime of any special character. 52, A limited proportion of bad characters are also habitual excessive consumers of charas or ganja. The remarks made in question 51 are applicable to this class of consumers as well. 53. I don't think so. I am not aware of any such case. 54. I don't think so. 55. Criminals do sometimes, in order to further their designs, induce their victims to partake of charas or ganja with or without dhatura and so stupefy them. Complete stupefaction is said to be produced by charas without admixture if ad- ministered in a large quantity to persons who are strangers to its use. 57. I am not aware that ganja or charas are ever eaten or drunk. 58. The excise administration in these pro- vinces is working on the whole satisfactorily. 60. The cultivation of the hemp plant in these provinces is free to all parties. The possession of the drugs, ganja and bhang, is permitted to cul- tivators. This, in my opinion, facilitates smug- gling. I would suggest that none should be allow- ed to cultivate the hemp plant without a license. 61. Charas is not produced in these provinces. It is imported from Central Asia. 62. The only further controlling that seems necessary in connection with the cultivation of the hemp plant for the production of bhang is what I have stated above in question 60, viz., that the cultivation of the hemp plant should only be per- mitted under a license. 63 and 64. I have no objection. 65. I have no alteration to suggest The tax- ation is reasonable.
41 66. I understand that different rates of taxation are levied in Bengal on all ganja exported thence to the North-Western Provinces, namely:42 11. Yes ; in the Gonda district the wild hemp yields ganja (Excise Report, 1892). It only needs manure and a rich soil and the elimination of the male plant to become ganja-yielding. Indeed, the upper foliage of the wild plant con- tains large quantities of the resin, and yields the best bhang. 12. Gonda, Gorakhpur, Fyzabad, Barabanki, and Pertabgarh. See above reply. It is easy to extract the resinous principle from the wild hemp43 to support them under intense physical exertions as Kahars and Baudanis. Some take hemp for the pleasurable sensations it excites ; some to drown care ; others because they have got into the habit. Hemp is only smoked with tobacco, and the ques- tion cannot be considered apart from the tobacco habit. Who could say why 75 per cent. of modern Englishmen smoke tobacco? "Because they like it" is the most rational answer. A number of people who suffer from painful diseases, such as stone in the bladder, hernia, etc., eat or smoke hemp to relieve their pain. Hemp is the most wonderful anodyne in existence. 29. Bhang is only mixed with water, sugar, and spices. Majum, a preparation of bhang, with flour, butter, sugar, and spices. Occasionally dhatura is mixed with majum by special order. But then, according to the first authority on "Hindu Materia Medica," U. C. Dutt, confections of bhang are used as a vehicle for a great number of drugs. Dhatura is used with ganja to allay cough or an asthmatic tendency ; also to add to the strength of hemp drugs. Smoking dhatura could be substituted for hemp smoking. Aconite (root of Aconitum ferox) and the seeds of strychnos, nux-vomica, are sometimes mixed with hemp drugs as nervine tonics. 30. Hemp smoking is a social habit, the pipe being passed round a group of people. Bhang is taken in company at wedding feasts, etc. On the whole the hemp habit is practised in company, though there are exceptions. Hemp smoking is of great-antiquity, and was practised in India long before the introduction of tobacco. Ganja and charas are largely smoked by the Dards in Kashmir and right through Afghanistan. The Afghans, who smoke hemp, are in point of physique second to no race in the world, and this shows that the habit can be generally adopted with impunity. 31. No easier than any other habit44 North-Western Provinces are given to using al- cohol to excess. They never use country spirits. 37. Rather milder ; it is also more expensive, and resorted to by native gentlemen. Both are inhaled by the hooka through water. Charas does not cause a tendency to cough in the smoker. The acridity of ganja in this respect is due to the crude tobacco leaf with which it is mixed in the opinion of many smokers. 38. The pathar ganja has a bitter taste, and is not so strong as the baluchur. Baluchur will consequently go four times as far. The effects are the same. In fact baluchur is rarely to be obtained pure. Pathar ganja has an inferior aroma to baluchur. In fact there is as much difference between them in quality and price, as between a coarse and cheap Burma cheroot, which sells at R1-8 a hundred and a box of Havanahs, which would cost R75 a hundred. 39. Drinking and eating bhang are, in moder- ation, positively beneficial ; so is the use of wine The same cannot be said for smoking either tobacco or hemp. The hemp smoker invariably smokes a mixture of hemp and tobacco. He further inhales the smoke into his lungs, as European cigarette smokers are learning to do. This causes a direct absorption of the active principles of hemp and tobacco into the blood. At the same time I see no more marked physical deterioration in hemp- smokers than in the tobacco smokers. I believe that tobacco has produced physical degeneracy in England among poor males in manufacturing towns. This is greater than in the case of the Indian hemp smoker, who lives in the open air, has plenty oil coarse food, and drinks water. It would be vain to prohibit the use of hemp drugs in India without at the same time prohibiting the use of tobacco. 40. Yes, largely. See U. Dutt, Materia Medica of the Hindus, and elsewhere. Hemp is used in cholera, dysentery, and malarious fever,45 dyspepsia, and tends to lower physical courage and muscular power. Tea drinkers suffer from a form of delirium tremens. Tea is commonly said to produce insanity in Ireland. 46. In this connection I repeat that I believe that syphilis, tea, and tobacco have done more mischief in England than hemp drugs in India. If British legislators are unable to stamp out these vices in their own country, it is much more impro- bable that they will be able in a foreign country to stamp out the use of a drug that grows at the doors of the people, the use of which is partly beneficial. It is often lost sight of that we owe our ascendency and existence in this country to 65,000 British bayonets and the volunteer forces of 30,000 men. 47. No. I know many children of ganja smokers who do not use hemp, and have quite as good a physique as their fathers. None of these drugs affect posterity to the same extent as the habit of wear- ing corsets among our females affects the rising generation in England ; and if we are reverting to an age of sumptuary laws and interference with the private habits of individuals, I believe a Commis- sion composed of Indians would be most usefully employed in England in enquiring into the extent to which females suffer from the effects of tight- lacing. They would be less prejudiced than certain doctors who use tobacco themselves to excess, and will not admit that the habit is injurious, though they condemn the habit of hemp smoking from its apparent results among habitual criminals and lunatics. Statistics as to the abuse of tea and tobacco among similar classes in England would lead to startling and most erroneous conclusions 49. Bhang and ganja have the reputation of being aphrodisiacs. I question their being any more aphrodisiacs than other intoxicants. Alcohol is largely used in European brothels by Europeans who desire repetition of the sexual act, and when we see that such opposite drugs as alcohol, opium, and hemp are all said to be used for the same pur- pose, I contend that I am right. Natives are very much addicted to inordinate sexual intercourse, whether they take hemp drugs or not. and it is excessive venery, not hemp, that causes their sexual powers to decay early in life. Alcohol has no special aphrodisiac qualities, yet is used as an aphrodisiac. It is credited by many with the reverse property (i.e., alcohol). 50. With regard to females, puberty is attained at the age of 9 or 10 in India. Maturity is there- fore earlier reached than in Europe, and decay is also more rapid. A native woman of 25 is consi- dered quite old among them, and no one would think of marrying a woman of this age. Orien- tals (the Ottomans particularly) generally believe that coffee has the effect of weakening the gener- ative power in man. Tea certainly has this effect. 51. There are burglars in India who are largely given to smoking hemp and tobacco mixed, but English burglars are also tobacco smokers to a man, and mostly addicted to the use of alcohol. Has no connection with crime beyond that indicat- ed above. 53. It is a fact that a man is occasionally fren- zied by excessive indulgence in hemp, but this hardly occurs so often as it does under the influ- ence of alcohol. Quite recently two English planters in Assam for pure fun cleared out a rail- way station by assaulting the railway servants, and they also broke all the glass and plate in the refreshment room. They were both gentlemen by birth, "such nice men too," and it was not under the influence of water that they acted thus. 54. Dutch courage is proverbial, and I believe Asiatics do use bhang in this way to fortify them- selves. Perhaps they require to fortify themselves this way oftener than Englishmen, and I don't see why they should not use hemp. Alcohol is commonly used for the same purpose. 55. Not that I am aware of. Dhatura is cheap- er, more easily obtained, and more effective, as the victim is not so liable to resist as when under the influence of hemp. Complete stupefaction can be induced by hemp, but the after-effects on mind and body are not so disastrous as the effects of being dead drunk on alcohol. There is hardly a village in the Allahabad district where the dhatura D-alba is not to be found, and I often see it growing so close to certain huts as to look as if it had been planted. 57. I have no doubt that both ganja and charas are now largely used dissolved in alcohol. A con- centrated tincture is by far the easiest way of extracting the full strength of the drug. I have no precise information on the subject. Charas clearly can be taken internally in the form of a pill and produces the characteristic intoxication of hemp. 58. Works well, but, like all human institutions, is capable of improvement. 59. In the direction of yielding a larger and perfectly legitimate revenue to the State were it not for external interference, which, coming as it does from a country that mainly derives its revenues from alcohol and tobacco and tea, is by no means relished by Indians. All these com- modities establish a craving or habit in a certain proportion of people, and when taken in excess do much harm. 60. A tax might be levied on pathar ganja, but owing to the very intricate nature of the boundary, this has hitherto been found impracti- cable. Arrangements might be made with the Gwalior Raj, which itself derives a considerable re- venue by taxing the ganja exported into British territory. European agency should be employed. 61. Charas is produced largely in Kumaon and Garhwal; but as the entire sacking used for ex- porting produce is made from the fibre of the same plants from which the charas is extracted, and the seeds are a valuable food stuff, any fur- ther rules would be vexatious and unnecessary and injurious. 62. No. Bhang is the sole produce of the wild plant, though it can be obtained from the cultivated plant also. For economic reasons this is not done. The wild hemp is the dominant weed over thousands of square miles of country, and grows spontaneously on waste land unfit to to produce anything else. 63. None whatever. 64. None whatever, though I think a tax might be fairly levied on the import of pathar ganja from Buudelkhand and Indore with the object of giving Bengal ganja a chance of competing with it. 65. The tax on baluchur ganja is excessive, as the article costs about twice as much as abkari opium, and there is a large amount of waste leaf and woody fibre in the flowering tops. But then the professed object of this heavy tax has been to prevent, if not crush out, the use of the drug. On the other hand, one pice worth of bhang will produce an equivalent amount of intoxication to 4 annas worth of spirit, and this is how an Asiatic gauges the virtues of an intoxicant. Charas might yield a considerable revenue. A tax might be put on it so as to equalize its value with ganja,
s46 but then it would be necessary to tax pathar ganja heavily, 66. Round and broken ganja should be more heavily taxed than flat ganja, as they contain more resin, are from picked plants, and command a higher price in the market. 67. I am inclined to think that a tax on charas would yield a decent revenue ; but I am against the theory that the object of this tax should be the repression of the article. I think it should be honestly looked upon as a source of revenue. If a person in the British Empire is free to contract syphilis and communicate it to others, I do not think it logical to interfere with his using a drug which is only at the most slightly harmful to himself and not at, all to posterity, while the unfortunate victim of syphilis transmits the disease to his children. 68. There are, I believe, only 15 shops for the sale of hemp drugs in Mirzapur town and 25 liquor shops. Their number is limited by the Commissioner of Excise. 69. If the wishes of the people were consulted, the number of liquor shops would be at once doubled, and ganja and bhang obtained at every bania's. I am afraid a paternal Government, urged by philanthropic motives, restricts the numbers of these shops very much to the inconvenience of the public. If there were but one public house in a small town in the manufacturing districts in England, the outcry would be tremendous. When the British people are prepared to forswear the use of tobacco and forego the taxes derived there- from, it will be time enough to question the dis- position of the Indian to forego bhang and ganja. 70. Bengal ganja is undoubtedly smuggled (vide Excise Report for 1890, District Report for Gorakhpur, by W. B. Cockburn, Esq). No duty is paid on pathar ganja. Baluchur pays a duty of R5 a seer or R200 a maund. Hemp drugs are smuggled from one district to another47 leaves of the wild hemp are sometimes smoked alone and oftener mixed with tobacco48 37. According to one of the first authorities on the subject, charas is the basis or type of all hemp preparations. As sold in the bazars of Allahabad, it is sticky resin which feels and looks like dirty bees' wax with a greenish tinge. When pure it is greyish with a steely feature. Its effects do not differ markedly from the effects of smoking good balucher ganja, and it has the same odour and taste as good ganja. It is, however, so subject to adulteration that it is hardly possible to find a pure sample outside a museum, hence the contra- dictory nature of the replies as to its potency. If pure, bulk for bulk, it should be five times stronger than ganja. By the poorer classes a narrow chillum alone, without the hukka, is used in smoking both ganja and charas, and 1 have seen alternate chillumfuls of both smoked. The smokers declared there was no difference to their taste. Some smokers use a greasy looking rag to the naked end of the chillum to filter the smoke and prevent ashes entering the mouth. Both ganja and charas are mixed with crude tobacco and also prepared hukka tobacco. Charas smok- ing in the Allahabad district is cheaper than ganja. A chillum of charas costs one pice. Moosahirs and aboriginal tribe here smoke it. 52. My denunciation of tobacco-smoking and its comparison with hemp-smoking might, by some, be considered extravagant, so it may be perhaps as well to point out that the comparison was made as early as 1839 by Sir William O'Shaughnessy, who emphatically states in his memoir on hemp that the sequelæ of hemp smok- ing, dwelt on by other writers, did not appear to him to be so numerous, so immediate, or so formid- able as many which may be clearly traced to over- indulgence in other powerful stimulants and narcotics, such as alcohol and tobacco. It may not generally be known that tobacco juice, after being masticated and mixed with saliva in the human mouth, is a more certain and virulent poison to the puff adder than the poison of the puff adder to man. Human beings can swallow the poison of the puff adder with impunity and often even survive its bite, but there is no known instance of a puff adder having survived after tobacco juice was squirted into its mouth. Tobacco has been nearly as highly lauded by an eminent English divine, as soma or bhang by the Vedantist Hindus. The following quotation is from the Revd. Chas. Kingsley's Westward Ho : "When all things were made, none were made better than tobacco. To be a lone man's companion, a bachelor's friend, a hungry man's food, a sad man's cordial, a waked man's sleep, and a chilly man's fire. There is no herb like it under the canopy of Heaven." The admission that tobacco is the bachelor's friend is noteworthy, and I have often heard tobacco praised for its chastening effects on mind and body. This (anaphrodisiac) quality is probably due to the poisonous effect tobacco has on the lower forms of life among which the human blood corpuscules must be included. It would certainly be safer for a man to swallow ten grains of ordinary ganja than to swallow ten grains of tobacco. And it is this noxious weed that it is proposed to raise a revenue from in India, and which largely contributes to the revenues of England and France. I must here repeat that hemp is only smoked with tobacco, and the tobacco habit and hemp habit are not only analogous, but indissolubly connected. 57. A tincture of hemp leaf (i.e., bhang) in wine or spirits was the celebrated stimulant in which Sheikh Haidar indulged, and I have since found that most educated Muhammadan gentlemen are acquainted with this method of using hemp. Oral evidence. Question 12.49 35. Evidence of KHAN BAHADUR SYED ALI HUSEN, Revenue Member, Rampur Council of Regency. 2. The definitions given may be accepted for Rohilkhand. The three products in question are called bhang, charas, and ganja. 3. The hemp plant grows spontaneously in the Terai (now known as the Naini Tal district) and in north and north-eastern part of this State, but at the former locality (the Terai) it is abundant. 5. Hemp plant generally grows wild in country lying at the foot of the hills. It germinates in March ; requires damp climate and moist soil. It does not require much rain for nourishment ; an elevated ground or a level plot hardly makes any great difference, except that on elevated grounds it grows better. 6. The growth of the hemp plant is generally dense. 7. So far as is known, the hemp plant is not cultivated in Rohilkhand. 14. Bhang is prepared in this State and neigh- bourhood generally by consumers themselves, but the preparation is limited to local consump- tion. 15. Charas and ganja are not generally pre- pared here. Occasionally, however, a common peasant would make "chur" ganja for his use. Bhang is usually powdered very fine, mixed with water and sugar, and sometimes with milk, strain- ed and drunk. To make it further flavoury and palatable, cardamom and other spices are added to the dose. For eating purposes the process is simple enough : it is made into large pills and swallowed. 16. Bhang is generally manufactured by the people in their homes. It can be prepared from hemp plant wherever grown. Ganja and charas can also be similarly prepared from the wild plant. 17. Bhang is made by all classes who consume it. Charas and ganja are not known to be made here, but are imported. 18. Ganja and charas deteriorate easily after the rains, but they do not quite lose their proper- ties after one year. With ordinary care, charas and ganja will retain their value for a couple of years, but the longer they are kept the more they will deteriorate in quality. Damp contributes much towards deterioration, and if kept in closely- sewn bags, covered with bhusa (straw), the de- terioration can be checked a good deal.- Bhang holds on longer, and with ordinary pre- cautions will keep good for three or four years, although, as in the case of charas, it will gradually lose its quality : causes of deterioration being very much similar to the other preparations. 19. Ganja and charas are used for smoking only. 20. Everywhere in the North-Western Prov- inces and this State, people smoke ganja and charas. Lower classes generally do so, such as kahars, dhobies, malis, komhars, and Hindu mendicants. Ganja and charas are not so much in use among Muhammadans as amongst the Hindus. Religion forbids the former from a free use of it. The percentage in total population of people smoking ganja and charas is between 2 and 3 per cent. In eastern districts of the united Provinces it may perhaps be higher50 32. So far as is known, there is no social or re- ligious custom in regard to charas or ganja, al- though charas is considered to be sacred to Hindu god Siva, and his votaries consume it in large quantities on that account. Bhang is, however, regarded as the favourite beverage of the god, and on the festival of Sivaratri, an offering of it is made. About the time of this festival the wor- shippers of Siva drink bhang more than ordinarily, and sometimes form the habit. 33. Charas and ganja are in disrepute, but not bhang to such an extent. The principal reason why charas and ganja are in disrepute is that the lower orders use them, and they are considered as fit for lower orders only. Any one using them is naturally regarded as likely to associate with low men. So far as is known, hemp plant is not worship- ped. 34. Yes ; particularly to the class of religious mendicants who consume these drugs immoder- ately. Their number is, however, not very large, being about 2 or 3 per mille of population. 35. It does not seem quite feasible to prohibit the use of these drugs, but it can be diminished by raising Government duty. The population will surely feel discontent, and it may become serious, since the consumers are generally ignor- ant and uneducated people, and may lead to the greater consumption of alcoholic stimulants. The discontent will not, however, amount to political danger. 36. No. On the contrary, these drugs are being substituted for alcohol. 37. The effects of ganja and charas smoking are similar in main. Ganja, however, is said to produce thirst. 40. Bhang is generally prescribed to help di- gestion, and is regarded as a remedy for piles. It is also given to cattle to alleviate fatigue, as well as in diseases. 41. The moderate occasional use of bhang may be beneficial as digestive, and that of charas to alleviate fatigue. The moderate use is to be pre- ferred to excessive use, and the use of the drugs in moderate quantities as digestive or alleviating fatigue is not restricted to any class of people. 42. The use of these drugs may be harmless in the beginning, but it is injurious to health in the long run. This opinion is based on observations. 43. Yes. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of these drugs on the habitual consumer is re- freshing. It produces intoxication, but does not allay hunger or create appetite. The effect is sometimes different in individual cases. Charas and ganja produce intoxication immediately, and bhang about an hour after, and the effect lasts for about two hours. The after-effects are languor and sometimes headache. The want of subsequent gratification produces both longing and uneasi- ness. 45. The habitual moderate use of these drugs injures digestion in the long run, and produces asthma except in strong constitutions. It induces laziness and deadens intellect. The moderate use does not ordinarily produce insanity. 46. The habitual excessive use causes loss of appetite, produces asthma, and sometimes dysen- tery. It impairs the moral sense and induces habits of immorality. The effects of charas and ganja are much worse than those of bhang, which does not impair appetite. Insanity is not unfre- quently produced, which is often permanent. Mental anxiety or brain disease may in several eases have been the primary cause of insanity, but the habit of immoderate use of charas has certainly fed the flame and accelerated and inten- sified the disease. 47. It is not a hereditary habit, and does not seem to affect the children of the moderate con- sumer. 48. The excessive use also is not a hereditary habit, but it affects the children of the consumer by producing a naturally weak constitution. 50. Cannot be ascertained. 51. Charas and ganja are consumed by bad characters. The moderate use of these drugs is not a material factor in promoting crime. 52. The excessive use of these drugs is the habit of the depraved and immoral. It promotes crime. 53. Yes. No such case has, however, come under personal observation. 54. Yes, sometimes. 55. Yes, but more powerful drugs, such as dhatura, etc., are generally used. Complete stupe- faction is caused for a time to people not used to them. 58 and 59. The system is working well ; only to prevent excessive use, the duty should be raised. 60. Whenever ganja is produced in a wild state or under cultivation, it should not be left to the owner or cultivator to sell it on his own account. The whole should be purchased by Government, as in the case of poppy, and then sold to persons authorised to purchase it. This will prevent the sale of the drug by the owner or cultivator to others, and serve as a check on excessive consump- tion. 61. As above. 62. Not necessary, as bhang is not so injurious as either charas or ganja ; but, if similarity of system is desired, it may be treated like ganja51 Question 15.52 19. Ganja aud charas are used for smoking only. 20. All Hindus, save Brahmins, smoke ganja and charas. Bairagis, gosains, Hindus, Muham- madan fakirs, and low class Muhammadans gener- ally smoke charas and ganja. 21. Round ganja is preferred for smoking. 22. Yarkand charas is used in these provinces. It comes from Amritsar, Punjab. 23. Bhang is never smoked. It is eaten or drunk. 24. People of all castes eat and drink bhang. I cannot say in what proportion. It is drunk in hot season and eaten in cold season. 25. There is no increase or decrease. 27. Gosains, fakirs, and Gangaputra Choubays of Muthra are excessive consumers of bhang, and high class Hindus, who do not drink, are moderate consumers of bhang. 28. Charas worth half anna to three annas ganja from three pies to two annas, arid bhang from half pice to seven pies can be consumed in one day. 29. Dhatura seeds are mixed up with bhang to make it strong. It is done by consumers and not by sellers. Bhang is also fried to make it strong. Souf, pepper, cardamom, almond, sugarcandy, milk, rose water, and keora water are also mixed up. 30. Ganja and charas are used in company, and bhang is used in solitude as well as in company. 31. The habit is easily formed. It can easily break off. The moderate use of it often leads to excess. 32. The use of the drugs is prohibited by Shas- tras and Shivahs ; but the Hindus who drink bhang called it bijiar, and use it at Holi and Shivratri and offer it to Mahadev. 33. The use of all intoxicating things is in dis- repute. The use of bhang according to custom is not now so much held in disrepute as the use of drugs and liquors. 34. The Choubays of Muthra, the gosains, the bairagis, the Muhammadan fakirs, and the Hindus who do not drink would feel it seriously if they are not allowed to use bhang. The num- bers of each cannot be given. 35. The people are bound to obey Government, but the masses will be dissatisfied if the Govern- ment prohibits the use of these drugs. The pro- hibition to use these drugs will make them drink liquors, which are very costly. 36. Alcohol is not used in place of these drugs. 58. It is working well, and is not capable of improvement. 68. Sakins and license-holders of these drugs have shops where these drugs are consumed on the premises. It is bad to have these shops, and is full of evil consequences to the public. 69. No. 70. None. 37. Evidence of BABU CHANDU LAL, Khattri, Deputy Collector, Orai, Jalaun District. 1. My answers are framed from my own per- sonal experience and observations, supplemented by a study of certain publications and enquiry from experts. 1 saw ganja and bhang plants growing wild at Naini Tal. I was an excise officer for a few months in the Jaunpur district. I have frequently seen ganja and charas being smoked and I myself have occasionally used a cup of bhang beverage and majum. 2. Yes. These definitions may be accepted for the North-Western Provinces and Oudh. Ganja consists of the young tops and unfertilized female flowers, and older leaves and fruit vessels bhang, and the resin charas. Bhang is also known by the name of sabzi, buti, vijia, harshni (the delight-giver), and kamalapati. The following is a proverb in this connection :53 into bundles, which are placed one over the other, and when dried are ready for use. Flat ganja.51 that I may sing the praises of Har and view the elephant rider as a mosquito. Another preparation of the bhang is majum. To make this, the leaves are well washed and boiled in ghi and then strained. The juice is then mixed with curds (khoa), sugar, black pepper, pistas, badams (almonds) ilachies (cardamoms), etc., so as to make a sort of sweetmeat. 30. Ganja and charas are smoked in company, and bhang consumed generally in company on Holi, Shivburt and Durga Puja festivals, and also in marriages (in phul, which usually takes place on the second or third day of the marriage) among certain castes, such as Brahmins, Khatris, Bunnias, etc. Confined to male sex. Not usual for children. They do take bhang in the shape of drink and sweets in Holi, Shivratri, and Durga Puja festi- vals in small quantities. 31. Yes, if used for a month or two, not diffi- cult to break the habit. Yes, in ganja and charas, but not much. 32. Ganja and charas.55 38. Evidence of LALA DILA RAM, Deputy Collector, Meerut District. 1. I am a native of Pilibhit, where wild bhang and ganja grow luxuriantly. I was employed for fifteen years at Bijnor, and wandered about in that district for about four years with the Settlement Officer, and served as Deputy Collector in charge of Excise about five years, Hence my replies relate to the Districts of Pilibhit and Bijnor. 2. Bhang and ganja plants are distinct, though the plants are much alike. The leaves of the bhang plant are narrower than those of the ganja plant ; similarly, the seeds of bhang are smaller in size and quantity than those of the ganja. There is another distinction : the bunches of the flowering tops at end of twigs of ganja plant are heavier than those of the bhang plant. The dry leaves of the bhang plant are called by different names of siddhi, búnti, bhang, sabzi, etc. The dried flowering tops and leaves of the ganja plant are called ganja or kalli. The methods of manufacturing ganja mentioned are unknown in the tract under notice. The habitual consumers generally grow a few plants in their houses, and then continue twisting the twigs as they come out. The twisted kallies are said to be more in- toxicating than the untwisted ones. The occa- sional consumer collects a few plants of wild growth for his use. The charas is the name applied to the resinous matter collected from the wild ganja and bhang plants which grow intermixed. The residents of Kumaon manufacture it by rubbing between their hands the green plant while the dew is thereon, The substance attaching to the palms is gathered and is called the "charas." 3. Ganja and bhang grow spontaneously and abundantly in the jungly and less cultivated por- tions of the districts of Bijnor, Tarai, and Pilibhit. 4. I have given the names in answer to ques- tion No. 2. Bhang plant is everywhere the same, as also the ganja plant. 5. Ganja and bhang always grow in moist soils, along water courses, canals, low lands, and in moist fields not fully cultivated. They also grow on the hills as well as in the plains, where the above conditions exist. 6. Dense. 7. I have never seen bhang and ganja culti- vated, but I hear they are cultivated in Kumaon hills for production of (a), (b), and (d). To what extent they are grown in Kumaon district I can- not tell. 10. In the hills of Kumaon ordinary agricul- tural cultivators grow it, but in the plains none cultivates them. 11. Yes, in the hills. 12. In the plains ganja is not specially culti- vated. A. few plants are generally grown by habi- tual consumers in a corner of their courtyards. 14. In the plains bhang plants of wild growth are cut, and their leaves, when dry, threshed and stored for sale either by the licensed vendors themselves or by residents of jungly tracts for sale to licensed vendors. Charas and ganja are not prepared in the plains to any appreciable extent for sale. 15. Wild bhang plants are cut and dried in the month of Bysakh. The leaves are then threshed and stored. Occasional ganja smokers cut a few ganja plants and preserve their twigs when dry. Bhang is pounded in a mortar after soaking it in water and cleaning it. With it are mixed kali mirch, sonf, kasni, dhania, well pounded. Then water is mixed, and after straining it, the mixture becomes ready for being drunk. Bhang is never eaten, except by the most excessive habi- tual consumer. Ganja and charas are never eaten, but smoked with tobacco. Charas is placed inside the tobacco when preparing a smoke, but ganja is well mixed with the tobacco on the palm of the hand before it is placed in the chillum. 16. Bhang is generally prepared for drinking by the people in their houses. It can be prepared from a dried hemp plant wherever grown, though generally the dried leaves are kept for a year or two in a dry place to improve them in flavour, Charas is prepared from both the ganja and bhang plants of wild growth ; but ganja is prepared from ganja plant alone. Bhang is never smoked like the ganja. 17. In the tract to which my experience relates, bhang is cut, threshed, and stored by ordinary agriculturists ; while ganja and charas are not pre- pared or manufactured for sale by any one. 18. Yes, they deteriorate by long keeping. They lose their effect in time. If kept carefully in a dry place, they will keep good for 4 or 5 years : moisture and exposure to air deteriorate them. To prevent deterioration, air-tight, dry receptacles, generally burnt earthen vessels, are used, and the receptacles are then placed within chaff or in granaries. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smok- ing. 20. Ganja is smoked by the lowest class of people, who have to work early in the morning. It is much used in cold weather and cold mornings and evenings. Charas is smoked by the lowest classes (who can afford to pay for it) as well as by a small minority of the higher classes everywhere. I cannot estimate the proportion of ganja and charas smokers. 21. In the part to which my experience relates, only one kind of ganja is smoked. 22. One charas is called. "Bukhara," and is imported by Kabulis. A second kind is called "Kumaon," and is believed to be manufactured in Kumaon district. A third kind is called "Dotal," and is imported from Nepal. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking. 24. Bhang is always drunk, and is never eaten except by the most excessive habitual consumer, and even by him when he cannot manage to pre- pare it in the regular way. Bhang is used (i.e., drunk) in the cold weather only by the habitual drinker, but in the hot weather by men even of highest classes as a cooling beverage. 25. The use of bhang and ganja is not on the increase, but the use of charas is believed to be increasing not among the population in general, but among the habitual and occasional consumers. The reason is that the "Bukhara" charas is be- coming cheaper. 27. Agriculturists, coolies, porters, carpenters, dhobies, cowherds, and sweepers, who have to work in the cold mornings with insufficient
56 clothing, use ganja and charas. These are also used by fakirs to keep off cold. 29. I have already stated above that ganja and charas are smoked with tobacco. I have enumerated the ordinary admixtures of bhang (vide answer to question No. 15). On occasions of Holi and in the case of rich and well- to-do men milk, sugar, badam, and kishmish are pounded and mixed with bhang, in addition to the ordinary admixtures, which is generally called massala or thandai. The object of these admixtures is to decrease dryness, that is otherwise created in the throat and to impart flavour. Dhatura is not mixed with any of the three drugs. 30. Bhang, ganja, and charas are all consumed in solitude as well as in company. Poorer con- sumers mark the time of use by richer friends and acquaintances, and see them at the time in hopes of getting a share. The above intoxicant is generally used by males, and is not generally allowed to children. No time of life is fixed for its use. 31. The habit of consumption is easily formed, but is difficult to break off. All the three drugs have a tendency to develop a moderate habit into the excessive. 32. The worshippers of Shiva offer the bhang to Shiva on the Shivaratri day. Bhang is also prepared generally and drunk on the Holi festival day by most of those who do not use liquor. Bhang is boiled in ghi, which is then strained, and the extract is mixed with sugar and* made into a sort of barfis. This product is called majum, and is offered to every visitor whether he consents or not to eat it. This custom is temperate, and is resorted to one day in each year. Hence it can- not create a habit or be otherwise injurious. 33. The use of ganja and charas is regarded as low, particularly by all non-consumers. I do not know of anybody who worships the hemp plant on any occasion. 34. Yes, to the habitual consumer alone for ob- vious reasons. The probable number of each class that will be affected cannot be guessed at. 35. So long as bhang and ganja grow wild, it would be next to impracticable to prohibit their use successfully, for in that case the drugs would be consumed illicitly in the neighbourhood of tracts where the drugs grow wild. The use of charas can be stopped, as it is an imported article. But the prohibition would occasion discontent among the consumers, though not to such an ex- tent as to amount to a political danger. The stoppage of charas would increase the use of ganja, which would be going from bad to worse. A very small proportion would adopt liquor in place of charas and ganja. 36. No. 37. The ganja spoils the lungs much more quickly and effectively than does the charas. 39. Drinking of bhang is considered much less injurious than smoking the charas or ganja, both of which are not known to me to be anywhere consumed by drinking. 40. I do not know. Bhang is given by way of medicine to cattle and horses to remove fatigue, etc. 41. The moderate consumers, whether habitual or occasional of each of the drugs ascribe (b) and (c) qualities in the drug they use. But quality (a) is ascribed to the use of bhang alone. There is no distinction among the classes of consumers. 42. None of the drugs is considered harmless. 43. Yes. 44. The bhang consumers use the drug only once or twice a day. It is said to be refreshing and creates appetite. Ganja and charas have no fixed time for their use. They are said to be re- freshing, but do not create appetite. Use of more than an ordinary quantity creates intoxication. None allays hunger except for a short time. Effect of bhang lasts for 8 to 12 hours, while that of ganja and charas for not more than an hour. The after-effects are laziness and a sensation of pain in joints, which causes an uneasiness that cannot be removed unless and until the drug is used again. 45. (a) No, except that ganja and charas might weaken the lungs. (b) No, as long as the man remains sufficiently strong. (c) and (d) Charas and ganja do so. (e) No. (f) The use of all the three drugs deadens the intellect. 47. No. 48. As above. 49. (a) No. (b) I do not know. (d) Ganja and charas are said to have this effect. 50. As above. 51. No. None in any conceivable degree. 52. As above. 53 and 54. Not, so far as I know. 57. I have never heard of this. 58. The present administration is working well. 59. Does not call for any improvement. 60. Ganja is little or not at all imported in the western districts of the North-Western Provinces. The consumers either grow in their houses, or gather it from the jungle thereof, growing around their homestead. 61. Charas is not produced in the tract which I am speaking of. 62. Bhang is not cultivated. 63. I have no objection. 64. None. 68. There are none, nor are such required. 69. Not at present. It would be better to do so before a new shop is opened. 70. Ganja is the only article that is said to be imported from Native States into British districts bordering on them. But importers are severely dealt with when caught. Oral evidence. Question 1.57 about a maund or so is prepared in each district, or rather that it would be one or two maunds, bub certainly not more than three maunds for the three districts taken together. Question 29.58 thus be effected that a list of consumers he prepared and a reasonable period in regard to their habits, new or old, be given to them, with a direction that they should lessen the use gradually. In this way there will be no difficulty, and at last the habit will easily be broken off and drugs will not be con- sumed illicitly, nor recourse to alcoholic stimulants be followed. The discontent of consumers would not amount to a political danger. 38. The consumers consider round ganja of first quality ; flat of second ; chur of third and accord- ingly their effects are in degree. 43. Moderate consumers are not generally con- sidered offensive to the neighbours. 51. Though there is no large proportion of bad characters among habitual moderate consumers, but still they are mischievous, and the common crimes are committed because they are always in need of money to buy drugs for consumption. 54. Yes ; they are used so. 55. Yes ; they do so by means of charas and ganja, though excessive use without mixture is not complete stupefaction, but still the criminals gain their aims. 57. Ganja and charas are never eaten, but always smoked. 66. It is very desirable that the fee be fixed according to the qualities of the drugs. 69. Before a shop is opened, the wishes of the people of a locality are well considered, and for this purpose tahsildars, police office, and zamindars of good conduct are consulted with. 40. Evidence of SALEHDI SINGH, Thakur Chauhan, Deputy Collector, Fatehpur. 1. The conversation with the men who indulge in these drugs ; and I am sorry to add that I have had no opportunity of reading Dr. Prain's report, dated 21st June 1893, as it was not available in our district office. 2. The bhang is called here bhang, sabzi, booti, and patti. Charas is called charas here. Ganja is called ganja. The varieties in use here are flat ganja or baluchur and broken or pathar. 3 to 6. Not known. 7. There is no cultivation in this province. 8. As there is no cultivation in this province, hence no increase or decrease can be explained. 9. I am unable to give any particular, as I have seen no cultivation in this province. 10. Not cultivated in this province. 11. Not known. 12. The wild hemp is nowhere especially cul- tivated for the production of ganja in this province. 13. Cultivation of hemp plant for ganja is not restricted in this province ; it is brought into the province from other provinces. 14. No. 15 to 17. Not known. 18. The ganja, charas, and bhang deteriorate by keeping. When affected by damp, it does not lose its entire effect, though it becomes very weak by long keeping. By ordinary care it keeps good for three years or so. The causes of deterioration are damp or exposure to air. The drugs will be less injuriously affected if they are protected from them and kept close in a room not affected by air. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smoking. 20. Kahars, Pasis, Chamars, and Kolis general- ly smoke ganja and charas in all localities in pro- portion to their number. The proportion of the use of ganja to the use of charas is 4 to 1. 21. Flat ganja is preferred for smoking, but it being costlier than the other kinds is not much in use in comparison with others which are cheaper. 22. The foreign charas is generally used. 23. No. 24. Generally Brahmins, and especially Chaubes and Gangaputro eat and drink bhang. 25; Normal. 26. The proportion of the consumers to the whole population of this district is :59 Certainly the peremptory prohibition would cause serious discontent among the consumers. I can- not say that such discontent will amount to a political danger, but recourse will certainly be had to illicit consumption of drug by their consumers. The prohibition may be followed by recourse to (a) alcoholic stimulants or (b) other drugs in course of time, but not at once. 36. In conversation with some of the ganja and charas smokers, 1 have come to know that when the habitual consumers anyhow happen to fail to obtain these drugs, they generally use dhatura and karwa chiraita in their place as a temporary measure till they succeed in getting their required drugs. 37. The effects of charas smoking are felt for a longer time than those of ganja smoking. 38. Yes ; they have. In this district we have two kinds of ganja60 only can be prepared from the hemp drug where- ever grown, but not of good quality. 18. The drugs do not deteriorate till one year, the causes of deterioration are damp and moist weather. Ganja is placed in paddy straw whilst charas is wrapped up in leather skins and bhang is placed on mackai above the ground to prevent deterioration. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smok- ing. 20. Generally by low and labouring classes both, Hindus and Muhammadans, and Hindu mendi- cants (sadhus) throughout these provinces. Pro- portion cannot be ascertained. 21. Flat ganja is generally preferred. 22. Foreign charas imported from Yarkand is chiefly used. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking. 24. Bhang is used by almost all classes of Hindus. Pandas of Bindiachal in this district are very great bhang-takers. Bhang is both eaten as well as drunk, but the number of bhang-eaters is comparatively few. Bhang is mostly taken in the hot weather. Proportion and localities cannot be given. 25. There is increase in the use of bhang, whilst there is a slight decrease in that of ganja and charas. 26. There are no statistics from which the ratio of proportion can be ascertained. 27. The labouring classes whose occupation requires hard bodily labour indulge in these drugs to give stimulus to their hard work ; the drugs being cheaper than other intoxicants. 28. Habitual moderate consumers use bhang one tola, cost pies 3 ; ganja and charas about 3 rattis, each cost pies 3. The habitual excessive consumers take61 60 and 61. Ganja is not produced in this dis- trict. 63. I have no objection to the present system. 64. I have no objection to the existing regula- tions on the subject referred to. 65. I think the present taxation is reasonable. 68. No drugs or their preparations are con- sumed on the premises of the licensed shops in this district. 69. Yes ; local enquiries are made through Tah- sildars and people are thus allowed to prefer their objections, if any. 70. No such importation. Yes, duty is really paid, and there is no consumption of untaxed drugs in this district. 42. Evidence of THAKUR HARDHAN SINGH, Chauhan Thakur, Deputy Collector, Mainpuri. 1. I had opportunities as Tahsildar for twelve years or more of enquiring into the subjects to which my answers refer. I have also been a Deputy Collector and Magistrate, first class, for more than ten years, and my answers are based partly on my observation and experience of that period. 2. I have never seen the plant which produces ganja or bhang, nor is it known in this part of the country by the name of hemp plant, as in Dr. Plain's report. The narcotic articles are known here by three names, viz., ganja, bhang, and charas ; bhang being also called sabzi and thathia. Charas comes from Yarkand and Bokhara. I do not know how charas is produced and manufac- tured. There are three kinds of ganja62 27. Fakirs and labourers. 28. (a) Ganja 1 pice, charas 2 pice, and bhang 1 pice. (6) Ganja 1 anna, charas 1½ or 2 annas,and bhang 3 pice. 29. Tobacco is ordinarily and exceptionally mixed as a rule ; dhatura is not as a rule used for mixture. It is sometimes mixed to increase the in- toxicating effect. Bhang is used as a rule with pepper, and the mixture of bhang with pepper is essential. In order to remove the flatulence caused by bhang, it is frequently mixed with the following cooling substances : cucumber seed, sounf, kasni, and cardamom, etc. But these substances are mixed by people who consume bhang in small quantities. As a rule the consumers of bhang mix it with pepper ; and for the purpose of increasing the intoxicating effect they mix bhang with juar root and dhatura, etc. 80. The consumption of all the three drugs begins in company. Each member of the com- pany then becomes addicted to their use, and others learn their use from him. As a rule, two or four or more persons meet when using the drugs. The children of the families of these per- sons join the company and use the drugs. As a rule, however, the children do not use the drugs. 31. The habit of consuming the three drugs is very easily formed, A taste for them is created, when a person consumes them two or four times with other persons, and he at last becomes addict- ed to them. If taken in ordinary quantities, the habit of consumption continues to be moderate. If the consumers fall into the company of fakirs and vagabonds, their habit of consumption becomes excessive. A person of moderate habit of con- sumption can give up the use gradually, but one of excessive habit of consumption cannot give up the use at all. There are loss of appetite and power of digestion and crumpling of the joints if the use is given up. Persons of excessive habit of consumption cannot, therefore, give up the use. These of moderate habit of consumption can give up the use gradually, but not at once. 32. There are no customs, social or religious, in regard to the consumption of any of the drugs. It is, however, the custom to consume ganja, charas, and bhang in assemblies. Their offer is looked upon as an act of honour and hospitality, for in assemblies in which any of the drugs is con- cumed, it is offered to persons joining those as- semblies, and an omission of this offer is objected to. This practice has become so prevalent that it is treated as having a religious binding. The drugs are used by fakirs to discard wordly thoughts, by labourers t6 remove exhaustion, and by ordina- ry persons for the sake of amusement. 33. The consumption of these drugs is not in disrepute, but customary only among fakirs and the lower or labouring classes. The custom of consuming these drugs is not in vogue among the higher or respectable classes. If any person uses them, he is not blamed. No doubt Kanyakubj Brahmans, who do not smoke tobacco, are held in disrepute by their own caste fellows if they use ganja and charas. There is no custom of worship in connection with any of these drugs. Among Hindus, however, the use of ganja and bhang is preferred and considered meritorious during the fasting in honour of Mahadeva. In some parts, the people of the lower classes dedicate the chillum in which ganja and charas are smoked to their gods, and chabutras are built in some places as the seat of their gods. 34. It would be a serious privation to all fakirs and other persons who are addicted to their use to forego the consumption of the drugs, as they use them daily and beguile their time by them63 57. Ganja and charas are not oaten or drunk, but smoked. 69. When a shop is opened, it is ascertained whether the number of consumers is large or small in the locality. It is on the strength of this in- quiry that the shop keeper applies for a license. 43. Evidence of THAKUR GANESH SINGH, Kshatrya, Deputy Collector, Moradabad. 1. In the quarter of the town I reside, almost every person takes either charas or bhang, or both. A number of them are habitual and excessive consumers. One person whom I know there spent an enormous amount in his life in charas ; having served the Government faithfully, now draws a military pension. Charas has been the sole en- joyment of his life. Cf. 39. 3. Baheri in Bareilly district, Kashipur in Terai, Gorakhpur. 5. Moisture, damp climate, is essential for its luxuriant growth. Sub-montane countries produce the plant. 6. Dense. 7. I do not know of any such. 14. Charas is not made in these parts, except in Bhabar and Terai tracts. Ganja does not re- quire any preparation. They pluck bunches from the plant used for the purpose and smoke it. So does not the bhang require any preparation. It is imported from Terai district and its dried leaves are pounded and a beverage is made. 15. In the northern tracts when the plant begins to ripen in the beginning of the cold season, dews fall on it : people go there in the early morning and wipe the dews with their hands and bodies. Thus a kind of gummy substance sticks to their bodies. Coming home they rub it and get it in form of fine 'battis,' and these are gathered together in small bundles. This is charas and is ready for use. But this sort is not liked in the plains. Its use is confined in Bhabar and Terai. Ganja leaves are put in chillum and smoked. Bhang leaves are pounded and then eaten, or a beverage made and drunk. 16. Certainly bhang is made by people in their houses. It does not require any preparation, besides that of its being well pounded. It can be made out of the plant wherever it grows. But people do not like the plant which grows in the country far from Terai, which is very rare. Yes ; ganja and charas can also be made from the wild plant wherever it grows. But the produce must be rank and on a large scale, 17. By almost all classes of people. 18. Charas is spoilt after a rainy season passes over it. It becomes heating, less intoxicating, and less flavoury as they call it. No care can keep it from deterioration after a year. Ganja, if protected from dampness and moisture, will not spoil. The bhang also requires protection from moisture. 19. Only for smoking as far as my experience goes. 20. The only line of demarcation in the use of ganja and charas is that the former is used in the east, the latter in the western districts. Charas, proceeding further east, becomes dearer and dearer, so they do not use it in the east. All classes of people do smoke these. 21. It is also called baluchar or pathar. The former is preferred. Chur is not a third kind of it, but simply broken pieces of the above two ; and of course the pieces of the former are preferred. 22. The charas known as Yarkand. 23. I do not think bhang being used for smok- ing anywhere in these provinces. 24. All classes of people, and in all localities, do drink bhang, and in rains and winter many of them change it to eating to avoid pain in joints and increase of phlegm. 25. They seem on decrease now. (1) Poverty ; (2) well-to-do classes have begun to take liquor instead of them. 26. (a) 50 per cent. (b) 10 64 36. Certainly liquor is substituted for these drugs among rich people. The proofs are the books of the wine merchants, and a more direct proof can be had by going to liquor shops at night ; causes for the change being the looseness of character. 37. None I think. 38. Round or baluchar is better, superior, and with better flavour. Flat or pathar is inferior, having bad smell. Chur being the broken pieces of the above two, poorer people are compelled to be contented with the latter. 39. No ; in everyday life drinkers seem hale and healthy and stout, while the others sickly, pale and feeble. 40. For piles they generally allow a drink of bhang and for stopping bleeding. They also put small round cakes on the part affected with piles. They give to horses and oxen when their hunger is lessened for some reason or other. 41. Charas is not beneficial anyhow, except that it has some effect in preventing malarious diseases. They consequently use it in the Terai or submontane tracts. So also is ganja. Almost all classes of people use it. A moderate habitual use of the drugs is regarded beneficial. Bhang is of course beneficial in moderate quantity as digester of food, creater of appetite, and it causes its con- sumer to eat more after a drink. The drinkers are an idle class of people ; they do not work, they lie on their beds. It also serves as preventive of malarious effects. 42. It is not harmless either. The charas and ganja create cough, asthma, loss of appetite, etc. Bhang, on the other hand, makes a man stout, for its drinker eats much and his appetite is never dead. Its drinker eats everything with a relish. 43. Yes. 44. Laziness, drowziness, talkativeness. Bhang only is refreshing. All the three produce in- toxication : charas and ganja immediately after smoking, and bhang after it is digested. Bhang only creates appetite ; the others lessen it. The effects of bhang last for five or six hours, and so also those of charas and ganja. 45. Ganja and charas create cough, asthma, weaken the body, reduce a man to skin and bone. Mind becomes wholly inactive but does not tend to immorality : certainly they burn blood. They injure digestion also and cause loss of appetite. They deaden the intellect and occasionally produce insanity. It is sometimes temporary and it can be re-induced by their use after once leaving them. Bhang improves digestion, creates appetite. It does not create any of the diseases enumerated above. 46. Ganja and charas have worse results in the forms given above. Bhang as above. 47. No. 48. As above. 49. No ; it is rather the contrary. It thins the semen and burns it. Fakirs use it purposely. Charas and ganja cause impotency, but bhang does not. Charas and ganja takers generally leave no issue. 50. Worse than above. 51. Habitual bad characters do not take these drugs. They make money and use liquor. Moderate use of these drugs has, I think, no con- nection whatever with crimes. 52. Still less. 53 and 54. No. 55. I have come across one such a case in Kashipur, where a man was murdered after he was stupefied by taking bhang. I hear they do prac- tice it by administering dhatura or other thing in chillums, and thus stupefy their victims. 57. I do not think so. 60. Ganja plant is not cultivated : it grows wildly in the Terai, which people pluck and use as they like. There seems no check for it. Poorer classes use it whenever they like. 61. Charas is not made in these provinces except in some parts of the Terai where the hemp plant grows in abundance, but that charas is not in use in the plains, as it is not of good quality, There is a thorough control over the charas of foreign production. 44. Evidence of M. MAHOMED WAST, Sheikh, Deputy Collector, Partabgarh. 1. I had had many opportunities of obtaining information regarding the matters connected with hemp drugs as a zamindar, pleader, Tahsildar and Deputy Collector in the districts of Ghazipur, Ballia, and Partabgarh65 duet and of no use. It consists of such parti- culars as are found in the fossil produced in this country, On the whole this sort of charas is not a pure matter of the plant, nor do the greater parts of it consist of the matter produced from the plant. There are two varieties of ganja. Flat ganja is imported from Patna, Monghyr, and other districts of the province of Bengal. It is not only trodden under foot, but is also pressed under a roller made of stone. "Ganja pathar" is imported from Khandwa district and Gwalior State. It is exposed to dew for a week or fortnight, and is pressed under stone, so that the agglutinated flower tops may become adherent. The leaves of both sorts of ganja are thick and blue. They do not lose their blue colour. The seed of this plant mostly resembles with the Indian-corn called mash (pulse). One can fully distinguish between the shape and varieties of both sorts of ganja and bhang. No sort of ganja is called "broken ganja" in this part of the country. The "chur" of each sort of ganja is known after the name of its own kind. The "chur" is not called "pathar" or "patellar." 3. The hemp plant grows spontaneously in the districts of Ballia, Basti, Gorakhpur, Naipalganj, Gonda, and Bahraich. It grows abundantly in the Bahraich district, where it is used often for making tattis for houses and also as fuel. 4. The different names by which this plant is known are bhang, sabzi, thandhai or patti. They refer exactly to the same plant. 5. To the growth of the wild hemp it is necessary that the climate should be moist or wet, soil sandy, rain in abundance, ground low and at the foot of the hill. It has no special reference to river. It is only on the bank of the river Ghagra that these plants grow larger in size on account of verdure ; otherwise in respect to the produce in abundance the banks of the river and other places are one and the same. 6. The growth of the wild hemp is ordinarily dense. 7. No. 14. (a) Nil. (b) Nil. (c) Bhang is prepared of the hemp plant in the districts of Ballia, Basti, Gorakhpur, Naipal- ganj, Lakhimpur, Gonda, and Bahraich. It is abundantly prepared in the Bahraich district. The extent to which it is prepared can be esti- mated from the returns of that district. 15. (A) Charas and ganja are used for smok- ing only. (B) Bhang is eaten in the following dif- ferent ways :66 ganja and charas is estimated at 20 per cent. People residing in cities and markets are more addicted to it than the villagers. 21. For the kinds of ganja, see the answer to question No. 2. Chur belongs to its respective class (flat or round ganja). The effect of flat ganja is refresh- ing. It is not violent in its intoxication. Not- withstanding its high prices, the flat ganja is preferred to round ganja for smoking. To the consumers of ganja, flat ganja is preferable to round ganja to the same extent as ghi is prefer- able to oil. Flat ganja is much used in Partab- garh, Sultanpur, Jaunpur, and Allahabad districts The effect of round ganja is too hot and unbear- able. It is much used in the districts of Nawab- ganj, Lucknow, Unao, and Rai Bareli. Besides its cheapness and custom of the place, it appears that people addicted to strong intoxication do not like to make use of substance producing but slight effect, such as persons addicted to mowha liquor do not prefer the use of shira, or any other sort of liquor producing but slight intoxication. 22. Native charas is not used in this province or in the districts lying on its frontier. Foreign charas is used in this province rather throughout the country. Shaljahan is imported from the Nepal hills. Charas is imported in large quantities from Laddakh, Amritsar, Hoshiarpur, Ludhiana, Jullundar, Lahore, and other districts of the Punjab province. The charas is imported from Laddakh in the following manner :67 ture and the ingredients mixed with bhang have been dealt with in answer to question No. 15. 30. The consumption of each of these three drugs is generally practised in company and often in solitude. They are generally used by male sex and very little by female sex. The practice is not confined to any time of life. It rests merely on habits and circumstances. It is not usual for children to consume any of these drugs. The con- sumers do generally administer bhang to children, especially during the hot season ; but they do not allow their children to smoke ganja or charas. 31. Yes ; the habit of consuming any of these drugs is easily founded. It is difficult to break off, but not so difficult as to break off the habit of consuming opium. It is nevertheless very diffi- cult to break off for the habitual excessive con- sumers. In the ease of ganja and charas, there is a tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive ; but such tendency is very rare in the case of bhang. 32. The religious custom is only this, that on Sheoratri day, when the Hindus worship the god Shiva, they make offers of ganja, charas and bhang, and consume these drugs like sacred relics (Parsad). The use of drugs in connection with such custom is not regarded as essential, but is considered a good omen to consume it as relics. It is generally temperate. It is not likely to lead to the formation of the habit. It does, no doubt, often happen that the persons not addicted to any intoxication become senseless if they con- sume any of these drugs, In Holi festival people often become senseless owing to the consumption of these drugs. and are involved, for several hours, in great trouble. I have noticed it while in camp, in the temple of Ghusar Nath Mahadeo, situated in the Partab- garh District, on the bank of the river Sai, close to the road leading to Sonipur police station, in the temple of Balesure Nath Mahadeo in Ballia district, and in several other temples. 33. The consumption of each of these drugs is generally regarded as evil. The consumers are so hated in the eyes of people that they are called "ganjeri" or "bhangeri." But those who con- sume these drugs in little quantities are not generally regarded as men of bad character. The public opinion in regard to the practice is about sadhus and bairagis. The use of the narcotic is in disrepute, because people under the influence of these drugs act against the advice of soundness of mind and morality ; also because the consumers become spendthrift, bad characters, offenders and unfor- sighted. They lose their property and are often overburdened with debts. There is no custom of worshipping the hemp plant. 34. To forego the consumption of the drug their use would be a serious privation to the sadhus and bairagis of the present day, and also to any class of people who are habitual excessive consumers, iuasmuch as their habits to consume has now taken its deep root in them. Moreover, sadhus and others of the kind consider it to be a part of their religious observance. 35. It would be feasible to prohibit the use of charas. The enforcement of prohibition is very easily possible. There would be no likelihood of illicit consumption of the drug. The easy method to prohibit its consumption would be to prohibit its importation in this country. The use of ganja can be prohibited without any likelihood of illicit vol. v. consumption. The easy way to enforce its prohibi- tion would be to prohibit its cultivation in the district where it is cultivated, and to prohibit its importation from foreign States. In support of this view, it would suffice to say that in many parts of the country the cultivation of ganja is prohibited, and the prohibition has been enforced without any difficulty. It is not probable that this prohibition would occasion serious discontent among the consumers, or that such discontent would amount to a political danger. (a) The prohibition would not be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants. (b) It would probably be followed by recourse to use of bhang. If duty be fixed on bhang, it will decrease its consumption, and its consumption can then be gradually prohibited. 37. The effects of charas-smoking differ from those of round ganja, and resemble with those of fiat ganja with a little violence in intoxication. (See also the answer to question No. 25). 38. The answer to question No. 21 does equally apply here. 39. Ganja and charas are used for smoking only. If they be eaten or drunk, the substance will be discharged with vomiting owing to the effect of their excessive heat. The remaining effect of the drug in the body would be highly injurious, so much so that it would be fatal to life. It can be consumed if only a few leaves of ganja, some six or seven years' old, be mixed with a large quantity of bhang68 43. No. 44. The immediate effect of the use of round ganja is that it produces a strong and violent in- toxication. It lasts for five or six hours, and a want of subsequent gratification is felt. Flat ganja and charas produce immediate effects, but the intoxication is not so violent. It is rather re- freshing, These effects last for four hours, and a subsequent gratification is felt. The effect of the use of bhang commences after ten or fifteen mi- nutes, and within half an hour it reaches its high- est degree of intoxication. It lasts ordinarily for six or seven hours, and even for a day or two, in proportion to the excessive consumption. There are after-effects69 Superintendents, who have much more opportunity to examine these drugs. 65. The answer to question No. 59 does equally apply here. 66. There should be different rates of taxation. The present duty levied on flat ganja is reasonable. The duty on round ganja should be increased on the principle that the effects are highly injurious, so that, if sold at a high price, there would be a decrease in its consumption. 67. There is no tax levied on bhang and charas. See the answer to question No. 59, 68. There are no houses in this province licensed for the sale of these drugs or their preparations, where they may be consumed on the premises. But there are many such shops. A close supervi- sion is required to prohibit the assemblage of cri- minals in such shops. 69. The licensed vendors do always wish to open their shops in such localities, where people may have opportunities to purchase the drugs without difficulty. The localities of these shops are considered with due regard to the localities of markets and abadis, which is deemed sufficient for the purpose. Oral evidence. Question 15.70 the poor classes as refreshing stimulants to alleviate their fatigue rather than as luxurious intoxicants. 35. The prohibition would not be feasible, and there is a fear of the drugs being used illicitly if the prohibition is enforced. The people now ad- dicted to their use are not likely to do without some intoxicant and may take to alcohol instead, which would be a change for the worse. But in the case of certain classes (of which there are good many in India) to whom liquor is religiously pro- hibited, the deprivation would be felt as a hardship, and the discontent thus caused may, coupled with other causes, amount to apolitical danger. 36. I don't think that alcohol is now displacing these drugs to any extent. 42. The moderate use of these drugs is obvious- ly harmless, as lots of persons have been using them for a long time without any appreciable injurious effects. 43. Yes ; they are quite inoffensive. 58. The present system, I think, is working pretty well. 46. Evidence of PANDIT BISHAMBHER NATH, Brahmin, Deputy Collector, Unao. 1. As an Excise Officer in Faizabad and Unao districts, I have obtained the information in the discharge of my official duties. 2. Yes, but there are two kinds of ganja71 80. Ganja and charas is used in company. It is confined to the male sex only. Children do not consume ganja and charas. Bhang is used in solitude as well as in company. The women of Kochis, Todhs, Ahirs and low Muhammadans also use bhang. Grown up boys also use bhang. 31. The habit is not easily formed, but when a man gets into the habit, it is very difficult to break it off. 32. Bhang and majum are used in Holi by those Hindus who do not drink. Bhang is also offered to Mahadeva on days fixed for the worship of Mahadeva. It is temperate. It cannot lead to the formation of habit and is not injurious. The custom is religiously observed by ignorant Hindus. 33. The consumers of ganja and charas are looked down upon with contempt. They do not move in good society. Bhang-drinking is not held in disrepute. 34. The labourers who use these drugs to alle- viate fatigue and to resist severe exposure or exer- tion will feel it seriously ; and to the Hindus who do not use any intoxicant save bhang it will be serious privation to forego the consumption of bhang. 35. It would not be feasible to prohibit the use of drugs. It will be consumed illicitly, and will cause a wide-spread disaffection towards Govern- ment. The prohibition will lead to the use of alco- holic stimulants with those where religion do not prohibit it ; but the others will have recourse to some more injurious drugs or poisons. 36. No. 37. There is a slight difference in the effects of ganja and charas smoking. The effects of charas are mild and its intoxication does not last long, and its effects are not instantaueous. 38. The effects of ganja are instantaneous, strong and not lasting. Yes, the intoxication of "chur" is not so strong as that of 'flat,' which is weaker than round. 40. Bhang is given to horses and cattle to re- lieve fatigue. It is used by baids as medicine in some diseases. It is used for the cure of piles. Charas is used for curing asthma and tetanus by baids. 41. A moderate use of bhang and charas is beneficial to health72 Sakins. I am to say that in all towns it is under- stood that women of more or less doubtful charac- ter follow the trade of supplying "huqqas" ready for smoking to passers-by who want a smoke of tobacco. These women are also known as Sakins. Oral evidence. Question 46.73 29. (a) In ganja, tobacco. (b) In ganja laung, zafran, mishk and rose. Tobacco is mixed by all classes of people who smoke ganja, and the rest of the ingredients are mixed by rich men. By all these admixtures the drug becomes more narcotic. Dhatura seed are sometimes mixed by such Hindu fakirs who take opium in large quantities. It is said that the fakirs smoke the dhatura seed with ganja when they do not get opium at all, or get it in insufficient doses. (a) In bhang, black pepper and sonf are ordin- arily mixed by all classes. (b) In bhang, badam, milk, and sugar by rich men. 30. Bhang is ordinarily used in solitude, and women also use it. Ganja is always smoked in company, and it is used by the male sex above the age of 16 years. 31. The habit of bhang consuming is easily formed, and it is not difficult to leave it. The habit of ganja smoking is gradually formed, and it is difficult to leave it. There are people in all classes who take bhang during summer only, and people who smoke ganja and charas in winter only. They say that bhang has no tendency to be developed into the habit of being taken exces- sively, while ganja has. 33. Generally regarded very bad. It has a dis- repute generally. Bhang takers and ganja smokers are always found relaxed in their daily work. Es- pecially ganja is said to cause general debility and thickness of the blood. It produces cough. The Hindu fakirs smoke ganja and charas because its use spoils the power of imagination of the brain and thus assists them in keeping themselves aloof from worldly anxieties. 34. Yes. It will put in trouble the fakir habi- tual smokers of ganja. It is said that ganja saves them from the effects of winter and flatulency. 35. I think it is feasible, although the drugs will be consumed illicitly for some time after such prohibition. It can be prohibited by disallowing the exports and imports and sales of the drugs. I do not think it will cause any serious discontent among the consumers, who are for the most part the Hindu fakirs and the Brahmins. It was ex- perienced in this district last year, when there was no sale of these drugs for about five months. The people felt an inconvenience, as far as it re- lated to their habit, and nothing else. There will be no political danger ; and they being Brahmins and fakirs would not take alcoholic stimulants. They will be content with tobacco. 37. Charas is said to produce more cough than ganja. 38. Chur is said to produce headache. 45. Ganja smoking produces these noxious effects. 58. I think the present administration is good ; but it is capable of improvement in this district. An export duty can be charged on bhang, which is a very good product of this district. 48. Evidence of PUNDIT RUGHOBER DYAL MISRA, Brahman, Offg. Deputy Collector, Lucknow. 1. I entered into service as Naib Tahsildar in 1877, and thence rose to my present grade. I also have some zamindari myself and my other relations are also zamindars, From the commence- ment of my service, I have been in the executive line, in which I have always had to deal with excise matters. I have always taken interest in acquainting myself with the manners and habits of the people of different classes and societies. I have also been excise officer in this district for about two years, and in other districts also. From all the above sources, I gained experience and in- formation on the subject in question and have also made special enquiries on some of the ques- tions. 2. The definition given by Dr. Prain of these drugs is correct. The other varieties of ganja are :74 stored. Bhang is not known to be cultivated any- where. Cultivated ganja plants are cut when they are not quite dry and are trodden over by foot or beaten down by sticks or stones to flatten their buds. Thus the ganja assumes flat or round shapes. Ganja plants are cut about the months of Decem- ber and January. Uncultivated ganja is simply cut and dried. Charas, the resinous matter of ganja plant, is grown in high latitudes and is ex- tracted by rubbing the plants while standing in the fields with hands early in the morning when the dew is on the plant. The gummy substance which sticks to the hands is scraped and collected. Ganja and charas are only smoked ; they are not eaten or drunk. Ganja is well rubbed in the hand with thumb and is mixed with tobacco (used for chewing) and is then smoked in a chillum pipe. Charas is used with tobacco (used for smoking); smoking tobacco is placed in a chillum over which charas is placed and then smoked, Bhang is both eaten and drunk ; bhang used for eating is pre- pared in several ways. (1) Bhang is powdered and mixed with some pepper (kali mirch and sugar. (2) Bhang is fried in a pan in butter "ghi ;'' sugar and spices are then mixed with it. (3) Bhang is boiled in water or milk with butter "ghi" ; when boiled, butter is extracted, which is mixed with sugar, spices, &c., and made sweetmeats of. (4) Bhang is pounded with water and eaten in the forms of pills. (5) Bhang used for drinking is prepared by filtering the pounded bhang in water and milk and mixing sugar in it. 16. Bhang for eating or drinking in the above process is generally prepared for use by people at their own houses. Some buy it in the prepared state from the licensed shop. Ganja (buds, etc) and bhang (leaves) can be prepared for consump- tion by any one from their plants wherever they grow. Narcotic properties would, of course, differ according to soil and climate of the place where they grow. Charas cannot be so prepared. It cannot be prepared from ganja plants grown in the province. 17. By men of agricultural class in places where the hemp drugs grow. There is no parti- cular class to my knowledge who make the pre- paration. 18. Four years after, ganja and bhang deter- iorate, and charas three years after. They decrease in their intoxicating properties every year after the rainy weather ; four or five years after they become utterly useless. Dampness of the place where they are stored, moist atmosphere, exposure to rains coupled with the nitrogenous gases pro- duced from the bundles and heaps in the place of storage are the causes of deterioration. The only preventive measures are to save them from rains and dampness, and exposure to air during the year (not in rainy weather though). 19. Ganja and charas are only used for smok- ing. 20. Agricultural labourers of all castes except Brahmans of the united provinces, dâk runners, fishermen, boatmen, day-labourers, masons, washermen, coolies who carry heavy loads, are the classes of men who generally smoke ganja and charas. They practically can't manage without it ; very few of the respectable class use them. Their percentage would be 10 per cent among this class of men. Bengalis are more familiar to thes drugs. Consumption of ganja is three times more than that of charas. The use of charas in cities and towns is more than in villages. Muhamraadans generally prefer charas to ganja. Among the lower classes enumerated above 40 per cent. of the consumers use ganja, 15 per cent. charas ; and among the higher classes, ganja consumers, 10 per cent. and of charas, 5 per cent. 21. In Fyzabad, Cawnpore and Benares Balu- cher ganja is more used. In Lucknow and Bara- banki, pathor ganja flat. The round ganja is nearly out of use now. 22. All the charas used in the united provinces is of foreign import. Charas is imported from Yarkand to Mian Mir, Hoshiarpur and Amritsar, whence it is re-imported to these provinces. In Lucknow, Nepal charas called Saljehan is prefer- red. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking. 24. Bhang is not so popular among the lower classes and Muhammadans as it is among the Brahmans, thakurs, khattris, bunias, religious mendicants, bards, poets. The Chowbeys of Muttra and Brindaban are the great consumers of this drug. In Benares, Allahabad, Cawnpur, Fyzabad, Muttra, the consumption of bhang is comparatively more. During Holi festival, Shivaratri, Dasehra, Divali, hot season, wedding parties, this drug is more used. These are the general times for occasional consumers. 25. The use of charas is more on the increase than ganja, though both these drugs appear to have an increasing tendency among the consumers. Drugs are much cheaper than other intoxicants. There is no religious prejudice among the Hindus against the use of drugs as it is with some castes in respect of liquor and tari. The drugs are so very convenient to be carried from place to place and to be kept at home. To a moderate consumer a quarter seer of bhang and 5 tolas of charas or ganja, if once purchased, would last for at least 15 days on an average. Therefore the consump- tion of these drugs is more than other intoxicants. Moreover, the abolition of chandu shops has also to account to some extent for the increase in the consumption of charas. 26. Among the drug consumers of each kind of the drugs, the proportion of the consumers of bhang is75 mere stimulants and tonic at leisure hours to invigorate them, give them good appetite, sound sleep, and men who use the drugs as safe guards against malarious diseases. 28. Maximum quantity that a moderate habi- tual consumer uses is:76 particular create bronchitis, asthma, loss of think- ing power, weakness of the eyesight, make the features appear ghastly. 47 and 48. No ; but as a rule children learn the habits of their fathers, and so I should think the children acquire the habit of use of drugs from their parents. 51 and 52. The consumers of these drugs, moderate or excessive, are not necessarily men of bad characters or criminals, nor has it any connec- tion with crimes ; men of bad characters and habitual criminals are often found to be addicted to the use of intoxicants. I think about 50 per cent. of the men of this class are drug-consumers. Ganja and charas are more familiar to this class than bhang ; such men are generally found to be excessive consumers of drugs. 53. Excessive indulgence in these drugs often leads to quarrels and fights and riots of unpreme- ditated nature. I have no information of its leading to homicidal mania 54. Bhang does not make a man active. Ganja and charas is known to be occasionally so used. 55. Yes. 56. I have personally seen some men usiug dhatura with bhang to get dense intoxication. I have also seen men using opium with bhang with the same object. They were noticed to sit or lie down in an unconscious state, fit for no work whatever and little better than a dead man. 57. I have never heard ganja or charas being eaten or drunk. 58. I think present system of excise adminis- tration is working well. 60. Ganja is not cultivated in this province. The only practicable control over the spontaneous grown ganja is that a possession of more than five tolas of ganja is made punishable by law ; beyond this no other practicable system could be suggested. 61. It is not produced in these united provinces. 62. There is much spontaneous growth of bhang in the province. I have known of no place except Farrukhabad where it is cultivated in these pro- vinces. Limit of ¼ seer of bhang that a man can possess and the restriction that a cultivator cannot sell bhang produce to any except to the drug con- tractor are the best methods of controlling the produce of uncultivated and cultivated bhang. 63. No. 64. As charas is the most intoxicating and injurious of all these hemp drug preparations, and it is an article of foreign import and product, and its consumption is now on an increase, four times more than it was ten years ago, as will appear from the figures given below, I would in the first place suggest that the import of charas be totally prohibited, or it be very heavily taxed. Average account of consumption from77 the fakirs who go there on pilgrimage to Badri- nath and Kedarnath. 7. Hemp is cultivated in this country very largely, but more for its fibre or seeds than for charas. Bhang and ganja are not prepared in this district. This district is divided into the following par- ganas :78 (2) From the fibres cloth, etc., are manufac- tured, viz.:79 22. Foreign charas, called Arkand, is more large- ly consumed by the pilgrims. Very little charas is prepared in this country. What is prepared is sold or given privately to the people of the country, or sold at Ramnagar and Kotdwin. Taking the con- sumption among pilgrims and the people of his country together, the proportion of country-made charas to Arkand will be one-seventh or one-eighth. The pilgrims prefer Arakand, which is stronger. 23. Very little. A few poor people here and there smoke wild hemp leaves ; and sometimes bhang leaves of cultivated plant are also smoked with tobacco, but very rarely. 24. Bhang is neither eaten nor drunk here, except on the occasion of the Holi festival, when a few people in towns drink bhang and eat what is called majum. It is prepared from bhang leaves after it is carefully washed. But this use is confined to the Holi festival and to a few well-to-do people in the towns. 25. I think the use of charas is on the increase. No particular reason can be assigned, except that there is a growing tendency to take narcotics of all kinds. 26. I think the proportion of moderate habitual consumers and excessive habitual consumers will be almost equal. There are very few occasional moder- ate or excessive smokers. Of these all will be moderate smokers. 27. All classes smoke charas. There is no reli- gious prohibition against its use. Vaishnavas or followers of Vishnu only abstain from it as a class. Fakirs or followers of Siva take it more largely ; in fact, every fakir will smoke charas. Those who are in the habit of associating themselves with fakirs generally take to charas. As a rule, the idle people, rich or poor, who have nothing to do, con- tract the habit. 28. A habitual moderate consumer smokes gene- rally two chillums a day, about half a tola, costing a pice or two. An excessive habitual smoker smokes about 2 chataks a day, which is equal to about 8 annas when hemp is cheap, and more when it is dear. 29. Tobacco is ordinarily mixed with charas, and some rich people put a little musk also, but very seldom. Some who abstain from tobacco on reli- gious grounds smoke charas alone. Bhang massala is not used here, but it consists of 'kasni,' opium seeds, cucumber seeds, rose leaves, black pepper, aniseed, and almonds ; sometimes all together are used, and sometimes some are not. 30. Charas is always smoked in company. Four companions are desirable. More may be tolerated. But a charas smoker, unless he cannot find any fellow smoker, will not smoke alone. Children don't smoke. It is confined to the male sex gene- rally. Adults from 16 to 32 smoke most. Some- times female prostitutes and female devotees also smoke. 31. The habit is easily formed if a man associates with smokers. People smoking moderately can leave off the habit without much difficulty. For a time they will feel general uneasiness and loss of appetite, but gradually, if they are determined, they can conquer the habit. Those who smoke exces- sively may reduce their daily consumption, but cannot leave off the habit. In the case of charas, habitual moderate smoking does not necessarily de- velop into excessive smoking. Many people smoke moderately for the whole of their lives without becoming excessive smokers. It depends on the general habit and circumstances of the smoker to become an excessive smoker or not. 32. The god Siva is supposed by the Hindu to be favourable to the use of charas or other intoxi- cating drags. During the Holi festival and the Sheoratri fast it is considered meritorious, though not essential, to smoke charas and drink bhang or eat majum. Many people who never touch these things on other days will take them during these occasions as a religious obligation. But it is very temperately used. Sometimes it leads to the habit, but not necessarily. Hundreds of people will never touch these things when the festival is over. As the use is very temperate, it causes no evil. 33. As stated above, the followers of Siva consi- der it meritorious to take narcotic things. The fakirs, who are generally followers of the god, in- variably smoke charas and drink bhang, but socially the practice is looked down and is not regarded re- spectable, and the people addicted to its use take it in private, and will take care not to smoke in the pre- sence of their superiors or those whom they vene- rate. The use of all narcotics is in disrepute theo- retically. Bhang drinking is less disreputable than smoking charas. Although many people smoke charas, they do not care to be known as such. This plant is not worshipped here, but a religious sect called "Kouls," who worship spirits, meat, fish, etc., have bhang plant as one of the objects of their worship. This sect performs their worship in secret. 34. It would certainly be a serious privation to the habitual excessive smokers, especially the fakirs, to forego the consumption of the drug. The number of such men, however, leaving the fakirs, is very small, perhaps one in a thousand. 35. I think it will not be feasible to prohibit the use of charas. To stop the cultivation of the plant; which is so useful, will be ruinous to the country ; and if the cultivation is allowed, charas must be made, and as a matter of course illicit consumption will follow. The prohibition of the drug itself will not lead to any serious discontent or political danger, but it will be next to impossible to enforce prohibition. I do not think the prohibition of the drug will as a matter of course lead to the use of alcoholic stimulants. The effect of charas smoking is not similar to that produced by alcohol. The prohibition may lead to excessive smoking of tobacco, although it may not give much satisfac- tion, and perhaps to the use of chandu. 36. I do not think alcohol is being substituted for these drugs. The use of alcohol is on the increase quite independently of these drugs. Many people have taken to drink alcohol, but they would not have smoked charas if they had not taken to drink. A hemp smoker will never get that satisfaction from alcohol which he gets from charas. 37. Ganja is said to be more intoxicating and stronger than charas. 39. This being a cold country bhang is not drunk. It would injure a man's health if he drank bhang habitually in this country, and for that reason bhang drinking would be more injurious than smoking charas. The intoxication produced by drinking bhang is more lasting than that produced by charas ; the effect is produced later. 40. Village doctors prescribe charas smoking in colic pain and all stomach disorders arising from indigestion. Sometimes charas diluted in water is also given to a man suffering from colic pain to drink. Charas finely powdered is applied to a cut. It stops the flow of blood, and heals up the wound. Bhang leaves are given to horses and cows also.
80 41. Charas smoking is digestive. It stimulates appetite and under its influence a man relishes the food he eats, and he can eat more than he otherwise would without fear of indigestion. It alleviates fatigue. Under the influence of charas a man can make a long journey without minding the fatigue. It gives staying-power under severe exertion or exposure. The fakirs use charas generally for its effects, as it helps them to go about without clothing, and make them accustomed to the exigencies of climate, etc., but others who have taken to smoking charas do not do so at first for its medicinal properties, but when once they have become accustomed to it, they begin to look for its virtues. The good effects de- rivable from charas result from moderate habitual use or moderate occasional use if the man can stand its effects ; for instance, one who has never smoked tobacco would not be able to stand the effects of charas when he first takes it, and in his case the good effects will be lost. It is therefore the habi- tual moderate use that produces the above effects. 42. Moderate use of charas, like tobacco, is cer- tainly harmless. It is not beneficial ; one would be much better without charas than with it. A habitual moderate use with nourishing and rich diet is not at all harmful. 43. A charas smoker, even if he is an excessive smoker is inoffensive to his neighbours. A moder- ate consumer is certainly inoffensive. It is difficult to distinguish between a habitual moderate smoker and a total abstainer. 44. The immediate effect of smoking charas on a habitual smoker is a little intoxication, a sen- sation of rest and general satisfaction, and a tem- porary forgetfulness of pain or misery. It does not allay hunger ; on the contrary, it sharpens hunger. Its effect lasts for an hour or two. A smoker's desire for anything that he may set his heart upon is very keen, especially in eatables ; and if he does not get them he becomes very miser- able. 45 and 46. Habitual moderate use of charas does not produce any noxious effect at once ; and if the habit is well kept under control and the man can afford to take nourising and rich food, which charas helps to digest, no ill effect may be perceptible. But in case of excessive smoking the evil effects show themselves sooner or later according to the smoker's constitution, and in the case of moderate smoking the evil effects in milder form become visible after a man attains to age of 40 or 45. The evil effects are : Brain gets weak or softened ; man becomes forgetful ; lungs are impaired, as- thma, cough, and bronchitis are produced ; eye- sight is weakened ; body becomes lean and emaci- ated ; man becomes lethargetic and incapable of making any kind of exertion. But it does not lead to immorality or debauchery. A hemper, on the contrary, becomes a reflective person and sym- pathises for others in trouble and abstains from many vices. Over use of charas sometimes leads to idiotcy or insanity. 47 and 48. It is not hereditary. A son may learn from his father, but he does not inherit the habit. No effects are perceptible on the children of moderate smokers or habitual excessive smokers. 49 and 50. Excessive charas smoking shrivels up the body and deadens sexual appetite, and some- times leads to impotency. Some moderate con- sumers, males generally, smoke charas to prolong the sexual enjoyment. It is injurious to a man's constitution, as it causes greater strain on his nerves, and the exhaustion is consequently greater. 51 and 52. Charas smoking does not necessarily lead to any criminality. Criminals may smoke charas, but it does not follow that a charas smoker may become criminal. It may in one sense. If a charas smoker does not get money to buy charas, he may be induced to commit theft ; but this can be said of any evil habit. 53. As far as I know, a charas smoker may be- come violent in language under its influence, but he is not inclined to commit any crime. It has no suicidal tendency. 54. Yes. As every person who is addicted to the use of charas takes it before he commences any work, it gives to the smoker the power of con- centrating his whole attention on anything that he undertakes, good or bad, and he does it well, with- out swerving from the course of action. 55. Bhang is said to be used by the 'thugs' in order to stupefy their victims. 56. Except tobacco, charas is not smoked with any admixture here, and tobacco does not affect charas in any way. 57. Not in this country. 58 to 61. In this district, every year in August, licenses to sell charas and bhang are put to auc- tion. The places where license vendors sell are on the pilgrim route to Badrinath and Kedarnath. These people sell Arkand, a charas that comes from the Punjab. The pilgrims prefer it to the country-made charas, which is not so strong. People are allowed to make charas, but they must sell it to the licensed vendor only. But in this there is not sufficient check. Those who prepare charas sell it privately to those who smoke, and it is very difficult to catch them. In this way a great deal of charas that is produced in the country is disposed of privately without the agency of the Government contractor. It would stop illicit sale if Government were to buy all country-made charas and sell it to the contractors ; but so little charas is made in this country, and the majority of con- sumers, who are the pilgrims, prefer Arkand to the country-made drug, that the trouble involved in the system may be greater than the profit actually accruing to Government. 62. Bhang is not produced in this country. 63. I think the present system, so far as charas is considered, is quite suitable. 68. No. 69. No shops. 70. Tehri is the only Native State which adjoins this country, but no charas is imported from that country. Oral evidence. Questions 3, 4, 5 and 6.81 into bhang when any one chooses. Bhang is not exported to any extent. It is good. Bhang grows everywhere in Garhwal, in all filthy places, and manured places especially. There is no prepara- tion of wild hemp for smoking as ganja, unless you take bhang leaves. Question 7.82 Majun is also used for eating in the aforesaid festival in place or in addition to the bhang drink- ing. In Sheoratri festival bhang is offered to Mahadeo as a religious custom. The use is regard- ed as essential. It is generally temperate. It does not lead to the formation of habit, nor other- wise injurious. 33. The use of ganja and charas is, no doubt, ill-regarded ; but such is not the case with the use of bhang. It is the notion of the religious men- dicants that the use of each of the three drugs leads to attend to divine devotion. There is no custom of worshiping the hemp plant or any of the three drugs83 Gonda, Sitapur, and Terai districts, and is exported from these districts. 15. As far as I can say, the male hemp plant, which is called " bhang," grows in this province; its leaves are gathered during the cold season, and used for eating and drinking purposes. The female plant is very rare, and is used for smoking only. 16. Bhang is not prepared by the people in houses. It can be prepared from hemp plant wherever grown. Ganja and charas can also be prepared in this province, like the one received from other province, if properly managed, from the wild plant. 17. There is no particular class of people who prepare preparations from hemp drugs. 18. These drugs deteriorate by keeping for a long time. They lose their effect after some time. Bhang and ganja remain good for a year, and charas for two years with ordinary care. When they get cold air or remain in damp places, they lose their effect. They should be kept out of damp places and exposed to air and sunlight occasionally to keep them in order. 19. Ganja and charas are used for smoking only. 20. Most part of the fakirs smoke ganja and charas, and the people of low caste use them more than high caste men. About 90 per cent. of the fakirs who are unmarried or widowers use these drugs, and 3 per cent. of other people of the whole province. 21. Baluchar is preferred for smoking, but in Bundelkhand "pathor" and "chur" are much used. 22. Foreign charas is chiefly used here, which is of two sorts84 It is not feared that there would be any public danger. Most of those persons use it who are not allowed to drink liquor, and, when they will leave this, they will not form more dangerous habits. 36. The alcohol is not used as a substitute for these drugs. 37. The effect of charas smoking is different from ganja smoking. The former is more narcotic, and lasts for a longer time than that of the latter. 38. The effect of baluchar is the best, that of the pathar moderate, and of the chur little. 39. There is no preparation of the hemp plant which may be in any way less injurious than drink- ing or eating the same, as the smoking of ganja and charas produces the diseases of cough and asthma, while those who eat bhang do not catch these diseases. 40. Ganja and charas are never prescribed by the native doctors; but bhang is used for some diseases. The over-worked cattle are generally made to eat bhang. It is also given in some cattle diseases. 41. The use of charas, ganja, and bhang has no beneficial effects. (a) to (d) No. Chaube Brahmins use bhang as a digestive. They use it habitually. 42. It is not beneficial. The moderate use of ganja and charas is also more injurious than that of bhang. 43. The moderate consumers are generally offen- sive and troublesome to their neighbours in the first place, the smoke of ganja and charas produces bad offensive smell, and bhang consumers trouble their neighbours by useless talk. 44. The habitual consumer of bhang gets false ap- petite after half an hour from drinking. Its effect lasts for about four hours; after that he becomes idle. The effect is of ganja and charas instantaneous ; it lasts for about an hour; the smoker gets cough and asthma, etc., afterwards. It produces no hunger. None of these drugs produce any refreshing effect. 45. (a) Yes. (b) Ganja and charas impair the constitution much, and bhang less than these. (c) Ganja and charas are more injurious than bhang to the digestive organs. (d) Ganja and charas produce bronchitis and asthma. (e) Yes, it does. (f) Certainly it deadens the intellect and pro- duces insanity. The insanity is temporary, and can be cured by the use of good medicines. If the drugs be again used, the symptoms re-appear ; the consu- mers have generally red eyes and cough, etc. Some insanes, who have no recorded ganja history, con- fess to the use of the drug. The persons habitually use these drugs without taking into consideration the result of their effects, and the insanes appear to have no desire on account of their insanity to use them. I have seen one person at Jaipur who formed the habit of smoking ganja and charas from the age of 25. He was verging to insanity and was suffering from cough and asthma. Finally he died while he was quite young. 46. Some time ago I had a servant who was a habitual smoker of ganja and charas. He is still alive, but is suffering from cough and asthma, and has lost sight of his eyes. 47. It is not hereditary habit, but when the head of the family uses these drugs, his children often also catch this habit. 48. The Chaubes of Muttra are habitual con- sumers of bhang, and so their sons and grandsons also use it. 49. Moderate use of any of these drugs is not aphrodisiac. The prostitutes use bhang and charas for imsak (prolongation of pleasure). Certainly it is more injurious when so used than when used as an ordinary narcotic. The use of hemp tends to pro- duce impotence. 50. Bachelor fakirs use ganja and charas to have no desire. 1. In my opinion there is not a large propor- tion of bad characters habitual moderate consumers of any of these drugs. 53. Excessive indulgence in any of these drugs incites to no crime whatever. 54. No. 55. Ganja and charas are not given to those who do not smoke, but dhatura mixed with bhang is given to victims to further their end. 56. The effects of hemp mixed with other sub- stances are not much if given in moderation; if mixed with dhatura, it lasts for a long time and produces laziness and idleness. I have never used, but have seen a number of consumers. 57. As far as I know, ganja and charas are neither eaten nor drunk. 58. The present excise administration is working well. 59. If any factory be formed of these drugs, like the one for opium, the improvement will be effected, as the contractors sell drugs of inferior quality at a high rate. 60. Very little ganja is produced in this pro- vince, and does not require to be well controlled. 61. As above. 62. In my opinion proper check should be exer- cised during the time of its harvest for two or three months, in the districts where it grows, so that it may not be illicitly exported. 63 and 64. I have no objection. 65. Yes; it is reasonable. 66 and 67. No. 68. I can give no decided opinion on this point. 69. The distance from one shop to another, as well as the population of the town or city, is taken into consideration before permission is given to open a new shop. It is not necessary to consult the wishes of the people on this point. 70. It is not generally believed that importation of these drugs from Native States is carried on. It is possible that such importation may be enforced in the villages bordering Natives States. It is believed that the duty of ganja and other hemp drugs used is paid. There is no use of untaxed drugs. Oral evidence. Question 11.85 of smoking or drinking the hemp drugs is not in- terchangeable with the liquor habit; but there is greater probability of the bhang drinker taking to liquor than of the smoker doing so. Question 30.86 classes of the people resort to it to a more or less extent; but it is very largely prevalent among the Chaube Brahmans of Muttra and the adjoining districts. 25. The use of ganja, charas, and bhang is on the increase on account of the dearness and weak- ness of country liquor, and the consequent incapa- city and disinclination of the lower classes to indulge in it. 27. The consumption of ganja and charas is very largely prevalent among the Hindu sadhus and the Muhammadan fakirs, and the lower classes of Hindus and Muhammadans. The Hindu sadhus and the Muhammadan fakirs use ganja and charas with the object of keeping down lower passions and pro- tecting themselves from the effects of cold in the exposed places in which they are accustomed to live. The lower classes of Hindus and Muhammadans take to the use of ganja and charas as a cheap means of intoxicating themselves, and probably also with the view of keeping off cold, to which they are particularly susceptible on account of want of clothes to cover themselves with. The Chaube Brahmans of Muttra and the neighbouring districts, among whom the eating or drinking of bhang is largely prevalent, were an idle class which subsist- ed on the religious offerings of other people ; and as the use of country liquor was against their religion, and that of ganja and charas injurious to their physical health, they took to bhang, with the object of relieving the tediousness of their life. 28. Habitual moderate consumers87 but the tax on flat ganja might be reduced with advantage, so as to obviate the necessity for people to have recourse to the other kinds of ganja, which are comparatively unwholesome, to the same extent as at present. 67. None. 68. None in this district. Oral evidence. Question 1.88 matter or a kind of gum obtained from ganja plants. It is known by the following names, viz., Kashmir, Shaljehan, Jethe, Yarkand, and Bhoori. Shaljehan is considered to be the best of all these kinds. Nepal charas is generally preferred to that imported from Yarkand on account of its being more pleasing to the taste and mild in intoxication. To a man not used to charas smoking, Yarkand charas is simply unbearable. 3. Hemp plant grows simultaneously in the undermentioned districts: 89 by respectable people; and if a respectable person by mixing in low company acquires the habit, he smokes these drags in secret only. The people of higher class generally present bhang leaves to the god Mahadev, and those of lower castes present ganja to Mahadev similarly. 34. The reason is that the influence of the in- toxication of these drugs is so powerful on their passions and senses that by the disuse of these nar- cotics they would not be able to feel so well as they do when they use. 35. It is impossible to enforce such prohibition. The prohibition would certainly occasion discontent among the consumers, and is likely to lead to in- creased consumption of liquor, which would involve increased expenditure to those who are sufficiently well off to buy it, and great distress to those who cannot afford to bear the expense. 36. There is no reason to think that any alcohol is substituted for any of these drugs. 37. Ganja smoking is supposed to be less injurious than charas smoking, which is said to produce asthma. 38. The effect is similar in kind or degree. 39. Bhang is drunk and never smoked. Ganja and charas are smoked and never drunk. Smoking is clearly less injurious than drinking. 40. Bhang is used medically, especially in cattle disease. 41. Moderate use of bhang is beneficial90 kahars, and other lower castes, about 90 per cent., and of other castes about 10 per cent., smoke. In Bareilly district, tahsil Baheri and tahsil Mirganj, about 25 per cent. of Thakurs smoke it. 21. Ganja is not used in these districts. I hear in Oudh and the eastern districts ganja of the sort " baluchur " is approved of. 22. It comes from Kabul direction into the Pun- jab, and is chiefly brought for these districts from Hoshiarpur in the Punjab. In these parts the Yarkand charas is best liked. 23. Occasionally, but seldom, smokers of charas use green bhang in the chillum, but only those who cannot afford or at the time obtain charas. 24. Commonly people drink bhang. People accustomed to intoxicate themselves with bhang take pills, or a thick paste of it. The Choubes of Muthra and Brahmans and Thakurs chiefly use bhang. 25. The use of bhang and charas is on the decrease, as the better castes have taken to using it less, and in its place drink liquor freely, viz., Thakurs, Brahmans, Bannyas, and Musalmans have all taken to drinking liquor, though they do it secretly for fear of caste-fellows, etc. The caste of Kayasths are giving up liquor; but this is small in proportion to the numbers of new drinkers. Liquor is accordingly increasing in use and the use of hemp drugs decreasing for the new teaching. Formerly, at the Holi, majun used to be much used, and was every day prepared in temples and shivalas, and all comers drank, and on every Mon- day in Sawan and in the Sheobarat "dudhia bhang " used to be prepared at such places and also offered up. This has now nearly stopped. The Government returns show bhang and charas in- creasing. The reason is (1) the increase of popula- tion, (2) the Government arrangements. Formerly there was much charas smuggled. Now it is only occasionally smuggled," but in fact it is not increas- ing. Owing to difference of price, it used to be much smuggled from Rampur. The farmer also competes for the farm, which makes the revenue seem greater; but in fact the use is on the decrease. 26. (a) 85 per cent. (b) 6 per cent. (c) 7 per cent. (d) 2 per cent. 27. Assemblies of fakirs, especially bairagis and jogis and takiadar Musalman fakirs, use charas excessively. Brahmans and Thakurs chiefly use bhang. 28. An average consumer would use daily of bhang one pie to three pies worth or about one tola. An excessive user of bhang would spend one anna and use one-half chittack. I cannot say as to charas, as it is smoked in company (i.e., the pipe passed round); but I calculate an excessive smoker would spend 2 or 2½ annas per diem. 29. Ordinarily with bhang only black pepper is used. (b) Sometimes seeds of melons or rose leaves, " sonf," " kasni," " gulkharu," " kaseru," almonds, cardamoms, ginger, seeds of " kaku," sugar, milk. In the Holi, majum is made from the bhang (made with ghi, sugar, etc.). Nothing is mixed with charas to increase its intoxicating power. Sellers sometimes adulterate with earth and tobacco. 30. Bhang is used both in company and in olitude, but chiefly in solitude. Charas and ganja are commonly smoked in company, only occasional- ly in solitude. Only men use bhang, charas, or ganja. Occasionally women of bad character smoke; but ordinarily women think it a great disgrace. Children do not usually consume, but children over twelve or thirteen do. Generally are used from the time of adolescence ; some people cease using on growing old. 31. The habit is acquired by a long course of use. People can easily drop either. Especially with bhang, there is a tendency to increase the dose. 32. Bhang is generally offered by Hindus to Mahadeo, mixed with milk and sugar. It is offer ed to obtain success in any matter; but sometimes a simple offering. This use is daily decreasing. Charas and ganja are not used in these parts in any religious or caste ceremony. 33. Educated people look with an unfavourable eye on intoxication from bhang, charas, or ganja; but bhang is not thought so badly of as charas or ganja. The class of educated people are opposed to these things, but bairagis, fakirs, jogis, gosains, etc., and Chaubes, among Hindus, are in favour of it and consider it good to drink bhang. The use of ganja and charas is commonly con- sidered disreputable, the reason being that the com- pany of users is thought evil, and their language among themselves is rude. Also the smoke is drawn from the chillum through the hands, which is considered unmannerly. There is no custom of worshipping the plant in these provinces. 34. People who use charas or ganja in excess would suffer to some extent in dropping the use at once; but not so much those who use bhang. People who use charas and ganja in moderation would suffer no deprivation. In damp climates, where it is used to ward off the effects of the climate, or boatmen and people who plant singharas, deprivation would follow. 35. I do not think it impossible to prohibit the use of bhang, charas, and ganja. But all the habitual consumers would be discontented. There would be no political danger. It could only be prohibited by an Act of the Legislature. An increase of the price would decrease the use; but the consumers would still use the article, and the subject would not suffer. Undoubtedly alcohol and opium would be increasingly used if hemp drugs were prohibited. Every country has its intoxicant from ages. So if these drugs were prohibited, opium and alcohol would be largely used instead, and their effects are worse. 36. Among the higher castes of Hindus the new lights have dropped these drugs and taken to liquor, which is contrary to religion. Therefore liquor is more used, the proof of which is that there are shops for sale of liquor in every town and big village. 40. Bhang is used to relieve "bawasir" (apparently bloody motions) and other diseases, and is also given to horses as a digestive. Villagers also use it for palsy. 41. (a) Bhang aids digestion. (b) Yes, bhang is used to alleviate weariness etc., and people accustomed to hard work, such as boatmen, use charas for this purpose. Chaubes usually use bhang, and have consequently large appetites and grow fat and healthy; but an exces- sive use leads to languor. (c) In damp tracts these drugs are thought to keep off fever and disease. (d) Lower castes, such as kahars, beldars, etc., use charas moderately to keep off fatigue; and fakirs
91 who live in jungles and hills use chants to keep off cold and damp and to keep down carnal lust and hunger; but now most fakirs have got the habit and take it for pleasure and show. 42. Even moderate use of ganja and charas is harmful, as it usually gives a cough and injures the lungs and causes phlegm ; and the intoxication stops the circulation of the blood, and checks its production and ruins the brain. Sometimes it even affects life. 43. Even moderate smokers of charas are offen- sive to their neighbours; but not the users of bhang. 44. The habitual consumer is not injured by a moderate use. These things do not give pleasure, they intoxicate. Bhang is also intoxicating, and its effects remain to the ordinary user for six hours. Dryness is an after-effect of intoxication for all these things. 45. Excessive use of bhang leads to languor. Charas impairs the appetite and makes lean, and leads to cough and asthma. I do not think it gives gripes. Charas impairs the power of reproduction, and leads to bad manners and folly. It does not lead to immorality, but weakness. Undoubtedly these things destroy the intelligence, and charas produces idiotcy ; and the idiotcy produced by charas is incurable. Charas impairs virility ; but bhang does not, but rather increases it. 53. In my experience I have seen no case. 56. Bhang is sometimes mixed with dhatura in order to increase intoxication, or for the purpose of committing an offence. 55. Evidence of MUNSHI UJAGAR MAL, Agarwalla Saraogi, Retired Deputy Collector, Meerut City. 1. I was first Naib Tahsildar, and then for ten years Tahsildar in Meerut district, and three years in Aligarh, and then for several years Deputy Col- lector in Jalaon, and so had opportunities of learn- ing about hemp drugs. 2. I consider all these definitions correct. Charas is also commonly called sulfa in this divi- sion. The other names stated for the different products are the usual ones. 3. The hemp plant grows spontaneously in all the districts of which I have knowledge92 32. There is no custom in any caste or religion enjoining consumption of any of these drugs. 33. Consumption of bhang is not generally looked upon with favour, but there is no general public opinion against it; but consumption of charas is looked upon as a vice, as it is used by men of low caste more especially. There is no custom of worshipping the hemp plant. 34. People who are accustomed to consume the drugs would undoubtedly suffer serious privation if they have to forego them. There would be the same difficulty as in leaving off all intoxicants. 35. It would be possible to prohibit use of these drugs gradually ; sudden prohibition would result in illicit sales and consumption. There need be no anxiety of serious discontent at such prohibition, as the consumers are few in number, of different castes, and mostly of low castes. Its prohibition would not be followed by recourse to alcohol, and there are no other drugs which would be substitu- ted. 36. In my opinion it is not being so substi- tuted. 37 to 40. Not known. 41. The use of bhang improves the appetite, but it is not a digestive. Both charas and bhang are considered to give staying-power under severe exposure to those accustomed to them, but those who smoke them occasionally only are helpless while under their influence. (c) and (d) Not known. 42. I consider it to be harmful. Consumption of bhang makes a man slow and dull-headed, while consumption of charas affects the lungs and pro- duces weakness; the same in regard to ganja. Some men at a single draught of ganja or charas become insensible. A Hindu proverb runs "charas ne kaha 'khansi karun, khurah karun, jub bhi na maré to kya karun?'" meaning "I cause such dangerous ill- nesses, and if a man does not die of them, I can do no more." 43. They are inoffensive to their neighbours; these being silent intoxicants. 45 and 46. Same as answer to 42. Excessive consumption of charas produces insanity, of the kind chiefly prevalent among fakirs; I have myself seen such effects. 47. In my opinion the habitual moderate use of bhang and charas is not hereditary. I have seen persons using them to excess, but with no effect of 48. Ditto There can be no exact definition of moderate and excessive, as what is moderate for one man is excessive for another. 49 and 50. Not known. 53. In my experience excessive indulgence does not incite to crime. 56. Not known. 58. The present system is in my opinion not so perfect as to leave no room for improvement. 59. In my opinion instead of the thekadar being allowed to choose his own persons for and place of vend, a duty should be imposed on charas and bhang estimated according to weight; and it should be made payable on receipt from the emporium (Dis- awar); or if there is a difficulty in that, then when it is sold to the contractors. The contractors now buy charas at Rs. 2-8 per seer, and sell it at from Rs. 17 to Rs. 20 a seer, and they buy bhang at Re. 1-4 a maund, and sell it at Rs. 5 a maund. At this calculation a tax of Rs. 15 a seer on charas and Rs. 4 a maund on bhang should be fixed, and the contractors allowed to sell charas at Rs. 16 or 17 a seer and bhang at Rs. 5 a maund; in this way the tax will be collected without difficulty, and there will not be the annually recurring difficulty of rise and fall in the contract; and thirdly, the contractor will not be able to falsify his accounts and on termination of his contract to sell his surplus stock at cheap rates as is done at present; fourthly, the purchasers will have a market rate at which to purchase. 63. For answer see 59 above. 64. I have no objection. 65. I consider they are more heavily taxed than other intoxicants, and I consider that this is a good thing. 66. I think there should, as there is a difference in their quality. 68. Charas and bhang are consumed on the premises of the licensed shops, which are for the most part on the roads and in the bazars. I think they should be away from the roads and bazars, and there should be no consumption on the premises. 69. As far as I know, the wishes of the people are not consulted. I think they ought to be con- sulted. 70. In the State of Rampura adjoining Jalaon district at the Nanauli village fair hundreds of maunds of ganja are brought from Gwalior, and the Raja of Rampura levies a light tax on this. It is taken by Thakurs and Kurmies secretly into the Jalaon district for their own consumption. 56. Evidence of PUNDIT GUNGA DATT UPRETI, Brahmin, Retired Deputy Collector, Almora, Kumaun. 1. Moving in the interior of the districts of Kumaun and Garhwal in my official career for thirty-live years, and enquiring from people con- cerned, as well as from others through curiosity, and also for Government reports, etc. 2. Only two varieties, viz., charas, the resinous matter, and ganja are sold here. The former is locally known as charas or atar or bhatjyu or sulfa, and the latter ganja or bhaugdhusa. The third sort, siddhi, bhang, subji or patti, is unknown here. The first drug is produced and prepared here, and the second or the ganja is imported from the Kumaun, Bhabar and Tarai in very little quantity as required here, and it is said to be manufactured by being trodden under foot, or by pressing between the hands, or by beating with clubs and sticks. This variety is prepared from hemp plants that grow wild in the jungles of the Bhabar and Tarai. It is not manufactured from the hemp which grows in these hills. 3. Kumaun, Garhwal and the Bhabar. 4. The general name of the same plant is bhang or bháng everywhere. 5. No information except that too much rain spoils the yield of charas. 6. Dense and scattered.
93 7. Yes; hemp is cultivated here94 36. I do not think so. But the use of tobacco has greatly superseded that of the drugs. 37. As ganja is not smoked here, I cannot answer this question. 38. As the two othr preparations are not used hero either for smoking or drinking, the question cannot be answered with any safety. 39. As eating and drinking of any preparation of bhang plant is not in practice here, the difference of effects between eating, drinking, and smoking cannot bo noticed. The small quantity of ganja imported for consumption in this district is either used for the preparation of a kind of confection (sweet) made and sold here only during the Holi festival, or for cattle when they are sick. I have been told that the influence of the drugs, when caton or drunk, lasts for a longer time than when smoked. 40. The drugs are said to be used by native doctors and also by people for cattle diseases. 41. Yes, some people smoke the charas habitually and some occasionally for the purposes noted, in moderate doses. This applies to all classes. I, believe they find relief and benefit therefrom. 42. The moderate use of smoking the charas is harmless at first, but eventually it produces contrary effects in old age. 43. Yes ; they are inoffensive in every respect. 44. Charas is refreshing and allays hunger and thirst, creates appetite, and acts as a digestive; and also increases hunger in such a way that the smoker finds a great relish in any sort of food he partakes of. It keeps people cheerful, merry and free from anxiety so long as they are under its in- fluence which lasts only for two hours. The want of it produces longing and uneasiness. Its after- effects, which palpably become apparent in old age, are noxious. The smoker is attacked with bron- chitis and asthma. It causes dyspepsia and reduces appetite. It is said to dry up the semen and to produce emaciation. 45. Yes, it does; but it has not produced in- sanity in any person in my knowledge belonging to the class of moderate consumers. 46. I have observed that the habitual excessive use of the charas sometimes produces temporary in- sanity in a weak constitution in rare cases. I have had also lunatics brought to me, some of whom con- fessed, or were proved to bo excessive charas smokers, and others had never been charas smokers. There are, and have been, many excessive charas smokers within my knowledge who are very little affected. 47. and 48. No. The habitual moderate use of charas has no effect whatever in the children of the consumer of the drug; nor does the habit of smoking charas ever descend to the children of the consumer as a hereditary effect. 49. No. Except as stated under 43 (latter part). 50. The excessive use of the charas is certainly practised as an aphrodisiac (to indulge in the plea- sure for a longer time). It is therefore purposely used by prostitutes and licentious youths. This practice is more injurious than its use as an ordinary narcotic, and eventually tends to render the con- sumer impotent. 51. Generally not. 52. By rendering the excessive consumer irri- table, it sometimes leads to petty assaults, abusive language, etc., but not (in my opinion) to serious crimes. 53. No case of the kind has ever come to my notice. But such consumers, when under its in- fluence, keep silent until teased or vexed by anyone; they become impertinent and sometimes resort to beating their assailant. 54. No. I never heard of any such criminal. 55. No. The smoking of charas in any quantity is not apt to stupefy a man. 56. I have no information on this point. 57. Ganja and charas are not eaten or drunk here, and so I am unable to note the effects. 58. The excise administration is working well here. 59. None. 60. Ganja is not produced here. 61. The cultivation of the ganja plant for pro- duction of charas is not looked after, but the sale of the drug is well controlled. 62. No bhang is produced here. 63. No objection whatever to the system obtain- ing here. 64. None. 65. I think reasonable. 66. Only one kind of ganja is imported and finds sale here. 67. None. 68. There are licensed shops for sale of the drugs, but the purchaser can consume them anywhere he likes. 69. No. I think the wish of the people of the place ought to be consulted as to the need of a licensed shop being put in any part of the district before a shop is sanctioned for the place. 70. The charas that comes from Doti (Nepal) is purchased hero by the licensed vendor. No charas is sold illicitly. The smuggler is adequately punished in every case and the drug confiscated. 57. Evidence of PANDIT MEWARAM, Brahman, Retired Deputy Collector, Lakhimpur. 1. As an Excise Officer and as Deputy Collector in camp and office for about eighteen years. 2. Th eterm siddhi is used in Bengal, bhang and subzi in North-Western Provinces and Oudh, patti in Baiswara (Oudh). Besides these, it is known by two other terms: bijaya* (victorious), and buti.95 large ones. But they know not the distinction between male and female hemp plants. The lessees, or thekadars, get charas known as kuppi* and bhar from Amritsar and Mian Mir, where it is imported from Bokhara and Yarkand. This charas is called bhuri. People in Oudh know ganja by two terms " kali "96 lodhs, ahirs, muraos, barbers, baris, kalwars and fakirs generally smoke ganja and charas in propor- tion of, say, 80 and 50 per cent., respectively, of male adults ; and chhatris, khatris, banias, kayasths and sonars in proportion of 20 per cent. ganja and 15 per cent. charas. 21. Nobody likes chur. People like kali (round ganja). Towards Fyzabad, Benares and Patna, ba- luchar ganja is preferred, and in Khiri district, pathar ganja, which comes from Gwalior, Atari, and Khandwa. 22. Foreign charas, called bhuri, which is im- ported from Yarkand into Punjab (Amritsar, Man- di and Chhaoni Mian Mir from the shop of Basan- tamul, Kedarnath). 23. Never. 24. All classes drink bhang in proportion of, say, 40 per cent. male adults, and eat in form of pills called gur bhanga 3 per cent. and majun 50 per cent. during Holi festival only; but in Mathra, where Choubes are addicted to bhang, I should say 95 or 100 per cent. male and 30 per cent. women and 40 per cent. children. I heard Choubes relating or reciting proverbs. (1) Mahadeva said to Parbati, hear unto me. It is not advisable to give bhang to ganwars or to boys and old men, but to male adults only, who, if they drink, they would be able to pluck out the elephant's tooth. (2) Morning drink at an early hour when cock crows is excellent as he would enjoy the king's life 97 for religious meditation like Rudra (name of Maha- deva), for separation like Rama, for enjoyment like Krishna, and for diseases thy effects are like nim tree leaves, for Divine contemplation thou art like Dhruwa, for awaking like Gorakhnath, for sleep like Kumbha Karan, for eating like Bhimsen, and for charity like Raja Bali." 34. It would be a serious privation to Mathuria chaubeys, gosains, gungaputras, maha brahmins, and to habitual excessive consumers to forego the consumption of bhang, because they are habituated to it, and they would be very uneasy without it. Their probable number would be about 4 lakhs in whole India. There would also be a serious priva- tion to ganja and charas smokers to farego the consumption of these drugs, and their number would be over 15 lakhs. 35. Yes, it would be possible, but not practicable, and it is also likely that the drug would be con- sumed illicitly. The prohibition can be enforced by enactment only. I think it would occasion serious discontent among the consumers; but I don't ap- prehend any political danger from such discontent from that class of people. It is likely the prohibi- tion would be followed by recourse to dhatura, kaner root, mouth root and ghunghchi root and the like, and the lower classes to alcohol. 36. No, I don't think so. 37. I have not the personal experience of this; but my enquiry leads me to state that charas being the essence produces strong intoxication, whilst ganja-smoking not so much. 38. I am unable to answer this, except that balucher ganja is very strong in its effect on con- sumers. 39. So far as I know, the same plant, whether it be bhang, charas, or ganja, is never used both for drinking and smoking purposes. Sometimes when ganja chur the farmers mix bhang for their benefit and sell it, the consumers find the small leaves floating on the surface of the water, and re- move them by certain number of washing processes. Bhang leaves sink down whilst ganja leaves float, and if any leaves remain unremoved, they spoil the entire taste of bhang. From this I conclude that ganja is not a drug intended for drinking, nor that anybody drinks it. The smoking of ganja and charas is more injuri- ous than the drinking of bhang, because the smoking of the said drugs bring on cough, bron- chitis, or asthma, which bhang does not. 40. Gun Ratna Mala, Nighaut Haritakiad, Bhawaprakash, prescribe the use of bhang on account of its medicinal qualities. Blang is given to cattle also to alleviate fatigue and to increase their appetite. 41. I know not of ganja or charas that even its moderate use can in any way be beneficial to health, but that it removes fatigue and cold is not question- able. Bhang is beneficial in its effects in all three cases (a), (b), and (c). I here insert two shlokes* (stanzas) I can at present lay my hands on, meaning that it is preven- tive of phlegm, digestive, and accessory to food, increases power of speech, and tends to enjoyment, etc., etc. The experience shows that it gives staying-power under severe exertion or exposure. Men coming after hard work or hard fatigue generally take this bhang to alleviate fatigue, and in malarious and unhealthy tracts it is taken as preventive of disease (fever), and, so far as I know, all classes use this * Not printed. bhang in Terai tracts, and even some female sex. I refer to moderate habitual use or moderate occa- sional use. 42. If one or two mashas bhang be taken with thandai (see answer to question 29) both morning and evening, after it is well saturated, well washed and well powdered and mixed with sugar and milk will certainly do good and nourish the system. The moderate use over what I have just stated would be harmless, if not quite beneficial. The proverb to be mastered means, one that goes to stool after drink is not likely to spend money for medicines or doctor's visit. 43. Yes. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of bhang is refreshing to drinkers, though it docs not produce intoxication at once. It creates appetite is undoubted. The effect lasts at least six hours. The want of subsequent gratification does not produce any longing or uneasiness. 45. If milk, cream and ghi are affordable to bhang drinkers, bhang would nourish both body and mind, otherwise it impairs constitution. It docs not injure digestive power or cause loss of appetite. It docs not cause dysentery, bronchitis or asthma is a fact; on the other hand, it is given as medicine in cases of dysentery. It docs impair the moral sense and induce laziness. If a man who has never drunk bhang happens to drink it, it would I certainly deaden his intellect. As regards ganja and charas, I must say that they impair constitution, injure appetite and diges- tion, and do cause both bronchitis and asthma. The proverb is "Ganja and charas declare their effects that they create cough, bronchitis, or asthma, and if the smokers don't die they are helpless, i.e., it is not their fault." 46. Auswer to question 45 applies to this also, with this exception, that occasionally habitual ex- cessive consumers of bhang are unable to partake their food freely, as their mouth and tongue get dry, and they cannot easily swallow food. The bhang greatly affects the intellect of the excessive consumers. But in case of excessive ganja and charas smokers, I know not what effects they produce on their body and mind; but I believe it does cause temporary insanity. 47 and 48. Never. 49. (a) Yes. (See stanzas under answer to question 41). (b) The prostitutes generally use charas, ganja, and liquor, and not bhang. Yes, because a man loses his strength. (c) Yes. If wholesome food and ghi or milk are beyond reach, bhang would cause impotence in time, and so ganja and charas. 50. Ditto ditto, with this difference, that bhang is not an aphrodisiac in their case. 51. The bad characters are also habitual moderate consumers; but their proportion cannot be fixed as regards each of the drugs. The only thing I can say for certain is that they are all addicted to some kind of drugs. 55. Yes, they do; but, so far as I have ascer- tained, complete stupefaction cannot be induced without admixture of dhatura. 56. For personal consumption the consumers mix dhatura in a small quantity, or as much as vol. V. R
98 they can bear; but, for administration to others, they admixture in large quantities, sometimes as a matter of foul play, but often to rob men, parti- cularly the passengers and travellers. 57. I never heard of ganja and charas as being eaten or drunk. 58. The system of excise administration in re- spect of drugs under the rules in force are working well; but it is capable of improvement, as I will show in my answer to the next question (59). 59. In two directions it is capable of improve- ment. 1st.99 and some for joke or for making senseless in order to gratify their worldly avarice and sensual desire. The above ingredients are mixed as a luxury, and black pepper is always mixed. 30. Those who have got some regard for society and caste rules use them privately ; others use them in assemblies of 10 to 15 persons more or less. Children do not use them. 31. They are habituated to them easily, and their daily use increase their desire to take them in large quantities. Afterwards it develops into a habit, which is difficult to give up. 36. No liquor is used instead of them. 38. None. 41. (a) Their consumers consider them as an aid to digestion. (b) They consider them invigorating after weari- ness caused by hard labour and trouble. (c) In the Terai or where there is a moist climate their use is considered as a check to the unhealthi- ness of the tract. 42. The use of the drugs, in whatever degree it may be, is injurious. Each of these drugs con- sumes blood, induces dullness, enervates the brain, produces cough and asthma, a man cannot work unless under its influence, loses reasoning power, and becomes impolite and shameless. 43. The consumers of these drugs are always a worry to their neighbours. 49. In reality it does not increase sperma genitale viri aut mulceris (human seed), but when it is used in youth it prolongs sensual pleasure. Prostitutes sometimes use these drugs as an aphrodisiac. 51. Generally rogues and vagrants use them in assemblies. Such bad characters often plan crimi- nal designs in such a condition. 54. Criminals use them to acquire temporary courage to commit a premeditated act of violence or other crime. 55. Criminals, in order to further their designs, induce their victims to partake of these drugs and so stupefy themselves. 64. The existing rules and regulations for the export and import of these drugs are satisfactory. 65. The taxation is reasonable. 66. I do not think it necessary to charge differ- ent taxation for different kinds of ganja. 68. No. 69. The wishes of none except those of the ven- dors are ever consulted. 70. I know of none. 59. Evidence of MOHAMED SALAMATULLAH, Tahsildar, Lakhimpur, District Kheri. 1. I have been in different districts on the posts of Sarbarahkar, Naib Tahsildar, Tahsildar and Supervisor Kanungo, and have also been in various capacities in the Settlement Department wherein I had occasion to be on tour, whereby I have learnt the characteristics of ganja, etc., and their uses. 2. As far as my experience goes on, I concur with Dr. Plain's opinion. 3. It grows wild, abundantly in the districts of Gonda, Bahtaich and Kheri. 4. They are called by the names of ganja, charas and bhang. These names refer to exactly the same plant. 5. It grows in Terai abundantly. 6. It is dense. 7. There is no cultivation of hemp plant here, but grows wild. 14. Charas and ganja is not at all prepared here. It is imported from other places. Only bhang is prepared here, as it is only a kind of leaf of a plant which grows wild in the northern portion of this district. 15. Ganja is smoked with tobacco, and it is imported from other places. Bhang is drunk after grinding and mixing with sugar and black pepper. Charas is smoked with tobacco. 16. Bhang is prepared, but ganja and charas are not. 17. The preparations of hemp drugs are not made here. They are imported from other places. 18. They deteriorate on account of wet or by keeping carelessly. The effects of the three drugs deteriorate by keeping for a long time. Bhang keeps good by ordinary care for two years. So is nearly the case with ganja and charas. When deteriorated, nothing can make them good. They are thrown away. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smok- ing. 20. Ganja and charas are smoked only by kahars, garias, workers in wells, fakirs, gosains, sanyasis and some thakurs. 21. Flat ganja which is called baluchur is pre- ferred to all other kinds of ganja. Though chur grows here in abundance, but it being less intoxi- cant, baluchur is sold in great quantities, which is imported from Gwallor, Jhansi, and other districts of Bengal. 22. The charas which is used here is imported from Gwalior. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking. It is used in eating, drinking and rubbing. 24. Often Brahmins, Thakurs, Khatris use bhang. Bhang is used abundantly in the sacred places of Hindus, such as Muthra, Benares, and Gola Gokarannath, etc. They eat and drink it for the satisfaction of their animal passion, and also it is considered buti of Mahadeo. In festivals of Holi and Devali bhang is mixed with sweetmeat, and is drunk, which causes intoxication. Bhang is altogether unlawful among Muhammadans. 25. As the three drugs, ganja, bhang and charas, are cheaper than wine, their use is on the increase. Poor men satisfy themselves with it in place of wine. 26. No correct proportion of consumers can be given, but the estimated proportion of the consumers of these drugs is as follows :100 28. In the Kheri district, where ganja grows wild, the average cost of it is as under :101 22. All charas is foreign and called dasauri. Most comes from Amritsar. 23. The very poor, if they cannot afford ganja, mix bhang with tobacco and smoke it, but they do not get the same intoxicating effect as with ganja. 24. All classes both eat and drink bhang and in all places. Muhammadans do not use bhang to the same extent as Hindus. About 10 per cent. of population like bhang. 25. Ganja and charas consumption remains steady. Bhang is increasing every year. Is used because a good digestive and appetiser. Much used by old men on this account. 26. (a) 5 per cent. of men. (b) 10 per cent. do. (c) 2 per cent. do. (d) 4 per cent. do. 27. Principally from the classes called 'fakirs.' 28. (a) 3 pie to 12 pie per diem. (b) 3 pie to 2 annas per diem. 29. (a) Smoking and chewing tobaccos are mixed with charas and ganja generally. Bhang102 bhang. Here at Lodhaisur the Kabariyas alone were able to perceive this distinction. 10. There is no special class of hemp cultivators. 11. Yes. When the plant attains a certain height it has to be distinguished whether it will produce ganja or bhang, and if it proves to be the former it is removed from the place where it grew and is planted at some suitable spot. 12. None. 13. The cultivation of hemp plant is nowhere allowed in Oudh. Wherever it grows its growth is spontaneous. As to the conditions of climate, soil, etc., vide answer to question No. 5. There is no such place, in my opinion, in this province, where its cultivation would be impossible. 14. Bhang is the only product of the hemp plant which is generally prepared in this province of Oudh. Ganja, too, is prepared, but very scantily, and by individuals. Charas is not at all prepared in this province. 15. As the ganja plant grows up, so its watchers go on twisting its leaves, and thus it is that the hemp plant gives ganja capable of being used for smoking. Unless its leaves are twisted it would not give ganja worth smoking. The plant with its leaves untwisted is useless. Generally the wild hemp plant produces bhang only. The plant is dried up, and its leaves shaken off and collected are used as bhang. Bhang can be used both by eating and drinking, but never smoking. 16. (a) and (b) Yes. (c) Yes, if watched. 17. By the people of the lower agricultural class such as Moorai, Kachi Goojar, Kabariya and Ahir. 18. Yes, they do deteriorate by long and careless keeping. It does lose its effect after a certain time. Ganja and bhang can be kept for four years, charas for seven years, if preserved with care. After the abovementioned period, they are likely to lose their narcotic power. In the meantime care should be taken from exposure into cold air, and specially in rainy season should be strewn in sunlight every now and then. 19. Yes, ganja and charas are used for smoking only. 20. Thakurs, ahirs, pasis, chamars, kunjras, nearly all people of the lower classes smoke these two drugs. The lower classes of Muhammadans use them too. The proportion of the population that use it amount to one-third, and the practice is common all over the province and not restricted to any special locality. 21. Flat ganja (locally known as pathar) is com- monly used throughout the province. Chur (popu- larly known as baluchar) is used in the eastern districts, such as Faizabad, etc. 22. Foreign, imported from Kandahar, Kashmir and Nepal. 23. Never. 24. The Brahmins and bairagis chiefly use this drug both by eating and drinking. Besides other classes of Hindu people do also use them, but in a small proportion ; nearly one-tenth of the popula- tion would be accustomed to it, and it extends all over the province. 25. The use of these drugs is increasing. The reason is that since Government has enhanced duty on liquor, the lower class people have no other resort but to these drugs. Bhang. Ganja. Charas. 26. (a) 15 per cent. . 7 6 2 (b) 10 ditto . 4 4 2 (c) 75 ditto . 30 30 15 (d) None. 27. The consumers of bhang are generally men of higher caste and specially. Brahmins. The con- sumers of ganja and charas belong mostly to the lower classes of people. The company of those who are already addicted to the use of hemp drag gene- rally induces others to use it at first as a mere luxury or pastime, which at last grows into a habit. 28. (a) Ganja of 1 pice daily, bhang 1 pice darly, charas 1 anna. (b) Ganja of 1 anna daily, bhang 1 pice daily, charas 2 annas. 29. With ganja and charas no ingredients are mixed. With bhang, pepper, " souf," cardamom are ordinarily mixed ; sugar and milk occasionally, and by the rich. Dhatura is very seldom so used. 30. Ganja and charas are used generally in com- pany. The use of bhang is more in solitude, though company is preferred, because it is more amusing. It is confined chiefly to the male sex. It is not usual for children to consume any of these drags. 3i. (a) Yes. (b) Not so very difficult as to be not easily broken off. (c) Yes, nearly in all of these drags. 32. None. 33. (a) Bad. General opinion is against their use and practice. (b) The use of all sorts of narcotic drugs is generally in disrepute because of the bad effects which it produces upon the minds of the consumers. After a little time their use weakens the brain and shatters the general health. (c) None. 34. It would go seriously to some extent with those lower class of people who have to labour man- ually all the day long, because the use of such drags gives them some relief during their working hours and makes the work lightly felt. I am un- able to give any probable number of any class. 35. In my opinion it would not be feasible to prohibit the use of all of these drags at once. If done so, it would be consumed illicitly, as the people have become accustomed to it, and habit is a second nature. The prohibition, if enforced, would certainly occasion serious discontentment amongst the con- sumers, but cannot give rise to a political danger. The people, when prohibited the use of these drugs, will certainly have recourse to some kind or other alcoholic stimulants. 36. No. The cases are rather the contrary. 37. The effects caused by smoking these two drugs are different. Charas causes dryness, while ganja produces phlegm. 38. There is only a difference of degree in the effects of the different kinds of ganja. Chur ganja is more intoxicating and therefore preferred. 39. The smoking of ganja and charas is more in- jurious than drinking and eating bhang or any other preparation of bhang, such as majun, etc. 40. The use of bhang is often prescribed on account of its medicinal qualities both by Grecian and Indian physicians. It cures malarious fever,
103 piles, and dysentery, when administered with other medicines. It is also used in the treatment of cattle disease. It is frequently given to cattle after hard labour. 41. (a) Bhang is so far beneficial in its effects as it is accessory and a little digestive. (b) As alleviating fatigue after severe exertion or exposure, ganja and charas are more beneficial than bhang. (c) They are all beneficial as preventives in such tracts, but especially ganja and charas are more so. The lower classes of people use them for above purposes. It is the moderate habitual use that has been referred to. 42. The moderate use of bhang is harmless, be- cause as a food it is accessory and to some extent disgestive. 48. Yes. 44. Certainly their immediate effects on the habi- tual consumer are refreshing, and their use removes the uneasiness. Produces intoxication. Ganja and charas allay hunger, but bhang increases appetite. The effects last according to the quantity taken. Of course the want of subsequent gratification produces both longing and uneasiness. 45 and 46. (a) Yes, physical and mental for cer- tain, and sometimes moral too. (b) Charas and ganja impair the constitution more than bhang does. (c) Ganja and charas cause loss of appetite. (d) Ditto ditto ditto. (e) To some extent they impair the moral sense, but not so as to lead to immorality or debauchery ; but laziness is certainly caused in almost all the cases. (f) Their use certainly deadens the intellect and sometimes produces insanity too, which is generally temporary; and the symptoms may be reinduced by use of these drugs after liberation from re- straint. Yes, the typical symptom is that the liver is affected. No such insane is within my experi- ence. (g) I have no personal experience on these points. 47. No. 49 and 50 (a) and (b) No. (c) Its use for this purpose would prove more injurious than any other narcotic, because the tend- ency is to make the matter watery. (d) Their excessive use leads in time to impo- tency. 51. (a) Generally bad characters are habitual moderate consumers. (b) Gambling and theft. 53. Very seldom. I have not come across any such case. 54. Very rarely. 55. Very seldom. The use of any of these drugs by itself is not sufficient to cause complete stupefac- tion without admixture of some other narcotic, such as dhatura, etc. 56. The effects of bhang are modified by the ad- mixture of other substances, such as sonf, pepper, cucumber seeds, sugar, milk, almonds, etc. 57. As far as my experience goes, ganja and charas are not eaten or drunk in this province. 58. In my opinion it is working well. 60. Ganja is not produced in this province gener- ally. 61. Charas is not produced in this province. 62. It ought to be controlled by the Government, because by such control the number of its consumers would be lessened. 63. I have no objection whatever. 64. None. 65. The present system of taxation is, in my opinion, in no way unreasonable. 66 and 67. No. 68. Yes. Such shops are often the resort of habi- tual consumers and bad characters. Their sight is obnoxious to the public, and young men are often unconsciously induced to acquire the habit of using them. 69. The wishes of the people are always consulted whenever any new shop is to be opened in any locality. People of such localities are informed by proclamation that a shop is being opened at such a place, and they are required to state their objections, if any, they may have. Such objections, if any, are taken into consideration by the local authorities, and order is passed accordingly. Oral evidence. Question 7.104 62. Evidence of DWARKA PRASAD, Jaini Agarwal, Excise Naib Tahsildar, Sardhana, Meerut District. 1. I am an Excise Naib Tahsildar since last two years. During this time I had opportunities to go over the chundoo-khanas, and to take information regarding the matters connected with hemp drugs, in regard to which I am able to answer the few following questions about Meerut district. 2. Bhang is commonly known under the names of105 27. Such people are taken from Brahmans, and others from menial classes detailed in the answer of the question No. 20. 28. It is difficult to distinguish between moder- ate and excessive use, while quantity is not given for each in the question. But by minute enquiries it appears that more quantity of charas is sold for pies by retail vendors. I am therefore able to say that from 2 to 6 pies a day for (a), and up to annas 8 for (b), or rather from one anna to annas 4 for (b). There are two or three men in the district who consume charas at 8 annas a day. The allow- ance for bhang-drinkers for (a) amounts to 3 pies to 9 a day, and for (b) from 6 pies to annas 2 per day in the district. 29. Black pepper is ordinarily used with bhang, as tobacco (kulkutya) with charas. Special ingredients are for bhang106 (b) Complete stupefaction is produced by the ad- mixture of dhatura, but it is difficult to prove. 56. Dhatura seeds are mixed in preparation of bhang and majun to make them stronger. Fakirs are said to smoke dhatura seeds with charas to become passionless, to draw the public : by their use they become passionless and prove to be sidh. Iska istimal syane jadugar, fokarah apni kartab aur apne mushghooli yade khuda men zahir karne ko karte hain, ki halet-i-nasha gum hun, aur be hisso harkat rahen, aur zahir ho ki dhyan laga rakha hain. Meri paros me ekh andha charasbaz yeh kia karta tha ki jis ne apni apko sidh aur jadugar mashhur kiya tha, aur har wakat nasha me gum rahtatha. 58. The present system is working satisfactorily, and does not seem to be capable of improvement. 61. It is not produced in the district. 62. The hemp is not cultivated for bhang in the district; it grows wild, and it is difficult to hold a man responsible for the existence of a wild plant at a distance of several yards from his field; and it seems to be impossible to prohibit his gathering from such plants. 63. No. 64. The rules given under chapter X, page 56, of the Excise Manual seem to be sufficient and satisfactory. 66. There are already, vide section 100, page 58, Excise Manual. 67. No. 68. The shops are licensed only for the sale of these drugs where they are consumed. 70. Bhang widely grown in the district is used as an untaxed drug. 63. Evidence of BIRGNATH SAHAI, Excise Naib Tahsildar, Gorakhpur. 1. Has been Excise Naib for two years, and so made extensive enquiries. 2. Ganja which comes from Bengal is called ' baluchar ;' that which comes from Punjab or other places is called 'pathar.' Bhang is also called ' sabzi' and ' bhuti.' The definitions are correct. 3. In Gorakhpur, Basti, Bahraich, Gonda, Kheri, Farrukhabad, Sarun, Champarun, and Monghyr. Most in Gorakhpur and Bahraich. 4. Only called ' bhang.' Patsan is not used. 5. In moist damp soil, such as the ' Ghat' soil in this district or the ' Kachhar ' soil, near rivers. 6. Generally dense. 7. There is no cultivation of hemp in this province for any purpose. 12. Not cultivated. 13. No cultivation at all. 14. Ganja and charas are not prepared. Bhang is prepared from the wild hemp in the districts mentioned in (3). 15. The contractors cut the wild plant in April. After being dried in the threshing floor it is beaten and broken up. The broken leaves are then se- parated. The stalks, etc., are either burnt or allow- ed to rot. The broken leaves are used for eating and drinking. 16. Bhang is not generally prepared by people in their houses, but only by the contractors. It can be prepared where grown. Ganja and charas can- not be made from the wild plant. 17. No special classes. 18. All these deteriorate by keeping. Charas and ganja lose their essential oil, and then their effect is lost. Charas keeps for one year; ganja for two years ; bhang for three years. 19. Ganja and charas are only smoked. 20. Hindus are chief consumers of both charas and ganja. Mostly used by fakirs of both reli- gions. 21. Baluchar is preferred in this district. 22. Only foreign is used, and that comes from Amritsar. 23. Bhang is not generally smoked. It is smoked, however, by those that are very poor and cannot afford to buy ganja in times of cold or dampness. 24. Usually bhang is eaten in the cold weather and taken in a liquor in the hot weather. Brah- mins and Kshattris are the principal consumers, because they do not drink spirituous liquors. 25. Ganja and bhang are increasing as regards consumption. This is due to (1) increased dear- ness of liquor; (2) Kaisth committees prohibiting consumption of liquor. 26. In this district107 Also made up into sweatmeats, called majum. Sugar mixed with ghee, in which bhang has been boiled. Dhatura is not mixed. Mixtures added for taste, and also to lessen the burning and intoxicating effect. 30. Ganja and charas are used in company. Bhang consumed in solitude. Only men use drugs. Children under 16 only consume drugs exception- ally. 31. Habit of taking drugs easily formed. Diffi- cult to give up ganja and bhang. There is a ten- dency in all cases to excess. 32. No social or religious custom of taking drugs. But it has become the custom at the caste meetings of fakirs. Bhang is considered necessary at certain offerings, but it is not necessary to consume it. 33. Regarded in a bad light, except in respect to fakirs. No custom of worshipping. Use is in disrepute because when under influence men become incapable of doing any work, etc. 34. There would be privation to all consumers, and a most severe privation to excessive consumers, such as fakirs. There would be a craving for it, and health and mental power would be affected. 35. It will be impossible to prohibit use suddenly. If it is done, the collectors should have power to give licenses authorizing fakirs to consume drugs, because prohibition would cause great discontent among them, and they have great influence over Hindus generally. Illicit consumption would cer- tainly result. 36. Alcohol not being substituted. 37. Charas has more intoxicating effect than ganja. 88. Effects the same, but baluchar and chur have most powerful action. 39. Eating ganja and charas causes most harm because the woody fibre is swallowed, whereas in smoking only the vapour is swallowed. For same reason eating bhang is worse than drinking. 40. Ganja and charas are not used. Bhang is used in medicines for cattle and human beings. 41. It is generally considered that ganja is 108 a man has made up his mind to a crime, and has not the pluck to do it, he takes the drug to give him Dutch courage. I know of no connection with unpremeditated crimes of violence. I know the case of a policeman, a short time ago, in Benares, who took bhang before going out to shoot the seducer of his wife. This was mentioned in the District Superintendent's report of the case, that the man had taken bhang to give him courage. I have heard of one or two other cases. I cannot speak positively to them. I heard of a sepoy in Bareilly, of a similar character, some years ago ; but that was not a case reported to me. In the case of the policeman, I know of nothing special in bhang. I suppose the effect of liquor would have been the same. I do not know why bhang was chosen. I know of no case of running amok in the sense of motiveless crime due to hemp. Question 55.109 68. Evidence of MR. C. P. KNYVETT, District Superintendent of Police, Saharanpur. 51. The proportion of bad characters, who are habitual moderate consumers of bhang, charas, and ganja, is small. The moderate use of these drugs has no connection with the commission of crime in general or crime of any special character110 district. I have not myself seen any such cases, but I have known cases of criminals in the mufassal fortifying themselves with liquor. Question 55.111 28. Of bhang112 nervous debility, spermatorrh113 It is the only means by which you can arrive at a diagnosis. All these points are as a rule kept in view in cases admitted into the asylum before diagnosis is arrived at; but, as I have said, where the use of intoxicants is arrived at and no other cause ascertained, that has been shown in the asylum register as the cause. As a rule I think the data on which this diagnosis is arrived at under my system of further inquiries are fairly accurate. It has not been my practice to rest satisfied with alleged use of the drug merely without further inquiry, when such inquiry was possible. Only where no other cause could be ascertained would that stand alone. The inquiry from friends has been chiefly directed to eliciting any information regarding hereditary tendency. If the friends stated in any particular case that the patient smoked ganja, that would be sufficient, if no state- ment showing heredity was elicited. If it were, then the ganja would be deleted as the immediate cause. I would not record as a " toxic insanity" case any case in which heredity was alleged. Ganja would not be entered as the cause, i.e., the sole cause; it might be entered " ganja and heredity." In Baldeo Lodhi's case (No. 16 of 1892, special list) " heredity " should have been entered as well as ganja. I do not think the case should have been shown as " toxic insanity " with this heredity taint. Ganja in such cases should be regarded as only the exciting cause. I have already said what I then could say upon the 1892 cases and have still to submit a further report on them. I do not consider that the question of cause is one which affects the treatment of cases. My inquiries therefore into cause are of a statistical, not practical character. The result will not affect my treatment of the case. 75. Evidence of SURGEON-LIEUTENANT-COLONEL J. MCCONAGHEY, Civil Surgeon, Allahabad. 1. During twenty years' residence in India, I have observed the condition of many who use these drugs, and have often made enquiry from them as to their effects. As Superintendent of Jails, I have met with a large number of the criminal classes, and in the ordinary course of my duties have seen many insane natives. 2. Dr. Prain's definition may be accepted for these provinces. 19. Ordinarily only for smoking. May be taken internally under medical advice. 23. I believe not in these provinces. 28. (a) Bhang, about 60 grains, cost ½ pice. Charas 114 76. Evidence of SURGEON-LIEUTENANT-COLONEL A. J. WILLCOCKS, Civil Surgeon and Superintendent, Lunatic Asylum, and Principal, Agra Medical School, Agra. 1. Nearly twenty years' medical practice in India, and eight years Superintendent of a Lunatic Asylum. 2. I may state at starting that I have no special knowledge regarding the varieties of the different preparations of the hemp plant. Any remarks I have to offer, therefore, apply to the hemp drugs generally, unless expressly stated otherwise. 19. Yes. The refuse of ganja is used to adulter- ate bhang with. 20. The poorer classes of labourers115 answer 56. He has lucid intervals when he is per- fectly sane. What he meant was that the seed was thrown into the dry bhang as sold. I did not suggest dhatura to him. At least that is my re- collection that he volunteered the statement. He said he had done this himself. He said that some consumers take the drug purely for intoxicating effects, and that the stronger the sample the better they are pleased, so he adulterated thus. He was a singularly disreputable man, so much so, that his brother turned him out of the partnership. He is also, of course, only a lunatic after all, though ap- parently quite sane in his lucid intervals. He did not mention the use of dhatura leaves or seed specially. He used the word dhatura, and I pre- sumed he meant seeds. Question 37.116 These last remarks about the entry of cause ap- ply also to patients coming from other districts. The patients come from great distances. Even relatives of Agra people rarely come, much less do they come in cases from out districts. Ordinarily it has been the practice to enter hemp drugs as the cause of insanity where it has been shown that the patient used these drugs. I cannot say precisely why this is the practice. It has come down as the traditional practice. As a matter of fact, until recently I looked on these drugs as very poisonous. As I have already said, my ordinary medical practice did not bring me in- to contact with them at all. I only came into con- tact with them in the asylum. I had no idea that they were used so extensively as I find on enquiry to be the case. I have made enquiry in connection with the attention drawn to the matter recently. I think that there are cases of insanity brought on by the excessive use of the drugs; but these cases, I believe, are temporary and speedily cured. The insanity might recur if the excessive use were continued, and insanity frequently recurring might end in complete dementia. I believe such cases occur, but that they are much rarer than I former- ly believed. In such cases I think the drug may not only be the exciting, but the real, cause. I think such cases as I can recall are more generally due to the smoking of the drug than to bhang drinking, but I do not exclude the latter. Where insanity is due to hemp drugs it may thus be either as a real or merely as an exciting cause. There are no typical symptoms of hemp drag insanity. All the symptoms I have seen may be due to other causes, e.g., dhatura or alcoholic liquor. Perhaps the most characteristic symptom of hemp is that the patient is easily impressed by his sur- roundings so as to make him cry, laugh, etc., more easily. This is more characteristic of hemp drugs than of dhatura, etc., I think. I do not think that injury to the head or exposure to the sun would produce the symptoms seen in ganja cases; nor syphilis to my knowledge. I mean that I know of no specific instances where these causes have led to its being supposed that the man was suffer- ing from ganja. But so far as insanity is attri- butable to any of these causes, hemp drag insanity is not distinguishable from such insanity. I can- not easily differentiate hemp drag insanity. There are no special symptoms, although there are certain symptoms not uncommonly met in such cases. I have only attributed to hemp drugs cases where there were symptoms not inconsistent with insanity due to these drugs, and where there was a history of hemp drugs. I would not attribute the case to these drugs without a history. You want the symptoms plus the history to be certain enough to record with propriety that this is the probable cause. Admission of hemp drug habit has hitherto been accepted as a sufficient ground for attributing the insanity to hemp drags in default of other cause. That has been the practice in the asylum and has come down as the recognized usage. In fact, men are watched to see how they smoke to- bacco, so as to ascertain whether they have the ganja or charas habit. Relatives, when they have no other cause to mention, are ready to attribute the insanity to hemp drugs if the man uses them. Now that I have had my attention drawn to the use and abuse of these drags, I do not think that the procedure hitherto adopted has been such as to lead to an accurate diagnosis of the cause of in- sanity. 77. Evidence of SURGEON-LIEUTENANT-COLONEL R. A. K. HOLMES, Superintendent, Central Jail, Lucknow. 1. Prom seeing its effects on prisoners and others, and from inquiries made of the various officials and medical subordinates. 2. These definitions may be accepted for Luck- now. Flat ganja is termed pathar in Lucknow ; in Fyzabad, baluchar. Round ganja is termed kuli ganja. Broken ganja is termed chur or chura; at Baramghat is a yellow kind of ganja called mohadewa. 19. Ganja and charas are used for smoking only. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking. 28. (a) One tola ganja, price 2 annas. One tola charas, 4 to 5 annas. One ounce bhang, 6 pies. The quantities for excessive consumers will be about double these. 29. Tobacco is mixed with ganja and charas for smoking; with bhang, black pepper, ginger, rose leaves, pumpkin seeds, sugar, occasionally dhatura is for intoxicating purposes, and this is called bhang massala. 30. Their consumption is said to be greater in company than in solitude. Chiefly the male sex ; prostitutes may use bhang. Young men use these drugs most. Children do not use these drugs. 31. The habit is easily formed, though their use is apt to nauseate at first. The habit is not easily broken off. There is a tendency to increase the quantities taken and develop excess. 32. Their use is connected with social customs not religous, except that at the time of the Holi their use increases. If drug-consumers go to the houses of others who do likewise, they are treated to them, as at marriages and melas, visits and festival times. It may turn out excessive, but is usually moderate. This induces others to begin, seeing and being there, when asked to smoke. 36. There is no reason to believe that the use of any of these drugs is being supplanted by alcohol. 37. The effects of charas-smoking are more heating than ganja-smoking and injurious to the lungs and general health. The effects of drinking bhang in moderation are said to be beneficial in promoting appetite, increasing weight; also useful in cases of hæmorrhoids. 39. Those who smoke ganja or charas are said not to drink or eat it; also the effects of eating or drinking them are said to be more injurious, as being more irritating and intoxicating and more tending to produce insanity. 40. Native Hindu village baids prescribe bhang for piles and occasionally for malarial fever. Bhang mixed with salt is given to cattle to promote appetite and keep down wind or indigestion. 41. (a) Moderate smoking of charas or ganja is said to promote appetite and digestion, and bhang as an appetiser. (b) Also to give staying-power and alleviate or prevent fatigue or its bad effects117 42. Moderate use said to be beneficial and harm- less. 44. The immediate effects are said to be refresh- ing, does not produce intoxication in moderate doses, does allay hunger, produce appetite; effects last about three hours; thirst, dryness of tongue. The want produces mentia, longing and uneasiness. 45. Those who habitually smoke ganja or charas suffer from chest affections, emaciation and want of energy. The effects of bhang are said not to impair the constitution. Ganja and charas- smoking weaken and lessen digestion and loss of appetite; said also to cause dysentery, bronchitis, and asthma. Impairs moral sense, said to tend to laziness, debauchery, and immorality. I have seen a number of cases of more or less pronounced insanity said to be due to excessive use of ganja : some of the cases are permanent, others subside or are capable of cure or alleviation. 46. The excessive use of charas also tends to insanity. 47. It does not appear to be an hereditary habit and does not specially affect the children. 48. Excessive use may be injurious to their children. 49. Said not to be taken as aphrodisiacs; not so used by prostitutes. The excessive use is said to cause impotence. 56. Their use in admixture is not said to be in any way beneficial. 57. From eating, their effects are more potent and intoxicating. 78. Evidence of SURGEON-LIEUTENANT-COLONEL G. C. HALL, Superintendent, Central Prison, Naini, Allahabad. 19. I am informed that ganja and charas are used only for smoking. I know of no other use. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking, but only for mixing with water or made into sweets or used in milk and mixed with pepper and drunk. It is used by the higher classes and specially by Pragwals and priests of Benares and Muttra. 28. I am informed that the average cost of a moderate consumer would not exceed two annas a month, if so much. An excessive consumer would use as much as two annas a day. 29. Pepper ordinarily. Almonds, cardamoms, carraway seeds, exceptionally, to make it more tasty. Dhatura, etc., not ordinarily used, except in cases to make it more intoxicating by regular excessive consumers who have become habituated to the drug. The spices mentioned above constitute a bhang massala. 30. Mostly smoked in company ; drunk also in company as a rule. Male sex mostly. Adult life - the same rules apply as with tobacco in European children not being allowed to use these drugs by their parents. 31. Yes. About the same as smoking tobacco, not more so than with the tobacco habit. 32. (a) It is a social custom and has no religious reference, except in few cases of Brahmins worship- ping the god Shiva, to whom bhang is offered before use. (d) Cannot say, but the fact of the combin- ation of the bhang with milk and other nutritious articles seems to show that it is not injurious in any way. 36. No. 37. The effects of smoking ganja and charas are immediate and evanescent. The effect of bhang is more lasting and takes longer to develop. 39. Smoking is generally considered the stronger form of taking the drug. I believe this is due to the constant repetition of the smoke. I believe with respect to any supposed tendency to insanity that the suddenness of the effect of the smoking makes it more liable to be a cause than the gradual effect of the bhang-drinking. I have no personal know- ledge. 40. I believe the baids are fond of prescribing these drugs in cases of fatigue and pain. 41. (a) Yes; this is what it is used for ostensibly. (b) Yes; without doubt it has a good effect in these cases. (c) Yes. 42. I believe the moderate use of these drugs to be harmless; my reason for my answer being that I have seen many moderate consumers who had taken these drugs for years and not suffered in health in any way. 44. (b) Said to be refreshing. (c) Not in moderation. (d) Allays hunger for a short time. (e) Creates appetite. (f) Smoking118 79. Evidence of SURGEON-LIEUTENANT-COLONEL M. D. MORIARTY, Civil Surgeon, Meerut. 1. Twenty-one years' service in India, viz., five years as a Regimental Medical Officer (Native Infantry) and sixteen years as Civil Surgeon and Superintendent of Jail. 2. The definitions of bhang and charas may be accepted for the province. Ganja I have little or no acquaintance with, and have never before heard of its three varieties. It is little used in these parts. The local names are bhang, charas, and ganja. I understand that amongst those who use it bhang is also called siddhi, sabzi, patti and bijiya. 19. The chief use of charas, and I believe also of ganja, is for smoking. I believe both ganja and charas are occasionally prescribed by native phy- sicians in cases of intermittent fever. I have also heard of both being applied locally in cases of hor- net sting. 23. Not that I know of. 28. I cannot say. 29. I have heard of dhatura being mixed with bhang in order to increase the intoxicating effect. No. 30. All three, especially charas and ganja, are, I believe, chiefly partaken of in company, e. g., in a "shivala" (Hindu temple), and by adult males. I have never known of a woman or child using any of these drugs. I should mention that ganja is very little used in these parts. 31. In regard to charas and bhang these ques- tions may, I believe, be answered in the affirmative, the first and third at any rate. I have heard that the hemp habit is much easier to break off than the opium habit. 32. I understand that in the festival of the Holi the higher castes of Hindus drink bhang in the same way that the lower castes drink alcohol. Such use of bhang use is not essential; it is, I understand, sometimes excessive. I have heard of women taking bhang in the " Holi," and remaining more or less under its influence for a week. 36. I cannot say, and have never heard an opinion to this effect expressed by a native. 37. In charas-smoking intoxication is almost immediate, in bhang-drinking I understand it occurs more slowly and is less intense. 39. On the contrary, I believe charas-smoking is the most injurious form of consumption both in regard to the respiratory affections it is prone to produce and to its tendency to produce insanity. Charas and ganja are, I believe, rarely eaten, and I have never heard of bhang being smoked. 40. I believe native physicians sometimes pre- scribe a poultice of bhang for an attack of the piles, and sometimes order ganja and charas (with other drugs) in intermittent fever. I myself have often used tincture Cannabis Indica in dysentery with good effect. 41. Not that I know of. 42. I do not. The effect is always, so far as I know, intoxication, more or less, and the tendency is to increase the dose. This is perhaps more true of charas-smoking than of bhang-drinking. 44. It is said to be refreshing, stimulating, and to some extent intoxicating, especially charas-smok- ing. Bhang-drinking is said to excite hunger. Moderate habitual consumers are, I believe, in the habit of using the drug morning and evening, and feel uncomfortable if they do not have it at the usual time. 45 and 46. It is not easy to define " moderate " and " excessive." The habitual use of charas is apt to produce noxious effects. The greater the use, the greater the effect. It is well known that charas-smoking may cause bronchitis and asthmatic symptoms. During the past 2½ years 36 cases of insanity have come under my observation. Exclud- ing from these 5 cases of post-epileptic insanity, 5 of dementia and 1 of amentia, there remain 25 cases of mania, of whom 6 were said to have been addicted to charas-smoking, 1 to ganja-smoking, and 1 to bhang-drinking. I cannot say what quantities of the different preparations these men may have used, or how frequently, or for how long ; the insanity is usually permanent and of a recurrent character; it is always mania so far as my experi- ence goes. I am not aware of any typical symp- toms. I have never heard that insanity tended to indulgence in hemp drugs. I believe that charas- smoking acts both directly as an exciting cause and indirectly as a predisposing cause of insanity. Following are short notes of two of the eight cases of insanity referred to :119 a week. They were not of bad character. There was no suspicion of dhatura so far as I know. The "influence" was intoxication. I had asked a Brahman whether he knew of women taking bhang. He said he knew of cases at the Holi, and he knew women who had been in a state of semi-intoxication for a week. Question 45.120 One of the thirty-six cases mentioned in my answer had an alcoholic history. I did not attri- bute the case to alcohol definitely, but put down alcohol with a mark of interrogation after it. As a regimental medical officer (Native Infan- try), I had no case that I can recollect. 80. Evidence of SURGEON-LIEUTENANT-COLONEL B. O'BRIEN, Civil Surgeon, Benares. 1. Twenty years' employment as Civil Surgeon in these provinces, during which I have very seldom missed a day in visiting the out-door department of the dispensaries which have been in my charge. At these there has been a daily average attendance of nearly two hundred per diem in round numbers. 31. I have repeatedly prescribed Indian hemp for neuralgias, for ovarian troubles, and for dysent- ery and its sequelæ and in large doses and for a long time. I never found any difficulty in stopping the drug, as would be the case if opium were used in the same (relatively.) doses. 41. I have several times been asked by my servants for money to buy bhang when out in camp, and when they have been exposed to bad weather. I have also frequently seen the drug administered with food to my horses and bullocks after a long and trying march. From the fre- quency with which I have been asked for this drug by my servants under such circumstances, and from the results I have observed after its use by them, I am of opinion that a moderate dose of bhang is very useful after severe exposure and hard work. 42. I consider the use of the drugs in modera- tion to bo harmless to most people. There are some few excitable people in whom even moderate doses of the drug cause very unpleasant symptoms. Some of my patients, after even very small doses of the tincture (10 drops), thought that they must be going mad, as their minds were full of delusions. In fact, they thought that they were delirious. Had the dose been larger, it is probable that these patients would not have been aware that their de- lusions and hallucinations were unreal, but would have taken them for real facts, and would, in fact, have been temporarily insane. 45. (a) Physical. (b) Impairment of the constitution is not observed after the use of hemp. (c) The digestive functions are not injured. (d) It gives great relief in dysentery. In both the Agra and Benares lunatic asylums it is thought by the officials that asthma is more prevalent amongst the insane who indulges in ganja. I could find no evidence to substantiate this idea. (f) During my twenty years' attendance at dis- pensaries in these provinces, I have never met a patient who alleged that he was suffering from the effects of the use, moderate or otherwise, of hemp drugs. Except for a very occasional luna- tic brought to the dispensaries, whose insanity was said to be due to ganja or charas by the police, I have had no experience in the treatment of illnesses caused by ganja, charas, or bhang. I do not believe that such exist. Even in lunatics brought to the asylums or dispensaries in a state of great emaciation, this condition was due to the violence of their excitement rather than to altered nutrition. 57a. I think that the records of every asylum in India should be gone over carefully, and every case of toxic insanity due to, or alleged to bo due to, hemp drugs should be tabulated. Then, I think, it would be made evident that there has been no perceptible increase in the numbers of cases of toxic insanity due to these drugs in recent years as is alleged. Oral evidence. Question 1.121 haling ganja may have a similar effect. I know three men within a hundred miles who are ordered to give up smoking tobacco for some months. Three or four cigarettes bring on bronchial trouble. I know a number of natives who use hemp whose constitution is not impaired at all. It is on my observation generally that I say I have not observed any impairing of the constitution. The insanity was the illness I was asked to deal with in the cases mentioned in the last paragraph of answer 45. The sentence would be clearer by putting the clause from " except" to " police" within parentheses. The lunatics referred to in the last sentence are lunatics whose insanity is said to be due to the use of hemp drugs; and of them I mean to say that when they are emaciated their emaciation is due to their excitement and not to other illness. I have never had any experience of deterioration or injury from either moderate or excessive use, though excessive use should theore- tically cause ill-results. In regard to insanity I have long thought that the moderate use of hemp drugs does not produce insanity, but that it prevents it. I have for many years believed that the moderate use of hemp and opium is one of the reasons that there is so little insanity in the country. I have never seen a case of insanity from the moderate use of hemp. Question 46.122 the system to sustain a prolonged exertion; it also alleviates fatigue. (c) Bhang from its effects on the nervous system acts as a mild preventive of disease in malarious and unhealthy tracts. 44. The immediate effect of the eating or drink- ing of bhang is refreshing, produces a feeling of exhilaration, and creates an appetite. The effects last from four to six hours. After that time a period of repose follows, but the effects are not the same in all individuals. In some it produces sleep at once. The want of subsequent gratification pro- duces an uneasiness. 45. The habitual moderate use of bhang does not act injuriously in any way any more than the habitual moderate use of alcohol. In two cases of insanity during the current year which were said to be the result of smoking charas to excess, I have no doubt that the charas merely acted as an exciting cause. One of the cases was that of a young man who previously suffered from great depression, insomnia, and general malaise, the result of over-work. While in that state he was known to have taken charas to excess, the result being acute mania. The other case was that of a man who while an in-patient in the dispensary, having undergone some trivial operation, suddenly dis- played symptoms of acute homicidal and suicidal mania. He was said to have smoked charas to excess, the immediate effects being as described. This man had a history of previous attacks of in- sanity. As far as my experience goes, the type of insanity produced by smoking charas or ganja is always that of acute mania. The effects are temporary and are re-induced after liberation from restraint. There is no doubt that the abuse of hemp drugs is most common amongst the religious ascetics. Many of them are from the commencement individuals of weak and unstable intellects. This, together with their vicious habits, acts as inducement to them to resort to those drugs. 82. Evidence of SURGEON-MAJOR EDWARD MAIR, Superintendent, Central Prison, Bareilly. 1. No special opportunities. 2. These definitions are applicable in this part of the North-Western Provinces. All these names are in use, except siddhi, which is that given to the juice of the kajur palms. 19. In this part of the country ganja and charas are only used for smoking. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking in this part of the country. 29. Ordinarily, no ingredients are mixed with any of these drugs. Occasionally, opium is mixed with bhang to make it more intoxicating. None of the other drugs mentioned are used for admix- ture in this district. Rose leaves, black pepper, poppy seeds, kakri, khira, and melon seeds, aniseed, and other substances are used by natives for mixing with bhang, but they make the mixtures themselves, and no prepared mixture is sold in the shops. 30. The use of these drugs is said to be almost entirety confined to men. The only women who use them are prostitutes. The drugs are never given to children. It is a common opinion that alcohol is being used to a much greater extent than formerly ; but there is no reason for supposing it is being used in place of hemp drugs. Charas is also said to be used to a greater extent than formerly. 37. The effects of ganja smoking are said to be more temporary than those of charas smoking. In this respect the effects of these drugs differ from those of bhang, the intoxication from which is more slowly induced and lasts very much longer. The kind of intoxication is the same in the case of all three drugs ; the only difference is in the intensity and the duration of the effects produced. 39. The common native opinion is that the use of bhang is less injurious than smoking charas, as the intoxication from the latter is more intense and more suddenly induced, while the moderate use of bhang is believed to improve the appetite and digestion. 40. In this part of the country these drugs are not used by hakims to any considerable extent, and, when used, it is only as a substitute for opium. These drugs are used in the treatment of cattle disease in the same cases as opium would be given. 41. Bhang is commonly believed to improve appetite and digestion, but none of these drugs are used to give staying-power, or as substitutes for opium in malarious districts. 44. The immediate effect of these drugs is stimulating and intoxicating. Bhang improves the appetite; charas and ganja smoking dull the appetite. The effects of bhang continue for three or four hours ; those of charas or ganja smoking only for five or ten minutes. In all cases there is a reaction after the excitement produced by these drugs, and one habituated to their use suffers considerable distress if deprived of them. 45. It is a common opinion that smoking ganja or charas is a frequent cause of bronchitis and asthma. 83. Evidence of SURGEON-CAPTAIN CHARLES MACTAGGART, Superintendent, Central Prison, Agra. 1. What I have recorded has been learned from prisoners who have been consumers of hemp drugs before coming to the jails under my charge. As an official visitor of the lunatic asylum at Agra, I have seen many cases of insanity due to these drugs. 2. These definitions may be accepted as regards this part of the North-Western Provinces. The three narcotic products of the hemp plant are known by the names given by Dr. Prain. 19. Ganja and charas are only used for smoking. 23. Bhang is never smoked. 28. (a) Charas, 123 (b) Charas, 2½ tolas to 1 cluttack. Ganja, 1 chittack to 2 chittacks. Bhang, 1 chittack. 29. (a) Tobacco is usually mixed with charas and ganja. Bhang is usually mixed with black pepper. (b) Bhang is sometimes mixed with cardamoms, almonds, sugar, milk, rose leaves, cucumber seeds and raisins. Bhang massala is sold in bazar. It consists of bhang mixed with the ingredients given above. 30. Women do not consume these drugs as a rule, except prostitutes. It is not usual for children to consume these drugs. 31. The habit of consuming is easily formed and is difficult to break off, the process being accom- panied by severe pains in the arms and legs, and sometimes diarrhoea. It is not necessary to go on increasing the quantity consumed to produce desired effect. 32. Not used in connection with religion. Chaube Brahmins of Mathra and Hurdwar use these drugs largely, but not in connection with their religious ceremonies. 37. Charas produces greater physiological effects than ganja. Bhang-drinking and ganja and charas-smoking have practically the same effects on individuals, except that bhang excites the sexual passions ; charas and ganja do not. 39. Drinking bhang is less injurious than smok- ing ganja or charas, and it is said not to produce insanity, as is the case when charas and ganja are smoked to great excess. Insanity is frequently undoubtedly due to ganja and charas-smoking. 40. I don't think these drugs are much used medicinally. Some native doctors use decoctions of bhang as an external application to relieve pain in acute local inflammations. 41. (a) The moderate use of bhang, ganja and charas are said to excite the appetite and aid diges- tion. (b) They stimulate the nervous system, and give staying-power for the time being. (c) Not used particularly for this purpose. 42. The moderate use of these drugs does not appear to be harmful. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of these drugs on the consumer is to lighten the intellect and cause a feeling of capacity for work. It stimulates the appetite, and does away with the feeling of fatigue after exertion. The want of subsequent gratification produces the opposite effects, i.e., a general feeling of malaise, fatigue, loss of appetite, pains in the limbs and diarrh124 ganja and charas none, except a desire for the repetition of the dose. 45. (b) Charas and ganja weaken the constitu- tion ; bhang does not seem to do so. (c) No. (d) Ganja and charas both cause difficulty in breathing; bhang not. 47 and 48. They do not seem to produce a here- ditary habit. 49. The moderate use of all three drugs seems to produce aphrodisiac effects. Prostitutes use them for that purpose. Charas and ganja do not seem to produce impotence, except in excessive quantities. Bhang only produces it if taken in excess. 85. Evidence of SURGEON-MAJOR F. C. CHATTERJI, Civil Surgeon, Basti. 1. Lifelong experience of India and from Pesha- war to Burma. 2. Yes. Ganja, charas and bhang. Ganja of good quality is known as " baluchar." 19. Used only for smoking. 23. Bhang is used for smoking by poorer people who cannot afford to buy ganja for the purpose. This obtains in the cases of moderate smokers in this district, but is not common. 28. (a) About 1 to 2 annas worth. (b) About 4 to 8 annas worth or more; 4 annas worth being about a tola. 29. Tobacco is ordinarily mixed with ganja and charas to make it presentable to the palate and also to render its intoxicating effect gradually felt. Dhatura is sometimes used by confirmed ganja- smokers to heighten its effects, and by Thugs to rob persons under its influence through the medium of ganja. The following is the list of bhang massala :125 86. Evidence of SURGEON-MAJOR G. A. EMERSON, Civil Surgeon, and Superintendent, Lunatic Asylum, Bareilly. 1. As Civil Surgeon in the North-Western Pro- vinces and Oudh. 2. Yes, these definitions may be accepted as applicable to this district. In this district bhang is called bhang, patti, bhouti and subji, but not siddhi. Charas is called charas and sulfa; and ganja, ganja. 19. Charas and ganja are only used for smoking in this district by the people. A preparation of charas is used as an aphrodisiac by certain hakims here, but only medicinally. 23. Bhang is, I believe, sometimes smoked by the Kahars, but only to a limited extent. 28. I have no definite information on this sub- ject. 29. (a) Ordinarily. With charas, tobacco is the usual ingredient. With ganja, tobacco is often used, but the drug is usually smoked alone. With bhang the usual ingredients are black pepper, cardamoms, and milk and sugar. I know of nothing that is used exceptionally with charas, and ganja, but with bhang, cloves, almonds, betel, pan are used. I have heard of dhatura leaves being used with bhang, and the leaves and seeds of the same being smoked with ganja and charas to produce the in- toxicating effects more quickly and intensely. I have never heard of opium, nux vomica or cantha- ridis having been used with any of these drugs. I know of no preparation as bhang massala. 30. Charas and ganja, as a rule, are consumed in company, though, of course, both are used to some extent in solitude; but bhang is principally used in solitude; at the same time it is to a great extent used in company. 31. The habit is easily formed and is difficult to break off. I should say there must be a certain amount of tendency for a moderate consumer to become an excessive user of the drugs, just as there is in the use of other intoxicants. 32. In the Holi, Dassera, Dawali and Sheorathri festivals of the Hindus bhang is largely used for its intoxicant effects. Charas and ganja are also used to some extent during these festivals. I believe the use is not really essential; but custom has made it nearly so, the same as the use of red powder (ahir golal) at the Holi festival. Bhang is used excessively ; but still I do not think that this annual custom is likely to lead to the formation of the habit; but it does sometimes produce injurious effects as a temporary measure. Bhang is given to children by some Muham- madans at the time that male children are circum- cised ; but this is solely done to prevent the child feeling the pain of the operation. 36. I think there is little doubt that the use of alcohol has to some extent taken the place of these drugs; but still those who want to take intoxicants will take alcohol more in preference to these drugs, because the effects are more certain and marked, and to some extent the social penalty, which was formerly exercised over those who take spirit, has been somewhat relaxed. Consumers of hemp drugs, and who also take alcohol, have told me that they do so chiefly on account of the intoxicating effects of alcohol being more certain. I have very little doubt in my mind that if the consumption of hemp drugs be interfered with there will be greater use of alcohol. 37. The effects of these drugs are all more or less the same; only charas is much stronger in its effects than either ganja or bhang. 39. This I do not know. 40. Yes, certain Hindus use them, and bhang is given to cattle as a supposed digestive. 41. (a) I very much doubt that bhang in anyway can be beneficial as a food accessory and digestive. (b) There is little doubt that these drugs, but chiefly bhang, do to a certain extent give staying- power and alleviate fatigue, and is consequently largely consumed by kahars, fishermen, and those who have to work much in water. (c) These drugs, but bhang principally, are used in the malarious districts, such as the Terai, on account of the supposed action as a preventive of disease, and the people who use them thus no doubt believe in their efficacy. (d) I know of no other way. 42. I consider that the moderate use of bhang is to a great extent harmless, as no doubt it does, to some extent, give a fillip to those who are tired or weary ; but I do not believe that ganja or charas would be harmless. 44. (b) Bhang is certainly to some extent re- freshing, but not ganja or charas. (c) They all three produce intoxication. (d) I very much doubt whether the former of these drugs allays hunger; but I have heard it stated that charas and ganja, when smoked, do to some extent, just the same as is done by a pipe of tobacco. (e) I do not consider that any of these drugs produces appetite. Bhang drinkers are inordi- nately large eaters ; but I think this is more due to a kind of paralysis of the stomach. The man can fill his stomach with food, and he does not feel as if well-filled, and he will often take food to excess, then vomit, and then take more food into his stomach. (f) From two to six hours or so. (g) No after-effects that I know of. (h) Yes, certainly the want of subsequent grati- fication would produce a longing or uneasiness. 45. (b) It certainly does impair the constitution. (c) It would certainly impair digestion and cause loss of appetite. (d) I have never seen dysentery caused by it; but there is no doubt that bronchitis and asthma are to a great extent due to the use of charas and ganja, as these are principally smoked, and bhang would, no doubt, produce the same diseases in those who smoke it. (e) I think it does, to some extent, impair moral sense and induce habits of laziness. (f) Yes, certainly, all these drugs do cause a certain amount of insanity and deaden the intellect, principally charas and ganja. As a rule, the type of insanity is mania with a great tendency to laughing. The insanity is nearly always tempor- ary, i.e., in those cases solely due to the use of these drugs. Yes, certainly, the symptoms may and will, in all probability, be reinduced by use of the drug after liberation from restraint. Typical symptoms126 confess to the use of the drug, hut often at first they will deny it. I am inclined to think that ahsecess of the liver may be induced by excessive use of these drugs. 46. As regards the excessive use of these drugs, their effects are the same as in moderate use, only more marked. 47. Not necessarily. And I don't think it would affect the children. 48. There can be no doubt that the habitual excessive use of these drugs, more especially charas and ganja, would have a deleterious effect on the children of the consumers. 49. It is said to be so used, but I have never seen it. I don't think the moderate use of bhang would produce impotence. I have never heard of its use in excess. 50. It certainly would produce impotence. 56. I have no reliable information on this ques- tion; but the dhatura leaves and seeds are no doubt used by classes who wish to have the intoxi- cating effects of these drugs quickly and surely produced. 57. By those who use charas and ganja in ex- cess, these are often eaten as a pill to produce the intoxicating effects more surely. Oral evidence. Question 1.127 to excess, and there was no other cause. One was before and one was after I began the special in- quiry in relation to this Commission. They were both within the last few months. Dysentery is the commonest cause of abscess of the liver among natives ; secondly, malarial effects. In both these cases there was an absence of history of dysentery and malaria as absolute as I could get. I think both men belonged to the town. They were not spirit drinkers. As regards malaria, it is almost impossible to find a native who had not suffered ; but as far as I could gather from the history, these were cases. Of course these men may have been exposed to malaria. I had never heard abscess of the liver attributed to hemp drugs before, but in both these cases the men themselves ascribed their ill- ness to the excessive use of the drugs, and one said that he had somewhat similar symptoms once before, and on stopping the charas smoking for a while he thought he had been better, but took to the habit again. This was the earlier case. As far as I know, there is nothing in the physiologi- cal action of the drug that would cause abscess of the liver. I have no information as to insanity being caused by these drugs apart from my asylum ex- perience except the temporary case above recited. In my practice I have had several cases brought to me in my dispensary practice of men tempora- rily insane whose insanity was ascribed by their friends to these drugs after a big bout perhaps ; but the histories were so unsatisfactory that I could not attribute their insanity to hemp drugs with anything like confidence. I have experience of cases sent to me for ob- servation as Civil Surgeon, and also of cases ad- mitted to the asylums of which I have held charge. In cases sent to me as Civil Surgeon, the Ma- gistrate sends me as much information as he can ; but it is very meagre. It is sent on a printed form. The information is sent filled up on a printed form, giving the man's history as far as they can get it from the police, and a blank space is left on the back for my certificate. This is the practice both at Benares and Bareilly. There is a space for cause, but as a rule it is unknown. I moke inquiry as to cause from friends who may be sent with the man, or from the police who accompany him (or in cases discharged cured without admis- sion to the asylum from the man himself), or from the papers above referred to. The friends very rarely attend. As a rule then I am left en- tirely to the statement or form received and to the police. The former is filled up in the Magis- trate's office, not in his band-writing, and signed by him. I do not know who fills it up. As Civil Surgeon, I would certify as to cause if I could get at the cause. Of course, there are num- bers of cases where you cannot. If the Magis- trate's statement showed hemp drugs as the cause and I could get no further information myself, I would certify that as the cause, as having been obtained from some source which he considered reliable. I would say " this insanity is pro- bably due to such and such a drug from the his- tory of the case." I consider that I have as Civil Surgeon to consider the cause as well as the fact of the insanity. This has always been my habit. When a case comes into the asylum under the orders of the Magistrate on the Civil Surgeon's certificate, the magisterial statement and Civil Surgeon's certificate are sent with the order. I enter the cause in the proper place in the asylum register as soon as the man comes in, i.e., at my next visit. I enter this from the papers I receive with the man, i. e., from the magisterial statement or from the Civil Surgeon's certificate if he certi- fies as to cause. Many Civil Surgeons do not. It is extremely rarely that I have a chance of meeting friends; they very rarely come. But both I myself and my subordinates enquire from the patient as to the cause when at any time he is fit to answer. If I were satisfied that he was giving a reliable answer, I should alter the entry as to cause, If I got at a history of heredity, I would enter that. If I got a history of ganja, I should put that down. If the cause were " un- known," I should put down ganja if the man said he smoked, if he acknowledged the use of the drug. At Bareilly the Deputy Superintendent is an old soldier. He has no medical training He very frequently makes enquiries. I wish to know the cause for my own satisfaction. It might affect the treatment. The Benares and Agra Asylums have Deputy Superintendents who are not medical men. If such a Deputy Superintend- ent were to state the results of his enquiries, I should not accept them without myself asking the patient or his friends, as the case might be. There is a Hospital Assistant also attached to the asylum. I would accept his statement as to en- quiries made. It is from such enquiries and from the papers that I enter cause. These are the only source of my information on this point. The Hospital Assistant in conducting such enquiries is left to his own discretion. He asks his own ques- tions. Of course, if I could verify his statement myself, I should do go. I would not take it without verifying it if I could. Diagnosis comes in after this. There are no typical symptoms, except perhaps that the person is much emaciated, combined with laughing im- moderately. At the same time I could not say that these symptoms were not due to another cause without a history of the use of these drugs. The history is absolutely essential for diagnosis. All the symptoms may be due to other cause? than hemp drugs. As a rule the histories given by friends of patients are so vague that I cannot say that they are reliable either when given before or after the admission of the patient. It practically re- solves itself into this, that the mere fact of the use of hemp drugs is a sufficient cause. I have no bias in reference to hemp drugs as compared with alcohol. If I had a history of both, I should put the case down to liquor. I did not write the report for 1892. In case of such further enquiries as I have de- scribed above, no entry is made except the mere correction. I was not in charge of the asylum in 1892, and have not seen (discharged) nine out of the eleven hemp drug cases, but I studied the histories and submitted notes on them. Dr. Anderson was in charge. He has returned to duty. In the eleven cases ascribed in Statement VII of the last Annual Report to hemp drugs, I should be inclined to put the cases of Nathu, Fackeray, and Debi rather down to drink, because there is in these three cases a history of liquor, and those who have both habits as a rule prefer the spirit drinking. In the cases of Davi Singh and Balak Ram the true cause is (I think from the history) heredity. The case of Malyun Singh is a doubt- ful case, for the circumstances of the man's sur- roundings as described in the history may have led to the bhang drinking or may themselves have
128 produced the insanity. In doubtful cases the entry should be "cause unknown." The majority of cases admitted to the asylum under hemp drugs are young men. But I have not considered the matter sufficiently to be able to base any conclusions on this fact. Question 50.129 that is mixed with hemp was opium seeds, and these only with bhang; and I think they were not used for the amount of opium they contained, which must be very small. 57. Ganja is not apparently used in this dis- trict, and all declared that charas is never eaten or drunk, but is only used in a chillum with tobacco. 57.(a) One observation I made in the course of my enquiry in the jail was the considerable num- ber of charas and bhang consumers there were amongst the prisoners without my being aware of the fact. Opium eaters invariably complain of the misery caused by the drug being stopped, and plead for it. In the whole course of my service as a Jail Superintendent I never yet have had a prisoner come to plead for his charas or bhang to be continued. Either then its total withdrawal does not produce the same amount of misery, or possibly their use is considered degrading; hence prisoners do not ask. Incline to the former view. Oral evidence. Question 1.130 other form of consumption. Smoking causes asthmatic bronchitis and general debility, impairs the appetite, retards digestion, and leads to insanity. I have seen two cases of insanity brought on through smoking charas. Bhang impairs the senses, causes inactivity and torpid- ity ; but I have never seen a case of insanity resulting from the use of it. 40. Yes, by Baids and Unani hakims, both internally and externally. Internally in the dis- orders of the alimentary canal and kidney diseases. Externally it is boiled and used as a fomentation for piles, or the patient sits over the vessel and steams the piles. It is also used for the treatment of colic and kidney diseases of cattle. 41. Moderate use of bhang is supposed (a) to keep the health, improve digestion ; (b) it is also supposed to increase the staying-power and pre- vent fatigue ; (c) it is also supposed to be a pre- ventive against malarial fever. 42. The moderate use of bhang is probably harmless. It is well known among natives that when they go to an unhealthy place, they use bhang to keep their health, and it does prevent them getting ill. 44. If a moderate consumer is deprived of bhang he feels miserable and is fit for nothing. A small quantity taken then revives and refreshes him : it excites hunger and he requires food. A dose lasts about 12 hours. It in no way inconveniences him afterwards so long as he gets his regular allowance : it is the want of it appears to affect him most. 45. Habitual moderate use of bhang, in my opinion, produces no ill-effects, either physical, mental or moral, except that once a man gets accustomed to it he cannot leave it off. (b) It improves the constitution. (c) It helps digestion and increases the appetite. (d) No. (e) No. (f) Moderate use does not deaden the intel- lect or produce insanity. I have never known a case of insanity produced by the moderate use of bhang. The moderate use of charas impairs the constitu- tion : it injures digestion, causes loss of appetite, brings on bronchitis and asthma, deadens the intellect, and leads to intoxication and insanity. He is unable to leave off the use of it. In the two cases of insanity I saw from the use of charas it was the exciting cause. It produces mania, but only temporary. Two cases I saw got well suddenly ; both were raving maniacs. They were kept in cells for a week, and during that time neither of them ever tasted food or water. On the eighth day when I visited them, they were both quite sane and wanted to be allowed to go back to their work. They were police con- stables here, both hill men. They had been drug- ged by a fakir ; but when they got well they denied where they got the charas from. This case came under my own observation since I came here. They were very violent, and were suffering reli- gious mania : both of them thought they were deities. Over-indulgence in the drug would rein- duce the symptoms after liberation. 47. The habitual moderate use of these drugs is not hereditary : it is very often by accident the habit has been forced on a man in this way. A smoke from a fakir's chillum is supposed to be a great honour. Almost all fakirs who smoke use charas, and they put some charas in the chillum for their guest. At first this guest is violently drank, but in a few days he gets fond of the sensation, and begins to use the drug on his own account. Parents never teach or encourage their children to use intoxicating drugs. The children of a moderate consumer are unhealthy. They are born weakly, and don't thrive. Some of them get over it as they grow up if they abstain from the drug ; some of them remain weak. 48. Not even the excessive habitual use of these drugs is hereditary. A man must begin it for himself. The children of this class will be also born weak, and seldom become healthy, strong men. 49. Charas is given in very small quantity for aphrodisiac purposes, and is given by prostitutes. Kashipur in the Terai is a well known place for this practice. Prolonged use of charas tends to produce impotence. 50. It is never given in excess for aphrodisiac purposes. 56. The effects of bhang mixed with dhatura are much more marked. The subject, if not used to the mixture, will get delirious at once almost. None of the other drugs mentioned in this para- graph are mixed with bhang here. The effects of an excessive dose of bhang and dhatura on a man not used to the drugs are very marked. He would be insensible for two days, and after the insensibility had passed off he would be giddy and out of sorts for several days. Oral evidence. Question 1.131 the whole time. When I saw them on the eighth day they were clothed (in dhoti). Both stood up and saluted and said they were ready to go back to their work. On the seventh day they had been precisely the same as on any other day. I could see no difference. I wrote on the eighth day that they were sane. They were released at once, and went back to their work. I have heard of no recurrence. I have seen one of them several times since, and heard about the other. Neither has had a relapse. 1 knew that the two men had both been well conducted in the police. They were so reported. There was nothing known accurately about the cause, for the men refused to give information, and nothing was ascertained that could have been used against the fakir, who was known. There was somebody who said it was charas. It may have been dhatura. I never examined the pupils. The men were in the cells all the time. I noticed no physical symptoms. Both men wanted to go back to the hills and become fakirs, and go in for a reli- gious life. I am persuaded that they took no food or water for seven days. Food and water put in were always left untouched. I do not remember any case of dhatura poisoning. I have neither seen nor read of any case of insanity pro- duced by belladonna or atropine. The men were never out of the cells. They were regarded as too dangerous. I have had several other cases of insanity before me. I have not had any which I attributed to hemp drugs. I have never had my attention drawn to the effects of these drugs. The matter has never come before me in my prac- tice. The fact that these two young constables had smoked with a fakir brought the matter before me in that case. Question 56.132 cannot give any opinion as to the habit being hereditary. 49. I believe that all the hemp drugs are sup- posed to have a temporary exciting effect on the sexual inclinations. They probably act by their generally exhilarating effects. Much as alcohol has the same effect. 50. As the man who consumes alcohol to excess is led into debauchery, so likewise is the habitual consumer of hemp drugs in their various forms. 56 and 57. I have no information to give on these points. 90. Evidence of SURGEON-CAPTAIN J. MORWOOD,Superintendent, Central Prison, Benares. 1: I arrived in India six years and seven months ago, but have had no opportunity of obtaining in- formation about hemp drugs. B. Kali Bassant, Head Clerk, Benares Central Prison, has made himself acquainted with the subject, and has supplied me with the informa- tion given below. 2. The definitions given are correct. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smoking. 23. Hardly ever. Very rarely it might be smoked medicinally. 28. (a) Habitual moderate consumers133 Provinces and Oudh, including the Kumaon hills, and for nearly two years I have been a Civil Sur- geon in this district and at Pilibhit Briefly, then, let me say here at the outset that, so far as the foregoing opportunities served to impress my powers of observation, absolutely no question of the use, and still less of the abuse, of hemp drug by the people of India had arisen in my mind prior to this enquiry. 26. The result of my ten days' (about) enquiry among all classes of the people of this district, including high caste Mahajans and Brahmins, re- ligious orders, native medicine men of various schools, residents of outlying villages (cultivators of the soil), native druggists, and a body of 500 convicts, has led me to the opinion that, while the use of one form or other of the drug is fairly wide- spread, the abuse is very rare, and that, speaking for this district, there certainly does not exist, a hemp question anything approaching the alcohol question, which exercises physicians, philanthro- pists, and social reformers in Great Britain. 45. Every native one speaks to here on the sub- ject is free to admit the abuse of the drug, but close questioning elicits very few definite facts. There is a general opinion that excess is harmful by causing a deterioration of the organic functions, but the observers, who are the source of my in- formation, are certainly nor close nor exact reason- ers. They do not distinguish between the gene- ral and particular, between the three sets of causes, as factors in the production of a definite result, viz., the ultimate, the exciting, and the determin- ing. They cannot affirm that the evil results they deplore are altogether the effects of the drug, or of the very trying environment of this Doab on people devoid of all sense of "comfort" and of hygienic arrangements; nor do they attempt an estimate of the approximate proportion of reproach which should be attached to these factors in the final result. This is a notoriously unhealthy dis- trict, central in the Ganges-Jumna Mesopotamia; the death-rate is high and the standard of health excep- tionally low; the stamp of the "malarial" cachexia is obvious on the majority, and almost invariably found on the lower classes. Yesterday I admitted 13 convicts into the jail, and the average weight per man was a little over 1 maund 12 seers, or 7½ stone; only one of these men admitted that he used hemp habitually, and his weight was consider- ably above the average; the others denied ever using hemp in any form, save at the Holi festival, when it is the custom for every one to take it. I only mention this as showing the standard of physique generally obtaining here among a large proportion of the population, and to show that there are conditions of environment at work here which so far to account for a general dyserasia, which fulfils the conditions which a rough observer, believing in the pernicious effects of hemp, might be led to attribute to the use of the drug. For, as I have said, those who most strongly aver the ill- effects of hemp deal (when questioned for definite facts) in generalities, suggesting a dyscrasia, loss of functional power, impotence (sexual), chronic rheumatism, pallor, and atrophy, and all these results are precisely what, I am led to expect from the malarial and splenic cachexia. Go to a village where the soil is water-logged and the spring (ground-water) level is very high, as it is gene- rally in the central parts of the Doab, where irri- gation canals are in use, and call out the male population for inspection, as I have often done in my tours, and you will hear a story of which the above symptoms are a bare outline134 all schools, I myself have interviewed several of the more than prominent of these. As a rule, I find they hold rather pessimistic views of the effects of hemp, attributing to it a terrible cata- logue of ills, which, however, done into English amount to the indictment I have already set forth, and which I have discussed. 40. The ideas of Vedantic physicians are not chastened and ordered by a knowledge of anatomy and pathology, as Westerns understand it, and their symptomatology is correspondingly exuber- ant and chaotic135 during the festival of Holi, by both sexes and at all ages. It is not used mixed with any of the drugs mentioned in the question. 30. Principally consumed in company among adult males of any age. 31. The habit is readily formed but can be discontinued without any difficulty; like all in- dulgences is to increase, so in these cases the habit may develope into the excessive. 32. They are used in gatherings to conduce to conviviality, and is not compulsorily used in any social or religious ceremony. They are ordinarily temperately used, but it is possible and probable, that the indulgence may lead to the formation of a habit which may operate injuriously. 36. Alcohol is used by wealthy Hindus residing in or near large cities, such as Calcutta, especially those who are fond, and mix in, European society; these prefer alcohol to any form of Indian hemp. 37. Charas smoking is stronger than ganja; the drinking of bhang is not as strong as either of the above. Drinking bhang leads to the form- ation of a habit which can be discontinued. 39. Smoking is far more injurious than drink- ing; it leads to organic changes in the lungs, premature decay causes bronchitis, asthma, bodily weakness and mental degeneration. 40. They are largely used by native doctors in the treatment of malarial diseases, affections of the generative organs, as a tonic, and locally as a soothing application to piles and painful parts; also as a stimulant in dyspepsia, to give staying- power under severe exertion or exposure and fatigue; in these latter cases, the effect is to some degree beneficial. Bhang is burnt with silver to form an oxide which is considered to be valuable as a remedy in weakness of the organs of gene- ration. 42. The moderate use of these drugs I do not think to be harmful. 44. At first stimulating and pleasant, to be followed by a sense of intoxication. They do not allay hunger: the effect is transient, leaving a feeling of languor and disinclination to labour, but commonly no longing for more remains. 45. (a) Yes, to the lungs and brain, in a greater or less degree. (b) Yes. (c) No. (d) Bronchitis and asthma. (e) Conduces to laziness, and the excessive use to immorality and debauchery. (f) They deaden the intellect and cause insanity of the maniacal type of a temporary character, which may recur after a return to the use of the drug. Some of the insanes have con- fessed to have used the drug. (g) In my experience mental anxiety had fol- lowed the use of the drug, in cases where insanity has resulted. There is evidence to show that insanity follows the indulgence of drugs by persons who are deficient in self-control through weakened intellect. 46. Remarks in the preceding paragraph have reference to the excessive use of these drugs. 47 and 48. No. 49. Yes, prostitutes indulge in the use of these substances to a small extent only, without injury or harm. I do not think the moderate use of these drugs tend to cause impotence. 50. Harm follows excessive use and causes impotence from tissue degeneration and want of nervous power. 56. Beyond what has already been stated in paragraph 29, the drugs are not mixed as cited in the question. 57. These substances are not eaten or drunk in this part of the province. Oral evidence. Question 1.136 this change would take. I knew one case137 The cases of insanity I have seen, which were incited by the use of hemp, were of individuals who from falling into bad company became slaves to the use of hemp drugs, but before this had manifested no signs of defective or weak intelli- gence. 46. See preceding remarks. 47 and 48. I can't say. 49. The drugs possess aphrodisiac properties, and are used by some on this account. Their use in this way is injurious, and leads to impotence. 50. See foregoing remarks. 56. I have had no experience of these combina- tions. 57. I don't know. 94. Evidence of ASSISTANT SURGEON MAN MOHAN DASS, Kayasth, Officiating Civil Surgeon, Muttra. 1. I have been in Government service as Assist- ant Surgeon for nearly sixteen years, during which period I served in Bengal, Madras, North-Western Provinces and Oudh, and had opportunities of seeing several people who consume the drugs. 2. The definition of Dr. Prain about bhang, charas, and ganja may be accepted for this pro- vince. Local names of bhang138 thin emaciated appearance and irritable temper and excited look are very characteristic. The effects of bhang drinking are different from those of ganja or charas. It takes a little longer time to produce the intoxicating effects. Bhang drinker is not so irritable and thin and emaciated as the ganja or charas smoker. Pleasant delirium and stupor are characteristics of bhang. 39. Bhang drinking or eating is less injurious than the smoking of ganja or charas. 40. (a) Bhang leaves are used by the Vaids in preparing medicines for chronic diarrh139 the past seven years, since 1887 to 1893, out of a total of 58 lunatics only in two cases excessive bhang was traced as the cause of insanity. Excessive dose of charas or ganja when taken habitually produces all the injurious effects on the constitution. The habitual excessive ganja or charas smoker is thin and emaciated in constitu- tion. His digestion is impaired. It causes dy- sentery, bronchitis, and asthma. It impairs the moral character, and he becomes a debauchee. It deadens the intellect. I have seen several cases of insanity due to excessive ganja or charas, and I should say that the drugs are the sole cause of insanity in them, that is to say, they are the pre- disposing as well as the exciting cause of insanity. Very recently a case of acute mania came under my observation. A man named Heranath Jogi, aged about 20 years, was brought to me on the 15th October 1893, suffering from symptoms of acute mania for the last 8 months. Before this period he was perfectly well. His father and mother are living, and he himself is married. He was quite sober, and there was no cause of grief or family anxiety that I could trace out by careful enquiry. One day he met a babaji, and took a fancy to become bis chilah. He then commenced smoking charas in his company, and ultimately went away from home with that babaji to Indore, and there the symptoms of acute mania developed. The insanity in most cases is of the type of acute mania, which is temporary and does not last long. In most cases a few days' stay in the asylum or in the jail makes them all right; very lately I had a case in the jail. A man named Radha Syam Bairagi, about 35 years, was sent there as an insane on the 11th September 1S93. He was a habitual charas smoker for the last four or five years. One day he took a very big dose of charas and became insensible and delirious. He was found assaulting a, crowd of people in the street, when the police got hold of him and cha- lanned him as an insane. The intoxicating effect of the drug passed off soon, and since his admis- sion to the jail he did not show any symptom of insanity or derangement of mind. He was ulti- mately discharged on the 14th October 1893. Such cases are not really cases of insanity, but of charas or ganja poisoning. Besides the above there are cases of insanity which have come to my observation in which ganja or charas acted as an exciting cause of the insanity and not the predisposing cause, the predisposing cause being mental anxiety or grief, etc. The symptoms of insanity are generally rein- duced by the use of the drug after they are set free. The typical symptoms are redness of the conjunctiva with contraction or dilation of the pupils. He is violent and restless, and is very talkative. In some there is homicidal tendency, and in some there is suicidal tendency. Some also suffer from a sort of chronic monomania. Insanes who have no recorded ganja history do not easily confess this habit. He will do it after much questioning. In case of alleged connection between insanity and the use of the hemp drugs, I don't think that the use of the drugs by persons suffering from mental anxiety or brain disease to obtain relief, has been sufficiently considered in explaining that connection. My impression is that many cases of insanity which are put down to ganja or charas smoking have some predisposing cause such as mental anxiety, grief, etc., the ganja or charas smoking being only an exciting cause. I have seen men who are known as pagal or baora are very much addicted to ganja or charas. In fact they are men of weak intellect or born idiots. 47. No. It has no hereditary tendency or affects the children in any way. 48. No. It has no hereditary tendency. 49. Moderate use of bhang, charas, and ganja are used as aphrodisiac, but few of the consumers use them for that purpose. Prostitutes also use them for the same purpose. When so used they are injurious, because the excessive venery under- mines the constitution. I believe long-continued use of bhang, ganja or charas ultimately produces impotence. 50. The excessive use of the drugs for aphrodi- siac purposes produces all the injurious effects on the constitution. 56. Bhang is used with black pepper, carda- mom, cloves, aniseed (sonf), kadu seeds and ajwan in cold season to increase the stimulating property of bhang, as well as to give it a nice smell and taste; in the hot season, khira and kukree seeds, as well as black pepper and nutmegs, to moderate its action and to make it a little soothing to the stomach. Tobacco is mixed with ganja or charas to moderate its action, as without this the smoke is very irritating to the throat and produces cough and spasm of the throat. There is a preparation of bhang called pancha- ratni. It is a mixture of bhang, arsenic, dhatnra, betelnut, and opium. It is considered to be luxu- rious preparation, something like the rum punch. It is prepared in cold season, when a small quan- tity of this will serve the purpose of producing the usual intoxicating effect, and when much fluid is not liked by the people. 57. Ganja or charas I have not come to know as being eaten or drunk. 59. Bhang, ganja, and charas in moderate doses are beneficial to the labouring classes, who have to undergo great fatigue and exposure to earn their bread. They require some kind of stimu- lant to alleviate their fatigue, and I think moderate dose of bhang, ganja, or charas proves of immense value to these classes. It is a very cheap stimu- lant, and they can easily afford to pay for it. Besides the above, the injurious effects which in some cases arise out of the excessive dose of these drugs are nothing as compared with the injurious effects of alcohol, which, I fear, the people will commence to use, in some cases at least, if repres- sive measures are adopted against the hemp drugs; and then it can be easily conceived what their fate will be, because the people of India are so poor. The hemp drugs are cheap, and it is the only stimulant which the poor can afford to buy and to use. As for the cases of insanity, I think it is somewhat exaggerated. There are certainly cases of insanity due to excessive use of these drugs. But they are very small as compared with the enormous population of India, I don't think the proportion of total insanes will exceed that of any other European country. Oral evidence. Question 1.140 cated at Calcutta Medical College, and am M.B. of Calcutta University. I have not made a special study of insanity. I have been seven years in Muthra, where bhang is largely consumed by the Chaubes. I have sixteen years' service. Question 37.141 lead to the habitual use of it or produce any injury. In the North-Western Provinces this custom is also held as religious, but they use it on the day of Holi. In the hot months they take regularly daily as thandai, and at Muttra I have seen the Chaubes take it daily in large quantity all the year round, and men and children indulge in it. With regard to the custom of the people of other provinces, I do not know. Charas and ganja are not used as such by the people at large. The habitual smokers indulge in them on the night of Shivratri, etc. 36. I do not know. 37. From a habitual smoker of charas and ganja I have heard that one can be substituted for the other. He has been to Bengal, where he used to smoke ganja, smoked charas in the North-Western Provinces and Kabul. His opinion is that the intoxication produced by charas is stronger than that of ganja, and the charas of Kabul is stronger in its effects than the Indian product. The intoxi- cation of bhang, taken in moderate doses, is of a hilarious nature, as I have stated before. Larger doses produce vomiting and sleep or wakefulness, with sensation as if the house is moving, his cot is taken up and thrown down alternately, headache, dryness of throat and delirium. The intoxication produced by smoking charas or ganja, according to the opinion of my informant, is instantaneous. It produces strength of mind and body, cheerfulness, and an increased desire for food and company. 39. The smoking of charas or ganja is more injurious than the drinking of bhang, as I have known cases of lunacy produced by smoking these drugs, and notably the Chaubes of Muttra, who are habitual consumers of bhang in large quantity, seldom become insane. 40. Bhang is generally used with linseed meal or atta as poultice to alleviate pain. I have used this drug as fumigation in cases of painful pile with benefit. Ganja is used by Bengal physicians to prepare anodyne oil. I do not know whether they are used in cattle diseases. 41. Moderate use they say is beneficial. (a) Produces appetite. (b) Alleviates fatigue. (c) I cannot say. (d) I do not know. 42. Moderate use is harmless, as I have not seen any bad effect from their moderate use. 44. The immediate effect of smoking charas or ganja, as my informants state, is the production of a peculiar sensation on the head, followed by intoxication of a pleasing nature. It lasts a few hours, and when it passes off, it produces desire for more. 45. They do, except bhang. The constitution becomes weak, digestion is impaired, produces a hawking cough, and I have seen cases of a6thma produced in those who are habitual smokers of ganja or charas. They certainly produce laziness. The above symptoms I have observed in those who have not the means of taking nourishing food. Habitual moderate consumers of these drugs seldom suffer from the above injuries when they are men of means. I do not think insanity is produced in those subjects of ganja or charas-smokers who use the drugs regularly in moderate quantity. 46. Insanity is certainly produced by the smoking of these drugs in excess. I have seen cases of acute mania in whom the smoking of these drugs is merely an exciting cause. They were people who were not in the habit of using the drug regularly, but took it for the first time either by mistake or by the inducement of others. These cases rapidly recover. I have seen cases of insanity in habitual con- sumers, in whom the smoking is a predisposing cause, the exciting being produced by loss of money or family bereavement. These people suffer generally from partial moral or intellectual mania, and, in most of them, the disease is difficult of cure. 47. I do not think so. 48. At Muttra, as I stated, the children of the Chaubes drink bhang with their father, but with regard to charas or ganja-smoking no such heredi- tary tendency can be seen. A ganja or charas- smoker's children seldom walk in the footsteps of their fathers in this respect. 49. Sometimes. The prostitutes, some of them at least. I do not think it is injurious in moderate doses, and I do not think it produces impotence. 59. Excessive use of any of these drugs, I think, produces an opposite effect, i.e., it destroys sexual desire and produces impotence. 56 and 57. I do not know. 96. Evidence of ASSISTANT SURGEON NOBIN CHANDRA CHAKRAVARTI, Brahmin, in charge of the Agra Thomson Hospital, and Lecturer on Medicine, Medical School, Agra. 1. As a medical man of twenty-six years' stand- ing, I have had opportunities, few though they have been, of coming in contact with persons having had anything to do with the hemp drugs. 2. The names given by Dr. Prain to the different preparations of the hemp plant are current in the North-Western Provinces. 19. Yes. 23. No; as far as I know. 28. The average daily allowance of charas for (a) is about 24 grains, costing one anna, and for (b) triple or four times the quantity. Bhang is generally used by the Hindus in quantities aver- aging daily about half a chittack for (a) and 4 chittacks for (b), costing half anna and four annas respectively. Ganja is not so much used in these provinces as in Bengal; and charas is just the reverse. 29. Dhatura is occasionally mixed with bhang to increase its intoxicating properties. Bhang massala, as used by the people of Muthra and Agra, consists of cardamoms, cayenne pepper, aniseed, liquorice, rose leaves, seeds of khira and kukri, Cucumis saliva and Cucumis mclo, and kasni flowers for summer, and simply pepper and almonds for winter. 30. Charas and ganja are not so much smoked in solitude as in company, and very few low caste
142 females and religious mendicants and some prostitutes smoke them. Children, as a rule, do not smoke, but bhang is used by the children of the Chaubes of Muthra. 32. On the occasion of the Holi festival, it is customary for the Hindus of these provinces to eat majum or confection of bhang, and on the last day of the Durga Puja it is customary for the Bengalis to see their friends, who offer them a cup of bhang and sweetmeats. These customs are essential. The use of the drug is generally temperate, and not, as a rule, injurious. It does not lead to the formation of the habit. 37. The charas is much more prompt in its action than ganja, and causes more dryness of the throat. Bhang is by far milder and plea- santer in its effects than either of the above. 41. Charas and ganja may be beneficial to give staying-power under severe exertion or exposure or to alleviate fatigue, and in malarious places as a preventive of fever. 44. The immediate effect of these drugs on the moderate consumer is that of an excitant. They produce intoxication and are refreshing. Charas and ganja allay hunger, but bhang sharpens appetite. The effects of bhang last about three hours, and the after-effects are slight giddiness and redness of the eyes. 45. Even moderate consumers of charas and ganja are considered as morally degraded; they are duller in intellect and physically incapable of hard and sustained work unless propped up by their necessary excitants. Bhang is not so much looked down upon, and causes heaviness and laziness. Appetite is never promoted, but rather retarded by charas and ganja. 46. Excessive use of charas is sure to produce bronchitis and asthma, but ganja not so much. All the drugs induce laziness, and may lead to habits of immorality or debauchery. 47. Consumers of these drugs set a bad example to their children, who quickly imbibe the habit from their parents. I do not think the tendency is hereditary. 48. For aphrodisiac enjoyments people do use these drugs in moderate doses. 50. Excessive use of these drugs may produce impotence. 97. Evidence of ASSISTANT SURGEON MUL RAJ, Khatri, Faizabad. 1. During twenty-three years of my service I have been in charge of different dispensaries. 19. As far as I know, ganja and charas are only used for smoking. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking in this coun- try and Punjab. 29. Generally black pepper and aniseed are mix- ed with bhang. Tobacco is mixed with charas and ganja; dhatura is occasionally mixed with bhang to increase its effect. Well-to-do people mix than- dai with bhang, besides milk and sugar. Thandai, as sold in bazars, consists of all or many of the following ingredients:143 98. Evidence of ASSISTANT SURGEON SUBHAN ALI, Agra. 1. Of a common medical practitioner in charge of an out-door Government Dispensary. 2. In Agra these articles are known by the names of bhang, charas, and ganja, and have the same definition as mentioned by Dr. Prain. 19. Ganja and charas are used for smoking. Some poor people, who are given to intoxication and wish to indulge privately, swallow a little charas. 23. Poor people sometimes smoke bhang on an emergency, but, as far as I could ascertain, it is not so used. 28. (a) Bhang, quarter chittack, worth one pice; charas, 1/16 of a chittack, worth about one anna. (b) Those who use in excess smoke from half to one chittack of charas, which costs from eight annas to one rupee per diem, or a chittack of bhang worth one anna. 29. With bhang in ordinary cases a little black pepper and fennel fruit is mixed. Dhatura seeds are mixed with bhang by those who indulge in excess to increase its intoxicating effects. Bhang massala differs according to the season of the year. In cold weather it is composed of hot ingredients, such as black pepper, ajwain, al- monds, cardamoms, and saffron. In hot season it is composed of cooling ingredients, such as kahu, kasni, rose leaves, liquorice root, etc. Bhang is also mixed with sugar and ghi, and made into sweetmeat, known as majum. 30. A few respectable people, who smoke charas, do it privately, either alone or in the company of a special friend. The low class people and Hindu fakirs are seen every day smoking on the road sides and on the banks of the river, dharmsalas, and in front of the contractor's shops, smoking in company, one person making over the chillum to another in rotation. The same remarks apply to ganja. The whiffs of smoke emanating from the mouth and nostrils of the charas-smokers are a nuisance to the passers by. Its smoking is not confined to the male sex. Children of the low caste and chelas of fakirs, while young, begin to learn it. 31. The habit is easily formed and very difficult to break. There is a tendency for it to develop into excess. 32. Bhang and its preparations are used by the Hindus as a religious custom at the festival of Shivaratri. It is also used at the festival of Holi and in other large gatherings of people, at sports, and pastimes. Some indulge moderately and some in excess. It might lead to the formation of the habit. 36. In my opinion alcohol is not replacing Cannabis. 37. Charas and ganja smoking are similar in their effects. Bhang-drinking produces effects similar to these, but there is difference in the time of intoxication coming on. The effects of smok- ing are much more speedier than that of drink- ing; in the latter case some time elapses before their appearance; in the former they are in- stantaneous. 39. None that I know of. 40. Bhang is usually employed by physicians and common people as a remedy for dysentery, fever, and painful diseases, and in this way the foundation of the habit is laid. Bhang is also used in the treatment of cattle diseases internally. It is also used as a poultice externally. 41. Bhang when used in small quantities, ex- hilarates the spirits; there is a glow of warmth in the body; the nervous system begins to act well, fatigue is assuaged, the digestion is im- proved, and appetite increased. It prevents the advent of fever. 42. All these drugs used in small quantities are harmless. Many people go on using them for years, and never have to complain of its ill144 ment combined together have a very bad effect, particularly on males. It is used by low class prostitutes. Better class using alcohol seldom indulge in the use of these drugs. Males, after long use, become impotent and weak in mind and body. 50. Excessive use of these drugs requires scarcely, if any, remarks. In the male it causes loss of sexual appetite and power. The females become inert, and do not feel any excitement while under their influence. 56. Those who use these drugs in moderation do not require the admixture of any of these drugs. Poor people who want to have excessive intoxication at little cost mix dhatura seeds. Thugs also mix dhatura seeds with bhang and charas or ganja to administer to their victims. Cantharides or nux vomica may be mixed to increase the aphrodisiac powers, but I have no experience upon this point. 57. Ganja and charas are sometimes eaten not for any intoxicating effect, but for aphrodisiac purposes. It is said that by their means the sexual act can be prolonged, and emission does not occur soon. In conclusion, Cannabis (and its preparations) is an intoxicant of the poorer classes. Those who cannot afford alcohol use bhang, charas, and ganja. It is a great solace to the people, but it makes them lazy and indolent; they loose all energy by degrees. Those addicted can only work while under its influence. It demoralises the person, reduces him to a low state of exist- ence, and unfits him for any intelligent occupa- tion. These drugs are mostly used by low classes and fakirs. Exceptionally wealthy people whose moral character is low, use it. Oral evidence. Question 1.145 99. Evidence of ASSISTANT SURGEON POORNA CHANDRA BANERJI, Brahman, Benares. 1. From observation and report of friends and professional men. 2. In Benares two sorts of ganja are sold, viz., (1), balucbar or flat ganja. It is imported from Baluchar, a village on the other side of Patna, near Hajepur; (2), pathar, a jungli product, not generally used by the consumer. 19. Only for smoking. 23. When ganja is not available, the ganja- smokers, to satisfy their hunger, do occasionally use bhang in smoking. It is, however, very rare. 28. (a) About grains 10 a day = 6 pies. (b) About 2 ounces a day = about R 2. 29. Ordinarily tobacco; exceptionally charas, tobacco. To produce a goood taste and to ripen its intensity of effects that charas and tobacco are mixed. Bhang massala consists of bhang, black pepper, cardamoms, almond, rose leaves, seeds of kharbuza, aniseed, sugar and milk. They are pounded and made into a sort of bolus. 30. In solitude, about grains 6. In company, ½ ounce. Mainly male sex, all ages; but gene- rally youth and old age. Females also smoke ganja, but they are of lower order of society; bhang is generally used by both males and fe- males. 31. (a) Yes. (b) Yes; in youth. (c) No. 32. (a) In Shivratri festival it is considered religious to smoke ganja or to drink bhang. In Dasomi day it is also considered sacred, for the Mahadeva is the god to whom these drugs are dedicated sacred. (b) The use of the drug is considered not essential. (c) It is generally temperate. (d) No. 36. Those who want to leave off this habit, they betake to alcohol or opium, and then after a few days' use leave off all intemperance. 37. No; ganja smoking produces more evil effect than bhang-drinking. 39. Ganja is smoked; bhang is drunk. They are not used in any other way, but very rarely in any other way; ganja produces a tendency to insanity, while bhang does not. 40. (a) Yes. (b) In horse and cow and bullock disease. 41. It increases appetite in moderate doses. Yes; it destroys the evil effects of severe exertion, exposure and fatigue. It acts as a febrifuge in malarious districts. 42. No; not harmless. It lowers the nervous power by long use. 44. (a) Excellent. (b) To a certain extent. (c) It exhilarates in small doses. (d) In moderate doses it creates hunger. (f) The effect lasts about four hours. (g) No after-effects. (h) Yes; longing and uneasiness is produced. 45. (a) Continued moderate use produces noxi- ous effects, physical, mental and moral. (b) It impairs the constitution. (c) Yes; after long use. (d) Yes. (e) Yes. (f) Yes. Exciting. Moderate use, long con- tinued, produces predisposing cause, generally permanent. No, the insanes do not confess to the use of the drug. (g) Yes; the insanes consume more of this drug. 46. The look of habitual ganja-smoker is characteristic. The temples are sunk, the features prominent, eyes sunken, shoulders raised, body emaciated, mind wandering, lips parched and dry. 47. No. 49. (a) No. (b) No. (d) Yes. 57. Ganja and charas are smoked. In my opinion the use of these drugs is bad. 100. Evidence of ASSISTANT SURGEON GANGA SINGH, Benares. 1. Professional practice and contact with the habitual consumers in North-Western Provinces and Oudh. They are known by bhang or sabji, charas, and ganja in these provinces. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smok- ing. 23. No. 28. (a) Ten grains of about 1/8th of a pice of bhang in a day. (b) Six mashas, or ninety grains or so, of about a pice a day of bhang, 29. The ingredients ordinarily used are (a) that of common bhang massala; (b) exceptionally dhatura. Common bhang massala consists of aniseed, black pepper, melon seeds, poppy seeds, sweet almonds, sugar or salt, and kasni seeds. 30. They are generally used in moderation in company, while the excessive consumers take them in solitude. 31. The habit can easily be formed or broken off. There is no tendency to develop from mo- derate into excessive one. 32. There is a custom amongst Hindus to drink bhang on the festivals of Shivratri and Holi. It is not essential, and is generally taken in moderation; nor does it lead to the formation of the habit. 36. No. 40. The hemp plant is used by all the native doctors of all schools for its medicinal properties both internally and externally. 41. The moderate and occasional use of bhang increases appetite and brings on sound sleep; that of ganja and charas alleviates fatigue, and pro- motes the power of undergoing severe bodily labour or exposure to cold. 42. The moderate use of bhang is harmless, as I have never come to know of any bad effect from it. vol. v. z
146 44. The immediate effects of these drugs are slight intoxication or stimulation, increase of appetite, and removal of anxieties of the mind, if taken in moderation, and they do not last more than three or four hours. They produce not any bad after-effect in moderate habitual consumers. 45. (b) Yes. (c) Yes. (d) No. (e) Yes; but not debauchery. (f) It deadens the intellect, but does not pro- duce insanity. Mania is generally the type of insanity produced by these drugs. 46. The habitual excessive consumers are lazy and dull in their mental powers. They are very prone to insanity. 47. No. 48. Neither the moderate nor the excessive use of any of these drugs is hereditary habit. 49. No. Habitual excessive use of hemp pro- duces impotence. 50. The excessive use of any of these drugs produces impotence, laziness, and predisposition to insanity. 56. The admixture of the bhang massala and milk with bhang lessens its weakening effect on the nervous system. Dhatura is occasionally mixed with these drugs by professional thugs to be given to their victims to facilitate robbery. In my opinion the hemp drug is a very good medicine for dysentery, cough, asthma, loss of appetite, and to relieve inflammatory pains. It is a better substitute for opium, inasmuch as it does not produce costiveness. 101. Evidence of ASSISTANT SURGEON SHASHTIVAR RAI, RAI BAHADUR, Kayasth, Bareilly. 1. Experience in private practice. 2. Dr. Prain's classification of preparation of hemp drugs holds good, except that bhang is also called here "bhunti," and not known here as siddhi. 19. Ganja and charas are, as far as I know, used for smoking. 23. I have never seen it so used. 28. I am unable to answer. 29. (a) Tobacco is ordinarily mixed with charas and ganja for smoking, and bhang with black pepper and cardamom for consumption. (b) Bhang is occasionally mixed with aniseed, rose petals, cucumber seed pounded, sugar and milk for drink in hot weather. I know of nothing being exceptionally mixed with charas and ganja. I have never seen dhatura, nux vomica, cantha- rides, or betel-nut used as an admixture. I know of no such preparation as "bhang massala." 30. Charas and ganja are usually consumed in company. Bhang is taken more in solitude than the other two, but at times it is drunk in com- pany. All these preparations are mostly used by the male sex. Bhang is also used by the women of low class, and on certain religious occasions by the women even of respectable families. Charas and ganja are rarely used by women. It is not usual for children to consume these drugs, but bhang in small quantities in the shape of confec- tion is sometimes given to them on religious occasions to make them merry. 31. The habit in my opinion is easily formed, especially in case of bhang; and it being once formed, it is difficult to break off. Yes; there is such a tendency. 32. Bhang is largely used as a drink and in sweetmeat, mostly by Hindus, on the occasions of religious festivals, like Holi, Dewali, Sivrat, and Dassera, and is considered by them more or less essential, and is generally used to excess. This annual custom is not likely to lead to the formation of the habit, but in certain cases it might be injurious, producing temporary derange- ment of the brain. 36. I don't think that alcohol is being sub- stituted for any of these drugs. 37. Charas affects the lungs and heart more than ganja. Bhang is milder, but it affects the brain more than the other two. 39. I am unable to answer. 40. Yes; I have seen these drugs medicinally used, as in tetanus hæmorrhoids. I don't know of any of them being used in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. (a) Moderate use of bhang before meals might be beneficial as a digestive. (b) It does alleviate fatigue and gives staying- power under exertion and exposure. (c) Charas and ganja might be beneficial as a febrifuge and preventive of diseases in malarious and unhealthy tracts. (d) Bhang is generally used with benefit in dysentery and diarrh147 not likely to be brought on by moderate use of the drugs as stated above. 47. Not necessarily hereditary, and does not produce any injurious effects in their children. 48. Not necessarily hereditary, but produces ill-effects on the brain and constitution of their children. 49. Not to my knowledge. 50. Excessive use of these drugs may produce impotence. 56. I am unable to answer. 57. Such cases have not fallen under my notice. Oral evidence. Question 1.148 102. Evidence of ASSISTANT SURGEON AMAR NATH DAS, Kayasth, Jaunpur. 2. In this province two varieties, one generally known as flat, called baluchur, and the other chur or broken ganja. 3. Hemp plant grows spontaneously in My- mensing, Bengal. 19. Ganja and charas used only for smoking. 20. Ganja smoked by the low caste people as Kahar, Ahir, Chamar, etc., especially by those who have taken oath not to touch liquor or meat, popularly known as vakt, and by wandering fakirs. Charas not so much used in North-West- ern Provinces as in Bengal and Punjab. 21. Flat and round varieties preferred, and chur is taken to be more or less adulterated. 23. Bhang never used for smoking. 24. Respectable and high caste Hindus drink bhang and sometimes eat it in the form of majum. (Bhang pounded very fine afterwards mixed with syrup.) 25. Use of bhang is on the decrease, as portion of the respectable people have taken to drinking liquors. 26. Wandering fakirs, both Hindu and Muham- madan, are habitual excessive consumers. Low caste Hindus, Kahars, Ahirs, and Chamars are moderate consumers of ganja and charas. 28. The habitual moderate consumers of ganja generally use half a pice or a pice worth of the drug in smoking. 29. Bhang is generally mixed with black pep- per; and it is the better class, who, to give it flavour and taste, mix it with sweet almonds, car- damons, cucumber seeds, rose petals, sugar and milk. 30. On the occasion of Holi and Dasahara bhang, in the shape of majum and ganja, and charas are consumed in company. During every festivity bhang and ganja are freely distributed among guests and dependants. The practice is mainly confined to the male sex; children do drink bhang occasionally in company with their father or guardian in a very moderate quantity. 31. Habit of consuming these drugs easily formed, not so difficult to break off as that of opium. 32. During Holi festival almost every Hindu who will not drink liquor will eat bhang in some shape or other. In Bengal, on last day of Dasahara, every Hindu, rich or poor, will drink bhang. The- custom is regarded as essential. Moreover, during every festive occasion, those who will not drink wine will eat some bhang. As a rule the drug is used temperately. The custom of smoking ganja and charas is mostly prevalent among the low caste Hindus. Repeated use may lead to the formation of the habit. 34. It would be a serious privation to Kahars, Ahirs, and Chamars to forego the smoking the ganja. I believe the majority of low caste Hindu males smoke the ganja. 35. There is every probability that bhang and ganja will be consumed illicitly if prohibited. The consumers will be discontented, and the prohibition will lead the consumers to have recourse to opium or liquors. 36. The well-to-do has to a certain extent sub- stituted alcoholic stimulants for bhang. Wine- drinking is recognised as more fashionable. 40. Native baids do prescribe the use of bhang on account of its medicinal qualities. 41. Moderate use of bhang increases appetite and is extensively used as a digestive by Hindus. The low caste people use ganja and charas to al- leviate fatigue, and the dooly-bearer cannot do without the ganja. 42. I believe the moderate use of the drugs to be quite harmless. I have been practising as a phy- sician for the last seventeen years, and have not come across a single case of illness brought on by the moderate use of bhang ganja, or charas. 43. Certainly inoffensive to their neighbours. 44. The consumers of bhang assert that the use of the drugs produces slight intoxication, and it refreshes and creates appetite; they feel no uneasi- ness afterwards. If the dose is excessive, they feel thirsty and dryness of the throat and mental hallu- cination. 45. (a) to (d) No. (e) May induce laziness. (f) No. 46. Habitual excessive use of any of these drugs deadens the intellect. One can always make out an excessive ganja smoker by his stupid look and slow ways. The excessive use sometimes produces insanity. 47. No. 49. No; the drug is seldom used as an aphro- disiac; the use of hemp in excess does produce impotence. 52. Bad characters do often use these drugs in excess. 53. No. 54. No. 55. Bhang is used as a cover to administer dha- tura for criminal purposes, 103. Evidence of ASSISTANT SURGEON MOHENDRA NATH OHDEDAR, Allahabad. 1. I know and have seen a large number of people who use the hemp drugs. Many of them I have at- tended professionally during the last fourteen years. 2. Bhang is known as bhang or sabzi. Ganja is called ganja, and that generally offered for sale is of the flat variety. Charas is called charas. 19. As far as I know, ganja and charas are used only for smoking. 20. Ganja and charas are used in moderation by the lower class people, especially labourers, such as those who work in the fields, Kahars, etc. In excess they are used by vagabonds and bad mashes, people who have no work and hang about the ganja shops in the day and spend their nights in gambling and thieving. Sanyasis and fakirs also use these drugs in excess to protect themselves against the inclemencies of the weather. 23. I have never heard bhang being used in this way.
149 24. Bhang in moderation is used by almost every class of people (Hindus) of the North-eWst- ern Provinces and Oudh, who are prohibited by religion to take liquor. In excess, it is generally used by the Pragwals of Allahabad, the Ghatials and Gangaputras of Benares, and by people of this class at all religious centres. 28. Moderate150 What may be moderate quantity in my opinion I may not be so in that of another. Five grains of bhang, one chillum of ganja or one of charas does not, in my opinion, produce any noxious effect, physical, mental, or moral. It does not, provided the above quantity is consumed, impair the con- stitution in any way, in jure the digestion, or cause loss of appetite. Ganja and charas very often produce bronchitis and asthma, and sometimes dysentery; but one chillum per day would not do so. The consumption of the quantities stated above does not, in my opinion, impair the moral sense or induce laziness or habits of immorality or de- bauchery, I have not known these drugs, when used in moderation, to deaden the intellect or produce insanity. 46. I have seen two cases of insanity due to the excessive use of ganja. 47. The moderate use of these drugs is not a hereditary habit, and does not affect the children. 48. The children of those who take these drugs in excess very often get into the same habit, but I believe more from association and example than any influence of heredity. 49. Charas and bhang are sometimes used as aphrodisiac, but I do not believe they have that effect. Low class prostitutes get into the habit of using these drugs, not for their aphro- disiac property, but to please their paramours and keep them company. If these drugs are used often for their aphrodisiac property, they tend to produce impotence by exhausting the system. The use of hemp drugs tends to produce impo- tence, and it is for this very purpose that they are largely used by fakirs and jogis. 56. The admixture of dhatura increases injuri- ous effects of bhang. Dhatura is very often given by thugs to unwary travellers to produce insensi- bility. 57. I have never heard of ganja or charas to be eaten or drunk. In conclusion, I have often heard that the con- tractors of hemp drugs adulterate them before offering them for sale to the public. This, if pos- sible, should be stopped. 35. I would be sorry to see the use of hemp drugs prohibited by legislation, because (1) it would be interfering with the liberty of the people, and (2) depriving the poorer classes of a drug, the moderate use of which helps them to go through bard work and relieves their fatigue. It would, in my opinion, be injudicious on the part of Government to interfere with the public in their consumption of hemp drugs, simply because a cer- tain number, on account of their excesses, happen to become insane or take to gambling and thieving. Government might as well say that no one should take liquor or consume more than a stated quantity per diem. The prohibition of the use of hemp drugs is also not feasible, because in many parts of the country they grow naturally, and because hard- working people require something to steady and soothe their nerves when the day's work is over. Were the consumption of hemp drugs prohibited, people would take to drinking liquor. Could any harmless exhilarant be supplied to the public, which would be as cheap as the hemp drugs, I would say: Stop their consumption by all means. It is not feasible to restrict the excessive use of these drugs. Government might increase the duty and thereby raise their price; but those classes of people who use these drugs to excess will use them even then, and take to more gambling and thieving to obtain the requisite money, If the consumption of hemp drugs is to be stopped, why not just as well stop the use of liquor, which is much more expensive and equally harmful when taken in excess? 46. Ganja in moderation relieves fatigue and gives appetite, but in excess it dulls the mental faculties and makes the consumer prone to fits of violence and excitement. The continuous use in excess sometimes leads to insanity. It also spoils the physique, and gives the consumer a peculiar haggard and ruffianly appearance. The moderate use of charas relieves cares and anxieties and removes fatigue, but its use in excess spoils appetite for food and aptitude for hard work. The consumer becomes almost a sloth. 55. I am not aware if any drugs are administered with any preparation of hemp. Oral evidence. Question 1.151 complete intelligence. The violent fit for which I was called in lasted a week or ten days. I don't know for certain how long the lucid in- tervals lasted. I attended him for four or five days after I was called in. The attack was not over when I ceased to attend him. I was told the fit lasted eight or ten days, and I don't know how long the subsequent lucid interval lasted, or how many attacks he has had since. I have seen him again when attending members of the family. There are still lucid intervals. I attribute the insanity to ganja, on the information of his friends that he smoked the drug, and because there was no other cause apparent. He smoked with people in the mahalla, not with low fellows of the bazar. His companions were given to vices of various sorts, sexual as well as other. I don't know of their taking alcohol. One of these companions was of the priestly class. It is as likely as not that the company indulged in dhatura, for the priestly class do take that drug. I don't know how long he was leading a loose life before he went mad. These are the only two cases of which I know the details. The last man must have become mad about the age of 21, I have hardly had any experience of insanity cases. I have seen very few. To ascertain the cause of insanity, family history, and the insane's previous habits and history, must be enquired into. In both these cases I took care by special enquiry to exclude causes such as injury, sudden grief, fright, or other kinds of mental shock, besides enquiring into the family history. I do not know of any special symptoms in insanity caused by hemp drugs. Question 57.152 plump and of good health, but on the contrary charas and ganja consumers are thin and asth- matic. 40.Bhang is used by vaide in disorders of the alimentary canal as in diarrh153 23.Never to my knowledge. 24.Only poor people resort to eating, but generally it is drunk. 25.On the increase. I think lots of people are getting in the habit of drinking liquor, but after a time, finding that they cannot afford, resort to bhang, charas or ganja, as they have formed a habit for intoxication. 26.For both bhang and ganja, habitual moderate consumers, and then occasional moderate con- sumers; then come the habitual excessive con- sumers, and lastly, occasional excessive consumers. 28.(a) One pie per day. (b) ½ an anna per day. 29.Generally they boil bhang in copper vessels, saying it becomes more intoxicating, and mix a few seeds of dhatura to increase the narcotic effect. The bhang massala generally consists of154 Fakirs and gosains who live on chary are fairly well provided with money, and therefore they will he able to buy liquor. I know some of them take liquor already in secret. This is the practice of some mahants of Hanuman Gadhi in Ajudhya. The hemp and liquor habits are to some extent interchangeable. Question 29.155 from the wild and the cultivated plants. Some- times they mix dust and ashes with it. Ganja and charas are mostly used for smoking, and sometimes they are used for eating, but not so much as for smoking. Bhang is used for drinking mixed with "sherbet" (syrup). 16.As far as I know, it is not prepared by the people in their houses. Yes; but good bhang is generally produced from the cultivated plants. Both ganja and charas can be prepared from the wild plants. 17.By the low cultivating class of people. 18.All the three drugs get spoiled if exposed to the moisture, specially in the rainy season. It loses its effects if kept for a long time156 40.The medicinal use of these drugs are both external and internal in painful affection. Bhang is used in the shape of poultice and fomentation. Mostly bhang is used in treating cattle and horses. 41.(a) I think not. (b)It may. (c)Doubtful. (d)External application is one of the best ways of treating painful diseases. Medicinally, a small quantity of ganja or charas is better in the shape of extract under class (b) it can be used. 42.Moderate use of any of these drugs is not harmless, because it brings on a habit of consum- ing the drugs in excess, and thus deteriorates the system, specially the nervous system, in the long run. Its use for medicinal purposes is quite harmless. 43.Not quite; at times when they use it in ex- cess they are troublesome. 44.Exhilaration of the spirits. To a certain extent it is refreshing. In moderate use the in toxication is not much. It is doubtful whether it produces a real appetite. From a few minutes to half an hour. The after-effects are headache and vertigo. Not much in moderate dose. It does produce longing and uneasiness for gratification of the subsequent want. 45.(a) Not much marked. (bPerhaps not. (c)I think not. (d)Might cause asthma or bronchitis if long used. (e)Very difficult to say anything positively about it. (f)Nothing very particular about the intellectu- al faculty being affected or insanity being produ- ced can be described. (g) None to my knowledge. Not in a position to give any account. 47.Very difficult to say.Perhaps not. 49.(a) It is to a certain extent used as an aphrodisiac. (c) Cannot say. (d) Difficult to say. 50.Excessive use of any of these drugs as bhang, ganja and charas, might produce an exhausting effect on the nervous system, and thus give rise to diseases of the nervous system. It is very difficult to discuss with accuracy how far these drugs produce their effect in producing diseases of any special system. 51.To a certain extent these are; for most of the habitual moderate consumers are of the low order. Cannot describe its connection with any crime particularly. 54.Might be used. 55.Cannot say how far the criminals induce their victims to partake any of these drugs in order to produce a stupefying effect. Complete stupefaction can be induced by a very large dose of any of the drugs without admixture. 56.(a) To produce an exhilaration of the spirits and to produce a pleasing sensation, (b) Cannot say to what extent are the effects when used in excess. I possess no information regarding the admixture of dhatura. 58. I do not find myself in any way prepared to answer the questions in chapter VII. 107.Evidence of ASSISTANT SURGEON ANNUDA PRASAD DATTA, Kayasth, Assistant Surgeon, Etah. 1.During my last thirteen years, Government service I had the opportunity to remain in Calcutta during the years 1880-81, 1883-84, 1889 and 1892, and was engaged by some wealthy gentle- men to be their family doctor. Some young men of these families were in the habit of taking bhang, chants and ganja. In their company several gentlemen used to frequent and partake these intoxicating drugs. So my daily medical attendance in these families gave me ample op- portunity to know something of the hemp drugs. 2.The definitions given by Dr. Prain's report are quite correct, and the name of each of these products is siddhi or bhang, charas and ganja. 19.Ganja and charas are used for smoking purpose generally, but some inveterate smokers feel less intoxication from its habitual use, resort to the practice of boiling ganja in opium solution, and after drying used to smoke. This class is small in number. Its intoxication is dangerous, even to a habitual smoker. My experience is confined particularly to the limits of Calcutta. 23.Bhang is sometimes used for smoking in some localities of Calcutta by middle class, and beginners to a small extent. 28.Habitual moderate consumers take half a pice worth bhang and a ganja smoker a pice worth (daily). 29.(a) Ordinarily dry tobacco leaf is mixed with ganja before smoking. Charas is mixed with prepared tobacco and fried before use. Bhang after macerating with water is mixed with black pepper (thoroughly pulverized) and sugar. Higher class mixes milk, pistachios, and almonds. (b) Exceptionally dhatura or opium is mixed with ganja before smoking: sometimes dhatura or nutmeg is mixed with bhang for drinking. The object of these admixtures is to get into a high state of intoxication to indulge sexual inter- course in excess. The retentive power in discharge of semen is prolonged for hours. I know such a preparation (which is privately sold by hakim) called by the name "yakuth": the ingredients are medicinal dose of arsenic, opium, and extract of bhang, and probably there is extract nucis vomicæ and musk. 30.The consumption of these drugs is prac- tised to a greater extent in company than in soli- tude. It is mainly confined to the male sex, and some females of the unfortunate class take it. Children ordinarily never take it, but in lower class some do take ganja and charas. 31.The habit of consuming any of these drugs is easily formed, but not difficult to break off. There is tendency for a moderate habit to de- velop into excessive. 32.On the Bijaya-dasami day of Durga Puja of Hindus, every member of a family, with friends and relatives, will partake of or touch a very small quantity of bhang macerated and well diluted
157 with water. Its use is regarded as essential, es- pecially on this auspicious day. No habit is ex- pected to result from this sort of use, and it is not at all injurious. 36.One or two of these drugs are taking the place of alcohol to a certain extent. I attribute this change to some persons not being able to afford the expense of liquor. 37.There is difference in degree of effect of charas-smoking and that of ganja-smoking; and drinking of bhang also differs in degree from either of these two. In ganja-smoking the effect is imme- diate and the degree of intoxication is greatest, but transient in its duration. Whereas the effect of charas-smoking is milder and lasts sometimes more in duration than ganja-smoking; the drink- ing of bhang produces its effect after some hours, and lasts for some hours and even days. 39. I do not think smoking of ganja and charas are less injurious than drinking bhang in a little quantity, which is in some cases beneficial to their constitution. The reason is this:158 even longer. I attended a female patient who was under the influence of bhang, and told me she had taken bhang the day before. She wandered in her conversation occasionally. On the third day she told me that she felt a recurrence of the intoxi- cation on taking food. She was a respectable woman. She must have taken a dram of bhang. The graduate mentioned above must have taken more. It did not occur to me to be a peculiar symptom that the intoxication should recur on taking food. That is a common effect of the drug on a beginner. Question 39.159 special occasions, or under exceptional circum- stances, by habitual consumers. The drugs are not sold mixed with dhatura or any other admixtures. But those who require to produce exceptional intoxication, mix ganja and charas together, and if that does not suffice, add dhatura, Dhatura is also mixed with bhang to produce the same effect, and sometimes insensi- bility. 30.Bhang is seldom used in company; while ganja and charas are as seldom smoked in soli- tude. But habitual consumers of the last two drugs sometimes smoke when alone. The use of none of these drugs is confined to the male sex; females (generally of the lower classes or of ill- repute) are now and then seen to use them. Per- sons who have not attained puberty are seldom found to indulge in the use of these drugs. But the children (almost always male) of fakirs and vagabond mendicants are sometimes seen to get into the habit of using these drugs as soon as or soon after they pass their childhood. It is, however, not usual for children to do so. 31.Yes, by association in the case of ganja and charas. It is not difficult to break off at once for moderate consumers; and in the case of habitual excessive consumers, they feel a certain craving for the drug, and uneasiness, lassitude, and languor for a fortnight or a month for want of their daily allowance, after which they do not much feel the want of it. The moderate habit has sometimes a tendency to develop into a habit of excess. 32.There are Hindu customs both in Bengal and the North-Western Provinces and Oudh in regard to the use of bhang during the Durga Puja and the Holi festivals, respectively. In Bengal bhang, triturated and dissolved very freely with water and mixed with bhang massala, as described above (i.e., thandai), is served out in very small quantities only on the last day of the Durga Puja, when after the submersion of the idol in the evening, friends, acquaintances and relations visit each other with greetings. In the North-Western Provinces and Oudh the custom is exactly the same, only it is observed during the Holi, and majum instead of thandai is generally preferred. The custom is religiously observed as essential in Bengal, and, as far as I know, also in the North-Western Provinces and Oudh. The use of bhang on such occasions is always moderate and temperate, and is neither injurious, nor likely to lead to the formation of the habit. I know of no custom with reference to ganja and charas. 36.Yes; to a certain extent. I attribute the substitution of alcohol to the more advanced ideas and enlightened views held by young men and. others in imitation of European habits. I have known some instances where people have prefer- red alcohol, and would use it rather than any form of hemp if they had the necessary funds or opportunity. 37.The effects of charas-smoking are lighter, more pleasant, and shorter in duration than those of ganja-smoking. The charas smoker feels exhilarated and cheerful and gay, is inclined to find humour and comicality in all his surroundings, becomes very polite and courteous, and sometimes benevolent and generous; while the ganja smoker feels exhilarated but not cheerful, is disinclined to talk, and becomes rather rough is manner and temper. Ganja is stronger, charas is mild. The effects of bhang-drinking are much milder than those of charas-smoking. 39.The drinking of bhang is the least inju- rious. Charas-smoking is more harmful, but less so than ganja smoking. The eyes and chest of the habitual excessive ganja smoker become contracted, hollow and sunken; the whole form becomes emaciated and wrinkled, and sometimes bent. The lungs and liver become impaired, and not unfrequently subject to disease. Charas-smok- ing has similar effects but much less in intensity. The charas smoker has no such faded look as the ganja smoker. One might come across a plump charas smoker of the better class, but no ganja- smoker even of the better class will be found so. It requires a very prolonged course of indul- gence in the most excessive use of bhang to produce similar results. As regards tendency to produce insanity, see answer to question 46. 40.Yes, so far as I know, both by baids and hakims. Native baids and fakirs and sadhus also frequently use bhang in the process of oxidis- ing certain metals. Bhang is also externally used as an anodyne in the form of poultice and other applications. It is also prescribed by Hindu baids practising in villages in the interior in cases of cholera. For such uses of ganja, vide answer to question 19. Ganja and bhang are both used in the treatment of cattle disease; but I do not know about charas. Hemp possesses anti-spasmodic and anodyne properties. 41.The moderate use of any form of hemp may be beneficial in its effects160 all three induce habits of laziness and indolence, and immorality and debauchery. But a long course of indulgence in them eventually impairs the virile powers. In my opinion the excessive use deadens the intellect, but not in all cases. In certain cases it produces insanity (as is shown in the reports and returns of the several lunatic asylums of these provinces, as also in a few cases which have come under my own observation) of mainly an acute type of mania and dementia, generally temporary. The symptoms may be reinduced by the use of the drug after liberation from restraint. I do not know of any typical symp- toms. I have no records of any cases from which I could answer the other points of the question. 49.Yes, all these drugs are often used as aphrodisiacs. On enquiry, I learn that prosti- tutes also use them as such. Moderate use of these drugs does not produce impotence. 50.Excessive use of these drugs does some- times produce impotency, but only after very prolonged indulgence in debauchery and immo- rality. See also answer to question 46. 56.The effects of hemp are greatly increased in intensity and duration by the admixture of dhatura; but moderate consumers never mix dhatura, It is only excessive consumers, who want to produce special intoxication, that mix dhatura. Criminals, badmashes, and others also, sometimes mix dhatura to produce insensibility in order to rob, maltreat, or otherwise ill-use their victims. Bhang massala is mixed with bhang for the purpose, as already stated above, of coun- teracting any baneful effects it might otherwise produce. The intoxication produced by thandai is very slight, and rarely renders any person in- sensible. 57.Ganja and charas have never been known by me to be eaten or drunk. Oral evidence. Question 1.161 (c) Poor people to keep off cold in winter. In short, those who lack business capacities or associate frequently with jogis and fakirs consume charas in greater number. 29.(a) Bhang or thandai-ka-massala with bhang, to make the drink "cooling" and aromatic. (b) Dhatura seeds with bhang or charas, to make them stronger narcotics or for criminal purposes. 30.Charas is usually consumed in company. Charas-smokers are generally very social towards other fellow smokers. 31.It is not difficult to break off the habit of charas-smoking, nor is there any great tendency for the moderate consumer to develop the habit of excessive consumption. 32.I am not aware of any custom in these provinces in which the consumption of these drugs is considered essential. During the festival of "Holi" in the month of March and on the Shivaratri fast day many people indulge in the consumption of charas, bhang or majun (a kind of sweetmeat containing bhang). It is always temperate, and I do not know of any case in which it has led to the formation of the habit. It is given up completely on the day on which the festival is over, and not resumed till the next festival comes round in twelve months. 33.Not favourably. Habitual excessive con- sumers are looked down upon. There is no public opinion regarding the practice. I do not know of any custom of worshipping the hemp plant. 34.I do not think it will be a serious privation to consumers to forego the consumption of the drug they use. I have seen some habitual excessive smokers of charas give up the habit without feeling any great inconvenience. For some days they felt the usual craving for the narcotic, and it went away after a time without leaving any ill-effect. The craving has never been so great as in the case of alcohol drinkers or opium eaters. 35.It might be feasible, but I do not consider it advisable to prohibit the use of any of these drugs. The drug would most likely be consumed illicitly. As long as the hemp plant is allowed to grow, it will be difficult to enforce prohibition of these drugs; for the preparation of charas and bhang does not require any elaborate process, and will to a certainty be prepared illicitly. The prohibition of the growing of the hemp plant will cause a real hardship to the people who extract fibre from the stem and oil from the seeds for domestic use. I do not think the prohibition of the consumption of these drugs would occasion any serious discontent amounting to political danger: (a) the natural tendency of the age is to have recourse to alcoholic stimulants; and if the use of these drugs is prohibited, the people will make it an excuse to take to drink. 41.(b) Occasional moderate charas-smoking is indulged in by labouring classes and travellers to ward off the ill-effects of exposure to cold, and also, to alleviate fatigue. Bhang forms the principal ingredient of "thandai" or cooling drink, and is consumed by the well-to-do and middle classes in the hot and oppressive evenings of summer. 42.I believe a moderate use of bhang in the diluted form in which it is usually taken is quite harmless. I know scores of people who in the summer season regularly take bhang both morning and evening. They have never complained of any ill-effect from its consumption, and to all appearances they look as healthy as others 43.Yes; quite inoffensive as far as I know. 44.Exhilarating. The man becomes gay and cheerful. His memory is refreshed. There is not much intoxication to speak of. The appetite is increased. People always smoke their charas before taking their meals to increase their appetite. The effect lasts for about an hour or two, and there are no after-effects except a sense of drowsiness and languor. In moderate consumers the want of subsequent gratification does not produce any great uneasiness. 45.Habitual charas-smoking makes men lean and emaciated. I have not come across a fat charas smoker. I had to treat a few cases of chronic bronchitis and asthma in which charas-smoking was the alleged cause. Charas smokers cough very much. While I was in Srinagar (Garhwal) a young intelligent bania, a habitual charas smoker, went to Najibabad to make arrangements for his marriage with a girl who had been partially betrothed to him, But before he could reach that place a richer rival came in to the field and married the girl. In his grief he smoked twelve chillums of charas in the night, and was found in the morning a raving maniac. He was brought back to me for treatment. I found him a dangerous monomaniac with homicidal tendencies. He would assault any one (his nearest relations and friends not excepted) who would come near him. But to me he was as respectful and obedient as he had always been. At every call he complained to me of the ill-treatment he fancied he received at the hands of his relatives, and implored me to let him kill them one and all. He would not take any food or drink unless I directed him to do so, and assured him that it did not contain any poison. My treatment not doing him any good, I advised the relatives of the man to take him to Budrinath, a Hindu temple in the coldest regions of the district. From this place he returned after a three months' sojourn as sane a man as he had ever been before, and took to his business. What part the charas and what the grief played in making this man temporarily such a violent maniac, I have not been able to ascertain. 47.I do not think the habit is hereditary. The children may learn the habit from their parents, but the habit is in no sense hereditary. 48.Same answer as 47. 55.Yes; I know of a case in which rape was attemped on a girl who had been given a dose of "majun" (bhang sweetmeat). I do not think that complete stupefaction can be produced without any admixture. A sense of lassitude and helplessness is produced, in which the victim knows what is being done, but cannot offer resist- ance. 56.I was once called to attend a case of bhang- poisoning. On examining the patient I suspected that there was something more than a case of simple bhang-poisoning. The pupils were dilated. I gave my suspicions about dhatura-poisoning to the father of my patient, and on examining the refuse left after straining the bhang found two or three crushed seeds of dhatura. It turned out afterwards that the patient himself had directed his servant, a deaf and dumb man, to make the drink stronger by adding a few dhatura seeds. vol. v. 2B
162 Oral evidence. Question 1.163 people. About 30 per cent. eat bhang in the shape of churan mixed with other digestive in- gredients, and about 20 per cent. drink it as a refreshing beverage habitually, most part of which consist of Brahmins, who prefer bhang to the other two hemp products. The use of charas is on the increase here in the Terai pargana. 25.As charas-smoking produces warmth of the body, increases appetite, and quenches thirst, for the time being, so it is a great inducement to the inhabitants of the Terai, and to the working class, who have to undergo much fatigue. 26.Ganja is not uesd in the Terai. Charas. Bhang. (a) 25 per cent. . . . 25 per cent. (b) 5 per cent. . . . 1 per cent. (c) 60 per cent. . . . 50 per cent. (d) 5 per cent. . . . 5 per cent. During the Sheoratri and Holi festivals, bhang and charas are greatly consumed, even by those who are not habitual consumers. 27.Ascetics, fakirs, and men having no responsi- bilities of life, are the chief consumers. Ascetics who practise Hat Yoga and concentration of mind, and people who have to expose themselves frequent- ly to cold and damp, readily take to the habit of charas smoking. 28.Charas164 use of hemp from the other forms; but there is a clear history of excessive use of the drug in al- most every such case. 46.The habitual excessive use impairs the con- stitution to a great extent, and the consumers are lean, sparely built, emaciated folks. It causes bronchitis and asthma, and deranges the diges- tive functions, and produces dysentery of a severe type. It induces laziness, but not immorality or debauchery necessarily. 47 and 48. The habit of the use of these drugs appears to be hereditary in some cases; but I think the children of the habitual consumers get the habit by following the example of their guard- ians more than by any inherent tendency. 49 and 50. Yes. Prostitutes seldom use these drugs. It is more injurious when used as such, be- cause it tends to venereal excesses, and impairs the constitution, both directly and indirectly. It tends to produce impotence indirectly by over-stimul- ating the sexual organs, which must necessarily lead to reaction, and by tending to excessive in- dulgences in the sexual act. 51 and 52. Yes, about 70 per cent. No special connection. 53.No. 54.Yes, in some cases by refreshing the con- sumers. 55.Yes, specially bhang secretly administered with sweetmeats.Complete stupefaction might be induced in those who are unaccustomed to its use. 56.Some substances increase and some correct the injurious effects. Dhatura is generally mixed with bhang by veteran drinkers for personal con- sumption, and is mixed with bhang by criminals for administration to others to produce complete stupefaction. 57.Nil. 58.It is working well, in my opinion. No material improvement could be made to the present system, 62.The thorough controlling of hemp plants for the production of bhang is not feasible, as it grows wild in the jungles and waste lands of most dis- tricts. 65.In my opinion, the taxation is reasonable, as compared to alcoholic and other intoxicants. 67.The taxation seems to be heavy, as the con- sumers are generally poor. 68.There is no such house licensed for the purpose of entertaining the consumers at the very premises; but there is a licensed shop where people buy these drugs and take them to their houses. 69.No, generally a shop is opened at a popular place. It is not necessary to consider public opinion before opening a shop, as these shops are not authorised to allow people to use these drugs at the premises. 111. Evidence of ASSISTANT SURGEON PRASANNA KUMAR BANERJI, Brahmin, Azamgarh. 1.As an Assistant Surgeon I have been serv- ing under Government for the last seven years nearly in these provinces. 2.Yes; these are called here ganja dali, ganja pamrhi, and ganja roha, respectively. 3 to 6. Nil. 7. No. 8 and 9. Nil. 11 and 12. Nil. 14. No. 16.(a) Yes. (b) Yes; it can be prepared from the hemp plant grown anywhere.(c) Yes. 17.Nil. 18.Bhang and ganja deteriorate by keeping. If they are not aired, they go bad and become quite unfit for use. But if they are aired two or three times a month, they will keep for a whole year and no longer. A sort of worms attack them and cut them to pieces and eat them in part. Their colour is also changed to that of ash, and after a year they produce no effects at all in the consumer. As to charas I have no experience, as this drug is not prepared in the country, but comes from Kandahar, Yarkand, etc. 19.Only for smoking. 21.Flat; but its price being higher, the chur is generally preferred by the people at large. 22.Foreign, Kandahar, Yarkand, etc. 23.No. 24.The priestly classes of holy cities, such as Mathura, Allahabad (Prag), Gaya, etc., use bhang to a larger extent than any other classes. 28. (a) about a pice worth I mean bhang or ganja. (b) about one anna 29.With bhang are mixed ordinarily the fol- lowing:165 34.The priestly class (Brahmins) of such cities in the North-Western Provinces and Oudh, as Allahabad, Mathura, Ajudhia, etc., would suffer seriously if they were to abstain from bhang drinking, as they are quite habituated to it. In this class I think about 95 per cent. of the male members are habituated to the bhang drinking in the evening before taking their meal. I think no other class would so seriously suffer. 35.It would be, I think, feasible to prohibit the use of ganja and charas, as these forms are mainly used by the lower order of people, and the class called jogis or fakirs (religious mendicants). But I think the use of bhang would not be a feasible thing to prohibit, as it is rather more (nay, I should say most) extensively used all over India, and on many occasions it is necessary to use bhang as a religious custom. The prohibition of the use of bhang would, I think, occasion serious discontent amongst its consumers, al- though it might not amount to a political danger. The prohibition might, I think, be enforced by the imposition of very heavy taxes on the sale of ganja and charas. 36.I do not think there is any reason to think that alcohol is now being substituted to a certain extent for any of these drugs. But, on the other hand, I fear that the prohibition of the use of ganja and charas is very likely to be followed by an increase in the number of drunkards, especially amongst lower order of people. 37.The effects produced by charas smoking are said to last shorter than those produced by ganja smoking, and also the exhilaration of spirits is not so marked. 38.No. 39.I have no experience of this thing. 40.Leaves of the hemp plant (bhang) are boiled in milk and used as an anodyne for foment- ation on piles by the Yunani hakims. None that I know of. 41.(a) The use of bhang is said to produce appetite, and the person is able to take more food than usual. The same is said to have a laxative effect also. (b)The moderate use of charas or ganja is said to give staying-power under exposure and to alleviate fatigue. (c)Never used in this way. (d)The fakir or sadhu class use ganja smoking and bhang drinking for the purpose of producing concentration of mind, and they use them rather in excess and habitually. About two-thirds of the Brahmins (specially the priests) use bhang habitually and moderately as a digestive. And almost all the fakirs or sadhus use bhang and ganja in excess, and charas only occasionally, to produce concentration of mind and to have staying-power under fatigue or ex- posure. 42.The very moderate use of bhang is, I con- sider, to be harmless. But not so the use of ganja and charas, as I have known persons, who used ganja habitually and moderately, to have got extreme nervousness and weakness of the sexual power, almost amounting to impotency, and impaired appetite. 43.Yes. 44.Exhilaration of spirits and hallucinations, which are said to be of peculiarly pleasing nature. Yes; it is refreshing, producing intoxication to a slight extent. It does not allay hunger, but creates appetite (I mean the moderate use of all the three). The effect of bhang drinking lasts about three to five hours, that of ganja lasts about an hour, and of charas about § of an hour. The only after-effect found in bhang drinking is a taxation of bowels. The want of subsequent gratification (in bhang drinking) does not produce any longing or uneasiness, but those of charas and ganja smoking do produce longing and uneasiness. 45.No; but in ganja, vide answer No. 42, only physically. The habitual long use of ganja and charas in moderate quantity causes loss of appetite. It does not cause bronchitis, dysentery or asthma, but cures them. No; it does not impair the moral sense, neither does it induce uneasiness and habits of immorality and debauch- ery. It does not (moderate use of any of them) deaden the intellect, nor produce insanity. I know of no insanes confessing to the use of the drug. No; I do not think there is any evidence to indicate that insanity may often tend to indul- gence in the use of hemp drugs by a person who is deficient in self-control through weakened intel- lect. 46.The habitual use in excess of bhang pro- duces a sort of shaking palsy, as I know a class- fellow of mine having had it while in school, and for which he got plucked once in Practical Surgery. The habitual excessive use of ganja is, I think, more harmful, as it produces extreme nervousness in a short time, and a sort of idiocy, which may run to insanity or mental dementia, in which the person appears to have depression of spirits and not capable of much physical exer- tion. And I know of me person having had extreme irritability of the urinary organs through excessive use of ganja, died of hæmaturia. 47.No; I know of none. 48.None. 49.No; not as aphrodisiac. No; not so used by prostitutes. No; not more injurious. Yes; it does, especially ganja. 50.Please see answer No. 46. 51.No; I know of none. I could trace no connection of it with crime in general, or with crime of any special character. 53.No; I know of none. 54.Yes; all the three forms are sometimes seen to have been used in such a way. 55.Yes; I know one person induced his victim (a young girl) in a most cunning way to partake a strong solution of bhang to produce stupefac- tion in the girl in order to commit rape, in which he succeeded. Yes; I consider that complete stupefaction can be brought on by the excessive use of bhang and ganja without admixture. 56.The moderate use of any of the three forms produces exhilaration of spirits and intoxication of a pleasing nature. In excess they produce complete stupefaction by themselves. Poor persons, who cannot afford to buy ganja, generally make a mixture of ganja, dried tobacco leaves, and the form of tobacco used for huka, and smoke them together. It goes by the especial name of kankar. This is said to have less intoxi- cation than the pure drug. Dhatura seeds are mixed with bhang to make it stronger in its effects for personal consumption as well as for administration to others. The seeds are also used with ganja and smoked together in the same way and for the same purpose. 57.I have never heard of such a thing.
166 112. Evidence of MUHAMMED SHAIQ,* Sheikh, Retired Assistant Surgeon, Gorakhpur. 1.I was for twenty-five years in charge of the Gorakhpur Charitable Dispensary, with an atten- dance of nearly 150 per diem. I had an extensive private practice also. I am naturally very inqui- sitive even for trifles. From these sources I have gained my information. 2.These definitions may be accepted for this district also. The different products of the hemp are known by the same name as mentioned by Dr. Prain. 3.In many parts of this district hemp grows wild abundantly. 4.Hemp is known by the name of bhang or ganja plant,Yes; they do apply to the same plant. 5.The wild hemp grows in damp and hot cli- mates, mixed or fluvial soil, and where there is abundant fall of rain. 6.The growth of the wild hemp is generally dense. 7.Hemp is not cultivated in this district of Gorakhpur for any of its preparations, but the leaves of the wild plant are used as subzi or bhang. 8.No cultivation. 10.No special castes cultivate them. 12.The wild hemp is not cultivated anywhere in Gorakhpur. 14.Only leaves are collected in this district for bhang and nothing else. 17.By all classes. 19.Ganja and charas are used only for smok- ing; but bhang is used as medicine also. 20.Ganja and charas are used specially by the lower classes of people, and extensively by the monks. 22.Foreign. Brought generally from Amber- ser in small quantities. 23.Sometimes it is used for smoking also by the lower classes all over the district. 24.Bhang is used for smoking, eating and drinking, particularly for the latter; generally by the Brahmins, Chattris and Kayasths pretty ex- tensively. 25.On the increase; but the difference is not much perceptible. Facility of travelling and the consequent admixture of the various classes of people. 26.Habitual moderate consumers are on the increase. 27.The bhang or its artificial preparation, majun, a kind of sweetmeat (barfi), is used by the middle and upper classes of the Hindus. It is used by the well-to-do and idle people, who have an independent source of living, 28.A few pice (2 pice) per diem for the bhang, and a little more (5 pice) for the ganja, and charas is very seldom used. 29.Fennel and black pepper and, with the exception of very poor, a little sugar are gene- rally mixed with bhang by almost all classes of people. With these a few almonds are mixed by the rich only. Dhatura is not so used. Sugar is generally mixed to increase its narcotic proper- ty. 30.Bhang is sometimes used in company, but ganja and charas are not so used, except if a friend be present, he is also offered. With a very few exceptions these are confined to the male sex, and used generally after the age of puberty. Not usual for children. 31.No; easier to break off the habit than that of opium or spiritucus liquors. The moder- ate habit can be developed into the excessive. 32.During the Dasahra and the Holi festivals, bhang is very frequently used, and friends are often invited. Its use is not regarded as essenti- al. Generally temperate. Neither it forms the habit, nor it is in any way injurious. 33.The use of ganja and charas are generally regarded as indications of meanness; but bhang is free from such stigma. Among the Muham- madan religion the use of these or any other nar- cotics is sinful. But in the Hindu religion, with regard to the use of these narcotics, I have no knowledge. The use of ganja and charas is in disrepute, very probably being generally used by the low castes only. Some of the lower classes of the Hindus offer them on the shrines of certain saints and deities. 34.It would not be a serious privation to any class of consumers, as their use can be easily given up without much inconvenience. 35.It would not be feasible to prohibit the use of any or all of these drugs. The drugs will be consumed illicitly. Certainly it would occasion serious discontent among the consumers. The discontent would not amount to a political dan- ger. Very probably the prohibition would be followed by having recourse to alcoholic stimu- lants or others. 36.I have no knowledge. 37.As the effect produced by charas is more powerful than that of ganja, and therefore it is preferred. 38.Chur is the best of all, as it is free from leaves and twigs, and consequently its effect is more powerful. 39.The smoking of any preparation of hemp is not less injurious than drinking of the same, as the narcotic principle contained either in smoking or drinking is the same in kind and quantity. 40.Bhang is used medicinally both for men and animals, sometimes with good effects. 41.The moderate use of bhang is beneficial: (a) it increases the appetite; and (b) gives staying- power under severe exertions and alleviates fati- gue; (c) yes, it is preventive. The villagers generally in large numbers. Moderate occasional use for (b); moderate habi- tual use for (c). 42.The occasional or habitual moderate use is beneficial as stated above. 43.The moderate consumers are always inoffen- sive to their neighbours. 44.It relieves the craving and soothes the mind. Yes; it is refreshing. Yes; it does produce intoxi- cation, but slightly. It does allay hunger to some extent. The moderate use of bhang creates appetite. The effects of these narcotics last much onger than that produced by the moderate use of pirituous liquors. The after effects are slight * Invited to attend at a meeting of the Commission for oral examination, but failed to appear.
167 languor and lassitude. The want of subsequent gratification does produce longing, but not much. 45.The habitual moderate use of these drugs does not produce any noxious effects. It does not impair the constitution. It does not injure the digestion or cause loss of appetite. Excepting those who have an idiosyncrasy in favour of its effects. Does not cause dysentery, bronchitis or asthma. It produces none of these effects. It does not deaden the intellect, nor produce insanity. 47.No. 49.Yes; it is used as an aphrodisiac. It is not so used by the prostitutes. Its use as an aphrodisiac is not so injurious as that of opium. Habitual excessive use lessens the venereal power. 51.Men of bad characters are not produced by the use of these drugs. 53.No, I am not acquainted with any case of temporary homicidal frenzy. 54.No. 55.(a) No. (b) By excessive use complete stupefaction can be produced. 56.To increase the effect of bhang, sugar is generally mixed with it, and in smoking ganja or charas, tobacco. Dhatura is generally mixed with the criminal intention of robbing men, and very often it is mixed for the above purpose with tea and other things also, as occasion may offer, 57.I am not aware of it. 58.It is working well. 59.Requires no improvement. 60.Ganja is not cultivated in the district of Gorakhpur.It is imported from Bengal. 61.Charas is not prepared in this district. 62.Though the bhang is not cultivated in this district, but in districts where it is cultivated, it would be feasible to have some control. But the nature of the control (according to the condition of the people, either more or less educated or en- tirely ignorant, very poor or in fair circumstances, whether acquainted with the laws of the country or quite ignorant of it) should be different. 63 and 64. No objection. 65.Vendors or thikadars generally complain that the taxation on ganja is too high, and they say that opium generally costs Government about Rs. 8 per seer and is sold for Rs. 16. On the contrary, ganja is bought by Government at Rs. 16 per maund or 2½ seers per rupee, and the un- broken is for Rs. 6, and the chur for Rs. 8 per seer. At this rate the profit is 15 times upon the unbroken and 20 times upon the chur, whereas on opium the profit is only twice. 66.It is not necessary that there should be different rates on different kinds of hemp, as this will enable the petty seller to extort more price from the poor purchasers under some plea or other. 67.In my opinion it would be better to reduce the taxation on ganja, and increase it on spiri- tuous liquors, as it would increase the number of those who use any preparations of hemp, the use of which is not injurious, and reduce the num- ber of those who use alcoholic intoxicants, the use of which is very injurious. 68.There is no such house in this district, 69.Not consulted. Don't know what mea- sures are taken. I think it is very necessary that the public should be considered for a liquor shop and not for hemp preparations. 70.I have heard that smuggling is carried on from the Native States, but very seldom. The existing police system is sufficient. No special attention is needed. Generally the duty is fixed. The use of untaxed drugs is very seldom, and carried on very privately. 113.Evidence of HOSPITAL ASSISTANT JAMAL KHAN, Pathan, Daragunj Dispensary, Allahabad. 2.Though the definitions quoted from Dr. Prain's report are of a general character, they appear to apply to this district in particular. 19.Yes; ganja and charas are used in the dis- trict only for smoking. 23.No; bhang is never used for smoking in this district, 28.The accompanying table, marked A, gives the average allowance and cost of each of the three drugs per diem as required. 29.(a). The ingredients ordinarily mixed with bhang by first class or well-to-do consumers, who are generally men of the Brahmin, Rajput, and Vaisya castes, are as follows:108 other caste people give a small quantity of bhang to their children in the way of medicines when suffering from stomach complaints. 31.Yes; it is formed by the daily use of the drugs continually for months, if not for days. Yes; when one is accustomed to use these drugs for months, they cannot give up their use without substituting either opium or wine in their stead, or, if he is a mendicant, arsenic in very small quantity. Like alcohol, these drugs are gradu- ally increased in quantity by their habitual con- sumers, except when the cousumer of these drugs voluntarily takes the precaution of keeping the quantity within its limits, according to his circum- stances and temperament. 32.Ganja and charas are socially prohibited, bat the worshippers of Siva, who offer these drugs to that deity, use them every day. Bhang is used on several ceremonial occasions by the natives of this district. These occasions are169 per cent. of these suffer from deadened intellect ap- proaching to insanity when advanced in years. Actual insanity is often porduced in a young man of sanguine temperament, even after a couple of months' use of ganja and charas; but as I never had an insane smoker of ganja and charas under my treatment, I cannot say more than this, that the insanity produced in a young man by the use of these two drugs is sometimes of a permanent and sometimes of a temporary nature, and curable if treated in due time. These insanes seldom ac- knowledge that they are ganja and charas smokers. There are even now a few idiots in Daraganj who lost their senses through the effects of these drugs. They wander about in the streets as destitute, inoffensive persons. A healthy young man, a do- mestic servant of a gentleman here, some years ago, became insane by a few months' use of ganja and charas, and his master got him treated by a medical practitioner of the city, who was his family doctor. The treatment consisted of cooling medicines and counter-irritants on the neck. The man was cured. He gave up smoking of these drugs, and it is now over eight years he has not had a single relapse of the disease. He is now serving as an industrious and faithful servant at Fatehgarh. 46.The habitual excessive use of the drugs in question brings on a rapid attack of those complaints which their daily habitual moderate use gradually produces. 47.It has been often seen that the children of persons who habitually use either ganja, charas, bhang or opium inherit the tendency of their parents, and become addicted to these drugs even at an early period of their life. Even among the members of good families this result is observable, and a medical practitioner, who acts as a family doctor to respectable native families, can confi- dently make the above assertion from the intimate acquaintance he possesses with the constitutional leaning of his patients.In rare cases the children of habitual consumers of these drugs are found without such tendencies. 48.See above reply. 49.It has already been stated in my reply to question No, 30 that the female sex very moder- ately use the mild preparation of bhang as a do- mestic medicine in several complaints. Bhang, if slightly fried with ghi and powdered with "zira" and "choti elaichi" though a narcotic to a certain extent, would not only improve the digestive or- gans, but also give strength to a weak person, and prostitutes using this preparation are not expected to suffer from the injurious effects of bhang when used purely as a narcotic. Yes; the use of hemp, without being admixed with other suitable ingre- dients, fails to produce good effects, and it is known that partial, if not complete, impotency is caused by the use of pure hemp drugs, as it is pro- duced by large and frequent doses of camphor. 50.I know of no instance in which the use of ganja and charas has produced impotency. 56.(a) The effects of hemp used in moderation, if taken occasionally as medicine, are conducive to health. (b) If taken in excess, even occasionally, is in- jurious to health. Regarding the admixture of dhatura and nux vomica with hemp drugs, all the information that can be given is that when a confirmed smoker of ganja or charas or a drinker of bhang is not in possession of a sufficient quantity of the drugs he uses, he mixes either dhatura seeds or nux vomica to make up the deficiency. These as well as cantharides (Indian "telni mukhi") are used by Chamars with flour paste for clandestinely killing cattle. They are also used by the criminal classes as admixtures to hemp drugs for victimizing the objects of their pursuits, just as in former days the thugs used to do. 57.I know of no place where ganja and charas are eaten and drunk. Appendix A. Number. Class of consum- ers. Bhang. Number. Ganja. Number. Charas. Remarks. Number. Average allowance per diem. Average cost per diem. Average allowance per diem. Average cost per diem. Average allowance per diem. Average cost per diem. Srs. Chit. R a. p. R a. p. R a. p. 1 Habitual moderate consumers. 900 3 14½ or 7 pounds 13 oz. 2 scru- ples, and 16½ grains per head or 33/4 mashas. 3 14 6 one pice for 4 per- sons. 150 20 tolas or 7 ounces, 4 drachms, 9 grains per head. 6 4 0 one pice per head. 50 8 tolas or 3 ounces, 71/5 grains per head J 3 0 0 nearly one pice per head. 2 Habitual excessive consumers. 100 ... ... 250 1150 N.B.170 That is what I mean by my answer here.I apply his dispensary average to the general public. Question 1.171 49 Somewhat aphrodisiac. Yes; the prosti- tutes use it as refreshing. 50. The excessive use of these drugs causes impotence. 56. It becomes very intoxicating by mixing dhatura with charas. No other medicine is mixed as far as I know. 57. Ganja and charas are not caten and drunk, except bhang, which is eaten and drunk. Oral evidence. Question 1.172 (f) Insanity may be caused by these drugs, and intellect is not deadened. It was distin- guished by me in majority of cases as a predis- posing cause of insanity, both temporary and permanent. Typical symptoms are laughing, weeping and jumping. (g) I am unable to answer. 46. Habitual excessive use of these drugs pro- duces physical and mental disorders, which are not likely to be caused by the moderate use. 47. No. 48. May produce some effects on the constitu- tion of their children. 50. It produces impotence. 56. I am unable to answer. 57. I have never seen. 116. Evidence of HOSPITAL ASSISTANT BHAGOLAY RAM, Nai, in charge of Branch Dispensary, Tanda, Fyzabad District. 1. For eighteen years has been in charge of branch dispensaries. 19. So far as my experience goes, ganja and charas are only used for smoking. 23. So far as I know, bhang is never used for smoking. 29. (a) Ordinarily sugar, pepper and milk are mixed with bhang by well-to-do classes of con- sumers in order to increase its strength. (b) Exceptionally dhatura seeds are mixed with bhang. Bhang massala contains kahu, kulfa, aniseed, black pepper, kasni, almonds, cardamoms, and seeds of khira and kakri. 30. Ganja and charas are generally used by the male sex only, and in exceptional cases it is also used by bazar women. Bhang is used by both male and female. It is very seldom that children under the age of 12 years use these things. 31. Habit easily formed; difficult, to break off; tendency to develop into the excessive. 32. There is no such custom. 37. The effect of charas is stronger than that of ganja, and the effects of bhang last longer than those of charas and ganja. 39. Hemp plant is only used for smoking. Excessive smoking has a tendency to produce insanity. 40. Bhang is used as a sort of anodyne, and also to render the effect of operation by means of native jarrah less perceptible. It is also used in cattle diseases. 41. (a) Charas and ganja are not used as a food accessory or digestive. Bhang is sometimes used as accessory or digestive. (b) Bhang is only used to alleviate fatigue. (c) Bhang is used as a febrifuge. 42. Bhang, if used very moderately, is harmless. 45. Bhang at first produces appetite and bowels are regular, and, lastly, it injures digestion and causes loss of appetite. Charas and ganja cause bronchitis and asthma, and induce laziness, their moderate use does not deaden the intellect, nor produces insanity. 46. Habitual excessive use only sends forth in- sanity, asthma and chest diseases. 47 and 48. No. 49. The moderate use of these drugs is prac- tised as an aphrodisiac. Does not make man im- potent; it is also used by prostitutes. 50. Excessive use also does not tend to produce impotence. 117. Evidence of HOSPITAL ASSISTANT RAHIMULLAH, Meerut City. 1. The information is gained by having more or less occasions to see every community, as a medical man. 2. Yes. The names mentioned in paragraph 2 are also called in the Meerut district. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smoking. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking so far as my experience goes. 28. Ganja not known. Charas173 30. Mostly used in company, extent not known; used generally in youth. Mainly confined to male sex. Children do not consume, the only exception being that bhang is sometimes used by Hindu boys. 31. Habit easily formed. Not difficult to break. Yes; there is tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. Customs in regard to174 Bhang is given as a sweetmeat to children on these annual festivals on religious grounds. This annual custom is not likely to lead to the habit, but may be injurious in certain eases producing temporary insanity, etc. 36. I do not think that alcohol has taken the place of these drugs. 37. Charas affects the brain, lungs and heart more than ganja. Bhang is milder than the other two, but the effects of drinking it are much the same as smoking the other two drugs. 39. Charas and ganja I have never seen used otherwise than as smoked, and bhang I have never seen smoked, so I cannot give any opinion on the subject. There is however in my mind no doubt that insanity, both temporary and permanent, can be produced by the long-continued use of these drugs. 40. Yes; I have used them in tetanus, hydro- phobia, hæmorrhoids, and sexual debility. Bhang is given to horses and cattle to help digestion. 41. (a) Yes: especially bhang when taken be- fore meals. (b) Alleviate fatigue, but do not give staying- power under exertion or exposure. (c) Act as a febrifuge and preventive of diseases in malarious and unhealthy tracts. (d) Bhang is used internally in hæmorrhoids, dysentery and diarrh175 the same as balucbar ganja, but being a much stronger smoke, it comes cheaper than the former. (b) Excessive consumers smoke daily from 10 to 20 chillums, and at proportionate cost at the rates given above. 29. Dhatura seeds are not infrequently mixed with bhang with a view to increase its intoxi- cating effects by certain shopkeepers in Lucknow where bhang is served publicly in the form of drink called thandai. Bhang massala, as sold in the bazaar, consists of (1) black pepper; (2) sonf or dill fruits; (3) cucumber seeds (khera and kankri-ki-bea), Be- sides these, respectable people use badam, dried rose-petals, and saffron as bhang massala. 30. Ganja is frequently smoked in company, especially by the lower class of people. 31. Habit is formed easily enough, and can be as easily broken off. Yes, there is such a ten- dency. 32. Bhang is not infrequently used as an offer- ing to Mahadeo, who is said to be very fond of the drug. It is also used as drink on a sort of religious ground during Sivrat and other religious festive occasions. It is never considered to be an essential custom. 36. Yes, to a certain extent, as drinking wine and other alcoholics is. considered more respectable, very probably under European influence. 37. Charas differs from ganja in degree more than in kind. It has more narcotic than stimu- lating effects. Bhang in the form of thandai creates a sort of exhilaration and very mild intoxi- cation. Bhaug is never considered to be harmful; and, as a matter of fact, in the form of thandai it is not harmful at all. 39. Vide answers below. 40. Vide reply to 19. 41. Neither ganja nor charas smoking is food accessory or digestive. Bhang as thandai drink unquestionably helps digestion and acts as laxa- tive in health. Ganja and bhang do to a certain extent give staying-power, help to stand exposure, and alleviate fatigue. I do not think any of these three has any of the virtues referred to in question Much stress has been laid on the following supposed actions of these drugs:176 pleasant intoxication and some stimulation is pro- duced. Charas is said to make the head feel heavy. Charas deadens appetite, so does ganja to some extent; but bhang gives appetite. No particular after-effects of ganja smoking or bhang-drinking. Charas smoking is followed by laziness and general uneasiness, languor, and a craving for the smoke. Effects of ganja last about an hour; of charas a little longer. (Information collected from repu- table ganja and charas smokers of several years' standing). 45. Charas undoubtedly has noxious effects, physical, mental and moral. It impairs digestion and injures the constitution in many ways; so does ganja, though to a much less extent. In some cases ganja-smoking moderately appears to be harmful enough. Charas and ganja both im- pair digestion. Dysentery and bronchitis are not the uncommon effects of even moderate use of ganja and charas. Bhang in the form of thandai is harmless in every way. Habitual moderate use of ganja and charas apparently does not deaden the intellect or produce insanity. Ganja and charas smoking are powerful exciting causes of insanity. The insanity produced by ganja and charas smoking is usually of a tem- porary and violent character. The symptoms may be reinduced by the use of the drug after liberation from restraint. I believe the circumstances alluded to in connection with the cases of insanity pro- duced by ganja-smoking that have come to my knowledge have been sufficiently considered. But granting that certain insane people primarily suf- fered from mental anxiety or some form of incipient or decided brain disease, and took to ganja smok- ing with a view to obtain relief from their suffer- ings, the very important share of ganja-smoking in hastening the ultimate result could not be ignored. Had such people not resorted to this unnatural source of relief and taken to some other form of narcotic or stimulant, as opium or alcohol, very probably they would not have so surely developed insanity in themselves. Opium is un- questionably beneficial in certain forms of brain disease. The part of the question which follows immediately appears to be rather obscurely worded (and do you think there is any evidence, etc.) The meaning is clear enough as far as the word "drugs;" but why the clause following, viz., by a person who is deficient, etc., has been added is rather difficult to comprehend. Is it meant that certain cases of insanity, as well as of deficient self-control through weakened intellect (which latter should, in my opinion, be considered as cases of incipient insanity) tend to indulgence in the use of hemp drugs? Then the question reduces itself to this: Does insanity or incipient insanity tend to indulgence in the use of hemp drugs? I do not know of any form of insanity developed or in the incipient stage that has this special ten- dency. Now to give only a few, among others, of well-observed cases of insanity traceable to ganja smoking, I need cite the following:- (1) A lamentable case of a young man in a respectable family, very closely related to a medical man of several years' standing, came to my personal notice in the city of Allahabad not many years ago. There was no family history of insanity; no cause of special mental auxiety, nor any symptoms of brain disease, and the insanity was clearly traceable to smoking of ganja, excessive or moderate could not be ascer- tained. This young man was usually very quiet and inoffensive, but at times used to be more or less violent, and the insane condition was more or less permanent. At any rate, it could not be removed by proper restraint. (2) Another well-observed case of a young man, also in a respectable family in Allahabad, is a living example of temporary insanity clearly brought on by ganja-smoking. In this case fortunately, however, sufficient restraint has been often successful in removing the insane condition. This young man is still living and in good health. To cite another lamentable case of a young man, a distant relative of mine, who died insane a victim to ganja-smoking. The insanity was of a tem- porary and violent character. Sufficient restraint could not be enforced, and the young man died insane. All these are evidently juvenile cases. Cases of chronic bronchitis and bronchial asthma and dysentery are too numerous to be cited. It is a popular notion, and I believe well founded in Bengal, that the habitual ganja-smokers suffer from bronchitis, and die ultimately from bloody stools. All the cases of habitual ganja-smokers that, have come under my personal notice have more or less harsh, thick voice and chronic cough, and it is no wonder that it- should be the case. The real wonder is that people sometimes do es- cape these apparently inevitable consequences, es- pecially affections of the larynx and bronchial tubes, of habitually filling up the lungs and bron- chial tubes daily with such enormous quantities of the narcotic and irritating smoke of ganja. 46 "Work and rest, so that work may be re- sumed," is the law of life. Lowest forms of animal life, whose vital activities are strictly limit- ed to spontaneous movements, find the needed rest in a quiescent stage brought on by overfeed- ing177 chiefly call forth activities of the physical centres find a satisfactory relaxation in moderate mus- cular exercise, as the former finds in an excitation of the cerebral centres by means of stimulants and narcotics. A diversion is equally needed by both if they are to remain pleasantly conscious of their respective surroundings. But here we see also the difference in the ways and means adopted, as well as in the kind of relief obtained in the two cases re- spectively. Obviously enough the means adopted by the one could not be harmful as those resorted to by the other. Needful muscular exercise surely could not have any tendency to injure or impair the constitution as the excitation of the cerebral centres, though needful by means of narcotic and stimulants. Then again the diversion brought about by the former means is so very different from that induced by the latter. The one simply restores, as it were, the disturbed balance of nerve equilibrium, and thus affords a sense of relief and some positive pleasure, which soon subsides into a state of neutral excitement178 our climate; an organ upon whose normal func- tional activities the nutritive processes so largely depend. The evil effects of bhang-drinking I have never met with amongst habitual consumers. In connection with this subject, I have to draw attention especially to the form of thandai which is consumed so largely in these provinces. This I maintain is perfectly harmless, and decidedly beneficial in moderate doses. In a concentrated form, especially if adulterated (which is not uncommonly the case) with dhatura seeds and other noxious ingredients, is certainly noxious to a considerable extent. Thandai is, I believe, less harmful than drinking tea. The Chaubes of Muttra and Brindaban and Pragwals of these provinces consume enormous, and often incredible, quantities of the drink daily, and they get never the worse for it. On the other hand, more than three ordinary cups of good strong tea daily is very apt to disturb the function of the stomach, and not infrequently tell injuriously upon the heart and the nerves. Tobacco smoking, when at all excessive, frequently causes a sort of dyspepsia and a sort of nervousness in good many people. It cannot be said so of thandai drinking. On these grounds, if not on any other, I consider it would be cruel and unjust and a wrong policy altogether to deprive by any means direct or indirect the people of India of the use of the drug, Since human beings in any climate or age will take to some form or other of narcotics and stimulants, do what we may by way of legislature, it is not at all wise179 of ganja having been antecedent to fully developed insanity. The phrase "well observed," with which I have introduced them, is not used in a strictly scientific sense. I have never seen any ganja smokers of long standing who do not suffer from bronchitis and bronchial asthma, and in mak ing this statement I do not confine it to my pro- fessional observation. I have not noticed that dysentery is so commonly connected with the hemp drugs. I have heard of ganja being smoked as a relief for asthma, and I have tried extract of Cannabis indica for it without good result. 121. Evidence of MAHOMED YAR KHAN, Health Officer, Aligarh Municipality. 1. Our answer to the 1st question is based on the books which we read in the Medical School of Agra, that (hemp plant) has three principal in- gredients. 2. The hemp plant is not cultivated in Aligarh district. It is imported from Bharatpur and Gwalior. Charas is the extract of bhang. Its formation takes place when the plant is washed by rain. After the rainfall when the soft leaves are pressed, it is called charas. 19. Both kinds of ganja and charas are smoked. But sometimes pills of charas are used by doctors in spasm. 23. Bhang never heard of as being smoked. 28. I have heard that the average cost of charas is about Rs. 12 per seer and bhang's cost is about Re. 1-8 for four seers per day. (a) Habitual moderate consumers are 25 per hundred. (5) Habitual excessive consumers are about 50 per hundred. 29. Some Hindu rich men mix with bhang the following spices:180 122. Evidence of AVINAS CHANDRA BANERJI, Brahmin, Medical Practitioner, City Allahabad. 1. In the course of my practice extending over a period of fifteen years, I have come across pa- tients who are in the habit of using these drugs. 19. Ganja and charas are used for smoking purposes only, as far as I am aware. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking, as far as I am aware. 31. Habit of smoking ganja and charas is easi- ly formed, as also bhang-drinking. It is difficult to break off these habits. There is a tendency to excessive use. 32. On the tenth day of Durga Puja, the Bengali Hindus after throwing the goddess Dur- ga in water, drink a small quantity of bhang in commemoration of the victory of Rama over Ravana, the King of Lanka or Ceylon. Its use is considered a portion of the ceremony. It is tem- perate use. It is unlikely to develop into a habit 39. Bhang drinking is less injurious than ganja or charas smoking. I have seen persons using bhang in small quantities keep good health, But charas and ganja smokers have always appeared to me poor in health. 40. Bhang is prescribed by Hindu system of medicine as an aphrodisiac and digestive and as- tringent along with other medicines. It is given to bullocks and horses for looseness of bowels, ]0ss of apperite, and over-work, exhaustion. 41. (a) Medicinal use of bhang is beneficial for digestive troubles, such as looseness of bowels and loss of apetite. 42. Bhang-drinking in very small doses is quite harmless. I have seen many up-country gentle- men using it for years without any injury to their constitution. 45. (b) Small doses of bhang, say, five grains, do not impair the constitution, (c) to (f) No. 46. Excessive use of bhang makes the intellect dull and constitution lazy. 47. No, it does not affect children. 48. Children born of parents given to excessive use are dull in intellect, 49. (a) Yes (of bhang). (c) Yes, by prolonging the coitions it weakens in the long run. (d) Yes (of bhang). All my answers refer to bhang, and not to charas or ganja. 123. Evidence of ASSISTANT SURGEON MUNNA LALL, Tamoli (Brahmin), Rai Bareli. 1. As a medical man I have observed personally what I have stated; also made enquiries from per- sons using the drugs and verified their statements. 2. Yes, practically; but only two varieties of ganja are sold and used in this district181 among the Musalmans; also a few among the respectable people having means at their command. 28. (a) One pice to two annas. (b) One anna to eight annas. This mostly depends on circumstances of the consumer. A poor man can daily enjoy his daily drug for a pice; while a man of means can spend any amount on the same, the extra cost being due not to hemp, which is only in proportionately a small quantity, but accesories in the shape of milk, sugar, almonds, saffron, musk, and such like, which are the ingredients of bhang massala. 29. Ordinarily only black pepper and bhang are made into a drink, Exceptionally milk, sugar, raisins, almonds, saffron, etc., are used. Dhatura is generally used by thugs, which they do not use themselves with bhang, but for their victims before they rob them. There is no one formula for bhang massala. Mostly the ingredients named above are used to make the drink more palatable, and the proportion varies, 30. About 50 per cent. of the consumers enjoy themselves alone; about a similar number in company; the latter especially being the case among the charas and ganja-smokers, who asso- ciate merely to share with each other, the major- ity of these being composed of fakirs, idlers, and poor people, and in places licensed for the sale of these drugs. Children, as a rule, are exempt from the habit. After years of discretion, it is not confined to any time of life. A small minor- ity of women is also addicted to their use. 31 The habit is easily acquired, but difficult to break off, although not so difficult as the al- cohol habit. There is a tendency to increase in the case of idlers, etc. 32. Only on special occasions of festivity, the Hindu festival of Holi or Dol Jatra being the chief occasion, when bhang, in the shape of con- fection called majun, is offered and accepted by one another, especially among those who are religiously prohibited from taking alcohol in any shape. This is not likely to lead to injurious results. 33. In the case of fellows with no occupation or calling, and who are excessively given to the use of the narcotic, the public certainly looks down upon them with contempt, the words bhangeri and ganjeri being synonymous with the term ''useless." There is no special occasion that I know of when the Hindus worship the hemp plant; but the orthodox section of the community certainly looks upon bhang as a sacred thing on account of its being the favourite food of the god Shiva, one of the Hindu trinity. 34. I do not know whether to call the privation a serious one; but it will be equal to that of a European labourer or soldier deprived of bis daily 6upply of beer. 35. In my opinion it would not be feasible to prohibit the use of any or all of the drugs. It will certainly lead to illicit consumption. I do not think the prohibition could be enforced easily in any way. I do not know if the discontent occasioned by prohibition would amount to a political danger; but probably recourse would be had to other drugs 182 appetite and energy, and brings on premature old age. The consumer consequently becomes a mere skeleton and pitiable thing to look at, besides being liable to mental derangement, as above stated. 51 and 52. My knowledge on this subject is not much. 53. Yes; the excessive use of ganja or charas is liable to lead one to acts of unpremeditated violence and crime. I know two cases of tem- porary violent mania where the men attacked tried to beat anybody they came across. 54. I do not know. 55. Yes, the thug and roadside robber generally use bhang as a thandai, which means a refrigerant, if they can induce their victims to take it, and generally mix it with dhatura. Complete stupefac- tion can be induced by bhang without admixture. 56. The only admixture that shows its effect is dhatura. It causes a peculiar kind of delirium, something like delirium tremens; the man picks at his bad clothes, and sees horrible objects, like snakes, scorpions, etc. If the dose is a very large one, he becomes drowsy and quite unconscious, which might terminate in death, or temporary madness and recovery. 57. I have not much experience. What little I know, I have stated already. Oral evidence. Question 1.183 gait, which the fakir had not. He looked just like insanes I have seen. The other case was one I noticed as a passer-by, and people told me the man was mad with ganja or charas. Question 56.184 temperance; for temperance is good. I cannot remember. I remember the matter being broach- ed. If one say my name was entered, I shall be unable to deny it; if he said it was not, I could not deny it. I do not know where Mr. Evans is, I did not know he had mentioned my name to the Commission. All replies I have written are my own opinions. 125. Evidence of RAM NARAIN, * Rajput, Hakim, Aligarh. 1. The sources of my information regarding the matters connected with hemp drugs in regard to which my answers are framed are as follows :185 satisfying the insane longing produced by the want of these drugs. 37. Bhang, Charas and ganja are almost alike in their effects of intoxication. Bhang produces strange hallucinations and delusions, and some men are so mentally influenced by it that a small figure appears to them to be a gigantic image, and vice versd. The general effect that follows from it on certain individuals is that they are afraid of their own shadows, while the state of the habitual drinkers remains almost unchange- able ; and as to those who are not addicted to its use, their association of ideas is always changing. On the contrary, the charas and ganja smokers are constant in their thoughts and resolutions. 39, The smoking of any of the preparations of the hemp plant is more injurious than drinking or eating the same. The reasons areas follows:186 brain; (b) to excessive consumers produces sloth and stupidity, although it may be used with some admixture or without. The ignorant mix thorn-apple (dhatura) with bhang with a view to increase the power of intoxi- cation ; the badmash does likewise to stupefy his victims. 57. With the object of inflaming the sexual powers, charas is used with other ingredients as stated in 40 or 41. 126. Evidence of Gokaichand, Brahmin, Private Medical Practitioner, Aligarh. 1. More particularly my medical profession than the general knowledge and belief of the public. 2. Yes. Bhang is generally called in these provinces bhang, sabzi, buti, siddhi, and bijia. Ganja is the general term, and charas is called sulpha also. 19. Ganja and charas are exclusively used for smoking. 23. No. 28. (a) Bhang ½ tola, ganja and charas 1 anna. (b) 187 127. Evidence of Isan Chandra Ray, Kayasth, Medical Practitioner, Benares. 1. (1) My own observation in course of prac- tice. (2) Information obtained from people indulg- ing in the drugs in question. (3) Medical and other books treating on the subject. 2. Yes; the definitions may be accepted as pretty correct for this province. The names given above are the names by which they are locally known. 19. Yes; they are generally used as such. But I have also seen ganja and bhang used for exter- nal applications in certain diseases. Sometimes ganja is fried in ghi, and in this ghi, sugar and aromatics are mixed, so as to form sweets. These are eaten. 20. Mostly the poorer classes and bad charac- ters smoke ganja and charas. There are, however, exceptions to this statement. 23. Bhang is very seldom used for smoking. It is only when an inveterate ganja smoker has no pice to purchase ganja, uses bhang, a compara- tively cheaper article for smoking. 24. The higher and lower classes alike drink bhang. But there are many who abstain. 25. I don't think the use of ganja, charas or bhang is on the increase. Alcohol has replaced them considerably. 30. When the consumption takes place in soli- tude, the quantity of the drug consumed is limited, but it becomes excessive when in company. Chil- dren sometimes use bhang. 31. The habit is usually formed ; when it is of short duration, it is easy to break off; but when of some standing, it becomes difficult to leave the habit. In most cases the habit develops from the moderate to the excessive. 32. Some Hindu mendicants indulge in one or the other forms for devotional purposes to concen- trate their minds in prayer. Sivaratri being devoted to Siva or Mahadev, a Hindu god, and bhang being a favourite drink of his Hindus, particularly up-country Hindus indulge in bhang on that particular day. I have seen boys of 12 or 14 indulging in it. I might call it a religions custom. But this is not an essen- tial thing enjoined by the Hindu Shasters, as several sections of the Hindu community abstain from it. The Pensralis generally use bhang on the Dasami day. This is generally temperate, but likely to lead to the formation of the habit, and so to prove injurious in the long run. 33. Ganja and charas smoking is generally look- ed upon with abhorrence. There is a strong public opinion against it. The dregs of the society, dis- reputable characters, mostly indulge in the above- mentioned narcotics, and hence the sentiment against it. People tolerate the use of the bhang. 34. To a certain class of consumers it would be indeed a serious privation to forego the use of the drug. There are many sadhus and Hindu fakirs who live on the mountains, and perpetually cold places where they have insufficient means of protecting themselves against the inclemency of the weather. It is there that these drugs exercise a truly protective influence against exposure and impart a staying-power to the system. The numbers of such people are not few. 35. It would not be feasible to prohibit the use of all of these drugs absolutely. There is every likelihood of its being used illicitly, as the hemp plant grows wildly without cultivation. The prohibition will probably occasion a dis- content among the consumers, but I do not think it can amount to a political danger. Very likely the prohibition would be followed by re- course to other stimulants, such as alcohol and opium. 36. There is a fair reason to suppose that alcohol is being largely substituted for these drugs both among the upper and the lower classes, but notably among the former. This may be attributed to the following causes :188 the pupils freely contracted on the approach of light. Happening by chance to lift up the patient's arms, the professional reader will judge of my astonishment when I found it remained in the posture in which I placed it. It required but a brief examination of the limbs to find that, by the influence of this narcotic, the patient had been thrown into the strangest and most extraordinary of all nervous conditions which so few have seen, and the existence of which so many discredit189 Question 41.190 Excessive smokers make admixture of dhatura, nux-vomica, etc, to increase intoxication, and also for evil purposes. 57. Ganja and charas are not drunk. When ganja is not available, bhang is smoked, but it causes more intoxication. 129. Evidence of ABU ALI MAHOMED JAFAR, Shaikh Jafari, Medical Practi- tioner (Hakim), Benares. 1. I have come to know some of the facts by my own professional experiences, as I have treated many patients suffering from the complaints caused by the use of these drugs; secondly, by reading the books containing the records left by the old and experienced hakims; and thirdly, by the enquiry from the consumers. 2. The report of the above doctor is quite true, but with this much difference, that the plant of bhang is different from that of ganja in this coun- try. Bhang is only called by the names of siddhi, sabji, and patti, and the gum-like exudation which collects on the plant of bhang, when mixed with dew and dust, is called charas. 19. As far as I could enquire, I have found that ganja and charas are generally used in smok- ing, but not in eating and drinking. Occasion- ally some people mix a very small quantity of charas with bhang to increase its intoxicating effects. 23. As far as the enquiry has gone, it is found out that in this country bhang is not used in smoking method, but is eaten alone or mixed with tils and sugar, or is drunk either alone or mixed with massala. 29. After enquiry it is found out that bhang is generally mixed with the following massalas : 191 Of course the habitual excessive use of any of these drugs weakens many of the organs, and it is found out by experience and common sense that the organs which were weak in parents are similar in their offspring. 49. Apparently they are not used for sexual strength, but for pleasure and intoxication. Moreover, bhang is used to bring on more in- clination for food. 50. Apparently the desire of more intoxication in Tamil, ganja; in Burmese, bin; in Malay, increases the quantity of their use and their bad effects are worse. The sexual powers and diges- tion are lost. 56. Its answer is stated against the 29th ques- tion. 57. Ganja and charas are used in smoking and bhang in drinking methods here; but small quantities of charas are mixed with bhang occa- sionally. 130. Evidence of MANOHER PERSHAD TEWARI, Brahmin, Practitioner in Medicine and Surgery, Cawnpore. 1. I am an inhabitant of these provinces, and have been living, moving, and practising as Assistant Surgeon in Government dispensaries and in private practice among the people of these provinces, and of observing their effect and ob- taining information regarding the matters con- nected with them in several localities and dis- tricts. 2. Bhang.192 14. Excepting bhang, neither gauja nor charas is prepared in our province. Bhang is to a great extent prepared in Farukhabad, Bareilly, Bijnor, Gonda and Bahraich, Kheri, etc. 15. Can't say whether they are prepared in our provinces. Bhang is, of course, only prepared by separating leaves of the plant from the tree, its stalk, stems, and branches, and kept for use, for eating and drinking purposes. Bhang is never smoked. 16. Yes, bhang can be prepared generally by the people in their houses from the hemp plant wherever grown. Ganja and charas can be pre- pared to some extent only from the wild plant wherever grown. But charas is never, or can never be, prepared in our provinces. 17. The preparations of the hemp drug, respec- tively, are prepared by cultivators in general. They do not form any special class. 18. Charas and bhang are deteriorated by keep- ing, but not ganja so much. Charas can be kept for one year only. Bhang for one or two years, and ganja for two or three years with ordinary care. The causes of deterioration are193 28. Bhang194 Bhang is always eaten or drunk, but never I smoked. A preparation of it called majun is always eaten and distributed at present on festival days. Bhang and majun both, if taken in excess, cause serious and fatal results in some cases. Cri- minals always give it in larger doses with dhatura or alum to cause stupefaction. Bhang, if used in moderate doses with its "massala," proves less injurious than either charas or ganja, 40. Charas and ganja.195 It was tried in two cases by me. In one case I it was given to relieve him from mental anxiety and procure sleep, and in the other to one habituat- ed to it. Both of them tended to indulgence in it. 46. When it is used excessively and habitually the symptoms, as described above, go from bad to worse, producing catalepsy or stupor, melan- cholin, or dementia of a confirmed sort. 47. Yes, the habitual moderate use of any of these drugs in some cases shows hereditary habit, and affects their children by producing idiotcy or imbecility in them, and a tendency to use these drugs. People of Garhwal district make much use of ganja and charas, and most of them are idiotic and hereditary consumers of them and bhang. 48. The excessive habitual use of any of them shows the same tendency in a stronger and exag- gerated form, as is seen in the case of Chaubes of Muttra, who use bhang extensively. 49. Yes, people make use of these, or any of these drugs in moderate doses to produce aphro- disia. Prostitutes never use it for this purpose. The use of any of these drugs for this purpose proves more injurious than its use as an ordinary narcotic. Ganja and charas produce their effects on the nervous system directly, and produce injurious effects by excessive amount of heat which they cause, and by their impairing the digestive and circulatory organs and the brain. When the man becomes anæmic or weak, his circulation becomes languid and does not supply proper and sufficient amount of blood to the sexual organs, and being denied of nutriment matter, does not nourish the body in general, and thus produces impotence. The semen becomes thin ; its spermatozoids languid and unable to move about in am196 controlled and looked after in such districts where I it grows wild; and its cultivation should not be encouraged but rather stopped. 63. Charas at least, if not ganja, should be dealt with by the excise department like opium, or sold in retail only. 64. It is evident from octroi duty that there is too much smuggling of ganja, and specially of charas, going on in these provinces, and that im- portation regulations specially require some modi- fication to be made in them. 65. In my opinion the taxation of (1) ganja, (2) charas, (3) bhang are not reasonable with (a) reference to each other, (6) to alcoholic or other intoxicants. The taxation on charas should be heavier in amount than on ganja, and on ganja heavier than bhang, because there will be good revenue, and these articles would not come within the reach of every one easily as at present. 66. At present there is much loss of revenue by there being one and the same tax on different kinds on ganjas, flat, round and broken, which would not be the case if it be taxed differently according to their respective value or amount of consumption. That, namely, which is much con- sumed should be more taxed than the other. 67. The present system of taxing to me (1) ganja, (2) charas, (3) bhang, appear lighter when I consider the ultimate incidence of the tax on the consumer. 68. Yes, there are such houses or shops in our provinces licensed for sale of these drugs, or their preparations, where they are consumed on the premises. I look upon them as so many depots or sources of bad characters or schools where so many bad characters are turned out daily. 69. When a shop of such kind or of any of these drugs is opened in any locality, people of it are not consulted in any way, nor are any mea- sures taken for this purpose. Local opinion ought to be thus considered or consulted, 70. By opening of octroi here, we have been able to find out such facts, which show that smuggling is going on here of these drugs in these provinces to some extent, and there is reason to believe that there is use of untaxed drugs in our provinces. Oral evidence. Question 1.197 delusion was love of adorning himself like a I woman. There are no typical symptoms of hemp drug insanity. It may take any form. The same symptoms might be induced by heredity, self-abuse, privation, poverty, loss and immorality, or self-indulgence. I have never seen or read of a case of injury to the head being a cause of in- sanity, nor of epilepsy. If I had no history of any of the six causes above mentioned, I should attribute the insanity to hemp drugs if the patient used any of them. I eliminated these causes in this case before attributing it to hemp drugs, Whether two or three drams would be an exces- sive dose of bhang would depend on the idiosyn- crasy of the patient. I think there was no in- tolerance of the drug in this case. There was no dhatura in this case. I inquired. Dhatura is never used except accidentally unless there is cri- minal design or an exceptional recourse to it by excessive consumers when they have not the hemp drug. Care is always taken to separate the dhatura which sometimes gets in by mistake, as bhang and dhatura grow together all the same. A special inquiry was made, and his father was asked whether he had taken any thing else. All the family said he had taken nothing else at all. Dhatura might produce temporary insanity for an hour or two, but I have never heard or read of a case. Bhang is a cumulative poison. The cumu- lative action of bhang takes three to seven years before symptoms are produced. The doses this patient took were moderate. There was no in- sanity in this man's family. The father never took bhang, but he used to prepare it always for his son. He encouraged his son on account of his desire to satisfy him and meet his wishes. He had taken his ordinary dose that day. The in- toxication on that day was the same. He was sleeping on the roof in the hot weather. I cannot say whether there was moonlight. There was no parapet wall. He was asleep by ten o'clock so far as was known. He had a quarrel with his wife after ten o'clock and before the fall. It was over- heard. He was so violent that he jumped off the roof without thinking of consequences. There was no serious injury of any sort. I alone treated him. I do not consider that he was mad before that night. I saw no sign of madness before that. The boy was not educated, but had average intelligence. He was a strong, stout fellow and a wrestler. He was an only son. His father died about the age of ninety. There is another case of insanity due to bhang. About two years ago, I had a case of a young man about 22 years of age (born 1869). He used to take bhang habitually every day from the age of 17 (18S6). His doses cannot be accurately stated. He was taking it every day in moderate or excessive doses. There was change in his character after three years' indulgence. He was violent to relatives and neighbours. His ideas became perverted, worse and worse every day. At last he became insane. He lived in my neigh- bourhood, and I know the case from early times. He showed symptoms every now and again of violence. These began after about three years' indulgence in 1889. He had occasional fits last- ing for an hour or two. They gradually increased in duration, until he was insane for one night or one-day for twelve hours. Then he became per- manently insane. That was in 1891, He was brought to me for treatment. I attended him at the time, and attend him still. He is worse than ever, uncontrollable, and therefore left alone to Nature. He lives alone shut up from his rela- tives. He killed a man over two years ago; he killed his brother, but it was not proved that he did so. He was not then insane when he went before the Magistrate. He was acquitted because the Magistrate did not believe the accused had killed his brother. It was in the autumn of 1891. He answered the Magistrate quite rationally. It was about six months after that he became insane, in the spring of 1892, His previous violence was known to few, and was not brought to the Magis- trate's notice. I know of no other cause that could have contributed to the insanity. Such insanity may sometimes be cured if the taking of the drug is prevented. I saw this lad in some of the fits which I des- cribed between 18S9 and 1891. He was talking loudly and irrationally. After this kind of fit was over, he was not trusted by his relatives, I am certain there was no dhatura in his bhang; for no one uses that drug. I cannot say that bhang is a more frequent cause of insanity than ganja or charas. I rather think the opposite. Question 33 198 Question 53.199 132. Evidence of PUNDIT RAM NARAYAN, Brahmin, Private Practitioner (Vaid), Ajodhia. 1. Have been private practitioner during thirty- two years. 19. In this part of the country, ganja and charas are used only for smoking. I don't know of any other use. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking. 28. (a) 1. Bhang, from 3 to 6 mashas. 2. Charas, from 4 rattis to 1 masha. 3. Ganja, 2 mashas. (b) 1. Bhang, 1 chittack. 2, Charas, 6 mashas. 3. Ganja, 1 tola. 29. Generally speaking, pepper, aniseed are mixed with bhang, and tobacco with charas and ganja. Some people mix dhatura seeds with bhang, but use like this is exceptional. 30. The quantity consumed in company far ex- ceeds that used in solitude. It is generally con- fined to the males. The use by females is very rare. There are some instances where children are addicted to the use of these drugs in company of their fathers and guardians, but cases like that occur among fakirs, sadhus and low caste people. 31. The habit of consuming these drugs is not easily formed in the first instance, but gradually ; and when one is habituated to their use, it is not an easy thing for him to break off the habit. Of course, there is always a tendency for the moderate consumers to take it in excess. 32. Among well-to-do persons there is a very rare use of bhang on festivals, but among low caste people it is generally used on Holi. It is not essential from a religious point of view. Use on such occasions is moderate, and consequently there is no danger of its eading to the formation of habits. 37. The effects of charas and ganja-smoking are very similar to each other, but the former is more astringent. Bhang differs in its effects from that of charas and ganja; that is to say, the effects of bhang are more lasting, and less immediate than that of charas and ganja. 40. Bhang is generally prescribed in diarrhoea by vaids, and its use in the treatment of cattle- disease is very common. 41. The moderate use of bhang increases appe- tite, and that of charas and ganja alleviates fatigue. 4:2. When used moderately, bhang, charas and ganja are harmless; but as there is a greater tendency of their being developed into habit, they are injurious in the long run, i.e., when formed into habit. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of charas and ganja is refreshing. It lasts for about 3 hours, and kills the hunger. Bhang im- proves appetite, and its effect is more lasting than that of charas and ganja. The want of subsequent gratification does produce uneasiness, so much so that one can hardly hold his mind to do anything. 45. Charas and ganja, even when used in small quantities, are injurious both mentally and physi- cally, but bhang is not so. All three tend to impair the constitution. The use of bhang increases appetite, while that of charas and ganja diminishes. Charas and ganja produce asthma. The use of all these three weakens the brain. 46. The excessive use of any of these three drugs produces bad result, 47. Yes. It is hereditary. 48. The same as 46. 49. Yes, it is used by prostitutes. The excessive use produces impotence. 50. The same as 46 and 48. 56. Dhatura and opium are mixed with bhang to make it more intoxicating. 57. Ganja and charas are never eaten and drunk. 133. Evidence of PUNDIT GANGA DIN, Brahmin, Private Practitioner (Hakim), Ajodhia. 1. Have been private practitioner during twenty- five years. 2, The same definitions are applicable to them in these provinces also. 19. Ganja and charas are used for smoking only in these provinces. 23. No ; it is never smoked. 29. With ganja and charas only tobacco is mixed to increase their intoxicating properties. With bhang are generally mixed black pepper and sugar. But in summer season, sonf, black pepper, sugar are exceptionally mixed in order to make it moderate in its effect and palatable. 30. It is not confined to the males only. Even the lower class women and women of bad character use these drugs in an adult age. No; it is not usual for children to use any of these drugs, except that the parents addicted to the use of these drugs voluntarily give them to their children also 31. Yes ; the habit of consuming it is easily formed, and when once formed, is difficult to break off. The moderate habit can develop into exces- sive. 32. The consumption of these drugs is only con- nected with society. 37. The effects of charas and ganja are similar to each other, and are felt the sooner they are smoked. Both these in their effects differ from that of bhang, which takes some time to produce its effects. 40. Bhang is sometimes prescribed only by vaids and not by unani hakims. Bhang is used in the treatment of cattle in order to alleviate fatigue. 41. The moderate use of bhang only is attended with some benefit in (a), (b) and (c). 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of these drugs is not refreshing. Yes; it does pro- duce intoxication. Yes ; ganja and charas allay hunger and diminish blood. Bhang does create appetite. The effects of bhang lasts from 4 to 8 hours, while that of the other two is of a short
200 duration. The want of subsequent gratification produces longing, but no uneasiness. 45. The moderate use of any of these drugs produces bad effects, physical, mental or moral. Yes ; it does impair the constitution by making the blood more watery. Yes ; it injures the digestion and causes loss of appetite. Ganja and charas produce bronchitis and asthma, and bhang is a remedy for dysentery. It does impair the moral sense. It induces laziness, being the result of the weakness of brain. It also induces the habit of immorality and debauchery. It deadens the in- tellect and produces insanity. It is the exciting as well as the predisposing cause of insanity. The insanity produced by the effects of these drugs is temporary, not permanent, and can be reinduced after liberation from restraint. 46. The excessive use of any of these drugs will allay hunger, dry the tongue, deaden the intel- lect, make the man insane. 48. As question No. 46. 49. It is never used as an aphrodisiac. Not used by prostitutes. It tends to produce impot- ence on the ground that it diminishes blood in man's system. 50. As question No. 46. 56. The moderate use of hemp modified by the admixture of other substances will increase hunger, give staying-power under severe exertion, while the excessive use of it will tend to make the con- sumer insane, weaken his constitution, and destroy his appetite. Only dhatura is sometimes mixed in order to increase the intoxicating properties. 57. No ; neither of them is used in eating or drinking. 134. Evidence of MOHAMMAD YASIN, Medical Practitioner, Fyzabad. 1. The information contained in my answers is I principally derived from my professional experience. I had, moreover, occasions, when I obtained in- formation from the consumers of these drugs. Have been a Medical Practitioner during thirty- three years. 2. Question No. 2 may be more properly an- swered by the consumers of, or dealers in, these drugs, as they alone are supposed to know accu- rately the technicalities or the particular names by which the different products are known. 19. As far as it is known to me, ganja and charas are used lor smoking only. 23. Bhang is seldom used for smoking. I do not know of any instance in which it is so used. 28. The average cost of each of these drugs per diem to both sorts of consumers is not much, being about a pice or two, when consumers indi- vidually smoke them, but it is more costly when these drugs are smoked, as they usually are, in company. 29. With charas tobacco is generally mixed, so also with ganja, but dhatura is sometimes mixed with both to increase their intoxicating properties. With bhang pepper is always mixed, but at times sonf, almonds, sugar, etc., are mixed to make it more pleasant and tasty to drink. 30. Ganja and charas are extensively used in company, where each of the consumers has his pulls by turns ; but bhang is used individually as well as in company. I have never come across a female or a child indulging in charas and ganja, though consumers sometimes give bhang to their children. 31. There may be circumstances under which the habit of smoking ganja and charas may be easily acquired. Company has much to do with the formation of such a habit. But I do not think it very difficult for a consumer to break off, that is, if he has the will to do so. Some uneasi- ness must, as a matter of course, be at first ex- perienced, but the hold of these drugs upon their consumers is not so strong and complete that it may be very difficult to break off. It is usual that the moderate habit develops into the excessive. 32. Holi is the only Hindu festival when people mostly indulge in these drugs, especially bhang. It is not, in my opinion, likely to lead to the for- mation of the habit unless the use be continued. Nor is it otherwise injurious, though sometimes people get insensible by an over-indulgence in it. 36. I think there must be very few of the con- sumers of these drugs, who would like to substi- tute liquor for any of these drugs, which are evi- dently less costly than alcoholic drinks. 37. Charas and ganja are similar in intoxicating their consumers as soon as they are smoked, but they differ from each other in so far that the former is a more powerful drug and retains its effects longer than the latter ; while bhang takes a considerable time in producing its effects, which are further of a more durable nature. 39. Majum, which is a sweetmeat in whose composition bhang enters, is the only preparation known to me, in which the drug is not so inju- rious as otherwise taken, unless it is taken in very large quantities. In my opinion these drugs, especially charas and ganja when smoked excessively, but without the help of good food and nourishment, must produce injurious effects on the constitution and tend to produce insanity. 40. Bhang is sometimes used a poultice for blind piles. It is also given to horses and bul- locks to alleviate fatigue. 41. The moderate use of these drugs may seem beneficial for the time being, but it is sure to in- jure the human system in the long run. (a) The drugs may, for the time being, seem to help digestion ; but it is not so, since the consu- mers of these drugs do not, by their looks, indi- cate that their digestion is the strongest in its action, (b) The consumers of these drugs may fancy that they give staying-power under severe exertion of exposure or alleviate fatigue, but they do noth- ing of the sort in reality. (c) The consumers fancy that these drugs are beneficial. 42. In my opinion even the moderate use of these drugs is not harmless. 44. The immediate effect of charas and ganja is to elevate the spirits of the consumer for the time being, but it is by no means refreshing. It does produce intoxication and allays hunger, as long as the effect lasts. I do not think it creates appetite. The effects of charas and ganja are not very lasting, and the after-effects, if any, consist in producing uneasiness. Yes; the want of sub- sequent gratification does produce longing and un- easiness.
201 45. (a) The habitual use of these drugs affects the consumers physically and mentally, but I cannot with certainty say how far their use affects their morality. (b) Yes ; it does. (c) I think it does. (d) Yes; it is injurious to the bowels and lungs. (f) Yes ; it deadens the intellect and tends to produce insanity. The use of these drugs excites insanity, which may at first be of a mild tpye, and may be temporary, but there are instances when it has developed into mania or dementia, etc. (g) Yes ; they may. I have known a man who smoked ganja becoming insane. His malady developed into mania and terminated in death. 46. The answer to the foregoing question applies here also. 47. I do not think the habitual moderate use of any of these drugs to be a hereditary habit, nor do I think that the children of the consumers of any of these drugs are in any way affected there- 48. The same answer as above. 49. In my opinion the use of these drugs for a continued length of time brings about impotence. 50. The same answer as above. 56. The admixtures modify the effects of these drugs by weakening or strengthening their intoxi- cating properties. Dhatura is the only substance known to me that is mixed with ganja, but it is so consumed only by the fakirs and bairagis, whose cravings for these drugs these drugs fail to satisfy. Dhatura is also mixed with bhang or ganja when it is to be administered to the persons whom it is intended to poison or make insensible. 57. In my opinion the use of these drugs is by no means conducive to either the public health or public good. On the other hand, the consumers of these drugs are haggardly creatures, reduced to skeletons, that regret very much their taking to these habits. Many of these consumers become insane or otherwise demented. Oral evidence. Question 45. There would be no harm to speak of, if a man continued to be a moderate consumer of ganja or charas. But I think it is difficult to keep the habit within bounds. My experience is drawn from the city, and I find that the moderate smokers who do not go to excess are few. I have lived at Fyzabad for twenty-five or twenty-six years. As long as a man remains a moderate consumer, there is no danger of his becoming in- sane. It is the excessive use which has the ten- dency to produce insanity. Bhang is less deleteri- ous than ganja and charas. 135. Evidence of SYED ABU IBRAHIM, Private Practitioner (Yunani Hakim), Fyzabad City. 1. My knowledge about these drugs is based upon the information obtained from those men who are addicted to their use and acquainted with their effects, as well as it is derived from the treatment of such persons, and from reading books on medi- cines in Yunani and in English. 2. Yes ; the same definitions are applicable to them in these provinces also. 4. In this district, siddhi, sabji, patti, and than- dai, are the different names by which bhang is known, The higher and the educated class of people give it different names, some calling it verk-ul- khayal, juzve-azam, arsh-numa, shahwat angez, munis-i-humum, chitra-khizr, and the luxurious men who prepare a majun from it call it falaksair. 7. In our district ganja and charas are not cul- tivated. But in Manjha bhang grows unculti- vated. In the time of the King of Oudh, bhang used to be cultivated in gardens abundantly, while in Manjha it grows itself in plenty. Now it is not grown in gardens. In the Gonda and Bahraich districts bhang grows in abundance, and is export- ed to our district. It is of a better quality and strength than that of our district. 14. Bhang grows in a small quantity in this district, and in a large quantity in the Gonda and Bahraich districts. During the time of the King of Oudh, the Murais used to cultivate bhang in our district, but now under the British rule its cultiva- tion is altogether given up. 16. Bhang is generally prepared (by consumers) at their homes, whether the bhang be from the cultivated or uncultivated plants ; whereas ganja and charas are not prepared from cultivated or uncultivated. 18. Any of these three drugs, if kept carefully in a dry place, and beyond the reach of damp and moisture, can be preserved for two or three years or more without its becoming spoilt. But the length of time weakens its strength. If kept for 2 or 3 months in a damp place, they will become spoilt ; and if affected with moisture, they will become quite useless within 10 or 15 days. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smoking. 20. Ganja is abundantly consumed by the labour- ers and the lower class of people. Charas is used by sadhus and jogis, that is, by fakirs, in plenty. There is a very rare use of these two drugs (ganja and charas) among the Muhammadans in general, and the respectable persons among the Hindus. Many persons from the religious point of view abstain from the use of these drugs : they are commonly used by those who are vicious. 23. No, it is only eaten or drunk. 24. In this district bhang is commonly eaten or drunk by all classes of people among Hindus, but chiefly the jogis, thakurs and Brahmans make a great use of it, taking it before their food. Nearly 75 out of 100 persons use it. 25. Ganja and bhang are more largely used than charas, and are so used on account of their being cheaper than other liquors, 28. Daily consumption is202 30. Women of loose character also use charas and ganja, as well as the lower class children ; but such instances are rare. 31. The habit of consuming ganja and charas is not easily formed, but, when formed, is difficult to break off. The habit of consuming bhang is easily formed and can also he given up easily. There is a tendency for moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. On festivals, chiefly in summer, bhang is used, while in winter, ganja and charas are made use of a great deal, 33. Commonly the lower class of people consider ganja smoking is a good thing, and those of the same class who do not use the drug are taunted with the proverb : " He who does not use ganja-kali (ganja flower) is worse than a woman." On the Sheoratri festival, ganja and bhang are offered to god Shiva, and also partaken of by the people. 34. There is no doubt that those who are addict- ed to its use will, on breaking off their habit, feel much inconvenience. 35. To force the consumers to give up the use of these drugs will be troublesome to them, as well as be the cause of their annoyance, which annoyance cannot be supposed to cause any danger. The only thing to be feared is lest the use of other liquors should take the place of these two. 36. No other intoxicating drug is used instead of these three, as they are the cheapest. 39. Ganja and charas smoking is more injurious, as it is said that the smoker of charas, soon after its inhalation, becomes insensible, because his brain becomes affected with the shock of its effect. In some cases it leads to insanity and ends in death. 40. The native hakims prescribe bhang in the following diseases :203 49. Not used by prostitutes. Ganja and charas cause impotence. Bhang is a slight aphrodisiac. 56. If mixed with dhatura, the effect is in- creased. 57. Only smoked. 63 and 64. No objection. 65. Is reasonable. 137. Evidence of AMJAD HUSEIN KHAN, Pathan, Native Doctor, Gorakhpur. 1. In course of exercise of profession. 2. Definitions correct. Known by same names in this district. 3. Bhang grows spontaneously to the north- east portions of this district. 4. Hemp plant is called sabzi. 5. Grows in cold weather and in moist soil. 6. Dense. 7. No cultivation here. 10. No special class cultivate or prepare hemp. 18. Bhang goes bad after being kept for more than one year. Ganja becomes less powerful if kept for over a year. Charas can be kept any length of time. 19. Ganja and charas are smoked. Charas is only eaten when mixed with other things as a medicine. 20. Hindu fakirs are principal consumers of ganja, charas and bhang. Low caste Muhamma- dan fakirs also consume them. Low caste Hindus use ganja and charas. Bhang is generally used by all castes. With the exception of fakirs, few people use drugs. Applies to all North-Western Provinces. 21. Baluchar is best and chur is worst. 22. Only foreign is used. Comes from Punjab. 23. Bhang is not smoked. 24. Vaishnus, Brahmins, Kshattris drink bhang. Ganja and charas are used by fakirs and low castes. Bhang is eaten or drunk indiscri- minately. 25. Consumption same as it always was. 27. Excessive consumers are fakirs. Others are moderate. 29. Ganja204 57. Only smoked. 58. Satisfactory. 63 and 64. No objections. 65. Taxation reasonable. 67. No objections 68. Are none. 69. No one objects to the opening of drug shops. 138. Evidence of Hakim Musharraf Ali Khan, Pathan, Medical Practitioner, Aligarh. 1. I have seen the use of these drugs for about thirty-three years in Delhi, Meerut, Karachi, Baluchistan, and in Aligarh. I have been in Aligarh twenty-two years. I have practised my profession for about thirty-three years. 2. These drugs are called qinnab in Arabic, which seems to be a generic term (in Persian kinnab). 3. Kashmir, Persia and Hindustan. 5. Warm climates, dry soil, slight rainfall (because its strength would be diminished), and elevated places. (N.B.205 sumption, except that it is extremely hard to keep to it. The tendency is to become excessive. 43. Quite inoffensive. 44. Bhang.206 cal danger because no religious question is involv- ed. (a) Alcohol would not be used by Banias, Brah- mins, and other high castes. (b) Opium would be used move. 37. Effects of charas.207 Excessive drinkers use only black pepper. 30. Drugs are generally used in company. Women in Sind used ganja, but not here. Child- ren do not use them. 31. Easily formed and hard to break off. The tendency is for a moderate habit to increase in case of all three. 32. There is a custom in Holi and sometimes in weddings of offering bhang. This is not essential or injurious. 33. The use of these drugs is bad, as people will sell their clothes to get them. Ganja and charas dry up the brain. Bhang is not so bad. It improves the appetite. They are a little bene- ficial. 34. For 20 days consumers would not be able to do any work if the consumption were stopped suddenly. The consumption could be stopped easily by degrees. 35. If it were stopped by degrees, there would be no harm. There would be no political danger. It has increased very much lately, and could be decreased again. Opium would perhaps take their place, but not till they had been left off alto- gether. 36. No. 37. Ganja has stronger effects than charas. 38. Flat ganja is strongest. 40. Bhang is used for people who have lost their appetite, and it is also good for dysentery, dys- pepsia, and also as a soporific. Bhang is given in cases of ague to keep off the fear patients have of the fever. 41. (a) Not at all. (b) Bhang is beneficial for this and refreshes ; charas and ganja are not. (c) Bhang removes the depression in fever, and is beneficial for a short time. (d) No other way. 42. Ganja and charas injure blood and heart, and are always bad. Bhang is beneficial as a medicine, but is injurious when taken habitually even though moderately. 43. Not at all. 44. Ganja and charas.208 formed. It is difficult to break off the habit of smoking ganja and charas. Its prohibition will cause pain to those who smoke it. Excessive con- sumption is caused by bad company. 32. There is no social or religious usage, even no custom. 33. Bhang, being digestive, is used for the object as well as in order to alleviate fatigue. Hemp plants are not worshipped. 34. The fakirs will suffer from the non-use, as well as those people who dwell in places of cold climate, and to whom its smoking is useful. 35. It is easy to stop charas. It cannot he consumed illicitly. The people will feel no discon- tent. Alcohol or the like cannot be substituted. 36. No. 37. Ganja produces phlegm and cough. Charas does not produce phlegm. Ganja smokers often come to my shop, and I give them medi- cine. Bhang is in no way injurious, but useful for piles and diarrhoea. 39. What is smoked is injurious. There is no other form of smoking charas than by chillum. Bhang is reduced to powder and then eaten, 40. According to Vedyak, bhang is used in dyspepsia, diarrhoea, and piles. It is rubbed on inflammation. Ganja and charas are not used in illness. Bhang is given to oxen, horses and ele- phants in health and illness. 41. (a) Bhang is digestive. (b) Bhang is useful. (c) According to Vedyak, bhang is used in fever. (d) Nil. Hindus and Muhammadans use it.209 30. Bhang is used in solitude, whereas ganja and charas are used in company. Boys do not use any of these three drugs. 31. The habit of consuming ganja, charas and bhang is easily formed, and the habit can be easily broken. But any of the above drugs can be wholly left off after using it for some time. The moderate habit can be developed into the excessive by means of company. 32. There is no custom, social or religious, in regard to the consumption of any of these drugs. 33. The use of bhang is generally regarded as useful to digestion of meal as well as to give rest in fatigue. Among the gentries ganja and charas are regarded with disrepute. The hemp plant is never worshipped. 34. The fakirs will suffer if they forego its consumption. Ganja is useful to the people of the district where the climate is so cold that if they will forego they will suffer. 35. It would be feasible to prohibit the use of either ganja or charas. It will not be consumed illicitly. The prohibition can be enforced through police preventing its plantation. It will cause discontent, but there can be no political danger. (a) and (b) No. 36. Those who drink wine as well as ganja, bhang and charas can remain content with wine only if they forego consumption of these drugs, 37. Ganja produces phlegm and cough, and patients suffering from cough and asthma have come under my treatment. Bhang is in no way injurious, but is useful in diarrh210 18. Bhang leaves lose a great deal of their strength if kept long ; also charas. 19. It is sometimes used for eating, but seldom, and as medicine, vide below. 23. Bhang is used for smoking only where charas is difficult to obtain. I can't auswer the second part. 24. Kahars and other low castes, Lodha, etc., smoke charas. Brahmans and Chaubis among Hindus, and Mirasis among Musalmans, are the chief consumers of bhang. 25. I should say on the increase, but cannot say for certain, 26. I cannot say with exactness, but the occa- sional consumers are in a very small minority. 27. See 24. 28. The allowance varies from 6 pies worth to 5 annas worth, according to the habits of the smoker. 29. In charas "karwa" tobacco (strong) is mixed. In bhang black pepper, cardamoms, al- monds, fennel (sonf), kasni. Sugar, milk and dhatura are mixed according to taste. Massala of any special kind is not known here, 30. Charas in company ; bhang both in company and solitude. Men and women both smoke : wo- men seldom, and children very rarely. 31. (a) and (b) Yes. (c) Yes, in the case of bhang and charas. 32. There are no social nor religious customs' but some Hindus through force of habit have begun to connect the consumption of drugs with religion. They offer the preparation of bhang known as "dudhia" to their gods ; and in the Dasehra, bhang is thrown in the face of Mahadeo during the marriage procession of Ram Chander. 33. The consumption of drugs is not approved of generally. I know of no worship of the hemp plant. 34. No, because the habit can be left off with- out serious harm. 36. Alcohol is looked on as the most pleasant form of intoxication, but those addicted to in- toxication only take to alcohol where it is cheap. As a rule, the expense of intoxication by liquor makes drugs used more commonly. 37. I don't know about the effects of ganja- smoking. 39. Eating is more injurious than smoking ; it acts more strongly. Charas causes constipation and heats the body. Bhang causes the stomach to swell (nagakh karta), and obscures the senses. 40. Bhang is used to improve the appetite, and imsak and bah ke liye mixed with other medicines. For earache bhang leaves burnt in tilli oil is a good remedy ; bhang leaves pounded with water are used to relieve pains in the "fotah." For "bawa sir" the stem from bhang leaves boiled in milk are a cure. Bhang is used in cattle disease 41. (a) The moderate use of drugs is beneficial at first, harmful if continued. (b). Yes ; I have seen labourers, who take drugs, walk 20 kos without food. They alleviate fatigue. (c) Yes, slightly ; but they are not used now-a- days. Kahars and other low castes chiefly use the drug, Brahmans and Chaubes are the chief habitual consumers among Hindus. Chaubes eat it frequently. 42. Drugs do harm--vide section 45 below. 44. The immediate effect is refreshing (mufar- rah) and intoxicating. Habitual consumers find their fatigue alleviated and themselves freshened by the intoxication produced. Bhang quiets the pangs of hunger,which reassert themselves sooner or later according to the strength of the consum- ers. The after-effects are slackness, laziness, weak- ness in limbs and restlessness. There is subse- quent longing and uneasiness. Charas does not allay hunger or improve the appetite. 45 and 46. The habitual moderate use is greatly injurious spiritually, bodily and socially. This poisonous weed is according to the science of medicine wet and dry to the third and fourth degree. According to chemistry, poison, narco- tics and particles of lime are found in this. If smoked in the chillum after being lighted by fire, it has a tendency of drying the liver, and the liver loses its original colour and takes a yellow colour ; and from exceesive dryness the liver loses its pro- perties. The air passages dry up and contract, resembling people with asthma, as habituals generally appear. The dryness of the liver affects the heart, the heart the brain, and this generally is injurious to the constitution internally and ex- ternally. The dryness of the heart affects the blood veins, which spread all over the body ; these veins, through the dryness of the heart, refuse to perform their function ; and the blood cannot cir- culate freely ; and often the circulation is stopped and the skin becomes yellow or black, and the body wastes. Experiment and experience prove this that no opium-eater or charas and ganja smok- er has many children, for this reason that on ac- count of drugs the habitué becomes impotent, and through its use man becomes lazy, and from not being able to get good and nutritive food death soon occurs, I treated two people for gout who were affected by reason of excessive bhang-drinking, and three people with dropsy. From charas-smoking a man is reduced to a skeleton. It impairs the digestion and causes loss of appetite. They often suffer from dysentery. It has been said about charas that none is free from asthma and cough211 56. Dhatura is mixed with bhang to produce greater intoxication. It was so used by thugs ; from the admixture of milk the dryness caused by hemp is lessened. The intoxication is diminished by eating bitter things after taking hemp. Oral evidence. Question No. 29.212 146. Evidence of HAKIM MOHAMED NAZIR HUSSEIN, Shiah, Native Physician, Lucknow. 19. Ganja and charas are smoken only in a chillum. 20. Ganja is used by Kahars, whether Hindus or Muhamadans, Koris, Chamars, Lodhs, Murasis, Ahirs and other low castes. Superior classes of Hindus and Muhammadans, such, for example, as belong to the Bakkal (Bania), Rustogis, Kashmiris, and other similar castes, use charas. 23. Bhang is not smoken in chillum. 24. Generally Muhammadans, Banias, mostly Brahmans, Murasis, Khatris, and almost all the Hindu sects or castes, drink it. Some, however, take it after mixing with it certain ingredients. 33. Civilized nations regard the use of each or any of these drugs to be bad. In my opinion there is no religious or national custom regarding the use of these things. Rather their excessive use earns notoriety generally, because under their influence one commits such ungentlemanly and unbecoming acts as one is apt to do in a state of senselessness. 85. If the use of this is prohibited, the natural consequence will be that men will resort to alcoholic drinks or other intoxicating things in- stead. 37. The effect of smoking charas is more in" jurious than that of ganja. We find paleness of the face or thinness of the body more in men who take to charas than in those who take to ganja. 40. In India bhang is used as medicine for most of the bodily diseases of men in general. Its use is not restricted to the adherents of any particular creed. It is given to the cattle also. 41. These things when used in moderate quantities, are useful at first, but their ultimate effect is rather injurious. (a) Bhang helps in the digestion of food at first, but afterwards proves injurious. Its ex- cessive use causes loss of sight. (b) The wearisomeness due to hard labour is less felt by taking bhang owing to its stimulating effect. (c) None of the three drugs is a cure for fever or other epidemics. They are used through habit only. 42. It is not beneficial, but rather injurious (vide reasons given above). Besides it causes dullness of the brain, loss or weakness of the sight, insanity, melancholia, impotency, thinness of semen, weakness of digestion, less formation of blood, bad smell from mouth, etc. 43. Cause very little trouble, if at all. 44. Those who use it begin to feel its intoxica- tion a little while after. Its intoxication is re- freshing and useful in mitigating the sensation of pain or uneasiness. The effect of bhang lasts for 3 or 4 hours. 45. Habitual excessive use is injurious to the physical, social and moral state of man. Its use renders the body dry and lean, and results in the less formation of blood and loss of appetite ; if used in excessive quantities, it will bring on cough, asthma, misanthropy, dullness and inactivity. It excites the desire for sexual intercourse, and con- siderably tells upon intellectual powers, so much so that excess of its use often brings on insanity, which is some time after rendered hopelessly in- curable. 49. At first these drugs appear to be tonic, and prostitutes are known to take them merely for the sake of intoxication ; but ultimately they prove injurious, and cause thinness of semen. 51. Generally these men don't commit any serious offences, but its use is the result of vaga- bondish life. 53. Excessive use of these substances does not lead to the commission of serious offences, nor produces the homicidal mania. 54. The use of these drugs does not fortify one to commit any premeditated crime. 55. An offender simply with a view to carry out his evil intentions cannot make his victim totally senseless merely by means of these drugs, unless he mixes with them some other substance stronger in effect than these. 57. Ganja and charas are only smoken in a chillum ; they are never used in any other way. 147. Evidence of BULDEO SAHAI, Brahmin, Hakim, Meerut. 1. As I have had occasions of treating several patients deeply under the influence of bhang and charas, and I have also seen persons who are addicted to the use of these drugs, I reply the questions set regarding these two drugs only. As regards ganja, which is neither cultivated here nor the residents of this place ever use it, I have no knowledge of it whatsoever. 2. Following are the different names applied to bhang213 only is used as an admixture with charas and no- thing else. As already described, the only massa- las of bhang in use are aniseed, black pepper, car- damoms, and almonds, etc. 30. Bhang and charas are generally used by men, but some bad-conducted women sometimes use them also. There is no age limit for the use of these drugs, but they are generally not used by children. Ill-trained boys sometimes use them in bad societies, and become habitual to them. 31. Bhang and charas are easily acquired as a habit, but it is broken off with great difficulty. There is no tendency of these drugs, as far as I know, to develop into an excessive habit. 32, In a religious point of view both bhang and charas are objectionable, but badly trained and ignorant people generally use bhang in a Holi festival, and offer it to temples also, and the term dudhia is applied to it, and that is considered to be a religious ceremony, though such a custom is never allowed in any religion. Often it is seen that on occasions like these generally larger quan- tities are consumed even by those who are in the habit of taking just a moderate quantity, and those who never used it before they also consume it, though in a very small quantity. Persons using it on these occasions sometimes become habitual consumers. 37. It takes time to be fully under the influ- ence of bhang, though the effect lasts for some time. Reverse is the case of course with charas, e.g., the person becomes soon intoxicated by its use, and the effect lasts only a short while. 40. Native practitioners use bhang for its astringent properties, along with other drugs in looseness of bowels of animals ; and charas for its aphrodisiac properties is also used with other tonics. 41. (a) Bhang given in a moderate quantity to a person who never used it before promotes appe- tite, but, in my opinion, never helps digestion, or rather disorders it. (b) and (c) No. (d) Useful in the treatment of piles. 44. Bhang at first causes delight and then intoxication. The appetite promoted by it is also only temporary, and whatever one eats under its influence is also not digested. The effects of: these drugs last only for some time, and then pass on. Persons addicted to the use of charas are generally phlegmatic, though at the same time anæmic. 45. Bhang and charas are both injurious- Bhang impairs appetite in the end, and charas causes bronchitis and asthma. Both these drugs bring on immorality, idleness, and loss of in- tellect, and incline one towards luxurious habits, but the person at last becomes incapable of doing all these. Charas and bhang both no doubt im- pair intellect and bring on insanity, and this is confirmed by different books. No such person who has really turned mad by the use of these drugs has, however, come under my observation up to this time. 49. Bhang used with other tonic medicines is no doubt potent, but when used alone is just the reverse. Oral evidence. Question 1.214 Dry tobacco leaves and the ordinary tobacco I stuff used for smoking are, as a rule, mixed with ganja and charas before they are smoked. The following are the ingredients of the ''bhang massala" as sold in the bazar :215 hand, renders a man cool and calculating and not easily roused to action. I have also observed it to produce a retiring disposition and heighten reli- gious tendencies when they already exist. The ultimate effect of prolonged, though moder- ate, use of bhang is injurious, and causes impair- ment of the constitution. It weakens the nerv- ous system, and occasionally gives rise to palpita- tions of the heart. Ganja, under the same con- ditions, have been known to cause dysentery and bronchitis. As regards its effects in causing insanity, I am not in a position to pronounce a decided opinion. This much is certain, that a considerable portion of the lunatics in this country are ganja smokers ; but whether ganja smoking acts as a predisposing or an exciting cause I can- not say. I may further add that I have found mania to be more prevalent amongst ganja smo- kers than the other varieties of insanity ; while, in case of bhang, monomania, especially of a reli- gious character, is more frequently met with. As regards the effects of ganja smoking in inducing laziness or habits of immorality or debauchery, I believe they are generally over-estimated, and are certainly not so immediate or formidable as may be traced to over-indulgence in other power- ful stimulants or narcotics, such as alcohol and opium. 46. The above-mentioned remarks apply to the excessive use of the drugs, the results being produced sooner and in a more intensified form than in the case of the moderate consumer. 47. No, the children are more affected by early associations than from hereditary taint. 49. Yes; but the effects are not more injurious than when used as an ordinary narcotic. 149. Evidence of RAMJI MUL, Brahmin, Medical Practitioner, Muttra. 1. I have bad many occasions in my experience as medical practitioner. 2. Besides the names given, bhang is also called bijia and buty. 3. In village Baheri, district Bareilly, bhang is not planted, but grows in itself, as also at Budri Narain, Jagadhri and Himalaya mountain. 6. It rises thick. 11. It is possible that the hemp be planted, but this is not done owing to prohibition. 16. It is not made up, but dry leaves are used. 18. Bhang spoils in damp. 19. Ganja and charas is smoked by chillum and not used otherwise. 20. It is used by menials and devotees. 21. Baluchar is preferred. There is another kind of ganja which is somewhat long in size also used. 22. It is imported from Yarkund, Afghanistan and Persia. 23. Bhang is never smoked by chillum. 24 It is drunk by nearly all classes of men in small as large quantity in every town. It is also eaten in the shape of confection, and dry leaves are also eaten in case of need, 25. Bhang and ganja are used in abundance, but charas on a lower scale as it is dear and not so good as the former ones. 28. Bhang costs between three pice and one anna, charas from one to eight annas, and ganja cost between bhang and charas. 29. In preparing bhang, black pepper, carda- mom, mace and fennel fruits are also mixed up, and milk and sugar are also put in to make it tasteful. If it is desired that it may be more intoxicating, it is boiled in copper pan and dhatura seeds mixed in, but this is very seldom done. 30. All the three drugs are used in all stages of life and in society ; even the boys of tender age use them. 31. If some one is addicted to them, they increase by habit. It is difficult to leave them by a habitual user, specially charas and ganja. 33. The use of the hemp is considered bad in general, as the operator becomes idle and indolent. 34. Of course they will feel inconvenienced, but the average number is 5 per cent. 85. Their use can be prohibited only by law. The persons using them will be annoyed, but not to such an extent as to pick up strife. In case these drugs be not obtainable, they will use wine. 36. The wine is of course on increase as it can be had without difficulty, while it is troublesome to prepare bhang. 37. Ganja does not affect suddenly, and its heat is somewhat steady, while charas is reverse to that ; the latter results in dry coughing and the former produces expectoration. 38. The pathar produces a dry heat and balu- char is still more intoxicating. They agree with each other otherwise. 40. Bhang is also given to animals after mix- ing salt. It is also used by a man in ague and fever, and made up in shape of poultice for boils ; it is also given as confection for constipation. 41. It is digestive if used moderately. It also prevents the effect of bad climate. 42. It is harmless to drink bhang moderately. 43. The smoking of charas produces a bad odour and is obtrusive to neighbours. 44. The habitual smokers of charas also feel its effects suddenly and think it intoxicating and productive of hunger. The effects of both the articles last from quarter to one hour and after- wards they produce a dryness. 45. The habitual moderate use of these drugs even is harmful for body, mind and morality. They produce asthma, bronchitis and a sort of madness which is perpetual and cannot be remedi- ed even when their use is given up. 49. If moderately used, they are aphrodisiac, and when in large quantity, they are unaphro- disiac. 51. The bad mashes use these drugs more or less in many towns. 53. I do not think any of these drugs produces an intention for committing serious cases. 55. None of these drugs produces a complete unconsciousness without mixing anything else 69. None of the residents of the locality where these shops are opened is inquired into before the shop is opened ; it depends upon the choice of the license holders to pick up the place where they please. 70. It is a rare case that the drugs be secretly brought from other places.
216 150. Evidence of KALLI BAIDJI, Brahmin, Native Baid, Lucknow. 1. My information is based partly on the written authoritien in Bhara Prakash and Gurra- tanmala, and partly on the experiences of persons using these drugs. 2. Besides the different names given in ques- tion 2, bhang is also called buti, bijya, juni, etc. In Bhara Prakash the terms bhang, ganja, matu- lani, madni, jara, are given. Flat ganja is called pathar. Round ganja is called baluchar, and the broken ganja is called maludeva. 19. Ganja and charas are mostly used for smok- ing. Oil extracted from ganja is also used for external application on the part affected as a pain killer, 23. Yes ; in rare cases when ganja and charas are not obtainable. This practice is resorted to in a different climate by way of an antidote to keep off the effects of the climate. 28. (a) Six mashas, cost about half a pice worth. (b) Two tolas, cost half an anna. Towards the Mathura district persons consume half a pound of bhang at a time. 29. The poor classes generally use black pepper only throughout the year. The more well- to-do persons mix in cold weather almond, saffron, musk, pepper with bhang. In hot weather seeds of kaddu, mun melon seeds, rose leaves, etc., are substituted. Milk and sugar are also added to the above mixtures to make the thing more deli- cious. Dhatura, nux vomica, and betel-nut are also used, but in rare cases, with a view to in- crease the intoxicating effect of bhang. Can- tharides being foreign to the country is not used here. The ingredients have been defined above already. 30. No precise extent of consumption practised in solitude and company can be given. The consumption of bhang varies from 2 rattis to half a pound. It is mainly confined to the male sex, but instances of females using these drugs are not uncommon. 31. Yes. Not difficult except in rare cases. Yes ; like all other intoxications. 32. None that I know of. 36. Alcohol being religiously forbidden is not generally used ; but a general idea remains as to the stronger effects of alcohol than bhang and ganja. The tendency of development therefore often leads men to use alcohol. 37. The intoxication of charas is of a more per- manent nature than ganja, the latter being drier in effects than the former. Bhang, however, takes more time to bring about the intoxication and keeps longer than either of these. 40. Bhang is not unfrequently medicinally used. The following recipe is given in Bhara Prakash as increasing hunger, helping digestion, stopping diarrhoea, decreases phlegm and heaviness in the stomach. A masha each of bhang, saffron, musk, cardamom, almond and pepper. Bhang is generally used in the cattle disease. 41. (a) A moderate use of bhang is digestive. (b) Charas and bhang operate as a stimulus for severe physical exertion and for undergoing ex- posure. But bhang is often taken to keep down the sense of fatigue. (c) Ganja is used in malarial districts as a safe- guard against the effects of the climate. 42. The moderate use of bhang is harmless, while it does not impair the brain functions, but keeps down the sense of fatigue. 44. In labouring classes the use of ganja is a sort of stimulant. If taken in large quantities, the hemp drugs do produce intoxication. Bhang increases appetite. The effects of ganja and charas are transitory, while that of bhang lost in three hours. Irregularities in the use of the drugs to a habitual consumer cause uneasiness. 45. Nil. Ganja generally causes asthma ; bhang causes laziness. 47. The children are apt to catch the contagion from their guardian, but the use of the drugs does not necessarily induce a hereditary tendency for its consumption. 57. Generally in this part of the country are not used for edibles. In conclusion, it will be better if our benevo- lent Government will pass a law against bhang, ganja and charas, for, as far as my experience is concerned, they are very injurious. 151. Evidence of CHANDI DIN, Brahmin, Hindu Physician, Pihani, District Hardoi 1. Reading bonks and observing cultivation. I have also attended drug consumers, and know their symptoms. 2. Ganja, charas and bhang are different plants. "Hemp" (translated "patsan") is the tree from which ropes are made, not that from which in- toxicants are produced. 3. Bhang near the Ganges in Katiari. Ganja to the north of the Kheri District. 4. Only ganja, bhang and charas (three separate plants). 6. Scattered. 7. (a) In Katiari pargana to a great extent. 9. Sown by itself in Katik. 10. No special class. 14. No. 16. No, not prepared in houses. 19. Yes. 20. Low castes everywhere. 22. Foreign, 23. Never. 24. Every Hindu everywhere drinks bhang. 25. On the increase. Society uses them. 28. (a) Very little ganja or charas. From 6 mashas to 1 tola of bhang. (b) 2 or 3 tolas to ¼ seer of bhang. 29. (a) With bhang, pepper, cucumber seeds, cardamoms, til and sugar. (b) (As a great intoxicant) also dhatura. There is no bhang massala.
217 30. Chiefly in company. Only men use ganja and charas. Women suffering from "dwasir" use bhang to a small extent. Not confined to any time of life. Children never consume these drugs. 31. Yes, as regards all three questions. 32. There are no such customs. 33. Their consumption is thought badly of, though there is no public opinion on the subject. The hemp plant is never worshipped. 34. No, because they would find it would bene- fit them. 35. It would be feasible. The law could pre- vent illicit consumption. The prohibition could be enforced by a penal law. There would be serious discontent, but it would not amount to a political danger, because the consumers (one or two in a thousand) are not numerous enough. They would drink spirits. 39. Eating or drinking bhang is less injurious than smoking ganja or charas. 40. Bhang is prescribed for dysentery, and to remove the effects of fatigue in animals. 41. (b) Bhang is used occasionally in moderation by the labouring classes to alleviate fatigue. 42 Such use, except in the case of bhang, is harmful, for ganja and charas injure the sight and induce various diseases. 43. Yes. 44. They produce intoxication ; they allay hunger. The effects last from 1 to 1½ hours. They make consumers lazy and uneasy, and they cannot work. 45. The semen is spoilt ; the intellect and ap- petite are diminished. Ganja produces bronchitis and asthma, but not dysentery. It produces im- morality to begin with, and then the consumer becomes impotent. It also produces insanity. If the habit is given up, such insanity can be cured at once ; otherwise it becomes permanent Tem- porary insanity is renewed with the return of the ganja habit. A ganja lunatic becomes mute, and does not move or speak. 46. Such use produces similar effects. 47 and 48. No. 49. Yes, but not by prostitutes. The use of hemp tends to produce impotence. 50. The same answer applies only in an en- hanced degree. 53 and 54. No. 55. Yes ; but they cannot do it without mixing dhatura with the drug. 56 Bhang becomes intoxicating and stupefying if dhatura be mixed with it. 57. Never. 152. Evidence of GUR DUTT, Brahmin, Vaid, Bareilly. 1. Being a physician, I came across many patients, in whose cases diseases and ill-health were due to the use of charas, ganja and bhang. 2. I am of opinion that these definitions are ad- missible, and in this part of the country charas also goes by the name of sulfa. 3. As far as I know, I can say that these plants are found in abundance in the Terai, in places such as Chilkiya, Ramnagar, Mandi, and Kala- dhongi. 4. The plant itself is called bhang. 5. This plant chiefly grows in low ground, subject to inundation and stagnant water con- taining decaying substances. 6. The growth of hemp is dense. 7. In our country, hemp grows abundantly without cultivation and is secured for bhang. 13. Only so much is known that hemp is found in Terai and on the high banks of those rivers where the flood-water collects and becomes stag- nant. 16. On the whole, bhang is not prepared in this part, but. for commercial purposes imported from other places where it grows wild. Charas and ganja are produced from wild plant. 17. Unable to answer. 18. These three products, ganja, charas and bhang, are soon spoiled by moisture, and lose their quality and warmth, but with proper care they keep good for two years. They should be kept aloof from damp and open places. 19. Ganja and charas are only smoked by chil- lum. 20. Everywhere farmers, fakirs, and low caste persons chiefly smoke ganja and charas to excess. 21. Those who use them, like churya very much. 22. Charas comes from Kabul and Yarkand. 23. Persons do not smoke bhang by chillum. 24. In sacred places, the Brahmins and the devotees use bhang to excess. 25. The use of charas, ganja and bhang is daily increasing, and the reason is that the price of wine being too high, the poor people cannot afford to use it. 29. Sometimes people mix dhatura with bhang to make it more intoxicating. 30. People use them in assembly, and their use begins in the days of youth and particularly they are used by males; and boys hardly use them. 31. The habit of drinking bhang is acquired easily, and it is very difficult to give it up ; and the persons are getting accustomed to these things more and more daily. 32. There is no custom, social or religious for their use, but it is considered somewhat necessary to use them on Shewratri festival. 33. Generally their use is regarded with dis- favour, and the reason is that the consumers of these drugs become vicious and ill-natured, and men give them the names of bhangri and charsi, terms which mean low character. There is no worship of the hemp plant. 34. Devotees, farmers, and boatmen use them to a great extent, in order to keep themselves warm. They will be put to serious inconvenience at first in giving them up, as they are accustomed to their use. 35. There is no harm if the use of these things be prohibited in general. But it cannot be so done unless it is declared to be illegal. The pro- hibition will not cause such dissatisfaction as to endanger the peace of the country. Probably the vol. v. 2 I
218 result of the prohibition will be that the Tow caste people will be inclined to use wine in their stead. 36. Non-intoxicating liquor is used at present, instead of these drugs. A person naturally prefers the thing that he is accustomed to. 37. Those who use the aforesaid drugs report that ganja and charas have the same effect. 39. The way of smoking by chillum is less harmful than any other way. 40. Bhang is used in native medicines and to cure cattle, 41. Bhang is useful, if it is used moderately. (a) It is digesting and tends to increase the appetite. (b) Bhang and charas produce impotency. (c) A little use of bhang in malarious fever is useful. Consumption of bhang for such purposes is not confined to any particular classes. 42. Even the moderate use of charas and ganja is not quite harmless. 43. Those who use them give inconvenience to their neighbours, and habitual consumers some- times commit thefts. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of these drugs on the habitual consumer is not refreshing ; it produces intoxication ; does not allay hunger. It gives rest to the weary during the time of intoxication. The effect lasts for four or five hours, and afterwards it causes uneasi- ness. 45. The habitual moderate use of the drugs produces noxious effects, physical, mental, and moral. It impairs the constitution. The use of charas and ganja injures the digestion and causes loss of appetite. It creates cough and asthma, impairs the moral sense, and induces laziness ; causes loss of sense and produces insanity. It produces temporary insanity. The chief symp- toms are immorality, wildness of temper, and can be cured by refraining from it. The symptoms will not be re-induced after being cured and liber- ation from restraint. 46. The habitual excessive use of these drugs will be injurious. The chief symptoms are uneasi- ness, pollution of blood, loss of sense, weakness of principal organs and joints of the body. 47. The habitual use of it is not hereditary. The beginners will suffer much by the use ; it will spoil his growth. 48. The loss would be a considerable one, as stated above. 49. The use of ganja and charas is not aphro- disiac, but it is so used by the prostitutes, and thus it is much injurious to them. By degrees the sexual power disappears. 50. Would produce a very great loss. 51. It is frequently used by the bad characters. 53. Excessive indulgence in these drugs, though giving transient pleasure, in some instance will incite to crime. 54. They do so frequently. 55. The complete stupefaction can be induced by these drugs without admixture. 56. The moderate use of hemp brings on intoxi- cation, but if modified by the admixture of other substances, specially dhatura, it produces disas- trous effects in the extreme. 57. I have not known charas and ganja as be- ing eaten; it is simply smoked; but if it be eaten, I can say from medical point of view, that it increases wind and causes distention. 153. Evidence of HAKIM AMBA. PRASAD,* Kayasth, Private Practitioner, Furrukhabad. 10. They do not belong to any particular class. They are of the same class as the common agri- culturists. 14. Bhang is planted and prepared in enormous quantities in tahsil Kanouj, District Farrukhabad ; also in Shahjehanpur District. There is no cultivation of ganja and charas in these provinces. 16. Bhang is not prepared by people in their houses or gardens, the Government having pro- hibited its cultivation without a license. Wild bhang is the least intoxicating. Wild ganja is not of a good quality, and neither good charas can be prepared from it. 17. By the agricultural classes in general. 18. Bhang if kept for a year greatly loses its power of intoxication. Ganja will keep good for three years if kept with ordinary care. Charas quite loses its effect after a year. These drugs deteriorate in the rainy season. If special care be taken to keep them safe from damp, air and moisture, ganja and bhang will keep good for four years, but the charas will wholly deteriorate after a period of two years. 20. Ganja and charas smokers are generally found in every district. It is commonly used by the idle vagabonds and immoral persons. 21. In this respect, the tastes of the smokers differ. One likes flat ganja, another round, while a third prefers chur to both the flat and round. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking. 24. Brahmans are largely addicted to bhang, specially those living in Mathura. Some of them take it in large quantities. Hindus who abstain from wine sometimes take bhang. 25. The use of ganja, charas and bhang is on the increase. This I have come to know by seeing the returns of contract for these drugs from 1850-92. 30. These drugs are often consumed in solitude. Company is not essential for their use. However, when they are joined by their fellow consumers, they are not sorry for it. It is not confined to the males only. Females also use it. But they are very few as compared to the male consumers. It is seldom that we find children using these drugs, though there is no limitation of age. 31. The habit of consuming any of these drugs is easily formed, and it is not very difficult to break off. Any of these drugs taken in a certain quantity will have a uniform effect for the first two or three weeks. But as the consumer becomes accustomed to it, and the brain begins to bear the intoxicating effect of the drug, that quantity will not satisfy him. He will resistlessly crave for more. Thus a habitual consumer of these drugs cannot help crossing the bounds of moderation. * Invited to attend at a meeting of the Commission for oral examination, but failed to appear.
219 This fact is beyond all doubts that these drugs do have a tendency to develop moderate habits into excessive for the reason just mentioned. 32. These drugs are in no way connected with religion. 33. The consumption of each of these drugs is generally disliked by the people. The smoke exhaled by charas and ganja smokers smells so badly that any other man will find it pretty diffi- cult to sit by him. No sect of Hindus worships hemp plant on any occasion, 34. A person who tries to give up the use of bhang feels a longing uneasiness for two or three days. The privation, however, is not serious. The case is different with the ganja and charas smokers. For the first two or three days they suffer badly, but are gradually used to temperate habits, and in a week or so their privation ceases. The probable number of the consumers of each class would not exceed 5 per cent. 37. The effects of ganja and charas are nearly the same. Charas is made from ganja tree, and is somewhat stronger than ganja. 38. All the three kinds of ganja have the same effects. It is, however, the opinion of some persons that flat ganja is a little stronger than the other two kinds. 40. Native doctors seldom prescribe any of these drugs for internal use. They are, however, sometimes used for external applications. Bhang alone is used in the treatment of cattle. Villagers give it to cattle with salt to increase their impair- ed appetite. 42. Ganja and charas, taken in howsoever small a quantity, weaken the brain, and narrow the nerves communicating to the lungs. This impairs the free circulation of blood, and often gives rise to the diseases of lungs, which gradually develop, weaken the man, and the sad end is not much delayed. 44. All narcotic drugs, when taken moderately, are slightly refreshing and create appetite. There are three stages of intoxication. In the first stage it is a little refreshing, stirs animal passion, and alleviates fatigue. The second stage is of stupefaction. He is no more master of his actions, and the brain loses, for the time, its discerning powers. In the third stage, the hilarity of spirit is substituted by a very disagreeable and painful state of mind. The man feels dulness, pain in the limbs, and a general uneasiness. The effects of ganja and charas smoking are instantaneous. The consumer may become sense- less in a minute. The effect lasts for three hours, and is gradually lost after the expiration of six hours. Bhang begins to have its intoxicating effects after an hour. 45. Ganja and charas, even when used moderate- ly, give rise to a number of diseases, specially to the complaints of stomach, lungs, brain, liver bowels, etc., lessen human vitality ; make the consumer lean and weak ; cause asthma, consump- tion and permanent cough ; impair the morals ; deaden the intellect ; and sometimes cause in- sauity. The insanity thus produced is only temporary. Permanent insanity, which is hard of cure, does not bring with it the loss of appetite. Even the appetites of some lunatics have been found to exceed the average appetite of men in general. The insanity caused by the excess of narcotic drugs renders the victim weak and sickly. Such lunatic loses his appetite ; his eyes are more than commonly red ; thirst increases ; he is more calm and silent than the permanent insanes, and can be cured in a comparatively short time. 49. The moderate use of these drugs has an aphrodisiac effect for the first few months of use, but after that it tends to impotence. 51. Male badmashes are the chief consumers of charas and ganja ; and they, being destitute of means, often commit thefts and other crimes to acquire money. In the higher circles, ganja and charas smoking is strictly prohibited. And if any gentleman uses these drugs secretly, when the matter comes to light220 27. Chattris, sadhus and low castes consume charas and ganja. Sadhus and Chaubes of Mathu- ra consume bhang. Persons addicted to sexual pleasures and bad characters consume these drugs, but some hard-working men use these to counter- act the effects of over-exertion. 28. An average habitual consumer consumes daily ½ a pice worth of bhang ; an excessive con- sumer ½ an anna worth. An average habitual consumer will consume daily a quarter of a pice worth of ganja and charas ; an excessive consumer, ½ anna ; but habitues mix other ingredients, which raise the prices to a much higher figure. 29. Tobacco is ordinarily mixed with ganja and charas. Poor people mix black pepper with bhang ; and rich prople mix seeds of kasni, me- lons and cucumbers, also rose water, keora, etc. This is done to modify the effects and to produce a pleasant scent. Dhatura is sometimes mixed, if it is desired to increase the intoxicating effect or to bring about complete insensibility. 30. These drugs, especially ganja and charas, are usually used in company. As a rule only men consume them, but women of bad character do so occasionally ; the "gauhauns" or singers of Benares use them largely ; children also take bhang, 31. The habit is easily formed : it is not diffi- cult to break off. Moderate use is apt to develop into excessive. 32. There are no such customs. 33. Indulgence in these drugs is in general disapproved of. This is the case because when intoxicated they are apt to act foolishly and dis- gracefully. Bhang is never worshipped in these provinces, but it is offered by some Hindus to Mahadeo, who call it Mahadeo's buti. Mahadeo was a great consumer himself. 34. It would not be any very serious privation for consumers if they were deprived of the use of these drugs. They would feel the loss of them for a few days only ; any inconvenience they may feel will be caused merely owing to the breaking off of a habit, not because they will sustain any bodily injury. 35. Yes, it would he possible. I would re- commend that the sale of these drugs as intoxi- cants should be prohibited, but retained as medi- cines. Consumption can be stopped by punishing the consumers. No serious dissatisfaction among consumers need be apprehended as a result of pro- hibition. Alcohol and other intoxicants are not likely to take the place of drugs. Consumers of drugs cannot be intoxicated enough to please them by other agents, and in any case intoxication would not do them so much harm. 36. Alcohol is not taking the place of drugs. 37. Charas is much more intoxicating than ganja, but the effects produced by both are of the same kind. 38. Baluchar is much the best, it causes less injury, producing less heat and dryness. Smokers enjoy the flavour of the smoke and feel a sort of exhilaration. Murrah is much stronger than baluchar and causes more heat and dryness. Pa- thar is stronger, hotter and dri r still; four or five days' indulgence causes blood spitting and blood in the urine. 39. Ganja and charas are not eaten ; they would cause serious injury if they were, and would cause insensibility or insanity. 40. Bhang is used by medical men in many ways. It is used in powders and pastes for diar- rh221 53. No, I know of no such case. 54. Yes. 55. Yes ; if a man be unaccustomed to the use of the drug, he will be completely stupefied. 56. By the admixture of dhatura the intoxi- cating effects of bhang are increased twofold, whether the use be moderate or excessive. The con- sumer becomes altogether unconscious, whether he be an habitual consumer or not. Bhang intoxicates an ordinary habitual consumer, but not to the extent of rendering him unconscious. The same applies to excessive consumption, but a person un- accustomed to the drug might be rendered uncon- scious. Even a moderate use might effect this. 57. To the best of my knowledge charas and ganja are never eaten alone. Charas is sometimes, mixed with bhang or majum to increase the in- toxicating effect. One ratti is sufficient to cause complete intoxication. 155. Evidence of PUNDIT RAM DAT, Brahmin (Gaur), Baid, Dalman, District Rae Bareli. 1. I have had to deal with three or four patients suffering from phthisis brought on by indulgence in ganja. 2. 1 do not know how the different kinds of ganja are prepared. 3. The hemp plant grows abundantly in Bah- raich District, at Nandpara, Bhinga, and at Khairigarh in the Kheri District. It grows spon- taneously. 4. The plant in its natural state is known as bhang. When twisted, it is called ganja. Ganja and bhang are the names by which the plant is known in this part of the country. 5 and 6. I cannot say. 7. The hemp plant is not cultivated in this part of the province. It grows spontaneously. 8. No cultivation. 10. I cannot say whether any special class cul- tivate the drug or not. 11. I cannot say. 12. I cannot say anything in answer to this question. 13. There is no cultivation of the plant as far as I know. 14. Ganja and bhang grow spontaneously. Charas is not made in this part of the country. 15. Bhang is the natural plant ; when it is twisted it is called ganja. Ganja is smoked in a chillum (i.e., a flat pipe bowl). Bhang is either ground up and drunk mixed with water, or made up into little pills and eaten, or prepared with ghi (clarified butter) and eaten. It is also eaten after being prepared with sugar. 16. People do not usually prepare bhang in their houses. The wild plant is bhang ; if twisted, it is called ganja. I cannot speak about the pre- paration of charas. It is not prepared in this part of the country. 17. I cannot say. 18. As regards charas, I cannot speak. Ganja and bhang will keep for a year. They deteriorate under the influence of excessive cold. If kept carefully in a bottle, they will remain good for two years. After two years they begin to de- teriorate. 19. Ganja and charas are usually smoked in a chillum (i.e., a flat pipe bowl). They may be smoked in a small pipe. 20. Ganja smoked by bairagis and naked fakirs (religious mendicants) and by people of low caste, such as Chamars, Pasis, Kahars. City- dwelling people use most charas. Religious men- dicants are found in largest numbers at places to which religious pilgrimages are made. The other classes of people are found everywhere. 21. Round ganja (murwa) and char are gene- rally preferred. Baluchar (flat ganja) is too ex- pensive. 22. Charas is imported into this part of the country from Kashmir and Nepal. It is not pre- pared here. 23. Bhang is not smoked in this part of the country. I can't speak about other parts of the country. 24. Sadbus (i.e., devotees), Gangaputras (i.e., devotees who frequent the places of pilgrimage and burning ghats, on the Ganges), and the Chaubes of Muttra (a class of Brahmins) eat and drink bhang in large quantities. People who live in large cities like Benares and Allahabad con- sume it largely. It is not so largely used in smaller cities. The reason for consumption in large quantities in Benares and Allahabad is that the water is of inferior quality. 25. Ganja and bhang arc used more largely in this part of the country. The use of the drugs has not increased. 26. I cannot answer this question 27. The labouring classes in cold climates, e.g., the Terai, use the drugs largely, and fakirs use them in order to debilitate themselves, and render themselves unfit for worldly occupations. 28. The largest daily allowance of bhang that a consumer can use is 1 pice worth (i.e., a chit- tack in weight) ; the largest allowance of ganja per diem which can be consumed is 1 anna worth (i.e., less than ½ chittack in weight). I cannot speak regarding the allowance of charas 29. No preparation known as bhang massala is sold that I know of. Bhang consumers often mix the seeds of the cucumber (khira) and wild cucumber (kakri), aniseed, the flowers of the gurhal (Hibiscus syriacus), black pepper, with bhang before using it. People of the better classes mix almonds, cardamoms and sugar with their bhang. Tobacco is mixed with ganja before using it. Dhatura is sometimes mixed with ganja. 30. The drugs are chiefly consumed by males ; women and children do not use them much. The highest classes consume them in solitude. The common people consume them in company. 31. The habit of consuming the drugs named is not easily formed. The habit once formed is not difficult to break off. Circumspect people do not increase the quantity consumed with the con- tinuance of the habit. 32. I know of no social or religious custom which enforces the consumption of bhang, but in festivals like the Holi, people use bhang as a pleasant stimulant.
222 33. I know of no public opinion (social or reli- gious) regarding the practice. 34. The residents of the Terai would be serious- ly incommoded by having to give up the habit of consuming ganja and bhang Bhang is occa- sionally used as a medicine for various diseases. If the use of bhang were prohibited, inconveni- ence would be caused in this respect. 35. The prohibition of the use of charas is in my opinion feasible. Its use might be prohibited by legislation, and preventing its importation. Consumers would not be discontented, and there would be no political danger. The prohibition would not be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants, or to drugs. 36. I have no reason to believe so. 37. As far as I know, charas-smoking and ganja-smoking produce the same effects. 38. No. 39. I cannot say. 40. Bhang is used in the treatment of piles. It is also used as a liniment in treating some kinds of pains, and in cases of impotency as an aphro- disiac. It is also used in crises of diarrh223 confined to the male sex, and it is not usual for children to consume any of these drugs. 31. The habit of consuming any of these drugs is easily formed, and, when formed, it is very difficult to break off without risk of disorder and uneasiness of mind; but an enforced discontinu- ance of the habit does not endanger life. As a general rule, the moderate habit develops into the excessive. 32. The consumption of any of these drugs, as far as I am aware, is not connected with any religious custom. A good many stories are told on the subject which have little or no foundation in truth, and it would be of no use to mention them. As a social custom, the natives of Bengal universally drink bhang on the Dassera day, and majun is eaten by the natives of the upper provinces at the Holi festival. 36. I have every reason to believe that alcohol is now being to some extent substituted for all these drugs among the well-to-do classes. This change is attributed to the exciting and bad effects of all these drugs. As for the proof, it is enough to say that rich classes of the people are now rarely found to consume any of these drugs, they having ample means to pay for alcohol. 37. The effects of charas-smoking are different from those of ganja-smoking, which has less influence over the brain than the former. The action of charas upon the brain is immediate, and it acts with greater force. The effects of bhang- drinking are quite different from either of the other two. Its action is slow, mild, beneficial to the digestive system, and less injurious to any of the organs of the body if moderately used. 39. With the exception of bhang, the eating or drinking of any other preparation of the hemp plant is a more injurious form of consumption than smoking. As for the general effects of the drug, I beg to quote the following passage from Dr. Cowperthwaite's text-book :224 57. My answer to this question is given in answer to question 19. In conclusion, under the circumstances stated above, I am of opinion that the use of ganja and charas in this country should be prohibited alto- gether. The consumption of these drugs is positively injurious in its effects ; but I would not prohibit the use of bhang, as its consumption in moderate quantities is beneficial. 157. Evidence of BRAJ LAL,* Kayasth, Medical Practitioner, Muttra. 1. My profession and my being a native of Muttra, where these drugs are mostly used, have given me the opportunity of knowing the effects of these drugs. 2. In addition to the definitions given by Dr. Prain for bhang, (1) bijiya, and (2) buti are mere extra names for it here. This product (charas) is also called sulpha locally. 19. Ganja and charas are here used only for smoking and for no other purpose. 23. Yes ; very seldom, i.e., when ganja is not at hand, some people smoke a quantity of bhang to allay the keen longing of it to some extent. 28. Bhang. (a) Two annas225 used by prostitutes for this purpose. It is more injurious to use the drugs for the above purpose, because it produces spermatorrhoea and impotency. 50. The excessive use of these drugs a produces in a few days spermatorrh226 have noxious effects, physical, mental and moral. They cause emaciation of the body, impair diges- tion, cause loss of appetite, dysentery, bronchitis and asthma. It impairs moral sense, but it does not induce habits of debauchery. It causes insanity. I have seen such cases of insanity. But they are very few. In such cases as have come to my notice ganja and charas were the exciting cause and not the predisposing cause. The insanity in these cases was temporary. They were not dangerous to others. They simply talked incoherently, laughed, and talked non- sense. The symptoms may be reinduced after liberation from restraint. I am not aware of any typical symptoms of ganja and charas in- sanity. Insanes who have no recorded ganja history do not easily confess to the use of the drug. I do not think that the use of the ganja and charas by persons suffering from mental anxiety or brain disease to obtain relief has been sufficiently considered in explaining the alleged connection between insanity and the consump- tion of these drugs. If a careful enquiry be made in many cases of insanity generally ascribed to ganja and charas, the primary cause will be found to be some grief or anxiety. Some 8 or 10 years ago I had come to know of a case of insanity in a (Gotakor) diver. He was a habitual moderate charas smoker. One day he suddenly became insane. But on enquiry I came to know that he lost a family member of his a few days before his insanity developed. I have seen many cases of weak and feeble intellect generally use these drugs. 46. Habitual excessive use of these drugs are in- jurious in every way physically, mentally and morally. They emaciate the body except bhang. They impair digestion except bhang. They will cause dysentery, bronchitis and asthma, except bhang. They will impair the moral sense except bhang. They will deaden the intellect and pro- duce insanity. I have not seen any case of insanity caused by excessive use of bhang. But I have seen cases of insanity caused by excessive use of ganja and charas. About the types and causes of in- sanity, I have already given my opinion about them. 47. They have no hereditary effect, nor do they affect the children of moderate consumers in any way. 48. Excessive use of these drugs has no here- ditary effect, nor does it affect the children of the excessive consumers. 49. Moderate use of these drugs is not practised as aphrodisiac. Prostitutes do not use these drugs for this purpose, because it impairs their beauty by causing emaciation of the body and paleness of the face. The hemp drugs in the long run of their use cause impotence. 50. My remarks are the same as in the previous questions. 56. The ingredients which are used with bhang in moderate doses or excessive doses modify the action of bhang in this way. The bhang is a very heating substance, and the ingredients modify its heating effect. I have already stated that dhatura is used with bhang for criminal purposes. Tobacco is used with charas and ganja to modify the irritating smoke of the drugs. 57. Ganja and charas are not eaten or drunk. I have not heard of such use. In conclusion, it will cause a great inconve- nience to many people if repressive measures are adopted against bhang and charas and ganja ; bhang is not very injurious in its effects. Oral evidence. Question 1.227 class people as well as by sadhus and gossains (religious mendicants). Among high caste Hindus, Kashtriyas sometimes indulge in these. Brahmans, except Kanujias, also consume these. I think the number of consumers is one-fourth to the population. These are used in almost every part of these provinces. 22. Charas used here is imported from Yarkand. 23. As far as I know, bhang is not used for smoking purposes. 24. Bhang is taken by Hindus more or less throughout these provinces. The pandas of Bin- dhiachal in our district and the Chaubes of. Muttra are notorious bhang eaters. 25. The use of ganja and charas is on the de- crease, as people are daily becoming apprised of their evil effects. 27. For the most part gosains and bairagis (religious mendicants and devotees) specially use these drugs to get their carnal passions restrained and to have their minds alienated from worldly concerns and attached to sacred cultures. 29. Bhang is ordinarily taken with black pepper, that its hot effects may be counteracted. The fol- lowing ingredients are sometimes mixed :228 25. There is no marked increase or decrease, as far as my knowledge goes. 27. Jogis, Kahars, bairagis, Thakurs and fakirs are generally taken to drugs, and the social habits lead to the practice. 29. Tobacco is generally mixed with ganja and charas by consumers of all classes. The well-to-do classes exceptionally mix with these drugs some smelly spices, such as mace, etc. The poor classes mix dhatura simply to make up the deficiency. The object of other admixture is to deteriorate the bad effect. Pepper, almond, aniseed, rose, melon seeds, coriander seeds, car- damoms, milk and sugar are the chief ingredients mixed with bhang. No bhang massala is prepared or sold in this district, 30. The use is confined to male sex over 12 years of age. The children very seldom use these drugs. 31. The habit of consuming drugs can be easily formed by associating with the consumers. It is difficult to break off the habit, and there is some tendency which develops the habit into the ex- cessive. 32. There are no social or religious customs with regard to the use of drugs. 33. The consumption of drugs is generally re- garded bad, because it tells on whole constitution and renders a man useless. The hemp plant is not worshipped by any sect in this district. 34. The consumers are sure to suffer, should they be made to give up the use of drugs, because they cannot easily and safely give up their long- acquired habits. Twenty-five per cent. of con- sumers might suffer the most. 35. The use of drugs in my opinion should not be prohibited. It will certainly lead to illicit use. The prohibition can only be enforced gradually. It must create general discontent, though it may not amount to political danger. The prohibition is sure to lead consumers to other alcoholic and drugs. 36. Alcohol is not at all substituted for drugs to the best of my knowledge. 37. The effects are not different, but charas is stronger than ganja. 38. Flat is stronger than round, and round is stronger than chur. 39. Smoking is certainly less injurious. Eating and drinking are apt to create headache, stomach- ache, sickness and bowel complaints. 40. The native physicians prescribe sometimes bhang in cases of diarrhoea and fever. It is also used in the treatment of cattle disease, paralyth, foot and mouth disease. 41. Yes ; Brahmins, Thakurs, banias and other higher classes use drugs for purposes mentioned in question. I would estimate 10 per cent. of the consumers who habitually use it. 43. Never, to the best of my knowledge. 44. Refreshing is the immediate effect of the moderate use of drugs. It also produces intoxi- cation and creates appetite. The effect lasts about an hour. The after-effects are that it injures the brain and lungs. 45. Yes ; it does produce noxious physical effects in old age. It impairs the constitution, digestion, and causes loss of appetite. It also causes dysentery, bronchitis and asthma. It does not produce insanity or injure the intellect as far as ray experience goes, and I refrain to state reasons on other points referred to in the question. 46. The excessive use is more injurious and produces rapid and bad effects. It does not pro- duce insanity. 47. The habit of consuming drugs do not appear to be hereditary, and it does not affect in any way the children of consumers. 48. See reply to question No. 47. 49. The use of drugs is practised as aphrodisiac in the beginning. The prostitutes do not use it in this district. The use of hemp causes im- potence to some extent. 50. The excessive use brings on bad affects rapidly. 51. I don't think that bad characters consume drugs in large proportion. The use of drugs has no connection with crimes. 52. See No. 51. 53. My local knowledge does not permit me to say that the use of drugs incites to unpremeditated crime or violence. The intoxication created by drugs produces timidness, which discourages the serious offences to some extent. 54 and 55. No. 56. The admixtures are made generally to re- move the defects. With regard to dhatura, I can say that it is mixed with drugs for personal use, when the consumer cannot obtain the sufficient quantity required, and for the others it is mixed for purposes of committing crimes. 57. Ganja and charas are never eaten or drunk to the best of my knowledge. 161. Evidence of SAYED ABDUL SAMAD,* Hakim, Bareilly. I, Saiyed Abdul Samad, residing at Bareilly, Mahalla Biharipur, have been practising as a physician for (the last) 24 or 25 years and give below in brief the information I have derived and the experience I have gained from the treatment of patients suffering from the after-effects of the use of opium, charas, bhang and ganja. Although the questions (framed by the Hemp Drugs Commission) are (many and) different, (I think) the inquiry is directed (solely) to the following points, viz.:229 information expressly asked in the question, and I shall not be able to give such further inform- ation as I can give from my experience, which does not fall under any of the questions. I shall, therefore, discuss, under the following five answers (or beads), some of the points enquired into (by the Commission). I shall not, however, write anything, for the present, about opium, chandu, dhatura, etc., as they are not referred to in the questions, First answer-nature (or description) of the drugs. Bhang. The bhang plant is different from that of hemp. It grows spontaneously in moist and manured soil in Bareilly (city) and its environs. The growth is dense and the plants attain the height of one yard and resemble the Indian marigold (Tagetes erecta) plant. Its flowers are small and of white colour. The seeds, which are much smaller than those of hemp plants (often) drop from the plants (and sink into the ground), and new plants grow spontaneously out of them in those places in the next rainy season. I have often seen wild bhang and ganja plants in Bareilly city in the low ground on either side of the northern road near Bahadur bridge. Early in hot season in spring the plants attain maturity, and the leaves are plucked by those who consume or sell them. Some people peel off the bark of the branches of the plant and use it as a drink after grinding it in water. Those who thus consume the bark are called postis. The seeds are purchased and kept in stock by druggists, as they are often used medicinally. The Unani physicians (i.e., the native doctors who follow the Greek system of medicine) prescribe these seeds under the name of "shahdanah" or "tukhm-i-kanb." The leaves are called "bhang" in Urdu, "bijya" in Sanskrit, "kanb" in Arabic, and "kinnab" in Persian. In colloquial Hindi they are named "sabzi" (green), "buti" (the plant) and "thandai" (the cooling drink). In colloquial Arabic and Persian they have been styled "juzw-i-azam" (the chief part or drug), "falak sair" (carrying to the sky), "warak-ul-kheyal" (leaf of imagination), "warak- ul-asrar" (the leaf of secrets), etc. Charas. This is a dusty exudation of the bhang plant which oozes out from the inside and settles like dew on the leaves and branches, where it becomes somewhat dry and solidifies. It is then collected by a special process and brought for sale to these countries (these parts of India) from Kashmir and Kabul. The collection and manufacture of this drug may be possible here, but it is not the custom to manufacture or collect it (in these provinces). I have seen two kinds (of charas), viz., (1) Yar- kaudi, the colour of which is a mixture of green, yellow-and brown, and the intoxicating effect of which is strong and disagreeable, and (2) Bukharai, which is black in colour and like wax in form (i.e., having the consistence of wax), and its intoxi- cating effect is mild and agreeable. Those who smoke it in chillums call it "sulfah," while phy- sicians prescribe it under the name of "Itr-i- Kashmiri," or "Itr-i-Jahangiri." Ganja. The ganja plant also grows spontaneously and resembles the bhang plant. Its leaves are stiffer and broader than those of the bhang plant, and the twigs also are somewhat stiff and rough. It is made into small cakes of different forms by rubbing, for the purpose of smoking in chillums (the part of the prepared huka which contains the tobacco and fire). It is not prepared at Bareilly, but is often brought (there) from the east and sold there. Second answer230 the quick-acting calorific property of the volatile particles of the drug at once produces its effect on the whole body. In the head it awakens the vital (or volitional) spirit or power which controls the motions of the whole body ; and all the powers of the brain get ready for their respective functions at that time. The five internal senses231 possess the property of occasioning a torpor in the limbs. The result is that blood becomes thick and ceases to circulate. The thickness of the blood results in stopping the circulation of the light vapours which are called animal spirits and they are (gradually) destroyed. This gradual destruction of the animal spirits is accompanied with a proportionate emaciation of the body of the consumer of the drugs, especially that of the habit- ual consumer thereof. Fifth effect. Lastly, the consumption of the drugs proves beneficial or injurious according as the manner of using them is good or bad. I give below the various (uses or) manners of using the drugs. Third answer. The various uses to which the drugs are put (and the different classes of persons who consume them). (The first class of consumers, i.e., patients who use the drugs with the advice of physicians.) Physicians prescribe the use of the drugs in two different methods described below. First method. When Native Doctors of any school whether Unani or Misrani (i.e., the followers of the Gre- cian or Egyptian system of medicine) prescribe the use of any of these drugs, it produces benefi- cial and not injurious effects, for the following reasons :232 for all work, temporal or religious, and getting addicted to the use of the drugs, suffer under many corporal maladies and moral evils. Third class of consumers, viz., those who are not habitual consumers. Although (strictly speaking ?) there appears to be no religious observance or custom in regard to the consumption of (any of) these drugs, some lower and also high classes of the Hindu commu- nity occasionally use bhang or majun (a confection made of the extract of bhang and sugar) with such substances as counteract the injurious effects of bhang in solitude or in company of friends considering it a religious custom or thinking that its consumption is allowed by their religion. They use the drug, i.e., the bhang or majun, on the occasion of such ceremonies as Holi, the great Hindu festival held at the approach of the vernal equinox in honour of the goddess (Horka), Divali, a festival observed (by the Hindus in honour of Lakshmi on the 15th of the Hindi month Kartick) and such other festivals, They use it sometimes as a medicine and sometimes for the purpose of exhilaration. Some Muhammadans also use the drug (bhang or majun) in the way stated above for the last mentioned purpose, viz., exhilaration. Fourth (class of consumers or) way of using the drugs. There are many shops in the city at some of which both bhang and ganja and at others only charas are or is sold. The drinkers or smokers of the drugs go to these shops (and use the drugs). Indigent persons (accustomed to the use of the drugs) stay at these shops and when any consumer (comes to the. shop and having purchased ganja or charas) prepares the chillum, all those present at the shop (including the indigent men) take a whiff or smoke a little (and are thus gratified). Fifth class of consumers. Some classes of workmen, e.g., beldars (labourers whose work is to dig or delve), (ordinary) labour- ers, Kahars (a caste of Hindus who draw water and carry dolis or litters) often smoke charas or ganja in chillums to strengthen their power of enduring exertion or to alleviate fatigue. On these occasions the fellow-labourers and caste- fellows of these men (who happen to be present at the time), though not in the habit of using the drug to alleviate fatigue, join with them in smok- ing the drug. Fourth answer233 28. Nil. Daily Allowance. Cost per diem. (a) Bhang, 80 grains to 8oz. Bhang 3 pies to 2 annas. Ganja, 30 grains to 2oz. Ganja Charas, 10 grains to 2oz. Charas (b) Bhang, 8 ounces and more. 3 pies to 1 rupee. Charas, 2 234 and not among women. These drugs are not I usually given to the children. 31. The habit of consuming these drugs is gradually formed by taking in small doses. It is difficult to give up the habit. 32. There is no custom, social or religious, in regard to the consumption of any of these drugs or for the essential use of these drugs. 36. No. 37. The effects of ganja and charas are the same ; ganja and charas are more effective than bhang-drinking ; and they are injurious to health, produce insanity and dryness of the throat. Bhang drinking creates appetite, and its after- effect produces rheumatism or pain of joints. 39. Ganja is mixed with other ingredients which make it less powerful in its effects. Ganja and charas impair the constitution and produce insanity. 40. Hakims and vaids sometimes use these drugs for medicinal purposes. Bhang is often used for cattle diseases, for appetite and digestion, etc. 41. The moderate use of all these drugs is not beneficial in its effects except that bhang drinking creates appetite. Ganja and charas are injurious to health either taken moderately or excessively. The consumers of ganja and charas are less liable to be attacked with any epidemic disease. 42. The use of bhang in moderate doses appears to be harmless. 44. Ganja and charas smoking is rather rapid in its effects on the consumers ; the effect of bhang is slow, but durable ; it creates appetite, Ganja and charas allay hunger. The want of subsequent gratification produces weakness, dull- ness and uneasiness. The effect is said to last for 3 hours. 45. With the exception of bhang the moderate use of ganja and charas impairs the constitution ; injures digestion ; causes dysentery, bronchitis, asthma ; and impairs the moral senses and eye- sight. They also produce insanity ; the effect is temporary ; and such insanes are often cured. The insane after his cure relates his history of ganja or charas smoking which produced insanity. 46. The excessive use of these drugs does all the harm noted in question No. 45. 47. Not known. 48. The excessive use of these drugs affect the children of the consumers, because the children born to such excessive consumers are oftentimes affected with these complaints. 49. Yes ; it is used as an aphrodisiac; not by prostitutes. The effect of these drugs in this way is likewise the same as for narcotic purposes, Ganja and charas produce impotence. 56. Ganja and charas are injurious, either used in moderation or in excess. Dhatura, nux vomica, opium are sometimes mixed with these drugs. 57. Ganja and charas are sometimes given with other medicines as a curative remedy for impo- tency. 165. Evidence of SALIG RAM, Hakim, Agra. 1. From generations upon generations we are born hakims, and that is the source of my inform- ation. 2. Doctor Sahib's writing is correct, but in addition some people eat dhatura, bachnag, and arsenic. Charas comes from Bokhara and Yarkand. In Agra that which comes from Yarkand is sold most. The Bokhara market is closed. A sort of ganja also comes to Agra, which is of a pale colour. Jasru ganja of Bengal is not sold here ; it is reddish in colour, and is more intoxi- cating. In Dehra Dun, bhang is cultivated to a great extent, and ganja is also a production of that place. 19. Ganja and charas are used for smoking, 23. It is not special to any class, but bairagis use. it mostly. If ganja cannot be had, then bhang might be smoked ; but it is not so effective as the other. 28. Not more than four or five annas per diem. 29. Ganja is mixed with tobacco and treacle, and charas with dry tobacco for smoking. 30. It is not confined to any time or locality. 31. Acquired easily, but left with difficulty. 32. None. 36. Habit cannot be changed ; neither is it necessary. 37. Ganja is more drying than charas. 39. Nothing is used instead of these, and any- thing smoked is injurious. 40. Bhang is most used ; next to that ganja. Charas is used only in special diseases. 41. (a) Is digestive, but its habit is bad and injurious sometimes. (d) For sexual appetite, 42. Bhang in moderate doses is not injurious, but ganja and charas are. 44. Action is temporary. No proper period can be fixed. 45. Injures soul and body, impairs semen, and impairs digestion no doubt. Diminishes brain power. 46. In my experience weak intellect has been often seen. 47. Is not hereditary. Acts more upon child- ren. 48. All these drugs dry the humours. 49. Prostitutes use these drugs themselves, and make others use it, and it is injurious in this way. 50. Excess is bad.
235 166. Evidence of SAYAD MASOOM ALI, Hakim, Agra. 19. Ganja and charas only for smoking, not for drinking. Rarely native physicians use charas as a medicine to prolong sexual intercourse, but not so used in Agra. In my opinion it injures, but to a person of lymphatic temperament during sexual intercourse it produces dryness, and causes increase in the act, and aids erection, or in a cold climate it causes heat. These drugs are much used in India. 28. According to medical doctrine, and from ex- perience, I can say that bhang is not smoked. It is used in several other ways. It is used by Hindus. Its dose is seven mashas ; and if more is taken by one unaccustomed, it kills. I have heard that the Chaubes of Mathra drink one pao of bhang. 28. Bhang236 the sexual act becomes protracted at the time. After all, on account of excessive use, the humours become dried, and cause injury. With bhang almonds, bael seeds and seeds of melons are used. 30. Used both in company and. in privacy, mostly by Hindus; their children also use it. 31. People become easily habituated. Habitual use can be left off gradually. By habit, more and more is required to produce intoxication. 32. Not used by Muhammadans. Those people who use it religiously must know it also whether they use it in small or large quantities ; but in both cases these drugs are injurious. The higher centres are affected, weakness of sight is produced. 36. I consider that those who use these drugs must begin to take liquor. Alcohol, if taken in a dilute state, is more delicious, and makes a person more merry. 37. Charas causes dryness of the brain, asthma, and itching of the skin. Ganja causes these symptoms in a less degree. Charas and ganja cause instantaneons intoxication, and bhang takes a longer time. 39. Ganja and charas ought to be given with almonds or jadwar and other wet things ; cause dryness and produce sonda ; cause insanity ; ought to be given in small quantities. 40. Hakims give it to Hindus with other medicines ; never to Musalmans. They also give it to cattle. 41. Causes the humours to dry. Is. digestive, gives staying-power, and prevents fever. Hindus use it, not Musalmans. 42. In our opinion and experience it is useful to other religious people, never to Muhammadans. 44. Charas and ganja cause intoxication even in moderate doses. Bhang causes intoxication gradually and merriment, and increases appetite. Effects come on in three hours. If a habituated person does not get it, he becomes miserable in the extreme. After-effects are weakness of the brain and heart, lungs, stomach and liver. 45. Moderate use produces noxious effects on physical, mental and moral powers ; disorders con- stitution, and impairs digestion and loss of appetite ; causes dysentery, bronchitis, and asthma. Con- sumers become immoral and debauched, lazy and in- dolent. It dries up the system. Most people become insane ; mania is the usual form ; he becomes angry and beats people. It is temporary if properly treated. If re-used after cure, insanity returns. Old history can be known from relations, and can be known also by examining the pulse and urine. 46. If used in excess, these drugs are very in- jurious. 47. If in moderation, it is less hereditary. If in excess, it is hereditary. 48. See No. 47. 49. In moderation aphrodisiac. Prostitutes use it for this purpose, but the effect is only temporary. Those who use ganja become impotent. 50. Excessive use of any of these drugs causes insanity, dysentery, weakness of sight, brain diseases, such as epilepsy, facial paralysis, diseases of the heart, lungs, bronchitis, asthma, etc. 56. Ganja, if administered with almond oil, causes less harm ; if used in excess, it is injurious. Ganja may be used in combination with dhatura, nux-vomica, etc. Dhatura is cooling and drying in the 4th degree. Its correctives are black pepper, ajwain, etc. Nuxvomica is hot and drying in the 3rd degree. Opium is cooling and drying in the 4th degree. 57. Ganja and charas not used for drinking purposes here. Might be in other places. 168. Evidence of GOSAYEN GOPI LAL,* Native Doctor, Etawah. 1. I have read a great deal about the drugs, and have had practical experience of their results by giving them medically. 2. These definitions may be accepted. There are no other local names than those here given. 3. I am acquainted personally with no such dis- trict. 7. (d) I am only acquainted with its cultivation in this Etawah District for its fibre. For this purpose it is largely grown. 9. That cultivated for fibre is cultivated in the ordinary way. 10. 1 have no experience. 14. (c) In mauzas Beta and Tattiya of the Far- rukabad District, bhang of the best quality is prepared to a very large extent, 16. Bhang is not generally prepared by people in their houses. The hemp plant from which bhang is made is a different plant altogether from that cultivated for fibre, and it is impossible to extract bhang from the hemp plant ordinarily cul- tivated in the southern districts. The wild plant grows profusely in the Etawah District ; and it is impossible to extract intoxicating drugs from it here. I am not acquainted with that growing in the northern districts. 18. Charas deteriorates within a year through the damp and cold of the rains. Ganja and bhang deteriorate after two years. After these periods these drugs entirely lose their effect. Charas may be kept perfectly strong for six months, and ganja and bhang for one year with ordinary care. How- ever carefully kept, the chill of the rainy season is sure to get at these drugs, and nothing can really be done to prevent their deteriorating. Proximity to a fire would only make them deteriorate faster. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smok- ing. 20. Fakirs and all people of lower castes, such as Dhanuks, Chamars, Bhangis, smoke ganja to a very large extent. Ahirs and Thakurs smoke ganja to a considerable extent, but much less than the lower castes ; Brahmins and other high castes practically do not smoke it. Dwellers in cities smoke far more than villagers and cultivators. In damp places and wherever there is muck irrigation, the use of the drug is very much more prevalent. 21. In the Etawah District round ganja is ex- clusively smoked. 22. Foreign charas is chiefly used. It is im- ported from Kabul. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking. * Invited to attend at a meeting of the Commission for oral examination, but failed to appear.
237 24. (a) Brahmins, Chaubes, Banias and such higher castes eat bhang considerably, mixing it with sweetmeats, etc. (b) The same castes drink bhang mixed in milk, sugared water, and medicinal preparations, far more than they eat it. 25. The use of all three drugs is greatly on the increase in comparison with the population. The reason is that in spite of license fees they can now be sold far more cheaply than before in comparison with spirits and opium, owing to the introduction of the railway. Opium and spirits are produced on the spot. Hemp drugs come from a distance, and therefore have been greatly cheapened by railways. 26. (a) About one-half. (b) About one-half. (c) and (d) May almost be neglected. In the case of all these drugs, when a man once begins consumption, he usually acquires the habit. Old people are usually moderate consu- mers ; young often excessive. 27. In the case of bhang Brahmins (Chaubes) are often excessive consumers. They are addicted to wrestling, and consider that pahilwans acquire great strength by the use of the drug. Fakirs and lower castes already mentioned are excessive consumers of ganja (much less of charas). Fakirs take ganja deliberately with the intention of doing away with their desire towards women, as it is thought disgraceful for a fakir to have sexual intercourse. Bhangis, Chamars, etc., con- sume ganja chiefly for love of excitement, and greatly to keep out the cold in winter. 28. (a) Ganja ½ tola. Bhang 2½ tolas. Charas 1/6 tola. (b) Ganja 2 tolas. Bhang 1 chittack. (haras ½ tola. 29. (a) Ganja 238 42. I consider the moderate use of bhang harm- less. It never produces madness, and it is very cooling. The intellect is never in the least affected. 43. Perfectly inoffensive in the case of bhang. But the smell of the smoke of ganja and charas is often very offensive, and goes a long way. 44. Bhang produces immediate intoxication, which lasts for 1½ hours. It is refreshing, and produces an enormous appetite. There are no after- effects, nor any subsequent uneasiness. Ganja produces immediate intoxication, which only lasts for 20 minutes. It is not refreshing, and allays hunger ; great slackness is the after-effect, and pain all over the body. The smoker wishes im- mediately to return to his pipe. Charas has practically the same effects. 45. Ganja and charas are physically, mentally and morally injurious. They injure the diges- tion and produce asthma. It produces laziness, but diminishes immorality. It produces insanity of temporary sort and. very noisy. The symptom may be reinduced ; madmen from this cause are subject to violent alternations and are very noisy. Their skin is hot and dry. After recovery from in- sanity insanes often confess to use of ganja. I do not think that persons of weak brains ever con- sume these drugs to obtain relief, or take them more than other people. 46. The above remarks are true of excessive use of ganja and charas to a greater degree. Bhang also if taken in excess produces great laziness and sleepiness. 47. No ; certainly not. 48. No. 49. Bhang is used as an aphrodisiac, but not by prostitutes. It is then more injurious than when used as a narcotic, owing to excessive sexual intercourse. Ganja and charas produce impo- tence. 51. No, there is no connection. 52. Excessive use of these drugs produces crime, because it consumes the property of the consumer and drives him to theft, etc. 53. I have never seen any instance of unpre- meditated crime committed by a consumer, ex- cept that madmen sometimes grow violent. 54. I have never heard of it. 55. I never heard of it. Complete stupefac- tion can be produced. 56. They are not modified. 169. Evidence of LACHMAN DASS, Brahmin, Hakim, Moradabad. 1. I am a hakim, and am well acquainted with the effects of charas, etc. I can answer the ques- tions in chapter VI. 37. The effect of ganja is hot in comparison with charas and quicker. The intoxication pro- duced by ganja is called "rikabi" with reference to an old story that if a man puts one foot in the stirrup and takes a whiff of ganja, he will be in- toxicated before he gets his other foot in the other stirrup. 38. Flat ganja is more intoxicating than round, and chur less intoxicating than either. But black stalk ganja is more intoxicating than green stalk, cut either round or fiat. 39. Smoking has a more immediate effect. But eating or drinking any form of the drug, by affecting the blood, finally produces skin erup- tions, and is therefore more injurious, though smoking affects the bronchial tubes and leads to coughing, and affects the eyes. 40. Yes; bhang is frequently administered both to human beings and cattle to remove phlegm, as a digestive, and for piles. 41. (a) bhang used in combination with other substances, is digestive ; charas is not. (b) Both bhang and charas are useful in al- leviating fatigue ; charas is frequently used for this purpose by carriers and boatmen, etc. (c) Bhang and charas are beneficial in damp, cold tracts, such as the Terai, as a febrifuge or preventive of disease. (d) See 40 above. 42. The moderate use of drugs is not in itself harmful ; but it must in the end prove harmful, when the consumer is enfeebled by age or disease or weakened in any way, 43. They are offensive in this way, that their conversation is frequently disagreeable or disgust- ing 44. Bhang takes effect in, say, 15 minutes ; it produces a certain exhilaration, not intoxication, which may last four hours. The after-effects are drowsiness, indisposition to move about, a certain amount of uneasiness and desire for more. It creates appetite. Charas takes immediate effect. The intoxica- tion produced by it is very strong, and lasts per- haps an hour. The after-effects are similar to those of bhang, but much stronger, and the desire far more overpowering. It allays hunger. 45. Bhang, if used habitually in moderation, produces no bad effects. Charas is harmful even if used in moderation. It affects the lungs and digestive organs, destroying the appetite. In any case it is certain to produce cough and as- thma. It produces an extreme of laziness, and impairs the moral sense. It deadens the intel- lects, and in some cases produces temporary in- sanity, which may be reinduced by renewed use of the drug. The symptoms are redness of the eyes, stability of the eyelids, sudden movements, immoderate drinking and eating, sleeplessness; In my experience, most of the men who have gone mad through smoking charas have been men of weak intellect. 46. The immoderate use of bhang has bad effects, but they are only temporary and pass off. The effects of the immoderate use of charas are the same as given under 45, but more intensified and immediate. 47. It is not a hereditary habit, but it affects the children ; their disposition is likely to be more passionate, and they are more liable to be affected with boils and skin affections. 48. The children are certain to be unhealthy. 49. Bhang is an aphrodisiac, specially if used with pepper, and it is used as such. 51. A large number of bad characters use charas habitually ; but I am not aware that its
239 use has any connection with crime in general, or with crime of any special character. 58. It does : excessive consummers of charas, when intoxicated, are violent, and frequently assault each other. 55. They use charas in this way, frequently adding dhatura, ah juice, and arsenic. 57. I have never heard of charas being eaten or drunk. 170. Evidence of BHAWANIDIN, Brahmin, Chaube, Native Physician, Ganoura, Bara Banki District. 1. I am acquainted with the Bara Banki District. 2. Bhang is known here by the name of bhang, siddhi, and sabzi. Do not know of charas. Ganja is known by two names, e.g., baluchar, and the other pattar (flat). 19. Ganja and charas are smoked in chillum. 20. Thakurs, gosains and fakirs smoke it. In Baiswara, Thakurs ; and in Fattehpur Tahsil, Kahavs smoke it abundantly. Cannot say their numbers. 21. Baluchar ganja is considered the best. 23. Bhang is not smoked. 24. Bhang is used by Brahmans and Thakurs and Hindu and Muhammadan fakirs in all places in India. 25. The consumption of bhang is in large pro- portion, as Brahmans do not use ganja. 27. Thaknrs, Brahmans, and gosains use bhang abundantly. 29. (a) Pepper and saffron are mixed with bhang. (b). Some people mix pumpkin seed, almond, milk, and sugar with bhang. 30. Bhang is used in solitude ; ganja and charas in company. 31. The habit of consuming bhang is easily formed, whereas it is difficult to break off the habit of using ganja and charas, because the phlegm which is produced from its use is stopped from its non-use, and the consumers suffer in consequence. 32. The use is not due to society, religion, or custom. 33. Generally all regard bhang, ganja and charas with disrepute. 34. Those who habitually use will suffer from foregoing the habit. 35. Ganja can be stopped, and there will be no cause of discontent. 36. No. 40. Know of bhang only. According to Ved- yak, bhang is given in singrahin and attisar. It is given to oxen in order to rest. 41. Bhang, if moderately used, is digestive and alleviates fatigue. It is given in cholera. Kahars use bhang in order to increase their appetite and to enable them to do hard labour. The number of such men is 25 per cent. 43. Inoffensive. 44. Those who are habitual consumers feel its effect after an hour and get intoxicated. It removes pain, and the effect lasts for 3 hours. They feel no trouble when the intoxication is over. But when the time of eating is passing over, they feel some pain. 45. Habitual consumers do not feel any physi- cal mental or moral injury. They neither feel pain nor ever have cough. Bhang creates moral power and leads to debauchery. It does not spoil the intellect. 47. Is not hereditary, and does not affect the children. 49. Creates lust. Have not heard prostitutes using it. 53. No crime is committed by excessive con- sumers. 54. Bhang is not used with an object to perpe- trate crime. 55. Criminals do not use bhang to further their design. 56. Bhang, if moderately used, is useful ; but if used with any mixture, such as dhatura, etc., is injurious. 58. So far as I know, the present arrangement made by the Government of shops is good. 63. The arrangement of wholesale and retail sale is good. 67. The present taxation is good. 171. Evidence of JANKI DAS, Brahmin, Baid, Muttra. 1. I have read about bhang in Hindu medical books, and I have experience of thirty-five years in medical practice, when I had opportunities to see several people who use bhang, ganja and charas. 2. I know that bhang is the leaves of a tree. I do not know how charas and ganja are prepared. Local names of bhang.240 30. Bhang is generally consumed in company. About one-third of the consumers will practise it in solitude and two-thirds in company. Ganja and charas are not consumed in solitude. It is mainly confined to the male sex, though females are no exception. The proportion will be about 1 in 100. There is no restriction about age. Children of about 10 or 11 years will consume bhang, but not charas or ganja. But it is not usual for children. 31. The habit is easily formed, and, when once formed, it is difficult to break off. In most of the moderate consumers there is no tendency to develop into excessive. Few only go to excess. 32. 1 am not aware of any special custom, social or religious, in regard to the consumption of these drugs, except that in Holi festival bhang is taken by more people and in greater quantity. 36. I have not seen any instance in which people have taken to alcohol as a substitute for these drugs. 37. Ganja-smoke is less injurious than charas. Effect of bhang drinking is milder than either ganja or charas. The intoxicating effect of bhang sets in later than that of ganja or charas. 39. I have no experience about this question. 40. Bhang is used for chronic dysentery, diarrhoea, and indigestion; also to check profuse perspiration, when bhang leaves are used as fomentation as an anodyne application mixed with oil. Cows, buffaloes, bullocks, are given bhang mixed with salt to increase their appetite and to keep the bowels clear. "Bhanga kafahari tikta grahimi madini guru." "Tikhuosna pittala mohamada bak-bahnibar- dhini." Bhang is beneficial in cough. It is bitter, con- stipating, intoxicating, and increasing bile and appetite. 41. Moderate dose of bhang has beneficial effect as food accessory or digestive. It gives staying- power under severe exertion and alleviates fatigue. It also acts as febrifuge in fever, which comes on with shivering and cold. Ganja and charas in moderate doses has no beneficial effect as food accessory or digestive. But it gives staying-power under severe exertion or exposure, and alleviates fatigue. It does not act as febrifuge. 42. Charas, even in moderate dose, is injurious. Charas-smoker is thin and emaciated, and will suffer from bronchitis. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of bhang in a habitual consumer is that it gives him refreshment. He feels happy. It exhilarates his spirit. Intoxication is very slight. It creates appetite. The effect lasts for about six hours. With moderate dose there is no after-effect, In a habitual consumer of bhang the want of subse- quent gratification does not produce any longing or uneasiness. The immediate effect of charas and ganja in moderate dose is that they produce intoxicatica rapidly. They do not create appetite. The effect lasts for about three hours. There are no after- effects. Want of subsequent gratification pro- duces uneasiness. 45. Habitual moderate use of bhang has no noxious effect on constitution. It does not injure digestion, but increases appetite. It does not cause dysentery, bronchitis or asthma. It does not impair moral sense, or induce laziness or habits of immorality or debauchery. It does not deaden intellect or produce insanity. Moderate dose of ganja and charas has noxious effects on constitution. It injures digestion. It causes dysentery, bronchitis or asthma. It does not impair moral sense, or induce laziness or habits of immorality, &c. It does not deaden intellect or produce insanity. It is beneficial that, with a moderate dose, they can bear exposure to cold. 46. Excessive dose of bhang is noxious. It produces stupor and uneasiness. It does not impair digestion, but increases it. It does not cause dysentery, but causes bronchitis and asthma. It impairs moral sense and induces laziness. It weakens the intellect. It does not cause insanity. Excessive dose of charas and ganja emaciates the body, impairs digestion, causes dysentery and bronchitis and asthma. Impairs moral sense and induces laziness. It deadens intellect. I have heard of cases of insanity caused by excessive ganja and charas. But I have not seen them. 47. Moderate use of these drugs has no here- ditary tendency. 48. Excessive dose of these drugs has no here- ditary tendency. 49. Moderate use of any of these drugs arc not practised as aphrodisiac. 50. Excessive dose of hemp drugs are not used as aphrodisiac. They produce impotence. 56. Effect of bhang is not modified by the admixture of black pepper, &c., which are mixed with it. They are used simply with a view to make it palatable. The same may be said of excessive dose of bhang. Tobacco is mixed with charas and ganja to modify its irritating smoke. Dhaiura is only mixed with bhang to increase the intoxicating power of bhang. It is mixed occasionally, such as the Shivratri festival. 172. Evidence of HAKIM SAKHAWAT ALI, Sayid, Yunani Physician, Agra. 1. About fifteen years' experience in practice in Agra. 19. Ganja and charas are only smoked. To- bacco is first placed in the chillum, and ganja or charas placed above. 20. Ganja241 83. Ganja and charas are not considered disre- putable. There is no disrepute attaching to bhang. The reason of the disrepute of ganja and bhang is that they are frequently consumed in excess. 34. Habitual consumers would find it a great privation, if they had to forego the use of ganja and charas and bhang, because the habit is formed. 35. Prohibition would be possible. An interval would have to be allowed for consumers to break off the habit gradually. Immediate prohibition is impossible. Consumers would be seriously discon- tented, but it would not cause a political danger. Consumers would take to other intoxicants, espe- cially opium. 36. No other stimulant is being substituted. 37. There is no real difference in the intoxica- tion produced. 38. They are of different strength, and produce intoxication varying in kind, not in degree. 40. Bhang is applied externally as a plaster. The essential oil of charas is also used externally242 49. At the beginning the virile power is in- creased, but subsequently it is totally extin- guished. 50. The injurious effects mentioned above are brought on sooner. 56. Bad characters mix dhatura for producing excessive intoxication, and administer to others to make them senseless for the purpose of robbing them. 57. Charas and ganja, as far as my experience goes, are never drunk. 174. Evidence of HAKIM ASGHAR HOSAIN, Sheikh, Native Physician, Fatehgarh, Farukhabad District. 1. In the course of my practice as a physician I have had opportunities of obtaining information regarding the matters connected with hemp drugs. 2. Yes ; the definitions may be accepted for this province. The drugs are known by these names. 3. In this district (Farukhabad) the hemp plant grows spontaneously to some extent. It is abund- ant in Saharanpur district. 4. It is known as ganja and bhang in this dis- trict. The bhang is also called sabzi (green), and by various other names denoting its qualities, such as "warak-ui-khyal," "sabz-pari," etc., etc. 5. Heavy rainfall, damp, and terai lands (i.e., lands by the river-side) are necessary for its growth. 7. There is cultivation of the hemp plant in this district (c) for use as bhang. Don't know where and to what extent. 14. Ganja and bhang are grown and prepared in the adjoining districts of Shahjehanpur and Hardoi. Don't know to what extent. 35. It would be feasible to prohibit the use of all these drugs if their use he declared to he an offence. Of course it will have to be done by degrees. At first some control should be exercised on the sale of drugs similar to that exercised on the sale of arsenic and other poisons. The prohi- bition will be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants, unless they are made too dear a luxury by imposing heavy duty on it. 40. Only bhang is prescribed by native doctors, but very rarely. Bhang is also used in the treat- ment of cattle disease. 41. No ; in neither of these cases the mode- rate use of any of the drugs is beneficial. The common people believe that these drugs give staying-power under severe exertion and fatigue ; but. in my opinion, the drugs have no such power though they temporarily produce an effect similar to this. The lower caste Hindus use these drugs for the purpose specified in (b). The proportion of the people is very small. 42. I consider the moderate use of all these drugs to be harmful, because the common people who use the drugs cannot be expected to continue a moderate use of the drug. They are apt to increase the consumption of the drugs after a time. 43. Yes ; the consumers of charas are offensive to their neighbours. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of the drugs on the habitual consumer is to pro- duce cough and to irritate the temper of the consumer. Yes ; it produces intoxication, which lasts only for a short time, after which a craving for the drug is felt. 45. As a rule the habitual moderate use of ganja, bhang and charas produces noxious effects, physical, mental and moral. It does not cause loss of appetite, but injures digestion. In the beginning unnatural appetite is produced. The use of ganja and charas causes bronchitis and asthma. Moral sense is impaired. The use of bhang produces laziness and habits of immorality and debauchery. The advanced state of in toxica- tion deadens the intellect. Excessive use of charas produces insanity, which may have lucid intervals. The intellect is permanently injured. A good many inmates of lunatic asylums will be found to have become insane through excessive use of charas. When a man is under the influence of the drugs he is liable to have melancholic notions. The intoxication may lead to crime. 49. Bhang is used as an aphrodisiac. In the end its effect is injurious. Prostitutes use bhang for this purpose. 51. Habitual criminals as a rule use the drugs. Their proportion is large. Moderate use is also apt to lead to crime, such as offences against person and property. 53. Excessive indulgence in the drugs does incite to unpremeditated crime. The use of charas may lead to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. Yes. 175. Evidence of HAKIM MUHAMMAD ALI Pathan, Yunani Doctor, Hardoi. 1. The perusal of medical works, and also in- quiry from hemp drug smokers and traders. 2. It appears from Dr. Prain's investigations that he has considered the plant which produces bhang and that which produces ganja to be one and the same. However, as far as 1 have been able to ascertain, this is not the case. There is a difference between the leaves of ganja and bhang. The bhang plant is five "gaz" (yards) in height, and the ganja plant never more than three "gaz" If the information given me is not erroneous, perhaps this is the reason why bhang is produced in this district and ganja is not produced here. In these provinces neither the ganja nor the bhang plant are called "patsan" (hemp). The "patsan" fibres are made into "san" (flax) and it has nothing to do with ganja or bhang. What Dr. Prain has said about the different, kinds of ganja is quite correct as far as it goes ; but besides those kinds there is another kind called "Mahadeva," which used to bo produced in Nawabganj (Bara Banki) and Sitapur. The leaves of "Maha- deva" is shaped differently from those of the other kinds, and it is made into bundles weigh- ing one chitak each.
243 3. Bhang grows spontaneously in Bahraich, Gonda, Kheri, towards the Nepal boundary, and in Katiari in the Hardoi district ; also in Kathri, Chandpur, in tahsil Kanauj, and Chapraman and Thathia (towards Farukhabad). I do not know where it is abundant. 6. The wild bhang sometimes grows densely and sometimes in a scattered manner. 7. (a) and (b) No. (c) In Katiari (Hardoi), about 200 maunds a year are produced. (d) No, though the seeds are collected. 8. Decrease ; 1,000 maunds a year were formerly produced. The old hemp cultivators now sow poppy and sugarcane. 9. They sow bhang with wheat in wheat-fields. When the wheat has ripened and been reaped, the bhang plants shoot up. 10. No special class ; ordinary cultivators or kachhis. 13. Ganja not cultivated at all in Oudh. 14. No, as far as I know. 18. Ganja and bhang keep for two years only. Charas, if dry, only for a few days. Then they entirely lose their effect. With ordinary care they can be kept for three years. Extremes of cold cause ganja and bhang to deteriorate, and extremes of heat charas. 19. Ganja and charas are only used for smok- ing ; but the oil extracted from charas is used in Yunani medicine to restore enfeebled vigour. 20. Low caste people generally. 22. Foreign ; imported from Samarkand via Hoshiarpur and Amritsar. 23. Never. 24. All classes of Hindus eat and drink bhang. 25. The consumption of all three hemp drugs is on the increase. No special reason, except that as other evil customs are increasing in these days, that is too, or because, owing to greater facilities in obtaining them (there is greater trade and there are more shops), they come within the reach of people who could never obtain them before. 30. Consumption of all mostly in solitude. Hindu women sometimes consume bhang, but charas seldom, and ganja very seldom. These drugs are usually consumed by men only. They are not given to children. They are usually con- sumed by "adolescents" and old men. 31. Habit easily formed. Not so difficult to break off as the opium habit; hut can be easily broken off, as the habit of using tea can. Natives who do not drink tea daily can give it up more easily than Europeans. 32. No social or religious customs as to drugs ; but when people call at a bhang drinker's house, bhang is offered like the "huka ;" not so ganja and charas. The habit is not formed by partak- ing of these drugs occasionally in this manner. 33. With disfavour. Social opinion among the Hindus and leligious opinion among the Muham- madans condemns it : charas or ganja much more so than bhang, because ganja and charas are more injurious than bhang, and are mostly used by low castes. The habits of life of those who use ganja, charas and bhang are worse than the habits of those who do not. The hemp plant is never wor- shipped. 34. No serious privation to any class. None could not abandon it, because the intoxicating influence 60on goes off, so the habit does not form very easily. The more a person is accustomed to take drugs, the more difficult it is for him to give them up. 35. It would be feasible to prohibit all, but difficult in each case, because those accustomed to use drugs would feel the loss of them ; but they could overcome the feeling. Certainly it would be consumed illicitly to some extent. The prohibi- tion could be enforced by forbidding cultivation and sale. Some discontent would no doubt re- sult ; but it would not be serious or amount to a political danger. The consumers would certainly resort to both alcoholic stimulants and other drugs. Those who could afford it to eat would resort to alcohol, and those who could not to other drugs. 39. Smoking affects the heart and brain much more than eating or drinking because of the heat, and is therefore more injurious. It also affects the lungs, because they are soft and spongy, and the ganja smoke permeates them. Bhang eating and drinking affect the heart, stomach, and liver, but very gradually. 40. Yes ; Hindustani (Yunani) doctors pre- scribe charas and bhang (never ganja), but to a very small extent, and very carefully and with great caution. I don't know about their being used for cattle disease. 41. (a) Bhang is used as a food accessory, and to a certain extent as a digestive, because on account of its dryness it sops up the moisture of the stomach, and strengthens digestion ; but when the moisture is entirely dried up thereby, it affects digestion prejudicially, i.e., its prolonged use be- comes injurious instead of beneficial to the diges- tion. Ganja also increases the digestive powers, and when people are seized with vomiting after meals it helps to prevent it. (b) To alleviate fatigue and to give staying- power ganja and bhang are used. (c) To prevent ague and fever bhang is given in very small quantities ; not specially in malari- ous, etc., tracts. (d) Fakirs and jogis use ganja and bhang be- cause they increase the power of meditation (union of man with the deity "ana'lhaqe"), and it is believed that after death a drug consumer's bones do not rot. Moderate occasional use. 42. Even moderate use harmful, because it affects the digestive powers, and thus induces other diseased conditions. 43. They are not uproarious like consumers of spirits; but the smell of ganja, when it is smoked, is offensive. 44. The immediate effect would be gratification, as in the case of any other habit. Bhang and charas are refreshing and intoxicating ; they re- move the pangs of hunger where they exist, and create appetite where it is wanted. But ganja only produces intoxication and sleep to a great extent. Ganja-smokers sometimes derive much pleasure thence, and sometimes much terror. The ganja intoxication goes off in about 15 minutes, and the bhang intoxication in two or three hours. There are no after-effects. The want of subsequent gratification produces uneasiness. 45. Noxious, physical, mental and moral effects are produced by such use. Though morals are not directly impaired, still through the heart and brain being affected, morals must suffer. For a time, VOL. V. 2 M 2
245 177. Evidence of JAGANNATH MISRA, Native Physician, Budaon City. 1. I have in my practice as native hakim fre- quent intercourse with different sorts of people both in and out of the town, and have studied several works on treatment of drugs, etc. 2. Yes. The definitions are accepted here Bhang is known as siddhi, bijya, and subzi. Cha- ras is called charas, but has two species, one being styled as charas Bokhara, and the other as charas Yarkand. Ganja is known as murra, chur, pa- thari, and baluchar. 3. In the damp districts of Terai, in Tahsil Baheri, District Bareilly, in Gorakhpur, and in Tashil Damaryaganj, District Basti, in Bansi, in Bengal, and in Cashmere the plant grows spon- taneously. 4. The hemp as such is called here san or patsan, and is quite a separate species from the hemp pro- ducing bhang, charas, or ganja. The hemp is cultivated in those parts with a view to obtain fib- res for cordage, etc., and is a great article of commerce. It is not of spontaneous growth. 5. Damp and moist soil is essential for its spon- taneous growth. 6. It. is ordinarily scattered. 7. (a), (b), and (c) No. (d) Yes, almost throughout the district. 8. No increase or decrease has taken place as far as I know. 10. There are no cultivators here of hemp for its narcotic properties. They grow it simply for its fibre or seeds, and are therefore classed as ordi- nary agricultural cultivators. 11. Very rarely, and that too by some of the mendicants or ascetics round their hermitage. 12. Nowhere. 13. For the purpose of fibres and seeds the cultivation is not restricted. As for ganja it is restricted to hermitages, etc., as 1 expressed in question 11. The cultivation is not general, though the kind of soil for the production of gan- ja is required to be damp, as explained in question No. 5. Its cultivation is quite impossible in sandy places and deserts. 14. They are imported, not prepared in the district. 15. Ganja is rubbed well by the thumb of the hand before it is mixed with tobacco for smoking. The charas is not rubbed, but only mixed with tobacco for smoking. The bhang is used for drinking ; it is first ground well, and then strained mixed with water, milk, sugar, pepper, and ani- seed. It is also eaten prepared thus : A seer of bhang mixed with four chattacks of ghi is boiled down. When well boiled it is kept for cooling, and the water is thrown away after the drug is deposited underneath. Subsequently in a chattack of this sediment two seers of syrup is mixed and a confection prepared. Sometimes instead of water milk is used for boiling down the bhang. On occasions bhang is eaten pure mixed only with sugar. 16. Bhang is generally prepared at home, but all bhang, ganja, and charas can be prepared from wild plant wherever grown. 17. By all classes of people. 18. Yes ; they deteriorate by keeping, and in time lose their effect. In the ordinary way, however, bhang and ganja can be preserved for a year, and charas for three years. The causes of deteriora- tion in ganja and bhang are dampness, and in charas loss of moisture. To prevent deterioration it is necessary that bhang and ganja be kept dry and charas moist. 19. Ganja and charas are used only in smoking, but I have seen recorded in a book that a kind of confection called maju shirza jani is prepared with essence of bhang mixed with charas in the Deccan. This confection even in a small quantity is a reme- dy for impotency. 20. Both the drugs are largely used by the bai- ragis of Ajodhya, the gossains of Jwalaji in Kangra Valley, and about all the mendicants, Hindus and Musalmans, in all parts of India. Most of the people other than those also consume them ; for instance, in Tahsil Dataganj, District Budaon, men and women both commonly use them. 21. In this district and its vicinity murra and chur are mostly used, but preference is given to baluchar, which is very scarce in these parts. In Bengal the last named is generally used, and abundantly obtained. 22. Foreign is chiefly used, and is imported from Kabul, Bokhara and Yarkand, and that im- ported from Yarkand is preferred. 23. Never. 24. The Brahmans, specially chaubes, almost throughout the division of Agra eat and drink bhang at large. The number of chaubes in Muthra and Mainpuri using the drug amounts to about 75 per cent. It is mostly consumed even in Kashganj and Sorau in Etah, and is sparingly used in almost all parts by almost all kinds of the Hindu community. 25. The use of charas is on the increase. Even the female sex has taken to its use, especially among the Rajputs and Ahirs. It is mostly used in Dataganj, Besouli, and Gonnour in the Budaon District. 27. Bhang and charas are used by the high and low both, but ganja only by the lower people. Idle and vicious habits and the society of the con- sumers of these drugs lead to the practice. 29. Pepper is generally mixed with bhang, but often aniseed is also combined. Dhatura is very rarely mixed with a view to make the beverage strong or to do harm to the consumer. With ganja nothing is mixed. But with charas the contractors mix linseed oil and honey for keeping it moist. 30. Bhang is mostly taken in solitude, but gan- ja and charas in company. The use is confined to the male sex chiefly in old age for stimulant qualities ; but women are also not quite exempt. Children never use the drugs. 31. The habit is easily formed. To break it off is also not difficult. There is always a tendency towards excess, for moderation in any of the in- toxicating drugs is never possible. 32. No customs require the use of the drugs, but some of the Sivites offer bhang in the wor- ship of Siva, though religiously it is not essential. If it is ever used on such occasions, its use is tem- perate, and it cannot lead to formation of habits.
246 33. The consumption of any of these drugs is generally regarded with suspicion : only the chaubes socially consider the practice of bhang eating and drinking good. There is, however, no religious necessity for it. The use of narcotic is held generally disrespeetable, for it muddles the brain and weakens the intellect, and when such is the case a man who uses narcotics must commit actions far from being acceptable, and is therefore viewed as detestable by the people. 34. It would go hard for a man if he gives up at once the deep-rooted habits of taking any of these drugs, but he can, of course, abandon it by and by. I cannot quote any instance in which men have suffered serious privation in leaving off the habit. 35. Prohibition is feasible. The drug cannot be used illicitly if hard-and-fast rules are laid down. Prohibition can be enforced by enactment of an Act. There would be some discontent, but it will not last long. There can be no political danger unless religious feelings are interfered with. Yes ; a measure to abolish stimulants may be apprehended, since the people seem to be fer- vently inclined towards wine; hut apparently there is no fear of the use of other drugs. 36. The use of bhang is generally, though secretly among those who have religious scruples, substituted for that of wine. While ganja and charas are openly superseded by opium smoking. The evidence for the use of wine and opium smoking in excess is the increase in the contract for their sale. Formerly there never existed so many liquor and chandu shops as at present. 37. The effect of charas is stronger than that of ganja ; it is productive of bronchitis and asthma, and leads in the end to impotency. 38. All the species of ganja lead to bowelish affections and impotency, but baluchar is stronger than murra, and murra than chur. 39. As far as I know, bhang is only eaten or drunk, and ganja and charas only smoked. It cannot be said, therefore, with certainty whether smoking of all these will be less injurious than eating or drinking. 40. Yes. Bhang is sometimes used for medical purposes, and it is very largely administered in the treatment of cattle diseases. 41. (a) Bhang if moderately used on occasions and not habitually taken is stimulant but never digestive. (b) None of the drugs has staying-power or alleviates fatigue. (c) It is not proved that any of these drugs are febrifuge or preventive of malarious diseases. (d). The native hakims use bhang often for the purpose of snuffing, rubbing over the body, and bathing. Persons of all rank use bhang occasionally for the purposes set forth in (a) and (d) . but charas and ganja, except being intoxi- cating, serve no end. 42. Habitually, if used even in moderation, the drugs are never harmless. No book on medi- cine I have read ever recommends the use of the drugs. 43. Never. 44. At the outset the effect of bhang is rather refreshing if taken moderately, but for a habitual consumer nothing but intoxication is the only result. It is also for a time productive of appe- tite. It has no after-effects, nor does the want of subsequent gratification produce any longing or uneasiness. Charas and ganja produce no effect save that of intoxication as far as I know. 45. (a) Yes, it does. (b) Yes, the constitution is seakened. (c) Bhang injures digestion, and charas and ganja cause loss of appetite. (d) Ganja and charas produce bronchitis and asthma. (e) All the three drugs impair the moral sense and induce laziness; but though at first they tend towards forming the habits of immorality and debauchery, they render impotent in the end. (f) The use of the drugs deadens the intellect and produces temporary insanity; but the symp- toms are reinduced by the use of the drugs after liberation from restraint. Insanity by the use of those drugs is in my opinion due to weakness of mind and brains as well as to deficiency in self-control through weakened intellect. Two cases of insanity caused by the examination of bhang, charas, and ganja came under my treat- ment. In both of these were found symptoms of melancholia, fear, sleeplessness, loss of appe- tite, and taciturnity. The effects remained for six months, after which a perfect recovery was effected. Whenever after this the use of any of the intoxicating drugs was made, the symptoms aforesaid generally reappeared. 46. The habitual excessive use of any of these drugs leads to a more powerful degree of insanity by causing the loss of the senses and weakening the intellect. 47. There is no reason to believe that the effect of any of these drugs is hereditary, nor does the habitual moderate use affect the children of the consumer in any way. 49. Bhang is at first aphrodisiac, but subse- quently its effects are quite the contrary. Charas and ganja are in no way aphrodisiac. The prosti- tutes sometimes use bhang for intoxication, but ganja and charas are very rarely used by them. Really the use of the drug is very injurious and produces impotency. 50. But the excessive use leads to impotency is proved beyond doubt. Almost all the old physicians agree in the statement, and experience confirms it. 51. The bad characters themselves often use intoxicating drugs very little, but they generally administer them to persons on whom they crimi- nally wish to lay their hands. 53. No, as far as I know. 54. No. 55. Perhaps, but no case in the district ever came to my notice. I do not think anything is mixed with ganja and charas, but bhang with the admixture of dhatura renders one insensible, but not completely stupefied. 56. The effect of bhang mixed with aniseed and pepper, together with milk and sugar, is rathar modified if taken moderately, but the ad- mixture of dhatura intensifies the effect and pro- duces insensibility. As to ganja and charas, I do not think anything is mixed with them. Ex- cess is always injurious. 57. Ganja and charas, as far as my knowledge goes, are only smoked, and never eaten or drunk.
247 178. Evidence of LALA NIHAL CHAND, Honorary Magistrate, Saharanpur. 1.No special opportunities. 2.Yes. This may be taken as the local nom- enclature of the various drugs. 3.There is an abundant spontaneous growth of the hemp plant in the Saharanpur and Muzaffar- nagar districts. 6.Scattered. 7.There is no cultivation of the hemp plant in the districts with which I am acquainted. 14.Bhang is largely manufactured in this district. No ganja or charas are produced. 16.Bhang is generally so prepared. It can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown. Ganja and charas are not prepared in this district. 18.Ganja and charas will keep for about a year, after which they lose their strength. Bhang will keep for two years or longer if preserved from exposure to cold and damp. 19.In this district they are used only for smoking, always mixed with tobacco. 20.Charas is principally consumed by fakirs, bairagis, jogis, and gosains. Ganja is very little used at all in this district. 21.Flat. 22.Foreign, principally imported from the Punjab. 23.Not in the districts with which I am ac- quainted. 24.(1) All classes of Hindus and (2) Mirasis, Takiadars drink bhang and also cat it ; but the practice of eating it is not common. 25.The consumption of charas and bhang is on the increase, as shewn by the rise in the drug contract price. I cannot give any special reasons. I do not consider that the recent rise in the price of liquor is responsible for the increased consump- tion. 26.(a) 25 per cent. (b) 15 per cent. (c) 50 per cent. (d) 10 per cent. 29.Bhang is usually mixed with black pepper. It is also sometimes mixed with almond, carda- mom, sugar, poppy seed, and milk. Dhatura is not used for this purpose. These admixtures are intended to minimize the heating and drying effects of the drug. No. 31.(a) Yes; (b) It is easy to leave off drinking bhang, but difficult to give up charas and ganja. (c) The moderate habit tends to develop into the excessive. 32.As regards Hindus, it is not considered disgraceful to consume the drugs although there is no injunction in their favour. The Muham- mad an faith prohibits the use of drugs. 33.The use of charas and ganja is considered reprehensible. No moral stigma attaches to the consumption of bhang. No such custom in this district. I believe the origin of the disrepute attached to the consumption of charas and ganja to be that the consumers are offensive to their neighbours owing to their breath being tainted. 34.The usual consumers would be occasioned considerable distress by the deprivation of the drug to which they are accustomed. An enforced abstinence renders them fretful and physically 'slack.' Some 50 per cent. of the consumers would be so affected. 85.1 consider such a prohibition would be in- expedient and ineffectual, as it would at once be followed by illicit consumption and would occasion serious discontent, which, however, would not amount to a political danger. Yes. 41.The moderate use of bhang is beneficial as a digestive, as a stimulant, and as a febrifuge and preventive of cholera. Ganja and charas are in no way beneficial. 43.Bhang-drinkers are inoffensive. Ganja and charas smokers are offensive. Their breath is tainted, and they are constantly coughing and expectorating. 44.Ganja and charas produce immediate in- toxication and torpidity. Bhang acts after about an hour. It creates hunger, and specially a desire for sweetmeats. They all have the effect of an aphrodisiac. The effects of ganja and charas last for a couple of hours ; that of bhang for about four hours. The after-effects of all three are a physical limpness. 45.The habitual moderate use of ganja and charas are injurious both physically and morally. They cause a loss of appetite, coughing and whooping cough, and deaden the intellect. The use of bhang produces corpulence, but has no mental or moral effect. The use of ganja and charas is occasionally productive of temporary insanity, which ceases when the drug is stopped and is reinduced by the drug being taken again. 47.No. 51.There is in my opinion no connection be- tween crime and the consumption of drugs. Oral evidence. Question 25.248 of the drugs. I can't be sure I should detect the habit of charas or chandu smoking from the smoker's appearance. Question 59.249 43.The ganja, bhang and charas smoking, generally speaking, are not offensive to their neigh- bours. 44.Habitual consumers of these drugs, if they consume these in moderate quantities on the whole keeps them jolly. The habìtual consumer, after the use of his daily drug, feels hunger. Bhang drinkers have often their time of drinking it fixed, as morning and evening. The effect of the drug to such habitual drinkers is sufficient during this interval. But the ganja and charas smokers have no fixed time of smoking. Its effect remains for about two hours if smoked well once. The use of charas and ganja is injurious on account of its causing asthma and cough. Bhang also, by medicinal rules, produces laziness and keeps one out of senses, but the latter is less injurious than ganja and charas. 180.Evidence of THE HON'BLE THE RAJA OF BHINGA, C. S. I.,* Bahraich, Oudh. 1.As a landlord my experience is confined to Bhinga, where the plants grow spontaneously and abundantly. 18.They improve if kept with care. 19.To the best of my knowledge they are used for smoking only. 20.As a rule ganja is smoked by the lower class of people and especially by the lowest of ascetics ; charas is used by the well-to-do classes also. 22.Native charas is not liked so much as foreign, which is said to come from Nepal. 23.To the best of my knowledge bhang is never used for smoking. 24.There is no particular class to whom drink- ing or eating bhang is confined. Persons addicted to bhang are found all over India, but in some parts of the country, such as Benares and Muttra, the use of the drug prevails to a great extent. 29.Ordinarily smoking tobacco and dry to- bacco leaves are mixed with ganja and pepper with bhang, but as the latter is used by the respectable classes as well, there are no end of ingredients used with it. Cardamoms, aniseed, saffron, sugar, milk and many other articles are mixed with it. Dhatura is generally used by men of vicious habits. 30.The use of these drugs is chiefly confined to male sex, and children seldom take them. 31.The habit of consuming these drugs is not very easily formed, nor is there much danger as in the use of alcohol for the moderate habit to become excessive. But when the habit is formed it is difficult to break it off. 32,There is no social or religious custom in this part of the country. The lower classes of people, however, sometimes make use of bhang when they cannot procure grog for such occasions as social gatherings. Manu distinctly lays down that the use of all intoxicating drugs is unlawful. 34.It will be a great privation to ascetics and poor people who indulge in the consumption of the drug and would no doubt be a source of great political danger. The prohibition is sure to end in the use of alcoholic stimulants and in the illicit consumption of the drugs. 39.Of all the intoxicating drinks bhang is said to he the least injurious, as it does not act on the brain like alcohol. The Brahmins of Muttra are the most notorious consumers of bhang and at the time enjoy splendid health. Smoking ganja, however, is most harmful and breeds disease. 40.Bhang is one of the chief ingredients in the medicines used by the Hindu physicians for loss of appetite, diarrhoea and other diseases ; and it is also given to cattle. 43.Inoffensive as a rule. 181.Evidence of RAJA JUNG BAHADUR KHAN, C.I.E., Landlord, Nanpara, Bahraich. 1.I have no practical acquaintance with the subject of hemp drugs, and my knowledge as to this matter is almost next to nothing. But I have been making very careful enquiries as to this subject from both the vendors and consumers of hemp drugs, and my answers are framed in accord- ance with the information thus acquired. 2.Yes; I think these definitions may be accept- ed from this province. But 1 am told that cha- ras is imported from Nepal and Kashmir, and is not prepared in Oudh. Ganja is known locally as jungli ganja or mahadewa, and its varieties as Baluchar and Patiala, both imported from other parts of India. By the way, the correct term is subzi, not subji, as given by Dr. Prain. 3.I do not know ; but in this district it grows spontaneously ; and I fancy there must be other districts in Oudh in which it grows like this. I believe it grows pretty abundantly in the Kheri district ; also in the Bahraich district. 4.It is known as bhang, buti, bijia, subzi, sid- dhi, and patti. Yes ; they refer to the same plant. 5.It grows in sandy soil, but rain affects it injuriously. 6.I believe it is ordinarily pretty dense. 7.There is no cultivation of it at all in this district ; it grows spontaneously, and I believe this is the case over the greater portion of this province. 12.I have no information. 13.I am not aware. I believe there are no such restrictions. 14.Yes ; bhang only. Ganja and charas are imported from abroad. As to extent, I do not know. 15.I am unable to answer this question. 16.(a) I am not quite sure, but I believe there must be some people in this district who pick the bhang leaves for their own use as well as for the use of their cattle. * Invited to attend at a meeting of the Commission for oral examination, but failedto appear. vol. v. 2 N
250 (b)Yes ; it can be so prepared. (c)No ; ganja and charas cannot be so prepared. 18.Ganja and charas, if kept carefully in a dry place, can keep good for two years. Bhang can keep good for only one year. Yes ; I under- stand after five or six years ganja and charas quite lose their effect : bhang after one year or so. 19.Yes ; only for smoking. 20.The labouring classes of the people smoke ganja and charas ; also fakirs. 1 do not know anything as to what proportion of the people go in for it, and in what localities. 21.The flat one is preferred. I cannot men- tion any particulars. 22.Foreign charas is chiefly used. I hear it is imported from Nepal and Kashmir and Bokhara. 23.Never so. 24.Brahmins and Rajputs chiefly drink bhang irrespective of localities. 25.I am told that the use of ganja and charas is somewhat on the increase. The use of bhang seems to be the same as usual. The increased consumption of ganja and charas may be attribut- able to the stringent enforcement of the regula- tions, and to increased vigilance on the part of the police, as well to the increase of population. 26.I cannot undertake to say. 27.The consumers of ganja and charas, as I have said before, are principally the labouring class- es and the fakirs. The labouring classes, I am given to understand, use it as a stimulant to their jaded powers, and the fakirs, who use it exces- sively, to curb and destroy venereal desires. 28.(a) The average allowance of ganja and charas per diem is 3 mashas, costing 1 pice. (b) The average allowance of ganja and charas, for excessive consumers is 1 tola per day, costing 1 anna. (a)As regards bhang, the average daily allow- ance is 1 tola, costing 1 pie. (b)In the case of excessive consumers, it is 2½ tolas, costing 2 pies. 29.They ordinarily mix tobacco with ganja and charas. In exceptional cases they mix the three together244 after men have begun to use the drugs, they look fresh and florid ; but the hands and feet and face eventually become swollen and dark, and virile vigour diminishes. The digestion is at first strengthened, but ultimately weakened, then dropsy is caused. Dysentery is never seen ; but bronchitis and asthma are often brought on by drugs, especially ganja.Yet ganja is a medicine for bronchitis and asthma if used in small quan- tities. Morals are apparently not impaired, but are undermined in the long run. Ganja induces habits of immorality and debauchery and laziness. Sometimes it produces courage and sometimes cowardice. It deadens the intellect and brings on insanity if the brain is weak from other causes. It will not, by itself, produce insanity. 176.Evidence of HAKIM MAHOMED SARFRAZ ALI, Yunani Hakim, Mirzapur. 19.Ganja and charas are used for smoking purposes generally, but there are two more me- thods in which charas is used 251 course, be aggravated by excessive indulgence in ganja and charas. In exceptional cases they may induce insanity as well. Bhang may also produce this horrid condition. 47.No. 48.This question is. for experts. 49.No ; on the contrary, ganja and charas im- pair the sexual appetite. Never so used by prostitutes. The use of hemp does not appear to produce impotence. 50.The above remarks apply with greater force in regard to the excessive use of these drugs. The use of hemp, however, does not cause impo- tence. 51.I cannot say. 52.I am unable to answer this question. 53.No. I don't think so. I am not aware of any such case. 54.There is no evidence to show this. 55.In rare instances perhaps they do so. A goodly dose of bhang can induce complete stupe- faction. Not so ganja and charas. 56.Ganja and charas are never smoked by themselves without the admixture of tobacco, which is done to give it aroma and flavour. They mix spices with bhang to give it a fine flavour. I have no special information regarding the ad- mixture of dhatura ; but I suppose they do it in the ease of personal consumption to induce strong intoxication and a state of happy oblivion ; and as regards its administration to others, criminals may sometimes adopt this practice to further their nefarious designs. 57.This does not appear to be the case. 58.1 believe the excise administration of this province to be working tolerably well. At all events I have heard no complaint about it from well-informed and unprejudiced persons. 59.I cannot indicate any specific improve- ments. 60.Ganja, I believe, is not cultivated in this province because perhaps of its inferior quality ; nor is it prepared here ; it is imported from other provinces of India. 61.Charas is not produced in our province, but is imported from abroad. 62.I do not think that this is necessary. I do not imagine that this would be feasible. 63 and 64. None. 65.I cannot hazard any opinion as to this question. 66.I am of opinion that the superior kinds might be taxed more than the inferior ones. 67.I am not sure. 68.I believe there are such shops in our province. I have no practical acquaintance with them, so cannot give any opinion. 69.As to the first and second parts of this question, I am not aware. I think local public opinion ought to be consulted. 70.I am not aware of any such facts. I think duty is paid in respect to the hemp drugs used. As to the last part of this question, I have no in- formation. 182.Evidence of RAJA LACKMAN SINGH, Government Pensioner and Zamindar, Agra. 1.I was Deputy Collector for more than thirty years, during which time I had often charge of the Abkari Department, and opportunities of ob- taining information on matters connected with the department, in the North-Western Provinces. 2.Ganja is not produced nor much used in the North-Western Provinces. Charas and bhang are used but not produced (or rather prepared) in these provinces for use. The limited amount of ganja used is generally of the sort called baluchar. 3.In the districts of Saharanpur and Muzaffar- nagar the hemp plant grows spontaneously and in a large area. 6.Rather dense. 7.See No. 3. No cultivation. 12.Ganja is imported into these provinces chiefly from the district of Rajshahi in Bengal. 14.No. 18.All the three drugs are spoilt within two years, even when protected from damp. If not so protected, they deteriorate in 12 months. 19.They are used only for smoking. I know of no case personally ; but I have heard that charas is sometimes eaten with betel leaf under the belief that it increases virility. The quantity taken is said to be very small, viz., about a grain. 20.Very low classes, such as grass-cutters (Chamars), cook boys, bhangis, dooly-bearers and the like. Mostly in towns and rarely in villages. In towns the smokers must be about 2 per cent. of the total population. Ascetics and professional mendicants are proverbially excessive smokers ; the former for the purpose of destroying virility. Brothel-keepers and their customers are generally charas and ganja smokers. 21.Baluchar is preferred. In the upper dis- tricts of the North-Western Provinces ganja smokers arc rather rare. 22.Foreign charas is chiefly used. It is im- ported from the Punjab and also from beyond the Indus. One kind is called Yarkandi, probably from its being imported from Yarkand. 23.No, I have never heard of it. 24.The Chaube Brahmans of Mathra are the famous bhang drinkers. It is not an exaggera- tion to say that 99 out of every 100 Chaubes drink bhang. In Mathra and Bharatpur, and in all the towns around them, bhang is largely con- sumed, and every class of people drink it. The average must be about 75 per cent. of the male population who drink bhang. As a rule the drinkers are men who have no work to do, or whose work is of the indoor sort. Eating of bhang is not much in practice. Residents of the places of Tirath (or sacred places) of the Hindus are almost all bhang drinkers; and so are the priests and mendicants and ascetics of those places. 25.It seems to be on the increase owing to the facility with which the drugs are obtained. An- other reason is that the caste-bonds, the old rules of society, the fear of excommunication, and the reverence for religious commands have been much destroyed by the development in this country of the customs and freedom of Europe. vol. v. 2 N 2
252 26.By a rough guess, about 80 per cent. are habitual moderate consumers, 20 per cent. are habitual excessive consumers. Of occasional con- sumers, about 95 in the 100 are moderate and five excessive. These percentages relate to bhang as well as to ganja and charas-consumers. 27.Ganja and charas are mainly consumed by low classes and ascetics ; but bhang is used by all classes. There is no strict prohibition in the Hindu religion against these drugs as there is against liquor. The Muhammadan religion strict- ly prohibits the use of all sorts of intoxicants ; yet the lower classes of Musalmans sin against the law, and so do the lower Hindus against their religion when they drink liquor. Ganja and charas-consumers are considered as vagabonds and dregs of the population. The words ganjabaz and charasbaz are terms of reproach for a man of the respectable classes ; but bhangbaz is not so bad, as it only indicates the man to be stupid or a fool, whereas the other two imply immorality and misconduct. 28.One pice (¼ anna) is the daily cost of each of these drugs for a moderate consumer; but for an excessive consumer bhang costs about one anna and ganja and charas as much as 4 annas a day, 29.Nothing is mixed with ganja or charas; but the very excessive consumers of bhang mix a few seeds of dhatura to make the intoxication stronger. The bhang massala consists of the seeds of sonf (aniseed), pepper, kasni, and cucumber, and the root called mulahihi (liquorice). 30.Bhang is generally consumed in solitude, and ganja and charas in company. The use of all th:ee is confined to the male sex, except in the case of women of bad repute. Children rarely smoke ganja or charas ; but the boys of bhang drinkers generally follow their fathers. 31.The habit is easily formed and easily broken off, unlike the habit of opium eating or liquor drinking. In the cases of ganja and charas there is a tendency to develop into excess. 32.There is a general custom amongst Hindus to drink bhang on the Holi festival. Even the total abstainers of bhang are often induced by their friends to take a small quantity of the green water on that festival. The worshippprs of the god Shiva consider it meritorious to drink bhang as a religious duty. Among the lower classes of the eastern districts ganja and charas are used on almost every festival and on public meetings. They offer a quantity of these drugs to the manes of their ancestors, as well as to their family gods, on occasions of births, weddings, funeral cere- monies, and festivals. 33.Except bhang, the use of the other drugs is generally regarded as disreputable, because (1) the consumers, as a rule, belong to the disrepu- table and misbehaved classes ; and (2) the use is injurious to health and pocket, and it leads to misconduct also. Bhang has been so adapted that its drinker is not considered a misbehaved person, although in daily transactions his memory and intelligence are not easily trusted. It is neither injurious to health, nor a very costly luxury. I know of no custom of worshipping the hemp plant. There is hardly any public opinion regarding the habit of using these drugs, except among the Muhammadans, whose religion strictly forbids the use. The stigma on ganja and charas is chiefly owing to the fact that they are consumed by men of a reprehensible society. 34.Certainly the foregoing of the consumption of bhang will be hard for a very large number of persons, say about 25 per cent., of the Hindu male population, not only because they are habi- tuated to the drug, but also because they believe it to be an innocent luxury and useful to their health. But the consumers of ganja and chara9 admit themselves that these drugs are harmful to both body and mind, and 1 think they will not feel it very hard if compelled to forego their use. 35.The discontent on the prohibition of the use of bhang will, I am afraid, be so general that it may amount to a political danger. But the case with ganja and charas is different. Their consumers are comparatively few, and confined to the lower or non-influential classes. For the higher or bhang-consuming castes the religious prohibition against the use of liquor is so strong that, even if compelled to forego the use of bhang, they will not resort to alcoholic stimulants. The ganja and charas-consuming classes already use liquor, and they will resort more freely to it if prohibited from using the drugs. Smuggling of bhang, etc., has never been effectually stopped, and it will never be so stopped when the use of these articles is made penal by law. It will rather increase. 36.I do not think that alcohol is now substi- tuted to any extent for ganja, charas, or bhang. 37.The intoxication by ganja is said to be milder and lasting a shorter time than the intoxi- cation by charas. Excessive use of each of these brings on diseases of the chest, and very often insanity, either for a short period or long. 40.Bhang is largely used in the medicines given to horses and horned cattle. No school of native doctors prescribes any of these drugs as a medicine for human beings, 41.Bhang in moderate quantities is useful as a digestive, and. also as a preventive of diseases springing from malaria or bad water. It does not assist at all in giving staying253 46.I know of no case in which habitual exces- sive use of bhang has caused any serious disease of the body or brain. But 1 know a case which occurred in the Bijnor district about the year 1866, in which a man, after smoking ganja or charas to excess, became mad and murdered his two children and a female relation. The madness was said by the medical officers to be acute homicidal mania. It lasted tor several weeks. 47.No. 49.Moderate use of ganja and charas is said to increase and excessive use to destroy virility. Bhang is neither beneficial nor injurious in this respect. 50.See 40. 51.It has become a custom among bad charac- ters to smoke ganja, charas, chandu, and madak, whether moderately or excessively. New members, as soon as they join the society of bad characters, begin to follow the custom. There seems to be no connection between crime and the use of hemp drugs. 52.See above. 53.Yes, see No. 46. 54.1 think not. 55.A strong puff of ganja or charas causes complete stupefaction to a person not accustomed to smoke these drugs to excess. A large dose of bhang also causes stupefaction. I know of no case in which any of these drugs, without the admixture of dhatura, was administered to facili- tate crime on the victim. 56.Hard drinkers of bhang mix dhatura for personal consumption, and criminals mix it in bhang or sweetmeat or food for administration to their victims. 57.I know of no such case. 58.The system is good, except that it does not prohibit the open use of ganja and charas in the shops where they are sold or in public places. 63.No objection. 64. None. 65.I think the taxation is fairly regulated. 67.No objection. 68.See No. 58. 69.Public opinion is not consulted at present, but certainly it ought to be consulted. 70.Smuggling in small quantities is so easy that I do not think it possible that it should be stopped altogether by any penalties. Oral evidence. Question 1.254 183. Evidence of RUNJEET SINGH, Landlord, Agra. 19.Yes. 23.It is not used for smoking, but it is used as a confection by the natives of India. 28.Not known. 29.Not known. I am not aware of the bhang massala. 30.They are not used for children, but taken especially by the male sex. 31.It is difficult to break off at once. 32.I am not aware of any custom,+ whether social or religious, in regard to consuming these drugs. The latter part not known. 36.As far as I know, alcohol is not substituted for these drugs. 37.Yes ; the effect of charas smoking is imme- diate, and that of ganja intoxicating power is gradual. The drinking of bhang differs in its effect from both of the above drugs : the nar- cotic effect comes on gradually, and retains its power for a longer period. 39.Drinking or eating is not so injurious as that of smoking. I am not aware of their causing any disease or producing insanity. 40.Yes, as Tinct. Cannabis and extract are used very frequently both in European and Native hospitals. Given to horses and bullocks to restore their appetites. 41.Under the use of bhang will increase appe- tite. I have seen bhang given in malarious dis- tricts to prevent ague ; but regarding charas and ganja I have no experience. 42.I do not consider the taking any narcotic drugs moderately to be beneficial. I believe in time it will eventually cause the person to take excessively. 44.(b) No. (c) Yes. (d) and (e) Charas and ganja allay hunger, but bhang creates appetite. (f) The effects are stated above. (g) By taking any narcotic drugs it produces habit and a longing. 45.Not known. Charas and ganja impair the health by injuring the digestion and subsequently loss of appetite, and very often produce either dysentery, bronchitis, or asthma, as also immoral- ity. Regarding intellectual insanity not known. I have had no experience. 46.As noted in 45. 47.Not known. 48.As stated in 47. 49.Not known. 50.As noted in 49. 56.Bhang, in moderation, increases appetite, in excess, short of insanity ; hut the admixture of these items I cannot say. 57.They are not used as stated. 184. Evidence of GANGA BUKSH, Choube, Zamindar, Muttra. 2.In my country the names current are :255 two at most. It goes bad in the rains ; damp affects it. 19.They are used solely for smoking save in medicines. 20.It is not confined to any particular class ; though mendicants (fakirs) and the lower classes use them more freely. 21.The flat sort. 22.Foreign, Bokhara. 23.No. 24.Bhang is used largely by the wealthier classes, e.g., Brahmins and the Muttra Chaubes. It is eaten and also drunk by people. It is used everywhere in the province. 25.On the increase. The reason is due to the price of spirituous liquors rising. 30.Ganja and charas are used in company. Bhang in solitude, Only the male sex use them. There is no particular age for their use. Children never use them. 31.The habit is easily acquired, but like all habits difficult to break with. Once acquired, it has a tendency to develop into the excessive. 32.There is no order or rule requiring the use of these drugs. 33.The practice of using charas and ganja is held in disrepute ; not so with bhang. The reason why the former is so held is solely because the manner in which it is used is not clean. It dirties the hands. No one worships the hemp plant. 34.It certainly would to a large number of people. 35.It would be impossible to stop the use of these drugs. If they were prohibited by law, the people would be driven to use them illicitly. Any legislating in this direction would be unadvisable, as the mass of people would misconstrue the ben- evolent intentions of the Legislature, and think that it was only another step in the direction of interfering in their social habits. 40.They are used in the treatment of cattle disease. 41.Beneficial. (b) Alleviates fatigue. 42.Harmless in moderation. 43.No. 41.Charas and ganja produce intoxication immediately. It increases the appetite. Its effects last five or six hours. Its after-effects arc nil. 45.(a) None. (b) No. (c) No. (d) Ganja and charas produce asthma and bronchitis. (e) No. 47.Not hereditary, nor does it in any way affect the children of moderate consumers. 49.It is aphrodisiac ; charas and ganja-smoking causes impotency. 51.Bad characters as a rule use these drugs. 58.The system of excise administration is working well and needs no improvement. 68.None. 186.Evidence of MUNSHI NARAIN SAHAI, Kayasth, Landholder, Tilhar, Shahja- hanpur. 2.Ganja, bhang, and charas. 3.In Kheri and Hardoi (Oudh), in Pilibhit and in the northern part of this district, ganja and bhang grow spontaneously in prolusion. 4.Bhang, sabzi, bijya, siddhi, and tusai, and sukha are all used for bhang. 5.No special conditions of climate arc requisite certainly. In the damp humid Terai it grows luxuriantly. 6.Dense. 7.Bhang and ganja are not cultivated in this district. 12.I do not think so. 13.I do not think it is cultivated anywhere in the province. It could grow anywhere. 14.It grows spontaneously. 15.Ganja leaves are rubbed on the palm of the baud into dust, which is mixed with tobacco and smoked in a chillum. Bhang leaves are ground and mixed with water and taken as a beverage. It is also eaten dry ; also is mixed in sweet meats, when it is called majum. 16.People do not prepare bhang. It can be made wherever it grows ; so also can ganja. Charas is never made here. 17.No class in particular. 18.They do deteriorate by keeping. With ordinary care they can be kept one year. In the rains they lose their effect. If sunned and kept carefully, they may probably last longer. 19.They are only smoked in a chillum. 20.Mendicants as a rule use them mostly. No locality is famed for it. 21.Ganja of any kind is only smoked in a chillum. 22.Yarkand charas is chiefly preferred for the reason that it is the most intoxicating. Bokhara charas is most in use, as it is more largely imported. 23.Bhang is not smoked. 24.All classes of people use bhang. They eat and drink it. Mostly in Muttra and in the Punjab. 25.The use of ganja and charas is on the increase. Bhang does not seem to be on the increase. 26.(a) 5 per cent. (b) 10 per cent. (c) 2 per cent. (d) 4 per cent. 27.They are taken from the mendicants (fakirs), musicians, and those persons who arc obliged to work in water. 29.Black pepper is mixed with bhang usually and drunk. Occasionally ginger, kasni, kahu seed, khurfa seed, melon seeds, cucumber seeds, cardamoms, white and red almonds, rose water cactus water, sugar and milk are mixed with it.
256 Sometimes as an intoxicant dhatura is mixed with it. 30.Charas and ganja are always used in com- pany. Bhang is used in solitude. The male sex only uses them. Children rarely use them. The use of these drugs is not confined to persons of any particular age. 31.The habit is easily acquired. To leave off bhang is not difficult, but it is otherwise as to charas and ganja. The tendency is to develop into the excessive. 32.The 'Shiv' offer bhang to their Mahadeo. They look upon this custom as a religious one and incumbent on them. 33.The use of bhang is not looked upon as disreputable. It is otherwise as to charas and ganja. I do not know of any class to worship the hemp plant. 34.It would be a great hardship to mendicants and the habitual consumers were they to leave it off. 35.It would not be impossible to put a stop to their consumption. No one can do anything con- trary to the law. Certainly those habituated to the use of these drugs would in the beginning feel the deprivation, and would use dhatura and other intoxicants. No political danger would arise from its stoppage. The prohibition should be gradual. 36.Alcohol is not being substituted for any of these drugs. Nor do I think it ever would be, for they are cheaper than alcohol. 37.The effects of charas and ganja smoking are the same, but charas is more intoxicating than ganja. 38.The flat ganja is the most intoxicating ; next the round, and last the chur. 39.Drinking or eating the drug is not less injurious than smoking, but when smoked, they produce intoxication more quickly. Bhang is usu- ally drunk. 40.Bhang is used medicinally for dysentery, and is given to cattle to counteract the effects of hard work and fatigue. 41.(a) Accessory. (b) Yes. (c) Yes. 42.Bhang is harmless. Charas and ganja are baneful. 43.They are not. 44.Bhang does not take effect at once ; ganja and charas do. They are all intoxicants and ap- petisers. Bhang affects one for 4 to 5 hours, while charas and ganja for 1 or 2 hours only. They have no subsequent ill-effects. The want of subsequent gratification does not produce any longing or uneasiness. 45.Ganja and charas are baneful physically and morally. They lessen the appetite and injure the digestion. They produce asthma and bron- chitis. They impair the mental powers and pro- duce laziness. 46.The habit of using these drugs grows on the users. 47.Is not hereditary. Does not affect in any way the children of moderate consumers. 49.The moderate use of these drugs does not promote lust. Prostitutes seldom use them. Charas and ganja produce impotency. 51.Fakirs as a rule are the greatest consumers of these drugs. Bad characters use the drugs freely. Bhang is mostly used everywhere by the better class. 53 and 54. No. 56.Used in moderation, it produces intoxi- cation of the usual type ; if mixed with dhatura, etc, the effects are great, well nigh producing death. 57.Ganja and charas are never eaten or drunk. 58.I. consider the present system of excise administration quite perfect. 59.Cannot be improved on. 60.Ganja is not cultivated in these provinces ; it is spontaneous in its growth. It is not proper- ly guarded. It should be grown under the same conditions as opium. 61.Charas does not grow here, nor is it made here. 62.The same reply as No. 60. 63 and 64. No objections. 65.Taxation is reasonable, and should not be altered. 66 to 63. No. 187. Evidence of CHAUDHRI GHASI RAM, Landowner, Maulaheri, Muzaffarnagar District. 1.I have no special or personal knowledge on the subject of hemp drugs. 3.The hemp plant grows wild in all parts of Muzaffarnagar district, particularly in moist places, such as the low lauds of the rivers or the banks of the canals. 4.It is known as bhang. 6.It grows densely. 7.No. 12.Not in this district. 14.The drug contractor collects bhang for sale in his shops. 16.No ; people buy bhang from licensed shops. It can be prepared from the wild hemp wherever grown. 19.In this district charas only is smoked. 20.Fakirs and Brahmins are the principal consumers of charas. Ganja is not used in this district. 22.Charas comes from Yarkand. 23.No. 24.Bhang is only drunk ; fakirs and Brahmins chiefly drink bhang. A few people of other castes also do so. 25.It is not on the increase. 29.Bhang is generally mixed with black pepper. 30.People generally meet together to consume drugs ; children are not consumers. 31.Bhang is generally consumed in moderation and the habit of taking it is easily left off. Charas smoking is more likely to grow into a habit and is abandoned with difficulty.
257 32.Drug consumption has no connection with religion. But Hindus only indulge : very few Muhammadans take drugs. 33.Public opinion is against the use of bhang and very strongly against the use of charas. The practice of taking drugs is condemned, because it is thought to be hurtful. There is no worship of the hemp plant. 34.I do not think that it would be any serious privation to drug consumers if drugs were suddenly withdrawn from them. They would suffer no serious discomfort, as opium consumers would do if deprived of opium. 35.Quite. Some drug consumers might for a time continue to obtain drugs illicitly, but drug consumption would be stamped out in a short time. The feeling of the people is strongly against drugs, 36.No ; I do not think so. The effect of alcohol and drugs is so different that consumers of one are not likely to take to the other. 39.Bhang drinking is much less harmful than charas smoking. The latter injures the brain and the eyes. Bhang being mixed with water does less mischief, but that too is hurtful. 40.Bhang is used as a drug for cattle to assist digestion. 41.The use of drugs even in moderation is never beneficial. Bhang at first may aid digestion but it subsequently injures the stomach. Drugs make a man lazy instead of energetic, and are of avail in fever. 42.I consider the use of drugs always hurtful, however moderate. 43.Men who consume drugs are generally bad characters and troublesome to their neighbours, but the use of drugs does not excite to violence. 188.Evidence of MAHA SINGH, Cultivator, District Muzaffarnagar. 1.I smoke charas when I can get it258 189.Evidence of Rai Durga Parshad, Bahadur, Khettry, Landholder, Benares, now residing in Gorakhpur. 1.I do not think myself capable of answering these questions fully, as I have had no good oppor- tunities of obtaining information regarding the matters connected with hemp drugs. I have not got even that experience what men of my rank and age can have by passing their lifs in this world. 2.The real name of the dry leaves of the hemp plant is bhang, and the words subji or patti and siddhi are also used for bhang. 18.It is said that bhang loses its effect by keeping or when it becomes old. 20.Ganja is used among lower classes, and fakirs whose religion does not prohibit its use. It is very seldom used by respectable classes. Only those who mix themselves in low societies during their minority smoke ganja. 23.No, I have never heard or seen any one smoking bhang. People say it is used for smoking as well, 24.All classes of Hindus can eat or drink bhang ; specially followers of Shiva (god) like it the most, because offering of bhang to Shiva is considered sacred. Men of other sects use bhang for pleasure's sake. It is beyond my power to state the true proportion of the men using bhang ; but approximately half of the Hindu nation uses bhang. 29.Black pepper is ordinarily mixed with bhang, and exceptionally and occasionally aniseed, almond, cardamom, sugar, and milk are mixed with bhang. I do not know about other ingredients. 30.On occasions of public gathering, public festivals, and evening parties, bhang is used in company ; otherwise in solitude. Children do not use these drugs save on medicinal purpose. 81.Habit of using all the intoxicating drugs increases gradually, and it is always difficult to give up the old standing habit. 33.The use of these drags is not considered good in the eyes of the public. 34.It is always troublesome to give up the use of these three drugs, viz., bhang, ganja, and charas, according to the quantity used. 35.The order of prohibition among the con- sumers would cause discontent. It cannot be said that the prohibition would cause the consumers to take alcoholic stimulants. There are four classes of Hindus, and the first three are prohibited by religion to take stimulants, I don't think that alcoholic stimulants can be substituted for bhang, ganja, and charas. 40.In diseases of cattle, bhang is given, and it is also given to cattle when they are fatigued and tired of long journey. 42.The use of all intoxicating drugs weakens memory, manly power, and sight, and I fully believe in these effects. 43.The consumers of these three drugs were never heard to be offensive to their neighbours. 44.Bhang is refreshing and produces appetite. 45.In my humble opinion the use of these drugs do harm less or more, as described in my reply to question 42. 47.I have neither heard nor seen that the use of these drugs becomes a hereditary habit. It makes no effect on the children of the consumers. 48.In my opinion the use of ganja and bhang is more than charas. 49.In my opinion these three drugs, viz., ganja, bhang, and charas, are not aphrodisiac, and they are not used for this purpose. 53.I have never heard the consumers of these drugs committing a serious crime, except using abusive language and doing simple mar-pit. 54.I have never heard that these drugs are used with such intention. 190.Evidence of LALA BAS DEO SAHAI, Bania, Zamindar, Sikandra Rao, District Aligarh. 1.I have used bhang and known many people who use it. 2.Bhang is called bijia, sabzi, bunti, kamla patti in Brij bhasha. 3.In very small quantities in Sikandra in groves and such places. In Muzaffarnagar and Saharan- pur it grows very much. 4.See answer 2. All refer to same thing. 6.Very dense. 7.The hemp plant is planted on each side of fields and is cultivated for fibre only and seeds are given to cattle and eaten by low classes. 16.Ganja and charas can be made anywhere. 18.Ganja, charas, bhang can be kept for a year, but then spoil. Cold also spoils them. 20.Fakirs and Brahmins at ghats in holy places, to the extent of 70 per cent., use ganja and charas ; kahars about 50 per cent. 22.It comes from Kabul. 24.(b) Banias (about 10 per cent.), Brahmins (30 or 40 per cent.), Kaiths (10 per cent.), Tha- kurs (20 or 30 per cent.), Low castes (40 or 50 per cent.), Musalmans (about 5 per cent.), drink it in all localities. (a)The same classes eat it, if they cannot get it to drink, but only to a small extent, except at the Holi, when it is eaten in majun. 25.On increase, because the Government now allows it. Former Governments forbade it ; also good liquor is not to be had now. 26.(a) 20 per cent. (b) 25 or 30 per cent. (c) 15 per cent. (d) 20 per cent. 27.(a) Kahars and nais. (b) Fakirs and ghat Brahmins. (c) and (d) All castes. Kahars and nais take these drugs to refresh themselves and also to deaden their senses. Fakirs and ghat Brahmins take these things because they have nothing else to do. 29.(a) Bhang259 30.In company. Men only use these drugs, except prostitutes, who use charas and ganja. Children do not use them. 31.Habit easily formed and hard to break off. The tendency is not for a moderate habit to become excessive. 32. It is a custom at Holi to use bhang, but I don't call it a religious custom, and it is not essential. It is not excessive, does not lead to formation of the habit and is not injurious. 33.All three drugs are considered evil, because the senses are injured and the brain weakened by their use. There is no custom of worshipping hemp plant. 34.Very severe if it were stopped suddenly because of the strength of habit. 35.It would be feasible to prohibit the use of these drugs. As many of the soldiers use it, the discontent caused by it might be a political danger : charas and ganja should be first stopped by degrees, leaving bhang. Alcoholic stimulants would not be used. 36.No. 37.Ganja has stronger effects. 40.(a) Bhang is used by native doctors for piles. (b)It is given to cattle for weakness of diges- tion. 41.(a) None of them are good. (b) Useful because they dull the perception. (c) Bhang is good, but charas and ganja are not good. (d) In no other way. Bhang is not used by respectable people. 42.All intoxicants harm the brain and are bad. 43.Not at all. 44.Ganja and charas260 consume it because they say, that under its in- fluence, their thoughts are more easily directed to God. Charas and Ganja.261 (d)About 25 per cent. 27.(a) Kahars and Nais. (b)Brahmins of holy places and fakirs. (c)and (d)All castes. Kahars and Nais take these things because they are strengthened by them. Brahmins take them so as to get a good appetite and be able to con- sume the food their pupils (jijman) bring. 28.Bhang.262 24.All classes of people drink or eat bhang pre- pared in sweets. 25.I believe that sulfa or charas smoking is decidedly on the increase, whereas bhang is almost stationary. The reason for the increase in charas smoking is the higher price at which country liquor is sold than what it used to be ten years ago, and people who indulged in liquor then have taken to the use of the cheaper stimulant, namely, charas. 27.The charas smokers chiefly belong to the poorer classes, though people of all castes indulge in the drug, and sometimes even well-to-do people use it. The habit is acquired through bad associa- tion and indolent habits, though very often it is indulged in merely as a soothing narcotic without considering its evil effects. 28.The average allowance may be about half an anna per man per diem. 80.The charas is indulged in always in company, and is mainly confined to the male sex. Bhang is used both privately and publicly by men and women. 31.Very easily. Very difficult. Of course like any other indulgence. 23.Bhang is never smoked. 24.All classes of Hindus eat and drink. 25.The consumption has been the same as be- fore ; there is no decrease. 27.It is mainly taken from kahars, sweepers and chamars, etc. 29.Ordinarily smoking and eating tobacco is mixed with charas and ganja. The latter is mixed to alleviate cough, etc. Dhatura is seldom mixed by fakirs to increase intoxication. Pepper, sonf, etc., are mixed with bhang, and no other ingredient is sold. 31.The habit is easily formed, and it is not difficult to break off. The habit can develop from moderate into excessive. 32.It is not religious, but it is useful for bad climate. 33.It is generally useful for bad climate. It is neither social nor religious. 34.Consumers will not suffer if they stop its consumption. 85.If any of the drugs will be stopped, it will be certainly consumed illicitly. 36.No reason for thinking that alcohol is now being substituted. 38.Baluchar ganja is best, and pathar is worse than that. 40.It is prescribed in the medicines on ac- count of its qualities, and bhang is given to cattle in illness. 41.These drugs alleviate fatigue and bad climate. 43.Inoffensive to their neighbours. 57.Ganja and charas are smoked, and bhang is eaten after being reduced to powder. 58.Yes ; working well. 59.No. 60.Ganja is not produced in this district. 61.Charas is not produced in this district. 62.Bhang grows spontaneously, but no care is taken. 194.Evidence of KIRAT SING, Thakur, Zamindar, Mohanpurwa. 1.I smoke charas. 28.I smoke two pice a day of charas and I get slightly intoxicated, but not so drunk as to fall down or not know what I am doing. 195.Evidence of RAMPRASADA PANDEY, Brahman, Zamindar, Ajodhya. 1.I have had the opportunity of being inform- ed through persons that eat, drink and smoke these drugs. 2.Yes ; Dr. Prain's definitions can be accepted for our province. Bhang, bijaya, sabzi and buti are different names of bhang ; ganja by ganja ; and sulfa is locally known. 3.It grows spontaneously in Bahraich, Gonda, Gorakhpur, Butwal, Bengal, and so on. 4.They are known by the names bhang, bijaya, sabzi, buti, ganja, sulfa, dum, charas. 5.They are usually grown in damp climates and often in hilly tracts. 6.Generally densely grows. 7.In Gonda and Bahraich bhang and ganja are produced, but not charas. 9.They are generally tied in bundles and then dried like tobacco in sunshine. 10.They are of the same classes as other agricultural cultivators. 11.Generally from the one seed. 13.It generally grows in cold climates and cannot grow in very hot places. 14.Yes ; ganja and bhang are prepared in our province, but not charas. 16.Yes ; bhang can also be prepared by the people in their houses. 17.Generally they are prepared by the people of low caste and the hilly tribes, such as Bhotia, Nepalese, and Kachhi ; Kurmi in our province. 18.Bhang loses its effect after one year, and ganja can be preserved with artificial forces. It is deteriorated by cold. 19.They are used for smoking purposes. 20.Brahmans and Sikhs generally do not smoke, but others smoke indiscriminately. 21.Baluchar is preferred for smoking. 22.Foreign is generally used and is imported from Jammu and Kashmir. 23.Yes ; bhang can be used for smoking after mixing both tobaccos. 24.It is generally used in Muttra and Benares by Hindus, but not by Muhammadans. 25.It is increasing day by day. 26.Bhang-consumers are moderate, but ganja- consumers are excessive in their use. 27.Bhang is generally used by all classes of
263 the people, but ganja chiefly by fakirs, bairagis, kshattries, and wanderers of the world. 28.(a)Habitual moderate consumers drink bhang of ¼ pice per day, while ganja of 2 pice per day. (b) Habitual excessive consumers drink bhang of 2 pice per day, while ganja of Rupee one daily can be used. 29.Ingredients of bhang are pepper, carda- moms, almond. 30.Among the rich class people it is used in solitary places, but among low class people in company. It is used generally by male 6ex at the prime of life, and occasionally by children. 31.Yes ; bhang can be got over, but not ganja. Bhang is not used in excess ; but ganja when once taken increases daily. 32.Bhang is generally used in Shivaratri and Holi, but essential, as former dedicated to Shiva. 33.It is held in disrepute, for it produces sloth and idleness. 34.Its consumers would suffer physically, but not risksome. 35.Their prohibition would not amount to a political danger. 36.No. 37.Smoking of ganja results in a swoon, but of others does not. 38.Ganja is more injurious than bhang. 40.Yes ; bhang is given to cows and other animals. 41.Bhang is digestive, gives staying-power, and alleviates fatigue. Bhang and ganja are use- ful for cold climates, but the former in both, when used moderately. 42.Bhang, when moderately used, is harmless. 43.Yes. 44.Bhang, when used moderately, refreshes, produces intoxication, and creates appetite ; and its intoxication lasts for five hours, while others, nearly two hours. Bhang does not produce un- easiness when not available. 45.Bhang does not produce any noxious effects, but ganja does. Both create appetite, but when excessive, ganja causes dysentery, bronchitis or asthma. They do increase laziness and sloth. Ganja after long U3e deadens the intellect and produces insanity, but not bhang. To a certain extent it relieves mental anxiety, but in mental disease it does no good. 47.No. 49.No. 51.It is used by persons of loose habits, but does not stimulate to criminal acts, but may result in a broil. 53 to 55. No. 56.It can be modified by the use of ingre- dients. Dhatura is used for increasing the intoxi- cation. 58.No need of better Government than England. 196.Evidence of MATHURA PRASAD CHOWDHRI UPADHYAYA, Brahmin, Zamindari and State Service, Mirzapur. 1.I have come to know more of it through persons that use them, and as for bhang I use it myself now and then. 2.I think Dr. Prain's definitions are quite sufficient for the purpose in hand. Bhang is usually called bijaya, buti, subzi, chaitnya, chamak, but bhang and siddhi are the usual names with which it is commonly called. 3.It grows spontaneously in Bahraich, Gonda, Gorakhpur, Butwal, Bengal, etc. 4.Ganja is also called sulpha, dam. 5.It generally grows in damp climates and hilly tracts. 6.It grows densely when it has overgrown. 7.(a) Bahraich, Gonda, (c) Goruckpur, Bahraich, Butwal. 10.There are no special classes that cultivate them, but generally low caste people, viz., Ahirs, Bhars, Chamars, cultivate them. 11.Generally from the seeds, but sometimes by planting the same plants. 13.It can be cultivated anywhere (after ob- taining a license from the Government), provided the soil be not very dry. Rainfall and damp are favourable to its growth. 14.Ganja and bhang only. Places already mentioned in answer 7. 15.Bhang is usually prepared after packing the plants in bundles and drying them in sun- shine. 16.Bhang can be easily prepared. Yes ; it is generally prepared from the hemp plants, Ganja could be prepared, but not charas. 17.Generally by the low caste people. The Nepalese, Bhutias, Bhars, etc. (vide answer 10). 18.Bhang and ganja deteriorate after an year. It produces very little or no intoxication. At- mospheric action, generally cold, is the cause of its deterioration. 19.For smoking purposes only. 20.Only Brahmans (who are religiously for- bidden to smoke) do not smoke these drugs. Others smoke them. They are usually used in cold countries and tracts adjacent to snowy moun- tains and Himalaya, but they abundantly are used in Lucknow and other places in Oudh and the North-Western Provinces. 90 or 80 per cent. of the people smoke them. 21.Chur or baluchar, as it is usually termed, is used and liked by persons of caste ; others by poor people. 22.Charas, generally used in these provinces, is what is imported from Jammu and Kashmir. 23.No ; if the ganja-smokers do not get ganja, they generally smoke bhang. 24.Bhang is generally used by all Hindus (excepting Muhammadans) ; nearly 60 per cent. of people drink bhang. But it is used with abundance in Mathura, Brindaban, Benares, Mirzapur, Lucknow, and Cawnpore. 25.It is increasing day by day, for the idlers and wanderers are daily increasing. 26.Bhang-consumers are moderate in their
264 uses, and only few who are fond of wildness use it excessively ; whereas ganja, once habituated, increases day after day. 27.It is generally taken by the priests (viz., the Chaubes of Mathura, and Pandas of Prayag and Gya) and those persons who have very little brain work to do, e.g., brokers, money speculators, fakirs, pilgrims. 28.(a) Bhang=½ or ¼ of a copper pice. Ganja=2 pice. (b)Bhang=on the most one pice. Ganja=8 annas or a rupee. 29.The ingredient that is ordinarily used in bhang is pepper (marich) only, but exceptionally almond, cardamoms, rose flowers, and different sorts of seeds, with sugar and other fruits, viz., pomegranate, grapes, ripe mangoes. Dhatura is used for the increase of intoxication, but very seldom used. There is no special massala that goes with the name of bhang massala. 30.By wealthy persons it is generally used in solitude, or in the company of a chosen few, but among the poor it is used in company. Generally it is used by the males only, in their prime of life. Children are forbidden from its use, but not so with Chaubes of Mathura, who are said to give to the infants in their milk (ghunti). It is only after some days' constant use that people generally get into its habit. Bhang can easily be discontinued, but not ganja. Ganja, when once used, increases day after day, but not bhang. 32.Bhang is generally used on two festivals :265 54.No. 55.Bhang can't stupefy the brain so much as to discern between right and wrong. Complete stupefaction cannot be brought on unless arsenic or dhatura be mixed with it. 56.The ingredients almonds, cardamoms reduce the strong effect of bhang ; while saffron betel-nut, when mixed, increases its intoxication. 58.I don't think it does not stand in need of much reform. 60.It is sufficiently controlled, although per- sons have been found to grow them Within their own houses, but it would be impossible to control them. 61.No ; it does not. 65.I am of opinion that ganja and charas should be more severely taxed, for they are pro- ductive of more evils than bhang.But alcoholic drinks should, if possible, be so severely taxed as to extinguish its use altogether, for the latter induces one to criminal acts and immoral habits. 66.The baluchar kind of ganja should be a little bit more taxed, for it is generally used by well-to-do persons, whereas the others too are used by men of scanty means. 68.There are many shops for selling these drugs. It is very advisable to keep their sale under license, for it begets in one way its re- stricted consumption. 69.It is the shopkeeper's own look-out to find where there is a great demand of these articles, and then ask the permission of the local author- ities. The local opinion ought to be consulted, when there is a serious demand of it. 70.Nepalese and Bhutias generally bring with them lots of ganja and bhang, and these are imported from the Himalayan regions. 197.Evidence of SITA RAM BHAGOVA, Brahmin, District Sitapur 1.Hemp trees grow in my garden and wild hemp trees in my zamindari villages. Good many persons having some connection with me use it. 2.As Dr. Prain says that three narcotic articles are obtained from hemp, so is the case really. In this district the dry leaves of hemp tree, whether male or female, are named bhang, sabzi, or buti. Charas is only named by this name in this district. Ganja is the only name used in this district. In this district also three varieties of ganja are used as defined in the ques- tion. Yes ; these are the very definitions used in this province266 26. The proportion is as follows :267 198. Evidence of HAIDAR HOSAIN, Sayid, Zamindar, Bilgram, Hardoi district. 1. I worked with Babu Badri Nath, the late Deputy Collector and Excise Officer of the Kheri district, as a Reader, and have been radiated with him throughout the whole district for the last two months on tour. We have read several articles published in the Pioneer regarding the hemp drugs and thinking of what was going on. Letters received from Colonel Harrison, the Deputy Commissioner, with an intimation that enquiry may be made into the drugs in question to supply a desideratum which has long been felt in these provinces. As the Excise Officer was very much engaged in other duties, he wished to be helped by me in the said matter. I immediately took up the task on me, and thus the dry subject drawn my attention to have a taste in and to deal with. I commenced the enquiries in the ways of tour from the villagers whom I could get hold of. Whatever information I received and gathered is all down in my private diary. At the time we have been out in camp and passed through the Palia, Singhai, Majgain pargana, we had a full sight on ganja plant spontaneously grown in a large area, even trodden under foot. As regards to the properties, effects, injuries and benefits of the hemp drugs, I am very much indebted to the works of native physicians and baids. 2. The definitions given by Dr. Prain are all acceptable in this province. No other name is applied for these productions within my know- ledge. 3. Hemp plant is grown spontaneously ; its pro- duction is abundantly found in Kheri district. 4. It is known by the names of ganja and bhang in these localities. 5. The moist climate, rainful, elevation, sea level are specially required for the growth of the wild hemp. 6. The growth of the wild hemp is ordinarily seen scattered. 7. There is no cultivation of the hemp plant in Oudh. 8. As there is no cultivation at all in Oudh, no- thing can be known to us as to its increase and decrease. 9. I can't say. 10. My personal knowledge is quite at a loss to mention them who cultivate hemp for narcotic purposes. 11. Though it is not cultivated here but heard to be raised from the seed of the wild hemp. 12. I um unable to mention any. 13. It is wildly grown in Kheri district. In my supposition the impossibility of its being cultivated would be a dry climate. 14. No. 15. The people say that the users used to cut off the ganja plants and wrap them into bundles, and, by digging up the ground, put them under- neath to protect them from air for a considerable time, and then it is taken out and smoked. 16. Yes, it is generally prepared by the users in their houses. It can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever it is grown. I can't say that ganja or charas can be prepared from the wild plants wherever grown. 17. There is no special class. 18. The wild ganja is deteriorated by keeping in this district, though it does not totally lose its effect ; but in my opinion the people of this district do not know, or they have no experience at all, how to keep them in a proper way of care, and hence it is deteriorated. 19. Ganja and charas are only smoked in these parts. 20. Pasis, Kahars, Dhanuks, Garias, cartmen, camel drivers, Thakurs, Kan gars, and other low caste men smoke these drugs to some extent. The drugs are not restricted to the lower caste, but Brahmans have recourse to smoke them as well. It is difficult to give the exact number of smokers. The excess in smoking is confined princi- pally to the Terai parganas of the Kheri district268 It is dried with the ganja plant and mixed and smoked with the ganja in the chillum. It creates a taste and makes the drug strong in its effects. The sellers adulterate the drug in order to form of the genuine stuff. In this they use the babul, indigo, and tulsi leaves, the object being to get a good price for the proper quality. Purchasers cannot, as a rule, detect their devices, though the taste changes. These leaves do not prove hurtful, and their effect is not poisonous. 30. Of the three drugs in question ganja, 6 mashas, is sufficient to intoxicate, smoked alone or in company ; bhang, 9 mashas, in company ; charas, 6 mashas, in company. The men, or the male sex generally, use the above intoxicants, and at all ages, Children are not given these drugs in any shape or instance. 31. The habit of taking grows generally, and there is a difficulty to abstain felt, because habit is a second nature. When once the habit has been formed, there is a likelihood to carry it to excess. 32. There is no religious law enjoining the use of these drugs. The illiterate Brahmans seem only to choose the use by calling it "Mahadeo ki buti," the beneficial use being the effect produced in thinking of God and His kingdom, rising in thought to heaven and its glories, and then sud- denly collapsing into the infernal regions ; then beholding Satan and his colleagues, to the glory of nobody, but to the intense disgust of his associates. There is no mention of this drug (bhang) in the Shastras. This supposition on the part of these Brahmans is wholly unfounded. The object is to pass away for smokers and to screen themselves from blame as the users and exponents of such authority. Only the artificer of fraud may be proud of this. The use of this drug is undoubtedly injurious. 33. The use of these drugs is detested by the people generally, and their effect is considered most injurious on the constitution, but not in the case with bhang when used for piles and gonorrhæa externally. All drugs and intoxicants, of what- soever nature, are considered hurtful and bad, inasmuch as they tend to lower the moral and intellectual character of the people who use them. Drugs are not known to be worshipped by any class. 34, It is difficult for habituals to cease taking the drugs at once, for the reason that a habit can- not be cured instantly. Some substitute in de- creasing quantities should be prescribed. In my opinion the fact of leaving off any of the drugs without a substitute would not of itself produce death. See people in jail. 35. All intoxicants are hurtful and injurious when taken to excess, as with anything else. When medicinally used, their effect is the re- verse. The control of these drugs, etc., always rested with kings and governments from the beginning. The strict prohibition of the use of these drugs would not in any way be a sufficient reason for discontent and rebellion, though the loss may and will be sorely felt by a good por- tion of the population. It is a well-known fact that Government makes laws for people to obey for instance, Sati, Age of Consent, etc., and where there is disobedience the same is enforced. To introduce any reform the same should be done gradually and in such a manner as a doctor would act in treating his patients. In this way there would be no fear of discontent on the part of the people. They would hardly notice that change going on and would be kept peaceful and unin- tentionally become reconciled to the happy change, or in words, because the people as a mother does a child to the new food for her precious milk. In lieu of the above drugs, liquor and opium, people use as intoxicants extract of poppy leaves, or gur, siddhi, and tari. 37. The difference in the effect produced by ganja and charas is that in the case of intoxicat- ing effect is slow and over, whereas in the case of charas the effect is moderate and lasting. 38. Of the different ganjas, the baluchar is the strongest, murra and chur being not quite so strong. 39. Of the three drugs in question only bhang is drank and eaten and not smoked. The other two are smoked in chillum. If the latter two, ganja and charas, be drunk or eaten, there will be no intoxicating effect produced whatsoever. Used dry in a chillum with fire, it produces effect desired ; without fire, this effect would be lost. If bhang be smoked in a chillum, there will be no intoxicating effect produced. Each drug is used differently. 40. Out of the three drugs, bhang (owing to its medicinal properties) is the most useful and beneficial drug for man and beast. It serves as a liniment (lape), eaten, drunk. It is a good ap- petiser and tonic for digestion. It is used in in- jection for gonorrh269 45. The use of these drugs is very debasing. The Hindu baids consider bhang appetising. Muhammadans do not consider so in any case. The use of ganja and charas is injurious to the lungs. They increase cough and dysentery. They cause the intellect to suffer, and a continuous use brings on insanity ; but for the proper treatment the cases can be cured. Some baids think the per- son remains somewhat insane or indifferent intellect after the disuse of the drugs. Those whoever have given up the use also mention to the state of their minds being in a wandering state. This is in some instances, and in others intellects are brightened up. 46. The answer to this question has been given in No. 45. 47. It does not follow that the children of the habitual users should also take to the use of drugs. Their using teaches a bad lesson, and tempts the children to follow ; but this is not a rule. 48. The users keep increasing rather than de- creasing the quantity of the drugs they use. 49. The moderate use of the drugs does not tend to prolong the sexual act. It is not an aphrodisiac. Prostitutes use the drugs to allay their feelings for the satisfaction of sexual sections, their object being not to get intoxicated only, but to support their strength for incessant copulation. 50. Answer given in No. 49. 51. In this district several cases have happened by this. It would seem the people here are fond of the use of these drugs. This can bo ascertain- ed from the excise registers of the district. There is a great number of badmashes. I do not mean people spoken of in sections 109, 110, Criminal Procedure Code. People who use drugs are likely to commit offences. 52. Answer given in No. 51. 53. Too much drinking is dangerous. The habitues commit themselves to crime. They plead intoxication as an excuse in examination of their crimes. 54. People have resort to drinking for nothing and in other purposes. 55. The effect of the drug is increased by the mixture of other ingredients. 56. Hemp drug produces intoxication. When moderately used is not hurtful. Moderate use is hurtful when dhatura is mixed, or used with other drugs. The stupor is intensified, and death is likely to follow. Dhatura in itself is a poison. 57. As far as I have been able to ascertain and get information regarding ganja and charas, I learn that each is smoked in the chillum. There is no other way of using them. 199. Evidence of THAKUR LAKHUN SING, Kshatria, Zamindar, District Bareilly. 1. I have often come across men who are habi- tuated to the use of bhang, charas and ganja, and sometimes have visited their smoking assem- blies. 2. Beside the names given in the question, bhang is also known by the names of buti, bijia, and kamlapati, and charas by the name of sulfa. The definitions mentioned in this number are ge- nerally accepted. 3. In the districts Kheri, Pilibhit, Bareilly, Terai, Bijnor, Moradabad, Saharanpur, Rampur and Bhartpur States. 4. The well-known names are bhang, bijia, subji, siddhi, buti, kamlapati. 5. Hemp grows abundantly in moist places. The presence of moisture in soil is essential to its growth ; and it is also found in low places on the banks of the Sarda river near the mountains. 6. Wild hemp is found to have thick growth. 7. Hemp is not cultivated in this province. 11. Yes. 14. Bhang and ganja are prepared at the places of their growth in such districts at Bijnor, Morad- abad, Shajahanpur, Bareilly, Pilibhit. 16. Bhang is not commonly prepared in houses ; but it is prepared from hemp at the places where it grows. 17. No particular caste prepares these things. 18. Bhang and ganja can keep good for one year and charas for two years. They should be kept away from damp. The cause of deteriora- tion is contact with water or dampness. 19. Charas is smoked through tobacco pipe or chillum, and in some places it is smoked through negali. 20. The use of ganja and charas is not confined to any particular classes. Among all castes, without exception. The ignorant generally and the educated rarely use them, and the number of consumers would be 10 per cent. of the whole population. Places where ganja and charas are smoked are villages, towns, and cities. 21. In this province flat ganja is regarded more agreeable and preferable. Pathura is second in degree, murra of third class, and chura of fourth class. 22. The charas used is foreign, and is called bukhara, yarkandi and itar. 23. It is not customary in this province to smoke bhang through chillum ; it is taken some- times dry. 24. Bhang-consumers are not confined to any particular caste. Majority of them drink it, and they are mostly Hindus and partly Muham- madans. 25. In this province the use of ganja, charas and bhang is increasing every day, and the cause of this is the presence of drug shops every where, and the easy means of providing oneself with such things at low price. 26. Among the men who use ganja, charas and bhang, 75 per cent. are those who smoke charas and ganja and 25 per cent. those who use bhang. Habitual moderate consumers. Habitual excessive consumers. Occasional moderate consumers. Occasional excessive consumers. Bhang 10 7 5 3 Charas 35 15 20 5 27. Most of the fakirs are found to be the smokers of charas and ganja, many of them be- ing Hindus and some Muhammadans. Among the rest, Hindus and Muhammadans often, and Christians seldom, smoke charas and ganja ; and of those who drink bhang many are Hindus and few are Muhammadans ; and the number of Chris- tians is a very limited one.
270 28. The average allowance of charas to be used by a habitual moderate consumer is 2 tolas and that used by a habitual excessive consumer is 2 chattaks. The habitual moderate bhang drinker takes one chattak, and habitual excessive drinker takes two chattaks at a time. 29. The ingredients mixed with bhang are these271 45. From the habitual moderate use of ganja and charas all the mental, physical and moral qualities of a man suffer injury ; the body be- comes thin, weak, and of a pale complexion, and defect is caused in the vision of the eye. Often the eyes begin to water, hunger is much reduced on account of its warming effect, and some defect is also caused in digestion, and cough and asthma often increased by them. The morals of a man also suffer, and the man is made lazy and idle. Head goes wrong, and some of these ex- cessive consumers of such things become nearly mad, though they had sound wisdom before this. Difference in their sense is caused only from the time they begin smoking ganja and charas. 47. The habit of using ganja, charas and bhang is not hereditary ; but, indeed, the evil influence of elders falls on the children of the family, and ultimately they acquire a taste for it, and by and by become habitual consumers, like other members of the family. 49. The use of ganja, charas and bhang is not practised as aphrodisiac. They cause physical debility, and are very seldom used by prostitutes. 51. Badmashes often make excessive and habi- tual use of charas and ganja, because they get a better chance of gathering together ; and often using this intoxicating thing, they unite to com- mit some crime or other. 53. By the excessive use of ganja, bhang and charas, it is possible that one may commit any serious crime. 54. Some badmashes commit crimes after smok- ing charas and ganja, and then falsely state that it was not a free action of theirs, but was commit- ted under intoxication. It is also conducive to excitement of the mind. 55. Knaves or badmashes, after making famili- arity with strangers, administer charas, sometimes pure and at other time9 adulterated, to facilitate their designs, and the excess of bhang can also make a man unconscious. 57. Ganja and charas are smoked through chillum and are not eaten. The other way of smoking charas is this, that they dig a hole in the earth and put a greater quantity of charas in it, and then gather- ing together, they smoke by separate pipes simul- taneously, and it is done in great assemblies. 58. Excise administration is good, but the rules for sale are defective, and the supervision is not such as to suppress the illicit sale. 60. In this province ganja and charas grows spontaneously, and the inspection of ganja tracts is made according to the existing law. 61. Charas is not produced in this province. 62. Hemp plant is not cultivated in this prov- ince, but it grows wildly in some places and is properly controlled. 63. There is no objection to the wholesale trans- action, but the retail sale is not in accordance with the law. 64. No objection. 65. The present taxation is proper. 66. Existing practice is sound. 67. No objection. 68. There are many shops and houses of licensed dealers where they sell charas and ganja, and the purchaser smokes charas and ganja there as well. It is thought to be the cause of evils. 69. Local opinion is not consulted. 200. Evidence of BHIKAM SINGH, Thakur, Cultivator and Zamindar, Hardoi. 1. I smoke charas. 24. Every one, including Musalmans, drinks bhang. 28. I smoke a pice worth of charas a day, and I do not get much intoxicated. 201. Evidence of AHMAD HASAN, Zamindar, Laharpur. 1. Hemp grows wild in my zamindari, and also I have seen consumers of hemp drug constantly. 2. Dr. Plain's report is correct, and can be taken as applicable to this district. Charas is not manufactured in this district, nor have 1 ever seen it made ; hence I can give no opinion about it. The definition of ganja is correct. There is only this difference, that in this district small leaves are mixed with the flowering tops. In this district 'pattara' and 'chur' (broken) ganja is chiefly used. It has been correctly defined by Dr. Prain. 3. Generally throughout the whole of Oudh, but in Kheri district more especially. 4. Panda patsan is commonly used for hemp plant. Plants that flower are called 'bhang,' and those that have merely flowering tops (kalyan) are called ganja. 5. The plant grows chiefly in damp places, and also on heaps of village refuse. 6. The growth is dense. 7. Patsan is not cultivated in this district. 9 and 10. I am unable to state. 11, 12 and 13. I cannot give any information. 14. Bhang comes to this district from Kheri district. 15. I can give no information. 16. Generally bhang is not prepared by the people in their own houses, but it can be generally made from (panda patsan) hemp plant. The same applies to ganja. Both ganja and charas can be prepared from wild plant, but are not made in this district. 17. The preparations of hemp drugs are not made exclusively by any one particular caste, but it is more common among Hindus. 18. All three drugs deteriorate by keeping, and after three years lose their effect. With ordinary care they keep good for one year. Damp causes deterioration. 19. Ganja and charas are smoked in pipes (chillum). I dont't know any other use to which either is put.
272 20. I cannot state the proportion of people who smoke ganja and charas respectively. People of all classes smoke both, especially Khatris, kahars, etc. Ganja is more extensively consumed than charas. 21. In this district 'pattar' and 'chur' (i.e., flat) ganja is chiefly used all over the district. 'Baluchur' ganja on account of the higher price is consumed by persons who can afford to pay for it. 22. Charas is not made in this district. It comes from Hoshiarpur district. 23. I have never seen bhang used for smoking, nor is it so used in this district. 24. People of all castes eat and drink bhang. The practice is not confined to any one caste, but Khatris, Brahmans, and Hindu fakirs are the chief consumers. 25. In my opinion the use of all three drugs is on the increase, and the reason is that poor people get tired from daily labour and take one or two pice worth of ganja or charas as a stimulant, and this relieves their lassitude. After a time they con- tract the habit of consuming these drugs. 26. I cannot state. 27. Chiefly people of the lower castes as kahars, guriyas. The circumstances and habits of these are different ; i.e., method of speech, manner of sitting down and getting up is changed. 28. I don't know. 29. Some consumers of bhang to improve the taste mix 'arak keora' and 'gulab' with it. Some mix 'elachi' and black pepper and sugar. Dhatura is mixed with ganja to increase its intoxi- cating properties. 30. All three drugs are generally consumed in company, but are also consumed alone. The use does not commence at any special age, but is more common among adults. Men are the chief consum- ers, but women also consume these drugs. 31. The habit of consuming these drugs is easily formed, and is very difficult to breake off. There is a tendency for moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. There is no such custom among Muhamma- dans. I am not sufficiently acquainted with the Hindu religion to give an answer as regards them. 33. (a) Among respectable people the use of these drugs is condemned. Among Musalmans it is absolutely forbidden to use these drugs. The use of narcotics is in disrepute among all castes. (b) The reason is that consumers of intoxicants lose all self-control, and neglect their business and associate with their inferiors. 34 It would be a serious privation for any class of consumers to forego the consumption of the drug they use all at once. The reason is that it is a privation to forego a habit. 35. In my opinion the use of ganja and charas should be prohibited, because charas and ganja do much more harm than bhang. The habit of con- suming bhang can be overcome, but not that of consuming ganja and charas. As regards prohibition, the difficulties which are always entailed by new laws will be experienced ; but the rules now in force as regards ganja and bhang will be of great use for this purpose. The cultivation of the hemp plant is generally illegal ; but if the cultivation allowed by law be reduced by two-thirds, there will remain sufficient to supply the wants of the consumers of bhang, and the amount now cultivated for the manufacture of ganja and charas will be abolished. This also will be sufficient for regulation of wild hemp plant, but supervision for prohibiting cultivation of hemp plant will have to be increased The loss of revenue which is involved in the reduction of the cultiva- tion of the hemp plant can easily be made up ; that is, the impost on bhang can be trebled. Another proposal is that the use of ganja and bhang should be made a crime by legal enactment, and some small fine should be imposed as a penalty for infraction of the law. The prohibition of the use of ganja and charas will be very distasteful to the consumers, but not to a dangerous extent. I do not consider that the prohibition of the use of a drug the consumption of which is universally condemned will have any lasting effect on the minds of the people. There is no doubt that the habitual consumers of ganja and charas, when they are unable to ob- tain these drugs, will take to other intoxicants. As the intoxicating effect of opium and chandu is similar to that of charas and ganja, these men will chiefly take to these, i.e., opium and charas ; but some will take to intoxicating liquors; such as spirits and tari. It is a matter of experience that consumers of intoxicants when deprived of one in- toxicant will take to 6ome other intoxicant. Un- doubtedly very few give up the practice entirely, but as a rule they take to some other intoxicant. 36. Persons of education, Hindustani and Eng- lish, instead of ganja and charas, consume fer- mented liquors. This must be the result of their education. 37. Charas is more intoxicating than ganja, and hence has a more deleterious effect. 38. Baluchar ganja is the most intoxicating ; after this round ganja. Flat ganja is the least in- toxicating. 39. Ganja and charas, which are smoked, are more deleterious than bhang ; which is eaten and drunk. 40. Bhang is often prescribed for cattle, and is of benefit to the cattle. It is prescribed at times for human beings. Ganja and charas are never used medicinally. 41. (a) Bhang increases the appetite. (b) All three drugs are used to alleviate fatigue. 42. Ganja and charas are altogether deleterious. Their use causes various diseases, as cough and asthma, silliness and weakness of brain, and weak- ness of heart and weakness of sight, etc. Bhang has not much deleterious effect. 43. If consumers of ganja and charas smoke such a little that no odour is perceived in the neighbour- hood, they are inoffensive to their neighbours. 44. Ganja and charas take effect immediately on habitual consumers. They also stop the feeling of hunger. The effect of bhang is the opposite. The effect of ganja and charas last about fifteen or twenty minutes, and of bhang for one or two hours. 45. The noxious effects mentioned in this ques- tion are all produced by ganja and charas, but not by bhang. I cannot give any opinion as to the connection between use of hemp and insanity. 46. It is usually found that the use of intoxi- cants tends to excess, and hence the evil effects also increase. 47. Habitual use is not hereditary. 48. Not hereditary. 49. (a) None of these used as aphrodisiac.
273 (b) I don't know about the use of these drugs by prostitutes. (c) The use tends to produce impotence. 50. Same as in 49. It is only a question of degree. 51. Bad characters generally consume intoxi- cants ; but this has no connection with crime. 52. Same as in 51, only a matter of degree. 53 and 54. No. 55. Yes ; non-habitual consumers can be com- pletely stupefied. 56. By the admixture of dhatura more complete stupefaction is induced, and people at times die of the effects. 57. Ganja and charas are neither eaten nor drunk in this district. 58. Excise administration is good. 59. Not capable of improvement. 60. Ganja is not produced from the cultivated plant in this district. 61. Charas is not produced in my estate. 62. Bhang is not cultivated in my district. The plant grows wild in Kheri district, but I can give no opinion as to how the cultivation can be con- trolled. 63. I can give no answer. 68. There are shops licensed for the sale of these drugs, and the drugs are consumed at all the shops. I consider that consumption at the shops should be prohibited, because bad characters assem- ble there. 69. People are not consulted as to locality. General opinion of people should be taken. 70. I don't know. 202. Evidence of KUNWAR MANDHATA SHAH, Chhuttri, Rais of Singahi, District Kheri. 1. In the northern part of Kheri (called Ganjar), Terai and Nepal, ganja and bhang grow wild abundantly ; and in the most parts of the district licensed vendors sell foreign drugs also. It being my Dative place, I am well acquainted with it, and explain what I know of. 2. These definitions are to be accepted. 3. Northern part of the Pilibhit, Kheri, Bah- raich, Terai and Nepal. 4. The leaves of these plants which are used after grinding are called siddhi, bhang, subzi, patti, bijia and mohni. Ganja is called by the names of haluchar, moora and pathari. Wild one is called ganja. Charas is called itr (perfume) in hilly countries, and these names are connected with the hemp plants. 5. It grows in Ganjar everywhere without any limit, also in places of cowherd, waste, mound, etc., and within population and in cul- turable tracts it grows in abundance. The climate of jungle is favourable to its growth. Rainfall in great quantity and floods are injurious. 6. In populated and cultivated tracts, as well as in manured land, etc., it grows dense, and in other places scattered. 7 and 8. No. 10. As it grows wild here, it is not cultivated. 11. Yes. 12. It is not intentionally cultivated here, but grows wild. 14. Consumers who inhabit Ganjar used to prepare these drugs from hemp plant in propor- tion to their want. They, however, on account of enactment, cannot prepare in large quantities. Therefore they do not commonly manage for its preparation. But the licensed vendors prepare bhang. 15. (a) In the months of Kartik and Aghan before the fall of ice, ganja plants are cut, and packed in small bundles which are pressed by some heavy thing for 24 hours. Afterwards they are dried; when pressure is not desirable, they are at first dried and packed in small bundles. (b) In the morning after dew drops are dried and in the evening before the fall of dew drops, the buds of these plants are rubbed with both Lands. Its glutinous matter which sticks in the hands is taken off and made into pills or batti (stick), and these are called charas. (c) In Baisakh in the tapper land the plants are cut and dried and the leaves are separated which are called bhang. (A) The green leaves of ganja and 6eeds are separated, and being rubbed with hands, are smoked with some smoking or drinking tobacco in chillum. Oftentimes musk is also mixed with it. Smoking tobacco, after being dried in fire, in proportion to four times of charas and some eat- ing tobacco are mixed. These three mixed things are smoked in chillum. (C) Bhang is ground and is either used as dry powder or mixed with water ; it is made into pills and sometimes being ground and sifted is drunk with water. 16. Bhang is commonly made, and can be made, and so is charas and ganja from wild plants. 17. It does not depend on any special race. Its consumers prepare for themselves. 18. The three drugs deteriorate by keeping for a long time. With ordinary care ganja is kept good for one year, bhang for two years, and charas for three years. Evidently there is no method by using which may be kept for a long time. At first these leaves are naturally not lasting in their effect. Secondly, by wet, their effects altogether disappear 19. Ganja and charas are usually smoked in this country. Some hilly people smoke the sticks. Shepherds sometimes make a hole under the ground like a mine and put some charas in the hole, and smoke it by means of a nergali (a wooden pipe of huqqa). Some fakirs smoke it in pipes. 20. Fakirs, gypsies, menial servants and other low castes, like kahars, kurmis, chamars, pasis, lodhes, bouts, kanjars, baildars, smoke ganja and charas in every place, but in cold places more, and the estimated number is 15 per cent. 21. Baluchar is preferable to mora or pathar in this part of the country, and all other kinds of ganja mentioned above are used in all places. 22. Foreign charas is much more used. It is imported from Yarkand, Bokhara, Soleiman moun- tain, Nepal, Chaogarkha, Almora, Behar, Kumaon and from other hilly places of north and west. 23. Bhang is not smoked in this part of the country. 24. Bhang is not unlawful among Hindus. But fakirs. Brahmans like pandas of worship con- vol. v. 2 Q
274 sume abundantly. Persons of other castes use and drink it, but some of them do not eat. The number of consumers is 20 per cent. 25.Moderate. 26.(a) Habitual moderate consumers, 60 per cent. (b)Habitual excessive consumers, 15 per cent. (c)Occasional moderate consumers, 20 percent, (d)Occasional excessive consumers, 5 per cent. 27.Hindus who are much associated with fakirs, ignorant persons, pandits become in the habit of consuming this. Low caste people con- sume this for alleviation of fatigue. 28.Daily allowance per consumer is as under :275 203. Evidence of CHAUDHRI DHYAN SINGH, Zamindar, Kanth, Moradabad. 3. In profusion on the hills, Naini Tal, Almora. Here and there in this district. 4. Bhang has a thin pointed leaf, containing no gummy substance ; when dried, the leaves re- main separate. The ganja leaf contains a sticky substance. 5. A moist climate ; stony or sandy ground. 6. Very dense under favourable circumstances. 7. Not in this neighbourhood. 10. They are of the same classes as other culti- vators. 11. They are so raised. 14. Charas only in the Kumaun hills ; bhang in the Terai, etc. 16. The fresh leaves are kept under bhusa (chopped straw) for 20 or 40 days to get rid of the scent, which they have when fresh. This changes the colour also. 17. No special classes. 18. Charas loses much of its intoxicating power in a year, and is quite spoiled by the end of three. Bhang keeps longer. 19. Only for smoking. 20. Ganja is used in the eastern districts, cha- ras in the western. The great consumers of charas are kahars, pusia, baghban, kuchi, kuti, gossains, fakirs. Very few Muhammadans. I suppose about 5 per cent. of the population smoke charas. 21. The baluchar is the best. 22. Almost entirely Yarkand, a little Bokhara. 23. Occasionally with tobacco, when charas cannot be got. 24. Chaube, Brahmans, gossain, fakirs, jauhris (jewellers). Here it is chiefly drunk mixed with almonds, cucumber seeds, endive, pepper, gilli- flower, cardamoms. With milk and sugar it is called dudhia. Here about 6 per cent. drink bhang ; in Muthra 12 per cent. 25. The use of drugs has increased. 26. Charas is consumed by 5 per cent. of the population. Of these half are habitual moderate consumers, quarter habitual excessive consumers, and the rest occasional consumers. 28. For moderate consumers a tola is sufficient, whether of charas, ganja, or bhang, which would cost, respectively, 2 annas, 1 anna, and 6 pies. 29. Only tobacco is used with charas. Bhang is used with many other ingredients. See No. 24. 30. It is not confined to any age. Children very seldom use drugs. 31. The bhang habit is most easily acquired ; but there is more danger of excess in the charas habit. After 40 the habit is extremely difficut to break off. 32. Bhang is so much used by the Muthra Chaubes that no ceremony is performed by them without it. Bhang is frequently consumed in Sheobart ; but it cannot be said that the use of any drug is considered essential in connection with any custom. 34. It would be a serious privation, and it would be harmful to their health. 35. Feasible, but not politic. The only way is to raise the price of drugs, when consumption will fall off of itself. 204. Evidence of PANDIT DEBI PARSHAD, Brahman Saraswat, Zamindar, Rai Bareli. 1. I have derived my knowledge from personal intercourse with persons who consume the drug. A cousin of mine is addicted to their U6e. 2. I know only of the following kinds of hemp drugs:276 26. For bhang277 injured their health and other reasons. It is not difficult to break the habit. Question 32.278 19. Ganja and charas are smoked in a chillum (bowl) and in no other way. 20. Generally assemblies of Naga and fakirs and jogis and bairagis, etc., smoke them, and kahars, beldars, hajam, dairis, and the lower castes. Among fakirs 95 per cent., and of others 80 per cent. may smoke the drug. Fakirs generally do so in places of pilgrimage, such as A judhia, Mut- tra, Hurdwar, Rishikesh, etc., and others in Muradabad, Bareilly, Bijnor, Rehar, etc. 22. Foreign charas is generally used, and it comes from the direction of Afghanistan. 23. Bhang is not smoked. 24. Generally fakirs, and among Brahmins the Choubeys eat and drink bhang ; but certain men of all classes use it. They are most numerous at Benares, Hardwar, Jwalepur, and Kenhal, etc. 25. The use of charas is increasing, the rea- sou being that liquor has become dearer ; this, a rapid and strong intoxicant, is cheap ; also the intoxication is rapidly arrived at, and so suits the lower classes. 27. The Choubes of Muttra use bhang exces- sively because it gives an appetite, and they get the best food gratis as alms ; so far that they are sometimes offered money to eat more. As to | charas, the most habitual consumers are Nagas and bairagis, as they suffer less from hunger and cold from using it. 28. The average allowance which a habitual moderate consumer of charas would take is 6 mashas per diem, value 6 pies. An excessive con- sumer would take three tolas per diem, value about 4 annas. An habitual moderate consumer of bhang would take about a pice weight, value with pepper 2 pies; an excessive consumer would take half chittack of bhang, value 6 pies with black pepper. 29. Charas is only as a rule mixed with tobacco. With bhang black pepper is usually mixed to prevent wind. With "shanhia bhang" milk and white sugar, and in the hot weather rose leaves, kahu, sonf, kasni, white cardamoms, almonds, melon seeds, which are known as "thandai" in the bazar are mixed. The object is, as regards charas, to prevent too rapid consumption and re- duce the intoxicating effects. The mixture with bhang makes it more pleasant and keeps off dry- ness ; the black pepper prevents wind. Dhatura is not used. 80. Charas is generally smoked in company. Bhang is usually consumed in solitude and by males ; but there is no custom as to ages. Child- ren do not generally use it. 31. The habit of using bhang is easily formed, that of using charas slowly. It is not difficult to break off the habit, but it is distasteful. There is no doubt a tendency with both drugs for the habit to develop into excess. 32. There is no religious custom in which the use of these drugs is imperative ; but commonly Hindus use bhang and its other preparations, such as majun, in the Holi festival. As the festival occurs only once a year the use of it then does not lead to habitual use, nor is there any great harm done. 33. The use of charas is wholly condemned, and only the low and stupid and short-sighted use it. There is no caste or religious opinion regarding it. Bhang is not thought badly of if used in modera- tion ; but the excessive use gives a man a bad name. The reason is that intoxication makes a human being no longer human. There is no cus- tom of worshipping the plant. 34. There would be no such deprivation to any class as would interfere with life or health. Un- doubtedly, to have to give it up suddenly, would be a deprivation, and cause distress. This would be the case not with any class in particular but with all consumers. 35. It seems somewhat unsuitable to prohibit all at once with a stroke of the pen, as people who have long been habitual consumers would certainly seek to get the drug to which they are accustom- ed by illicit means. Further, they would suffer excessively. It would be better to check by de- grees, by raising the price and reducing the num- ber of shops. To suddenly prohibit would un- doubtedly cause severe discontent among consum- ers, even though it would not amount to a political danger. 36. No other intoxicant is taking the place of bhang and charas. 39. Charas is only smoked. 40. Bhang is used in Hindustani medicine, and also in cattle disease. 41. Moderate use of bhang has beneficial effects. (a) It assists digestion. (b) It does not alleviate fatigue. (c) It to a slight extent prevents malaria. (d) It is used for piles as a poultice. The above uses are not confined to any class, and refer only to moderate use. 42. The average use even of charas is injurious, for, from the beginning it causes cough and dries up the body, and in the end results in asthma. 43. Moderate consumers of charas are a nuisance to their neighbours, but not the consumers of bhang. The affluvium of charas smoke is offensive. 41. The habitual user of charas is at once intoxicated; the pangs of hunger are mitigated, and the brain heated. Its results remain for two hours more or less. After that, on account of the dryness, there is a desire for sweetmeats, cream, etc. There is a resultant thirst. The use of bhang moderately gives pleasure and induces appetite. After that there is no reaction, as in the case of other intoxicants. 45. The habitual moderate use of charas injure the body and soul and morals. The body becomes thin, the digestion is weakened, and the appetite impaired Cough and asthma follow. The moral senses are twisted ; advice is not listened to ; and the power of argument is destroyed and languor follows. Lust is not stimulated ; mode- rate use does not result in idiotcy. The habitual moderate use of bhang injures neither body nor mind. 46. The excessive use of charas in addition to cough, etc., causes a kind of idiotcy. The exces- sive use of bhang destroys the brain power. 47. The moderate use does not lead to a here- ditary habit; but children may partly inherit the results. 48. The excessive habitual use of bhang and charas makes the children small brained and in- clined to intoxicants. 49. Charas is not an aphrodisiac but the reverse. Bhang neither increases nor diminishes the desire. Prostitutes do not usually use either.
279 50. The excessive use of either destroys carnal lust. 51. No class of budmashes are particularly addicted to these drugs. 52. Nor does the excessive use assist budmashi. 53. An excessive use of charas or bhang is not an incentive to violent or other crime, unless the intention has been formed beforehand ; nor does it lead to homicidal frenzy. They undoubt- edly lead to want of foresight. 54. No. 55. Sometimes criminals induce their victims to smoke charas, as charas induces complete stupefaction. 56. The effects of bhang are much increased by mixing dhatura, and, if taken in excess, may cause loss of life. Generally criminals mingle sugar with bhang and make majum, in which they add dhatura, or make bhang sherbet, in which they mix dhatura and give it to their victims. In the same way dhatura is mixed with charas to facilitate the commission of an offence. 57. Charas is not eaten in these parts. 59. Duties on charas should be increased, and instead of having outshops, it would be sufficient to have a shop at the head-quarters. 62. See answer 59. 64. Charas should be heavily taxed as compar- ed with liquor ; for liquor does not do much harm and is of great benefit in many diseases both to men, horses, and cattle, whereas the use of charas should be checked in every way possible. 67. There are such shops. 1 would have all outshops closed, and allow no smoking on the premises. The shop in the sadar should be in the bazar, where purchasers would be seen. It would not be easy to collect smokers in private houses, which might stop the use. 68. The wishes of the neighbours are not con- sulted. They ought to be. If, however, smoking in the premises is forbidden, it would not matter. 205. Evidence of LAKSHMANDAS, Agarwala, Mahajan and Zamindar, Benares. 1. I have no personal experience about these drugs, and my answers to the following questions depend entirely upon enquiries from perpetual smokers and other persons who have practical knowledge of these drugs. 2. Bhang's definition, as given by Dr. Prain, is accurate. People in this province, that is, North- Western Provinces, even call bhang vijaya or buti. The definition given by Dr. Prain as regards charas also seems to be correct. There are two names for it280 32. The followers of god Siva and of the Hindu trinity use bhang in the worship of Siva. Ganja is very seldom used, and charas is never used, for the said purpose. Bhang is regarded in the wor- ship of Siva as essential. I am not aware that ganja is indispensable. I do not think the moder- ate use of these drugs is injurious, but, of course, it is by no means advisable to use them. 34. Certainly it would be a serious privation to consumers to forego the consumption of the drug they use, as their natural propensities will incline them to indulge in other stimulants, say, country liquor or whisky, rum or brandy, or beer. These articles are more expensive, and the privation will eventually lead them to utter penury or starvation. It is no use to deprive them of the use of these drugs, as long as English or country liquors are freely sold in the market. Besides, illicit con- sumption of these drugs will increase rapidly and affect moral habits of the people. My answer to this last question will be sufficient for question 35. 36. The rich and middle class people to imitate European fashion often indulge in liquors, and a great proportion of them are addicted now-a-days to this habit. And in proof of this I can only say that year after year some new liquor shops are opened. 207. Evidence of HANUMAN PRASAD, Agarwala, Zamindar, Chunar. 1. Information obtained from principal con- sumers and dealers. 2. I have nothing to add to the names already enumerated by Dr. Prain, viz., siddhi, bhang, and charas. They are known by the very names in this district. The definitions are exhaustive, and might be accepted. 3. In the Bahraich district. 4. Bhang, buti, bijia, and subzi. 18. These keep good till one year, after which the effects are partially lost. Damp and moist weather destroy its strength. They are wrapped in straw and kept on teapoy above the ground. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smoking purposes. Ganja is said to be used for medicinal purposes. 20. Ganja and charas are generally used by labouring classes, such as kahars, mushars, and pasis, etc., as well as by low caste Muhammadans in the Mirzapur district. Proportion cannot be ascertained. 21. Flat ganja is generally preferred. 22. Foreign charas imported from Yarkand is generally used. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking purposes. 24. Bhang is drunk by almost all Hindus generally in the hot season as a cooling draught. The proportion cannot be ascertained. 26. There are both habitual and occasional consumers, but their numbers cannot be known, 27. Labouring classes mainly contribute to the bulk of consumers. Poor labourers who live from hand to mouth generally indulge in this luxury, as it serves to give them impetus to enter upon their works with redoubled energy and spirits, as in the absence of which they would be quite undone, and would not be able to do full justice to their task. 28. (a) Moderate bhang consumers take three pies worth of bhang, whilst those of ganja and charas take one anna each. (b) Habitual excessive bhang consumers take bhang worth 4 annas each. Habitual excessive ganja smokers take ganja worth 6 annas each. Habitual excessive charas smokers take charas worth 6 annas each. 29. Bhang281 weakness, lassitude, etc. The absence of gratifica- tion is followed by longing and uneasiness. 55. Yes; dhatura is sometimes used with bhang to produce stupefaction. 57. I have never come in contact with any such case as regards drink or eating of these drugs, nor have heard of it. Both these drugs, so far as I know, are smoked generally. 58 and 59. The present system of Excise administration appears to have been working fairly well; hence I see no reason why it should be altered, nor have any suggestions to offer regarding its improvements. 63 and 64. No objection whatever. 68. Yes They are equal to the requirements of the localities. No change is needed. 69. Yes. Under existing rules local enquiries are ordered through tabsildars of parganas and people have thus an opportunity offered them to make any objections they wish to prefer. 208. Evidence of PRATAP SINGH, Zamindar, Dehra Dun. 1. General observation. 2. Buti or bhang, charas, and ganja. 8. I know only about Dehra, where it grows very abundantly and wild. 4. Bhang or buti which refers to the same plant. 5. A climate and condition like those of the Dun will suit most, judging from here; it grows here. The richer the soil, the more abundant the growth, 8. More or less dense. 7. There is no cultivation at all in Dehra Dun. 8 to 11. See answer to 7. 12. The little knowledge I have is limited to the district of Dehra Dun, where, as I have said above, the plant is not cultivated. 13. See answers 2, 7 and 12. 14. Bhang is prepared, but to no mentionable extent, by some Brahmins and sadhus here and there, particularly in the Eastern Dun. 15. Bhang is prepared from the wild growth, especially of the villages of Nawaila and Rishi Kesh, the bhang of which places is stronger than of other places for drinking purposes, in the following way:282 drug ; and complete stupefaction can be induced by the drug alone, especially in the shape of majum. 57. I don't know if ganja or charas is eaten or drunk. 58. I never studied the question. 62. The plant is not cultivated in this district, bat grows wild and abundantly. 63. 1 did not study the matter enough to reply to this question. 68. There are no such licensed houses or shops in this district. 209. Evidence of T. SHIB SINGH, Kshattrya, Zamindar, Bodhouli, Bareilly District. 1. I have often come across men who are habi- tuated to the use of bhang, charas, and ganja, and sometimes have visited their smoking assem- blies. 2. Besides the names given in the question, bhang is also known by the names of buti, bijia and kuralapati, and charas by the name of sulfa. The definitions in this number are generally accepted. 3. In the districts of Kherf, Pilibhit, Bareilly, Terai, Bijnor, Moradabad, Saharanpore, Ram- pur and Bharatpur States. 4. The well-known names are bhangs bijia, sabji, siddhi, buti, kamlapati. 5. Hemp grows abundantly in moist places. The presence of moisture in soil is essential to its gowth, and it is also found in low places on the banks of sandy rivers near the mountain. 6. Wild hemp is found to have thick growth, 7. Hemp is not cultivated in this province. 11. Yes. 14. Bhang and ganja are prepared at the places of its growth in such districts as Bijnor, Moradabad, Shahjehanpur, Bareilly, Pilibhit. 16. Bhang is not commonly prepared in bouses, but it is prepared from hemp at the place where it grows. 17. No particular caste prepares these things. 18. Bhaog and ganja can be kept good for one year, and charas for two years, They should be kept away from clamp, 19. Charas is smoked through tobacco-pipe or chillum, and in some places it is smoked through negali. 20. The use of ganja and charas is not confined to any particular class. Among all castes, with- out exception, ignorants generally and the edu- cated rarely use them, and the number of con- sumers would be 10 per cent. of the whole. The places where ganja and charas are smoked are villages, towns, and cities. 21. In this province flat ganja is regarded more agreeable and preferable283 34. The prohibition of the use of bhang, I think, will be troublesome to those who are given to its use, and more so in the case of fakirs than ordinary persons. It is usual that one undergoes a little trouble in leaving off any habit at first ; but afterwards no difficulty occurs, and it is often seen that when consumers of drugs, after committing crimes, are sent to the jail, where they can't have these things, they have to control themselves, and in the end they suffer no inconvenience, Had they had the idea of increasing trouble life would have been burdensome to them, but it is not the case. Therefore there is no actual trouble, but only an idea of trouble. After a few days they come round, 35. It is possible to prohibit the use of ganja and charas ; but the use of bhang not being so dangerous may be allowed. On being prohibited by law, charas and ganja cannot be consumed illicitly. The prohibition would not produce dis- content amounting to political danger if it be carried out in the following manner :284 57. Ganja and charas are smoked through a chillum, but are not eaten. The other way of smoking charas is this, that they dig a hole in the earth and put a large quantity of charas in it, and then gathering together they smoke by separate pipes simultaneously, and it is done in great assemblies. 58. Excise administration is good; hut the rules for sale are defective, and the supervision is not such as to suppress the illicit sale. 60. In this province ganja grows spontane- ously, and the inspection of a ganja tract is made according to the existing law. 61. Charts it not produced in this province. 62. Hemp plait is not cultivated in this pro- vince, hut it grows wild in some places, and is properly controlled. 63. There is no objection to the wholesale transaction, but the retail tale is not in accordance with the law. 64. No objection. 65. The present taxation is proper. 66. Existing practice is sound. 67. No objection. 68. There are many shops and houses of licensed dealers where they sell charas and ganja, and the purchasers smoke charas and ganja there as well. It is thought to be the cause of many evils. 69. Local opinion is not consulted. 210. Evidence of HADI, Zamindar, Jaunpur City. 2. Flat ganja is called baluchar ; round ganja is called pathar. There is another kind called pamri. I do not know its nature. 15 (a) (i) Ganja (flat) prepared as follows :285 rather high lands where rain water would not lodge for any length of time is necessary. 6. The produce of scattered wild hemp is the best. 7. No hemp (patsan) is cultivated in this district. 8. Since there is no hemp cultivation in this district no reply to this question is necessary. 9. I can give none as none is sown in this district. 10. No particulars can be given as there are no such cultivators either in this or the adjoining district. 11. As there is no patsan sown in this district, I have therefore no knowledge of the plantings from the seed of wild hemp. 12. Such is not the case in this district, and I have no information of any other district. All 1 know of the wild hemp is that where it grows. Some plants naturally produce ganja and others bhang. There is no one. that can make a male from a female plant. 13. Patsan is not cultivated in this district. Having no knowledge in its cultivation, I can give no particulars regarding other districts. 14. No. 15. I can give none. 16. Ganja, bhang and charas can be prepared from the wild plant : it is however owing to the law not prepared openly. 17. None in this district. 18. I can give no special reasons, but I think if kept free from damp it will not deteriorate for some time, will probably not lose its powers for 2 years. 19. In this district ganja and charas are used only for smoking. 20. The fakir (beggar) class generally and some of the menial population smoke ganja and charas. Can give no particulars as to proportion. 21. The flat ganja is preferred for smoking in this district. Can give no further particulars. 22. Not known. 23. Very sparingly by menials in all parts. Extent not known. 24. All classes more or less both eat and drink bhang. Can give no particulars as to proportion. 25. No apparent increase or decrease. 26. (a) Half. (b) One-fourth. (c) One-eighth. (d) One-eighth. 27. From all classes of fakirs. Idle habits, Keeping of health and its digestive powers lead to the practice. 28. (a) One anna. (b) four annas. 29. In ganja dry tobacco; in charas smoking tobacco, and in bhang sugar and pepper are mixed : these admixtures are all necessary. Sometimes in the way of a luxury some perfume is added. In bhang sonf, rose water, cardamom, kahu-kulfa, kakari seed, kasni, gulkhiro, etc., etc., and at times to increase the intoxicating powers dhatura seed is also mixed. 30. All three drugs used in company, and con- fined chiefly to the male sex, not confined to any time of life ; not consumed by children. 31. Yes in all three cases. 32. None. 33. Their use is considered bad and injurious No public opinion as regards to practice, social or religious. The moderate consumer generally becomes an excessive one and so is considered a drunkard and unable to attend to his duties in life. Hindus at times offer bhang to the god Mahadeo. 34. Would certainly be a privation. Can give no particulars. 35. (a) Not feasible to prohibit any. (b) Would be consumed illicitly. (d) to (f) The prohibition would be a cause of great discontentment among the consumers and would to a certain extent be a political danger, as in Muttra it is used by a large body. The prohi- bition would tend to have recourse to other drugs. 36. None up to date. 37. Both the same, but charas relished the more. 38. All ganjas are more or less intoxicating. The flat ganja the most. The other two create phlegm. 39. The preparations from the hemp plant are consumed as above described. As no other form of consumption prevails, I am unable to note reasons. 40. Bhang is prescribed by hakims (native doctors), and is used also in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. Moderate use of bhang only beneficial. (a) Digestive. (b) Yes. Confined to no particular class. All classes make both moderate habitual use and moderate occasional use of the drug for the above purpose. 42. My experience is that the moderate use of ganja and charas is injurious; it creates phlegm, and their consumers are reduced to skeletons. 43. They are not offensive to their neighbours. 44. Of these drugs ganja alone has an imme- diate effect, it is intoxicating, it does not allay hunger, nor does it create an appetite. Its effect lasts for about two hours, its after-effects are a cough and pains all over. The want of subse- quent gratification does produce longing and uneasiness. 45. (a) Ganja and charas do produce physical noxious effects. (b) It produces cough and phlegm. (c) It does not injure digestion nor does it cause loss of appetite. (d) It causes bronchitis and asthma. (e) No. (f) It does not deaden the intellect nor does it produce insanity. 46. The habitual excessive use of ganja pro- duces laziness, affects the intellect, and the phy- sique of the consumers decreases gradually. 47. The moderate use of ganja and bhang appears to be hereditary and does affect the chil- dren of the consumers. 48. The habitual excessive use will add mate- rially to the above-mentioned effects. 49. The moderate use of bhang is aphrodisiacal. I cannot say anything of its use by prostitutes. Being narcotic, its use is not injurious. Hemp does not produce impotence.
286 50. The excessive use of bhang affects the intellect; ganja and charas produce impotence and weaken the intellect. 51. I have no personal knowledge, but I do not think that moderate consumers are bad charac- ters ; it is not a drug that helps to form a bad char- acter. I cannot say anything about crime. 52. The excessive use of ganja will probably tend to produce a gang of bad characters. 53. These drugs are not known to increase serious crimes. I have no knowledge in which it has led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54. Only ganja is so used as a rule. 55. Criminals do induce persons to smoke ganja with an admixture of dhatura seed, and some- times without any mixture at all which also has the desired effect for a short time. 56. It stupefies one very soon when dhatura is mixed with ganja and charas, but I have no personal knowledge. 57. Ganja and charas are used only for smoking in this district. 58. The management of the Excise Depart- ment is good and leaves nothing to be desired. 59. No improvement necessary. 60. Ganja is not cultivated in this district. 61. Charas is not made in this district. 62. Hemp is nob cultivated in this district for bhang. 63. The quantity allowed by the retail sale of ganja and charas under section 3 of Act XXII of 1881 is 5 tolas, it should be increased to 10 tolas, and of bhang, instead of being 4 chittacks, should be increased to 2 seers, this will tend towards the convenience of distant villagers and this will, it is hoped, increase the trade. As bhang is given to cattle, it would also be advisable to raise the quantity allowed for wholesale purchasers. 64. No objection. 65. No changes needed. 66. Different rates of taxation will result in the price of the good ganja brought in from a distant quarter at considerable expense being raised and so cause great inconvenience to the consumers. 67. None. 68. The licensed shops in this district are in my opinion conveniently situated. 69. The wishes of the people are consulted. The distance between shops should be considered ; they are located where the poorer classes are nu- merous. Public opinion should be taken. 70. This district borders on the Nepal terri- tory. I cannot state that smuggling from Nepal is not carried on, the duty of these drugs is much higher in British territory compared with that of Nepal; such being the case, the Nepal duty is paid and the drug smuggled into British terri- tory. I can name no offender in this particular. 212. Evidence of PIRTHAPAT SINGH, Thakur, Talukdar, Tahsil Haidergarh, District Bara Banki. 1. Got information from reliable sources. 2. The very name noted in the question. 3. I am not acquainted with the condition of the whole district. I did neither go, nor had occasion to go round the district. Of course I am aware of the condition of my neighbouring villages. I do not live in the tahsil or pargana. In this par- gana ganja and bhang are neither cultivated nor do they grow spontaneously ; somewhere or other people plant one or two trees of ganja and bhang in their houses, but they are not good. 4. The names of baluchar, pattar, ganja and bhang are known, and there are different names according to different applications, but all of them grow from one and the same seed. 5. As hemp plant is not cultivated, nor grows here, it is impossible to state the effect of climate. 6. The wild one does not grow here. 7. Does not grow here. 8. It is not cultivated here even : how to state increase or decrease in area. 23. Bhang is never smoked in chillum. 24. Bhang is used by the Hindus without ex- ception. 25. The consumption of bhang is at increase, because one or two races of Hindus, who live in large number here use it. 27. Rajput tribe is foremost in using it. 28. (a) One chittack pokhta. (b) Half a pow. 29. Pepper, sugar, and souf are mixed with bhang. Dhatura is not mixed with bhang, but with ganja, in order to increase intoxication. 30. No special method of using is limited ; can be used in solitude as well as in company, 31. Men can easily acquire the habit, and it is difficult to break off. The habit is gradually in- creasing and to the highest degree. 32. Its consumption is not due to religious usage, nor is it obligatory, but those who are ha- bitual consumers must, of necessity, use it. Its excess is injurious. 33. Its use is generally regarded with disrepute, because when overpowered with intoxication, men are apt to use harsh language and to do evil. The excess which is gained by daily habitual use is in- jurious physically. The hemp plaint is not worshipped by any caste. 34. Those who consume abundantly will suffer if they forego. No special class of community will suffer. 35. Prohibition is possible ; specially there will be no harm if bhang is stopped. Those who are habitual consumers will, notwithstanding the pro- hibition, use illicitly. There will be no cause for serious discontent. There will be no political danger. Use of any alcohol will not be the con- sequence. 36. In place of these no alcohol will ever be used by the Hindu gentries.
287 213. Evidence of THAKUR SURJ BAKHSH SINGH, Talukdar, Kamalpur, District Sitapur. 1. No regular opportunities, but information gathered now and then, since the appointment of the Indian Hemp Drugs Commission. 2. Yes; the names locally known are (a) bhang, siddhi, sabji, sabzi, and patti ; (b) ganja, chitakna ; and (c) charas. 3. Kheri, Bahraich, Gonda and Garhwal. 4. The name hemp plant (Hindi, patsan) is not commonly known. We generally call it bhang plant. In Nepal it is called jia. 6. Dense. 8. No. 11. They may. 12. Yes; perhaps it is, but in a very unappre- ciable degree as regards my province. 14. Ganja and bhang are prepared for consump- tion in the Kheri. Bahraich, Gonda and Garhwal districts to a small extent. This I gather from the fact that these districts are more or less hemp (plant) producing districts. They are also prepared in Gwalior and Khand- wa. 15. Bhang being ground in a stone pot with a wood pale is either eaten in a lump or drunk as a beverage. In the latter state a large quantity of water is mixed with it after grinding it, and some- times sugar is also added to it. Ganja being rolled on the hand-palm with the aid of the thumb for from 5 to 10 minutes is mixed with tobacco (dry or smoking or both) and then smoked. Charas mixed with tobacco (or ganja and tobac- co) is smoked. Dry leaves of bhang are roasted in ghee (clari- fied butter) and the leaves being thrown away, that ghee is mixed with sugar and left to condense. When the compound gets cool, it is cut into small bits and is taken in the form known as majun. There are no different modes of preparation of any of these narcotic drugs as distinguished from the cultivated and the wild plants. 16. Yes. 18. They do not lose their efficacy for one season. Dampness reduces their efficacy. 19. Yes; and they are not used in drinking or eating. 20. Ganja is used everywhere or nearly every- where, but is most used by fakirs (mendicants) perhaps because it allays hunger. Charas is generally consumed in large towns and mostly by persons of bad morals. Neither is used by the high caste people or by the gentry. 21. Flat ganja. 22. There are three kinds of charas known in my part of the country, viz., (1) Shaljaha, (2) Yarkandi and (3) Bokhari. They are produced in (1) Nepal, (2) Yarkand, and (3) Bokhara, respect- ively; the second and third are chiefly used. 23. No. 24. Bhang is restricted to no class, and is used by perhaps 12.5 per cent. of the Hindu population. Muhammadans, a limited number of them, also use it. 25. The use of bhang and ganja is not on the increase or decrease neither, but that of charas is, I suppose, on the increase. The reason is that it is generally prepared and sold (as retail dealing) by the fair sex in large towns. 28. Name of the drug288 nal properties. It is also used in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. Bhang used with moderation is food acces- sory or digestive. Ganja favours (b) and (c). As for part (d), I beg to say that bhang is occasion- ally and moderately used by the vulgar people in treating motions. 42. No ; because there can be no regular moder- ation in habitual addiction. 43. No. 47 and 48. No ; not hereditary. Of course the children may be degenerated. 51 and 52. Yes. Crime is not naturally known to the bhang and ganja consumers. But charas being mostly used by bad characters, the latter are apt to betake themselves to stealing, adultery, rape, etc. 53 and 54. No. 55. Yes; they sometimes give ganja mixed with poisonous ingredients, without which (latter) no complete and instantaneous stupefaction is, 1 suppose, possible. 58. The Excise Department, as intendel by the Government, is working well. But it can be re- formed in many ways. 62. No; and bhang being more of natural or wild growth than (if at all) of cultivation, it will be futile to attempt to control its preservation, if the Government does not abolish the sales alto- gether. 65. Taxation under head (a) seems reasonable, taxing charas and ganja more heavily than bhang. But with reference to (b), they should never be taxed to a point that people would prefer alcoholic or other intoxicants. My simple reason being that otherwise people would use alcohol, opium, etc., more freely, and the bad effects of these strong intoxicants are tenfold more than the hemp drugs. My idea is that attempt should be made to do away with stronger intoxicants, and then the minor ones (ganja, bhang, and charas) may be dealt with, 68. In large towns there are such places. It is right to close such houses. They generally serve as muster-places for a lot of young idlers and men of questionable characters. 69. Hardly ever the wishes of the people are consulted. The hop-keeper calculates his profit and loss in his own way and starts his work. It is advisable to consult local opinion before opening such shops. 214. Evidence of THAKUR BALBHADDAR SINGH, Talukdar of Mahewa, Gadhi Pershadpur, District Kheri. 1. In my villages, as well as in other villages of Kheri and Tahsil Nighasan, ganja and bhang grow wild abundantly. I have learnt the charac- teristics of the plants and their use through my personal experience, and also from their smokers. 2. The definitions given in question No. 2 are not applicable in this province. Ganja plants are different from bhang. The bhang tree is small, and its seed is so small that it is scarcely visible, and is only called after the name of bhang. In my opinion charas is not made in this province. The ganja plant grows wild, and it being glutin- ous, the leaves become closely adhered. Its seed is very large. The seed is not detached from the ganja until it is rubbed at the time of smoking. Every kind of ganja, bhang, and charas is sold and is called by these very names. 3. It grows wild in the districts of Kheri, Sita- pur, Bahraich, and Hardoi; especially in the dis- tricts of Kheri and Bahraich it grows in abun- dance. 4. Is known by the name of ganja and bhang. If no care be taken of ganja plant, it is called goorha; if it is taken care of, is called mahadeva. There is no other name for bhang. 5. The westerly wind is useful for hemp plant, so also taper land and absence of rainfall in the months of Kartik and Baisakh. It ripens in Kartik and Baisakh. The easterly and northerly wind is very injurious. The ganja grown in dry land is better than that grown in damp parts. 6. It is dense. 7. In my opinion there is no cultivation of hemp plant in this province. 16. People generally prepare bhang in their houses. It can be prepared wherever grown. Ganja and charas can also be prepared from the wild plants. 18. Ganja and bhang deteriorate by keeping. It is kept good with ordinary care for one year ; after this deteriorates on account of wet. There is no measure to prevent deterioration, except to keep in the sun and to save it from dampness. 19. Yes; ganja and charas are used only for smoking. 20. Bairagi, naga, jogi, joshi, kabirpanthi, jugjewandasi, munnadasi, gossain, and other mean classes like goria, kahar, chamar, pasi, kori, etc., smoke them in large proportion. Their estimated number in this province is 30,000. There is no such particular place, but nearly in every village there are different classes of people who smoke them. 21. The best kind of ganja is baluchar and is smoked. 22. Charas is not prepared here. It is im- ported from other places, like Bengal and Gwalior. 23. Bhang is not smoked. 24. All classes of Hindus, like Brahman, Chatri, Khatri, Buniah, Kaisth, Kurmi, etc., eat and drink. No special locality or number can be given. 25. Is used moderately in this province. 29. The ordinary ingredient for bhang is black pepper and is seldom mixed with melon seeds, sonf, kasni, black pepper, rose flower, melon flower, cucumber seeds, kahoo seeds, khurfa seeds, and being grounded is drunk with sugar. Dha- tura is used only among fakirs. By mixing in- gredients its effects are moderate, while dhatura mixture makes it more intoxicant, and the throat and tongue are dried. 30. It is equally used in solitude and in com- pany. Children and women do not use any of these drugs. 31. It is easy to get in habit of consuming these drugs, but it is difficult to break them off. By and by it develops into excess.
289 33. Of these things, the consumption of ganja and charas is generally regarded as worst. There is no public opinion (social or religious) in regard to the practice, but some offer them to Mahadeo. The consumption of ganja and charas generally leads to disrepute. The worship of hemp plant is not in vogue. 34. It would be difficult for the consumers to give up this habit. They do not like food for, three or four days. They will feel dullness and a little uneasiness. 35. It would be feasible to prohibit the use of any of these drugs, and would be consumed illicitly. The prohibition will occasion discontent among consumers, but it would be replaced by some other intoxicant. Such discontent would not amount to a political danger. 37. Charas is more injurious than ganja. Charas-smoking leads to burning of heart and is harmful for the life, while the effects of ganja are light and last for only a short time, and the effects of charas last for a long time, 40. Bhang is used in the treatment of cattle disease and to alleviate fatigue, and is specially given to cows, elephants and buffaloes. 41. The moderate use of charas, ganja or bhang is not beneficial in its effects, nor is used for bodi- ly good. 42. The consumption of ganja and charas is harmful. Appetite is affected. Bronchitis and asthma are caused. Matter comes out of eyes, which become red. Body becomes thin and weak. 43. Not offensive to neighbours, but the smell is offensive. 45 The consumption of ganja and bhang im- pairs the constitution in body and mind. Body becomes thin. It injures digestion. Appetite is affected. It causes dysentery, bronchitis and asthma. It causes dullness and a tendency to- wards dirtiness. It deadens intellect and leads to forgetfulness. It sometimes produces insanity, in habitual excessive use. 49. The use of any of these drugs is not aphro- disiac. Their effect is rather contrary. 51. Yes; it has no connection with crime in general or in special character. 55. Yes; complete stupefaction can be induced by this drag without admixture, if taken in large quantities. 56. By the admixture of dhatura life is in dan- ger sometimes. 69. No; no objections are raised. 215. Evidence of KUNWAR ARJAN SING, Muafidar, Singpur, Pargana Kamasni, Zilla Banda. 1. My answers are based on my local knowledge and my acquaintance with the persons dealing in drugs. 3. Hemp plants grow spontaneously in the Bahraich district in abundance. 4. Bhang, ganja, charas. The two latter named drugs refer to one and same plant. 7. There is no cultivation of the hemp plant in this district. 12. Yes; wild hemp is specially cultivated in the Pana, Chatterpur, Ajegarh, Charkhari and Rewan States for the production of ganja. 14. No. 16. Bhang is very seldom prepared by people in their houses; ganja can be prepared from the wild plant wherever grown. 17. All classes of Hindus, specially Muham- madan fakirs, kahars, chamars, kachis. 18. Yes; by lapse of time, say three years, and it becomes useless after six years. These drugs should be kept in boxes and kept in dry place, and these measures would prevent deterioration in my opini- on. 19. Ganja and charas are only used for smok- ing. 20. Thakurs, kahars, chamars, arkhs, sweepers, Hindu and Muhammadan fakirs, and kachis, smoke ganja and charas. I estimate 50 per cent. of these classes given to drugs in this dis- trict. 21. Baluchar (flat) is preferred for smoking, but it is used only by those who can afford to pay higher prices. The lower classes use patharia (chur). 22. Foreign charas is chiefly used, and it is imported from Kabul and Kandahar. 23. Certainly not to the best of my knowledge. 24. Brahmins, thakurs, bairagis and gossains generally drink bhang in this district, ten per cent. people drink bhang in Banda, Kamasni, Badoresa, Girwan, Baberu and Pailani Parganas, and 25 per cent. in Parganas Karwi and Mau. 25. There is no marked increase or decrease in the use of ganja, bhang and charas. 26. The proportion of consumers is290 34. The habitual consumers would suffer the most in case of giving up the consumption of drugs. The probable number might be estimated at fifty thousand in this district. 35. The prohibition of these drugs would not be feasible in my opinion. It would lead to illicit practices. The prohibition can only be enforced by reduc- ing the quantity consumed. The prohibition must create serious discontent among the consum- ers, but it will not amount to a political danger. The prohibition might lead people to use dhatura, sicigya, etc. 37 Charas and ganja have the same effects. The former is stronger than latter. 38. Balucher (flat) is stronger than morra (round), and morra is stronger than patharia (chur). 41. The consumers believe that the moderate use is beneficial and it creates digestive power, but I do not agree with them. Fifty per cent. of kahars, chamars use these drugs for purposes mentioned in the question. 43. The moderate consumers have never proved offensive to their neighbours to the best of my experience and knowledge. 41. The immediate effect of these drugs on the habitual consumers is that they get relieved of anxieties and fatigues caused by hard labour. 47 and 48. The habitual use of these drugs has never proved to be hereditary, and it does not affect children of the consumer. 50. The excessive use produces injurious effects rapidly. 51 and 52. No. The use of these drugs has no connection with the crimes in general. 53. No. I know no such case. 54. No. 55. No. Not to my knowledge. 56. The admixtures make tasteful and remove the defects. Dhatura is mixed for personal use only in cases the consumer cannot afford to purchase sufficient quantity owing to poverty. Criminals only mix dhatura for administration to others for purposes of depredation, etc. 57. Ganja and charas are not eaten or drunk to my knowledge. 58. I think the present excise administration is popular. My opinion is that illicit import of drugs in this district from Native States cannot be stopped, and any arrangements that can be made to check illicit practices would be a great improvement. 64. No complaint has ever been heard of. 68. My views are in favour of houses and shops licensed for the sale of drugs. I had no oppor- tunity of hearing any complaint in this district with regard to location of such shops. 69. The wishes of people are very seldom con- suited, and in my opinion it would be simply drawing attention of the people to raise unueces- sary objections by calling on public for their opinion with regard to the location of excise shops. 70. Kahars, kalals generally visit the Native States on business, and they import illicit drugs in small quantities for their personal use free of tax. 216. Evidence of KAZI KARIM-UD-DIN, Cultivator, Mandha, District Hamirpur. 1. I, live in Mandha where there is a shop, and have frequent opportunities of meeting the con- sumers. 3. Know of none. 7. In the tahsil in which I live there is no cul- tivation of the hemp, except for fibre and seeds, which is general everywhere. 14. None. 18. Ganja and bhang deteriorate by damp in the rains, but with ordinary care can keep good for five years. I know nothing about charas. 19. I know nothing about charas. The answers in this paper refer to ganja. Ganja is used only for smoking. 20. Chamars, khewats, kahars, kumhars, basers, jogis, fakirs, and Thakurs smoke ganja. 200 people altogether in Maudha town and 700 people in the tahsil. 21. Only "chur" in this tahsil. 23. Not in this district. 24. Thakurs and Brahmins eat balls of bhang, and other castes grind it up with water and drink it. In this pargana there are 100 who eat it, and 400 who drink it. 25. Use of ganja about the same. 26. In this pargana291 42. The moderate use of ganja is hurtful, producing cough, etc. 43. No; they consume it at home (ganja and bhang). 44. Ganja at once induces intoxication lasting about an hour. Bhang produces intoxication after half an hour, lasting 3 hours about. It induces appetite. 45. (a) Ganja292 42. They are always baneful. Because they produce various ailments, such as decline, asthma, bronchitis. 43. They are offensive. 45. (a) Yes; physical, mental and moral. (b) Yes. (e) Charas and ganja. (d) Asthma and bronchitis. (e) Yes. (f) It produces temporary insanity. 47 and 48. No. 49. They are used to promote lust. They do not produce impotency. 51. About 75 per cent. of the bad characters are consumers of drugs. 53. It does. 55. They are. It can. 58. I consider they are working well and have no suggestion to make. 220. Evidence of MR. HERBERT FINCH, Landholder and Indigo Planter, Meona, Shahjahanpur. 1. Have been in this country since 1865. For the past thirteen years have been proprietor of twenty-six villages and employing over 3,000 cul- tivators whose lives and occupations I am acquainted with, and have a general knowledge of the people of these provinces and their habits. 2. Bhang, ganja and charas. 3. It grows wild in this district, but I have not seen it in abundance. 6. Usually scattered. 7. It is not cultivated in my vicinity, 14. No. There is one licensed shop in Khuda- ganj, and the average monthly sale is about ten seers charas, two and a half seers bhang. 16. Yes; the leaves of the wild plant are crushed up and mixed with water, then strained ; ganja and charas are not prepared locally. 22. It is believed to come from Kandahar and Bokhara. 25. No. No perceptible difference. 27. There seems to be no particular class that is addicted to the use of the drugs. 28. (a) Half annas's worth. (b) Two annas worth per diem. 33. The use of these drugs is not looked upon favourably, but at the same time the moderate use of any of them does not prejudice the user so long as it is not taken in excess. 34. It would be to the habitual users of these drugs a serious privation to stop using them, for the simple reason that the habit of using stimulant is very difficult to get rid of. 35. I don't think it would be possible to stop the use of these drugs considering that the plant grows wild in many places. The prohibition would cause decided enmity against the Government and would be resented when opportunity occurred. Any in- terference with social customs by the Government is looked upon as quite unwarrantable. 41. Charas is used to prevent the effects of exposure to malaria and damp, as in the case of men who cultivate singaras (water nuts), and who work for hours immersed in dirty water. Without the use of these drugs they say they could not do the work, and from my experience I think they are correct. 42. I consider the moderate use of these drugs harmless and in many cases, such as (41), beneficial. During my experience I have had only one case where the user was incapacitated by the use. 43. Yes ; I have never seen or heard of the con- trary being the rule. 44. Ganja and charas have a soothing effect and promote sleep ; also relieve the effects of over-exer- tion ; often used as a digestive. 58. I consider the present excise rules sufficient. 68. No. The foregoing answers are given from my experi- ence with the agricultural people who dwell in my villages and roundabout. I have no experience of city life. 221. Evidence of SAYED AHMED HUSSEN, Sarbarahkar, Court of Wards, Khairigarh, Singahi, District Kheri 1. I am Sarbarakhar of Khairigarh Court of Wards estate for about 4 years, where ganja and bhang grow wild in abundance. In the transaction of my ordinary business I have learnt the character- istics of the plants and their use through my per- sonal experience, and also from those who have a thorough knowledge of the plants. The plants of both ganja and bhang are alike. The only difference is that ganja plant has seeds, its leaves are thin, while bhang bears flower only and its leaves are thicker. There are buds on every joint of ganja and the plants after being cut are dried up and can be done in one sunny day. After this, the leaves and seeds are separated, thrown away, and the buds are taken out, at least 5 or 6 buds are mixed in a chillumful of tobacco (which, if wet, is dried in fire), and when it is well mixed, it is made up into pieces and placed in a pipe, and having put some fire on, it is used. Bhang plants after being cut are spread out in the sun and the dried leaves picked out. Some boil the leaves and cast some copper pice while boiling to make it more strong and use it; others wash the leaves and dry them in the sun and then use them. Charas is made by rubbing the ganja plants by the hands.' As it is glutinous, its juice sticks in the hands which is taken off by means of tobacco; this dirt is kept and used in proportion of a small shell in the following manner:293 different classes of people is as follows:294 222. Evidence of MUHAMMAD AMIR, Manager, Court of Wards, Sahanpore, Bijnor District. 1. What I have observed in the different districts in which I have been. 3. In Lakhimpur (Oudh), Pilibhit, Bijnor (N.-W. Provinces.) 4. Bhang is also known as buti. B. Bhang is generally produced in the Tarai and hills, especially in damp lands. 6. Generally dense. 7. Not in these provinces. 14. Bhang is produced in the districts mentioned above. 15. Charas and ganja are not produced here; bhang is dried and its leaves kept. 16. As far as I know, people do not prepare it themselves. The lessee does so. 17. It is peculiar to no caste. 18. Charas is less intoxicating after a year when it has passed through a rainy season. After two rainy seasons it is quite spoilt. Bhang is spoilt by damp. If kept from damp it keeps good for three or four years. 19. Both ganja and charas are smoked from a chillum (bowl). In this district charas is used, not ganja. In the east ganja is chiefly used. 20. Hindu fakirs generally and Mussalman ceme- tery keepers (takiadar fakirs) use charas, and kahars and boatmen and those who cultivate singharas use it. Bhang is generally used by Brahmans. Hindu and Musalman fakirs also use it. Perhaps 70 per cent. of Brahmans and fakirs use bhang. Bashnovs and bannias also. 22. Yarkand charas is used. It is not produced here. 23. I do not think any one smokes bhang. 24. People use bhang usually mixed in water. Few eat it. Bashnovs, bannias, fakirs and Brah- mans chiefly use it. 25. The consumption of bhang and charas is average. I do not think it is increasing ; in fact, charas is somewhat less used, as educated people think ill of it. 26. (a) Habitual moderate consumers, 60 per cent. (b) Habitual excessive consumers, 10 per cent. (c) Occasional moderate consumers, 20 per cent. (d) Occasional excessive consumers, 10 per cent. 27. If the elders of the family smoke, the habit may be formed, or from association with those who have the habit, particularly the latter. 28. An average consumption of bhang is 2 tolas; and excessive consumption, 5 tolas. I do not know about charas, as it is generally smoked in company, several people using one chil- lum which may contain about a masha. 29. Charas is only mixed with tobacco. Bhang is usually mixed with pepper; some mix it with milk and fruit; the object being to keep off dryness. Dhatura is not usually mixed with it. 30. Charas is commonly smoked in company; bhang both in company and in solitude; men usu- ally smoke them; sometimes women. Children do not usually consume these drugs unless in eases when corrupted by evil society. 31. Habit is easily formed, and it is not difficult to break off as in the case of opium; but all habits are difficult to break off. 32. Though it is not fully proved to be connected with religion to drink bhang, yet fakirs drink it. No one uses ganja or charas in religious rites. 33. They are not regarded with favour as a rule; but among Hindus, bannias and bashnovs consider it good, as they say Mahadev drank bhang. I do not know whether the plant is worshipped or not. 34. Habitual consumers would undoubtedly find it a deprivation; for any one feels it a deprivation to give up the stimulant he is accustomed to. I cannot estimate numbers. 35. Only by an Act. A legal prohibition would undoubtedly cause discontent; but it would not amount to a political danger, for the consumers are scattered. Prohibition would have one very bad effect, viz., that all the consumers would probably have recourse to liquor; the intoxication they can get for 1 anna would cost them one rupee, which would be a great loss to the subject. Generally educated people deem the use of drugs evil, but the use of liquor is spread- ing both among Hindus and Mussalmans. 40. The use of charas is not prescribed in medi- cine, but bhang in used in many diseases. A lotion of it is useful for (?) gumboils and piles. It is also given to horses to bring them into condition. 41. (a) At first bhang is a digestive and prevent tive of constipation. In the end it weakens the intestines. (b) Charas and bhang alleviate fatigue to those who are accustomed to it. (c) Bhang or charas do not ward off fever, nor is it used for that purpose. (d) It is of use for swellings and piles, and at first gives pleasure, but in the end causes injury. Usually the cultivators of water nuts (sing- haras), mullahs and kahars use bhang to keep off chills. 42. The use of charas leads to weakening of the brain; and injures the lungs and gives asthma and cough, and weakens the body and the senses. Bhang is in the beginning pleasant, and aids virile power and digestion; but when the virile powers are weakened by age, causes diseases, weakens the intestines, and chills the blood, and makes the chap yellow; and induces impotence and produces foolish fancies, and even results in idiotcy. 43. Excessive use of bhang or charas may de- stroy life. 44. Charas intoxicates at once and lasts for about two hours Bhang intoxicates slowly and the effects remain long. Its intoxication is not pleasant, and lasts for some six hours. 45. The use is injurious both to body and morals. 51. I do not think the consumption of these drugs leads to any particular crime, but it ruins the moral perceptions. 53. I do not think so; for being smoked in com- pany, if there be any crime committed it is on account of a conspiracy, not of the drug. 55. I do not think criminals induce their victims to take these drugs, nor would the drugs stupefy sufficiently without admixture.
295 56. Dhatura is not mixed with bhang unless for the commission of the offence. Frequently dhatura is administered in bhang in order to commit an offence. People who practise this take dhatura in bhang to accustom themselves to it. 57. I do not think any one eats charas. 58. The present arrangements are, I think, suit- able. 60. Ganja is neither produced nor used here. 61. Charas is not produced here. 62. Bhang grows spontaneously, and is not culti- vated. The existing control is excellent, I know personally that cultivators in whose villages bhang grows themselves buy it from the farmer. 223. Evidence of SOTI HARBANSA LAL, Brahmin, Zamindar and Municipal Commis- sioner, Bijnor. 1. I myself have never used ganja or charas, but have used bhang on some occasions. My answers are based on my knowledge of various persons who are accustomed to take these drugs and on my ob- servation of their habits and mode of life. I have also derived my knowledge from the persons who have been long using these drugs themselves. 2. These definitions may be accepted for our province. Charas is also called here by the name of sulpha. Ganja is rarely used in this district. Bhang is also known as buti, bijia and sabzi. 3. In this district wild hemp is generally found growing in damp places, and it generally grows in gardens in rainy season. In the jungles of the Nagina and Najibabad tahsils, it is found growing in abundance. 7. As far as I know, hemp is not cultivated in Bijnor district. 18. Yes ; they do deteriorate by keeping. Yes ; generally after three years they quite lose their effi- cacy. For two years it keeps good with ordinary care; exposure to moist air and cold deteriorate them. If exposed to sunshine occasionally and guarded against the exposure to moist air, deterioration can be prevented. 19. In this part of the united Provinces ganja and charas are used only for smoking. 20. Nagas and other Hindu sadhus smoke ganja and charas in excess. 22. Charas used here is of two kinds : one is called " Yarkand," and the other "Garda" or " Bokhara." They are brought here from Umballa. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking. 24. The Chaube Brahmins of Mathura generally eat and drink bhang. The consumers are greatly found in Mathura, Hardwar, Benares, Allahabad and other places of Hindu pilgrimage. 25. The use of bhang is on the decrease; while that of charas is on the increase. Bhang is on the decrease; liquor is on the in- crease. This drug, viz., liquor, is not confined to cities, but has found its way even to villages remote from the Sadar, and can be easily obtained any- where. They prefer liquor, because in its case they have to take no trouble to prepare the drink; they have only to pay for it at the liquor shop and can take it there and then; while in the case of bhang, as generally used, they have to adopt the lengthy pro- cess of pounding and filtering. And those people who either on religious grounds or for fear of society do not take wine, have recourse to charas and ganja which produce the desired intoxicating effect imme- diately on the very first puff. 27. In the case of bhang.296 give up the habit as in case of charas and ganja. Yes, I in case of all these drugs, the habit has a tendency to develop into the excessive. 32. (a) On occasions of Holi and Shivaratri bhang mixed with milk and sugar is drunk, and is also offered to the god Shiva or Mahadevji. This mixture is known as dudhiya. Bhang mixed with sugar is made into cake6 known as majum or majun. In Holi festivals it is a custom for persons to offer majun to their friends who go to see them. (b) The use of bhang is not essential, religiously or socially. There are lots of people who never use bhang on such occasions, and whose omission to use it is not considered a violation of any religious or social law or custom. The use of bhang on such occasions is generally moderate, and is not likely to form a habit or to be otherwise injurious. 33. (a) Generally the consumption of bhang is not regarded to be as bad as that of ganja and charas. In the eyes of the Hindu public bhang possesses many good qualities, and with most of its consumers its intoxicating effect is only a second- ary object, the chief object being to aid the diges- tion and increase the appetite. A Sanskrit name is given to it which shows how the Hindu public think of it. The name is " udar manjani," i.e., stomach-clearer. Muhammadans regard the use of bhang as religously prohibited. (b) It can be said that there is such a public opin- ion. The Hindus think that the use of any of these drugs is neither socially nor religiously very essential. The use of ganja and charas is generally in disrepute. The reason is that their consumers are mostly men of low position in society, such men from whom society derives no good. On the other hand, they take to gambling and thieving when they are in want of money for smoking purposes. (c) Hemp plant is not worshipped in this part of the country. 34. To the Nagas and other sadhus it would indeed be a serious privation to give up ganja and charas. The reason is that from habitual use they have become so much addicted to it that it has be- come a sort of diet to them, and helps them in bearing the inclemencies of the weather. The habi- tual excessive consumers of bhang will also feel a privation by giving it up. They have been using it for so long a time and have become so much used to it that they can pass a day or two without food, but not without the drink. 35. (a) It is neither feasible nor advisable to absolutely prohibit the use of any of the drugs. (b) In case of absolute prohibition the drugs will be consumed illicitly. (d) and (e) The prohibition would undoubtedly occasion serious discontent among the consumers, and it is likely that the Nagas, bairagis and simi- lar classes of consumers, whose number is legion, and who are notoriously fearless of death or of evil consequences of disturbances, will get poisoned to- wards the Government, and they may in time seek an opportunity of causing serious political disturban- ces in this country. (f) The prohibition would, moreover, lead to greater consumption of wine and opium. 36. Yes ; there is reason for thinking that alco- hol is being used to a certain extent for bhang. The causes of change, I think, are, 1stly, that education advances, ideas become refined, and the people are giving up coarser things and adopting those more refined. It is this general progress of things that make men, at least those for whom use of liquor is no religious prohibition, change their drink and adopt the drink of the civilised world; 2ndly, it is becoming easier and easier every day to obtain the liquor even in the villages ; 3rdly, that the liquor does not entail those preliminary precesses which must be undergone before bhang is ready for drink. The proof is found in the increas- ing sale of liquor and also in the fact that many men are found drinking liquor who depended upon bhang as their only stimulant. 39. Smoking is more injurious than drinking or eating. The reason is that smoking brings about an immediate intoxication, and seriously and directly affects the brain and the lungs. 40. In the Ayur-Vedic system of treatment bhang is regarded to possess many medicinal quali- ties. Bhang is largely used in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. (a) Moderate use of bhang is beneficial as a food accessory. (b) Ganja and charas smokers say that they give them staying-power under severe exertions and exposure, and alleviate fatigue. (c) In unhealthy tracts, use of bhang is benefi- cial. In malarious places ganja and charas are known to keep off fever. (d) Bhang is beneficial for piles. Hindus, even of high caste, use bhang for purposes mentioned in (a). 43. Generally moderate consumers of charas and ganja are not offensive, but they are troublesome to the neighbourhood where they have got smoking dens where they meet to smoke. 44. All are refreshing; ganja and charas produce slight immediate intoxication on habitual moderate consumers ; ganja and charas both give a sort of temporary satisfaction, and thus as it were allays hunger for the time being. Their immediate effect is not to produce appetite ; the effect of ganja and charas lasts for about three hours. After-effects are297 of their father in the case of habitual moderate consumers. 48. In case of excessive use, the consumer's children may inherit physical, mental and moral defects and weakness of their ancestor. 49. They are not used as aphrodisiac; neither prostitutes use them for the purpose. 50. The excessive use is not also practised as an aphrodisiac ; but it tends to produce impotence. 51. Most of the bad characters are habitual con- sumers of charas. The smokers of charas are generally of scanty means ; of necessity they take to gambling and thieving which soon grows into a habit. 54. Yes ; thieves and dacoits and highway robbers do use charas and ganja for the purpose. 55. (a) Bad characters, who go in disguise as travellers and fakirs, induce their victims to partake of ganja or charas for the purpose of robbing them. (b) Complete stupefaction may be caused by charas or ganja without any admixture to those who are not accustomed to it; but those who are accustomed, they can be stupefied by the admixture of dhatura. 56. Dhatura is mixed when speedy and excessive intoxication is required. 59. In question No. 35 it is asked if the prohi- bition of any of the drugs is feasible, by which I understand that absolute prohibition is meant. Such a prohibition is neither practicable nor advis- able. But the vice is increasing, and checked it must be in the best possible way. In my opinion the best way to check its increase and to effect a decrease in the consumption would be to adopt the following methods:298 other places, such as Shahabad in the Hardoi district in Oudh, which is known by the name of: "zarda." 3. This district of Bareilly does not produce hemp for the sake of ganja, charas and bhang. 4. Bhang besides the names in this question, bears the names of buti, bijia and zarda. 14. As far as I know, the hemp plant is not cultivated in the Bareilly district for the sake of ganja, charas, and bhang. 15. Ganja and charas are generally smoked like tobacco in chillum, but bhang is consumed in different ways, viz., some eat and drink it after powdering and dissolving it in water, while others take dry leaves mixed with sugar ; but it is general- ly consumed by powdering and dissolving it in water. 18. Dampness of the rainy season often spoils all these three drugs, and their effect is somewhat lessened after a year's time unless they are pre- served from dampness. 19. Ganja and charas are generally smoked in chillum mixed with tobacco, and sometimes are smoked without the aid of tobacco by a pipe applied to a pit dug in the earth. 20. Ganja and charas are generally consumed by most of the Hindu devotees as well as by other illiterate and uncivilized persons of both cities and villages. 23. Bhang has never been heard of being smoked in the chillum. 24. Bhang is extensively used by Hindu devotees, Brahmins, and other Hindus of different sects, but Muhammadans rarely use it. 25. All these three drugs are abundantly con- sumed in these days, as early marriage has under- mined the constitution of the people, and hence they use stimulants. 27. Hindu devotees use ganja and charas abund- dantly for the sake of self-restraint. Chaube Brahmins of Muthra are much accustomed to use bhang for the sake of taking their food in an usually large quantity, and to give relish to it. 29. The spices used with bhang are black pepper, sonf, kasni, melon seed, kahu seeds, khearan seeds, and almond, milk and sugar, which are used in special cases. Sometimes dhatura seeds are also mixed with bhang, ganja, and charas for the sake of augmenting their intoxicating effect. 30. All these three drugs are commonly used in assembly and seldom in seclusion, and are con- fined to the male sex only. 31. The habit of using these drugs is caught from bad company, and by and by becomes exces- sive, when it is difficult to break it off. 32. It is customary among the Chaube Brah- mins of Muthra to use bhang in order to promote their appetite, because the pilgrims who go there search for such Chaubes as eat a large quantity. 33. The use of ganja and charas is commonly thought of bad, but the Hindus are in favour of both bhang and ganja as well as charas, for in ganja and charas they find means of subduing their passions, while they use bhang for the con- centration of mind. But in my opinion the use of every intoxicating thing is bad and causes infamy ; because when a man is under the influence of any sort of intoxication he loses his senses, is apt to hazard his own life and property as well as others, and consequently is reduced to great poverty through extravagance. At the same time he becomes unfit for work or labour, and falls a victim to such diseases as lead to an untimely end. Such a man is at times also offensive to others. 34. The Hindu devotees will be put to great in- convenience if the consumption of these drugs is prohibited; they will become idle, and will be disturbed in their religious contemplation. The Chaubes of Muthra and other Brahmins in Oudh who are addicted to their use will also suffer in such a case. 35. The use of ganja and charas should be strictly prohibited, exemption being made in case of Hindu devotees alone. 37. Charas widely differs from ganja299 225. Evidence of ABDUL RASHID KHAN, Secretary, Municipal Board, Koil, Aligarh. 1. From my own knowledge and experience; also practised medicines, and so did rather, brother, and grandfather. 2. Bhang is not cultivated in Aligarh, but it is naturally grown in gardens during the rains. Charas is imported by Kabulis as well as ganja from up-country. 3. I have stated that it is spontaneously grown in some of the gardens in Aligarh and also in some parts of the Shahjehanpore district. 4. Both ganja and charas are obtained from hemp plant. It is stated that in the up-country* hemp plant is grown, and when dews fall over the plants ashes obtained from burning dried branches of the different trees are sprinkled or thrown over the plants, whereby dew sticks itself in the leaves of the plants and the Kabulis pass through the plants wearing leather garments in the morning and the said sticked dews is transferred or restrict- ed in the said garments, and that when they come out of the field, the sticked stuff is scratched from the garments in question and collected for consump- tion or exportation. Any stocked quantity of the stuff saved in the leaves is scratched therefrom and after that the leaves themselves are taken off and used as third class charas. Thus there are 3 classes of the charas in question. As regards ganja it is the leaves of the flowers of the hemp plant. In the Aligarh district the population name the said materials as bhang, ganja and charas. 5. In the culturable area of land during the rains. 6. Dense. 7. (a) No. (b) No. (c) No. (d) No. It is grown itself. It is used as medicine. Dur- ing the rains it is grown in small quantity in the corners of the garden and it is dense. 14. No. 19. Ganja and charas are used in smoking. 20. It is smoked generally by the Hindu fakirs as well as by the persons resorting to their huts located specially in the baghs or gardens in the neighbourhood of the town of Aligarh. The persons resorting are generally of low caste of Hindus. 21. The persons presently smoking the said stuffs are not aware of the classes. They smoke as they obtain from shops opened in the bazars. 22. Foreign charas is used which is imported from up-country. 23. No. 24. In Aligarh about 20 per cent. of the ban- nias, Brahmans, Kayasths, and other low castes of people such as kahars and kolis, etc., drink bhang. 25. It is on increase. 29. In Aligarh the habitual drunkards consume or drink bhang with black pepper, and there are few who mix zira or cummin seed and sonf or aniseed, because the pepper, the sonf and zira purges the costiveness of the stomach and intes- tines resulting from the consumption of bhang. As bhang is diuretic it is used for running or gonorrhea disease. Its ingredients are tea, sonf or aniseed, sandal (white), and cinnamon or darchini. These ingredients are boiled with water and after straining the water bhang is infused in it and after passing a night it is strained and mixing syrup of bazuri or refrigerated seed in it, it is used or drunk by persons for above diseases. Bhang is also applied to swelling of testicles. It is ground with a little opium, cotton seed, red earth and vinegar. It is also used with leaf of castor tree to the said swelling. It is also burnt and its smoke is applied to the swelling and pain resulted by the pile disease in the private part of the body. 30. As far as I know I have seen these stuffs are generally used in company. It is used by male sex generally. 31. Persons resorting to the drunkards' assembly are generally in habit of using these drugs. There are very few persons who join the assembly and do not use the drugs in question. 32. According to the Muhammadan religion bhang use is strictly prohibited, and it is an order that if a drop thereof happened to fall over any part of the body that part be scratched or cut with a sharp knife. With regard to the use of bhang among Hindus it is commonly allowed. During the festivals of Holi and Dewali, it is commonly used by all castes among Hindus in the shape of sweetmeat which is made by halwais or sweetmeat- sellers and sold generally in the markets. Its use in this way does not seem injurious anyhow. 33. Hindus following or worshipping their sacred Mahadeo are strictly obliged to drink the bhang, because it is said that it is expressed somewhere in their sacred religious books that their acred Mahadeoji when he betrothed Parbatiji had taken a cup of the drug, that is, bhang. 35. The prohibition would of course put to some inconvenience to the habitual consumers till they learn to replace it with some other kind of drug, such as opium. The prohibition can be enforced without any political danger. The prohibition should not be made at once, but it should be arranged to issue orders to the sellers to raise high price rates of the drugs and to sell to pur- chasers less quantity and not as much as he would like to buy. Thus from time to time orders be issued to that effect whereby consumers will be restrained to pay and will undoubtedly leave their habits. In my opinion the best way to save the popula- tion from the dangers resulted by use of bhang, charas, ganja and opium would be to prohibit or stop the selling of the said drugs altogether from India. A list of the habitual consumers of the drugs in question be ordered to be prepared at each locality in the inhabited areas and kept up with the leading well-to-do inhabitants or zamindars and in the Government dispensaries as well as with the native doctors, the hakims and the influential officers or officials in the Governmment employ. Medicines, that remove effects of the drugs and prevent dangers of diseases resulting from leaving the habits of consuming the drugs in question, be prepared and kept with the said influential bodies with directions to distribute it to the consumers *Village Awazni in Peshawar. vol. v. 2T 2
300 who leave the habit of taking the drugs when they are subjected to some dangerous diseases resulting from leaving consumption of the drugs in question. The diseases that result from leaving the consump- tion of the drugs are apparently :301 42.The moderate use of any of the said drugs is in no way harmful to well-to-do consumers who can consume the ghi and milk after using the drugs and specially of charas and ganja. 43.Yes. 44.The immediate effect resulting from smok- ing charas and ganja is that eyes become red and convulsed, the brain demented and the heart also and the stomach contracts and thus the person-is intoxicated. As regards bhang I have stated its effects in answer No. 41. 45 and 46. See answer No. 41. 47.As far as I know, it is a hereditary habit; and as regards children of well-to-do persons it does not arffect, because they are in habit of consuming ghi and milk, etc., which mitigates the fervour of the drugs from the internal organs. 51.I do not know of any crimes to have been committed by consumers of the drugs in question. 56.I have already expressed in the above men- tioned answers on the moderate and excess con- sumption of the said drugs. As regards dhatura, the habitual excess consumers mix it in drinking the bhang for strong intoxication. 57.Charas and ganja are not eaten or drunk as far as I know. Oral evidence. Question 32.302 a pice. If the sale is restricted in such a way as to be beyond the reach of the labouring classes, its use may diminish. 61.Not produced here. 62.Not grown in Agra. 63.Fide remarks against question No. 58. 68.There are no such shops in Agra. 69.Public opinion is not consulted. It should be. 70.As Agra is surrounded by three Native States, there is great facility and probability of these drugs being smuggled into Agra. 227.Evidence of SYED MUHAMMAD NUH, Zamindar and Member of District Board, Machlishahr, Jaunpur. 1.Personal knowledge, and also special in- quiries. 2.In this district baluchar (flat ganja) and pathar (round) are consumed. 3.Shahabad, Bengal; Amritsar, Punjab; Bah- raich, Gonda, Sitapur, Kheri, Oudh; Gorakhpur, Basti, North-Western Provinces. 4.The plants are known as303 228. Evidence of MUNSHI BORAM KISHOR, Kayasth, Zamindar, and Member of the District Board, Machlishahr, Jaunpur. (1) Medical books. (2) Information from con- sumers. (3) Personal knowledge. 2.Definitions may be accepted. 3.Gorakhpur, Basti, Fyzabad, Bahraich. 4.Ganja304 people who are given to indulgence in these dele- terious drugs. But in any case it is most difficult for Government officials, who are suspected with some ulterior object, to draw out a full and a frank information on such a question. A desire to please the hakim or the fear of loss to themselves will bo a serious hindrance to get at the truth. This, I think, should be borne in mind by the Commission in drawing up the result of their enquiry. III.305 traffic through which thousands of its own subjects are ruined. This is a serious charge, but it is as true as it is regretable, and it applies to opium and liquor as well as to hemp drugs. Let the Government wash its guilty hands clean of the traffic as far as its own dealings with it are concerned. Let it sanction no official cultivation or contracts for disposing of the dangerous drugs; let it do all it can by a high and prohibitive tariff on all importations of such drugs from Native States; and let it impose a heavy duty on every biga of land on which the hemp drug grows, or, best of all306 there on the banks of the Gumti; but these banks 1 do not produce a supply which may meet demand at the time of emergency. 4.In Lucknow bhang goes under the names of "siddi," "sabji," and "bijya," and, as far as I know, it goes under the same names in the whole province. 5.The plant grows in abundance in damp tracts. 6.The plants of bhang and ganja are generally dense, but there are exceptions also. 7.In the translation the word patsan is used, but the patsan is used either in making ropes, or in jute mills it is used in making mattings and sacks. The bhang plant is also fibrous; but they don't sow its seeds like those of other plants: it is a wild plant, i.e., it grows spontaneously. As far as en- quiries could show, it has been established that the plant is not cultivated. 8.As the system of cultivation of the plant does not prevail here, there can be no mention of the plant occupying a large or small area. 9.As above. 10.In our province there is no class of cultivators of this drug. 11 to 13. It is not cultivated. 14.These plants grow spontaneously in damp tracts. In the wild tracts, where the bhang plant grows, it is reaped and left to dry. When it is dry its leaflets are taken off. In the same way the ganja leaflets, together with a few slonder branches of the plant, are dried and placed in small bundles. In our province charas is imported from somewhere else. 15.When our enquiries do not show that these plants are cultivated, we will restrict our statements to their wild growth. 16.Dry leaflets of bhang are imported from places where it grows in abundance. People make a mixture of the plant in their houses for use. It is also offered for sale as a drink by Brahmans and Saqaus. Ganja and charas are imported from places where they grow. 17.Ganja and charas are prepared by the people inhabiting the parts where they grow. There is no particular class who makes these preparations. 18.The bhang leaflets do not lose their efficacy for three years, provided they are kept safe from moisture. Likewise ganja and charas last for two years. After this period they lose both their flavour and pungency. The licensed vendors of these drugs do generally make it a point to keep them free from moisture. 19.The practice here is for people to smoke ganja and charas in a chillum. Some people, however, mix a little smoking tobacco with it. 20.Ganja and charas are chiefly used by the lower classes, labourers, fakirs, vagabonds, those classes of hard workers who have to expose them- selves to the heat of the sun and to the dews of night, and people who dwell in the hills and cold countries. Of the two drugs ganja is the more largely used. The use of charas is comparatively small, as it is a costly drug. Higher classes of community only use these drugs either under strong compulsion resulting from certain diseases, or under circum- stances, such as associating with people given to the use of such drugs. But higher classes of people arc generally ashamed of indulging openly in the use of these drugs. 21.The two kinds of ganja largely used in these provinces are gol (round) and baluchar. 22.Our province does not produce charas. We import it here in Oudh from Nepal. It has also been discovered that the traders of Yarkand also deal in this drug. It is imported from Ladakh and Bokhara riá Kashimir. One kind called bhari is largely purchased from the markets of Amritsar, etc., in the Punjab. 23.People never smoke bhang in the chillum. 24.Fakirs, jogis, labourers, poets, bards, and Chaubes of Muthra and Brindaban use bhang as a drink. In these parts, i.e., here in Oudh, the number of such persons will be something about 20 per cent. 25.In the province of Oudh charas is used only on a very small scale. The use, however, of ganja has now considerably increased owing to Govern- ment closing the chandu-khanas. Bhang is used on a moderate scale. 26.No definite number of persons using these drugs can be fixed. 27.Contained in No. 20. 28.By Government permission a single pur- chaser can buy five tolas each of ganja and charas and four chittacks of bhang. The largest quantity that one, habituated to use these drugs, can use in a day is ten tolas of bhang, two tolas of ganja, and one tola of charas. In ordinary circumstances these drugs are used in half the above quantities. 29.The articles usually mixed with the bhang are:307 if any attempt be made at compulsory prohibition of their use without substituting some other drug in their place, these persons will be subjected to serious hardships, especially in the case of those who use them as medicine against any malady. And in the case of persons using bhang as stimulant to hunger, the prohibition of its use will be keenly felt. Likewise in the case of labourers given to the use of ganja and charas, the prohibition of the use of these drugs will embitter their (labourer's) whole lives. 35.In case the use of these drugs is compulsori- ly prohibited, it will interfere with the pleasure of many people, and may perhaps cause discontent308 through my workmen, of whom there are about 1,000 attending less regularly than they used to do, and the enquiries I have had to make in conse- quence.I cannot recall accurately what used to happen before, but the matter has come under my notice more directly since the complaint regarding the closing of chandu shops, of which there were many in the city of Lucknow. I am sometimes told that men are absent because they have gone to their friends' houses to smoke ganja as the chandu shops were closed. I do not mean to say that the attendance of my hands has become less regular since the closing of the chandu shops, but that the explanation that absentees had gone to smoke ganja with their friends is now more often made. The impression left in my mind is that a good many people have taken to ganja-smoking since the clos- ing of the chandu shops. It is true that they can still smoke chandu in their houses, but ganja is found to be cheaper because chandu smoked at home would be expensive. Question 35.309 cult to give the exact proportion of those who use it. Some use it because they feel cold; others because it is an aphrodisiac; others because they want to kill thought; and so on. It is used habi- tually by bad characters and wandering fakirs. 22.Native charas is used mostly, though a kind of charas called Yarkand, so named because im- ported from Yarkand in Central Asia, is also used; but this not often. 23.Bhang is, as above stated, very rarely used, and so not smoked even when used. 25.An answer, supported by statistics, cannot be given, though I dare say that the use of these intoxicants, here as elsewhere, is on the increase; for of late years there is a remarkable tendency to use intoxicants, and in my opinion these three are not excepted. 26.The exact proportion cannot be given. The larger proportion of the consumers are habitual moderate consumers; and again occasional excessive consumers are more to be found than occasional moderate consumers. 28.(a) Habitual moderate consumers would use charas twice or thrice per diem, and so spend one pice or two pice at the utmost; but (b) habitual ex- cessive consumers would use charas worth two annas or more. Fakirs, etc., may use charas worth even more than that310 (c)Charas is also a febrifuge. In Terai-Bhahar, which has a very unhealthy climate, it is often used to prevent the attacks of malaria. (d)In cold it is used to keep the body warm, and in heat to keep the digestive organs in proper order. In severe colics, it (charas) is often used, and is known to do good. The drug as a medicine may be used by all classes; but as I here allude to those that use it moderately and occasionally, I cannot give any proportion of the smokers. 42.Except for medicinal purposes, I regard even the moderate use of these drugs to be harmful. In the first place an habitual consumer is a slave to them, and though he be at first moderate, it is certain (at least it is probable) that he becomes an excessive consumer. 43.Moderate consumers do not give any kind of offence to their neighbours. (I refer to charas). 44.On the moderate but habitual consumer the effects of charas are not very marked. Yet, as it is the fulfilling of a craving, the use of charas is to him refreshing. He is not intoxicated. They say it creates an appetite. The effect lasts generally an hour or two. The want of subsequent gratifi- cation does create a longing, a craving, an uneasi- ness. 45.If the moderate use of charas does not lead to excessive consumption, it leads, if prolonged to many years, to effects that are harmful. It impairs the constitution. The sunken eye, the sallow check, and the stunted growth distinguish the habitual user of charas. It causes emaciation, and develops a tendency for asthma. In the long run it causes loss of appetite and injures the diges- tion, for the excrements of such users always are hard and show imperfect digestion. I know that it causes bronchitis and asthma, and it may cause dysentery also. There is no doubt that it dulls the moral sense, and induces habits of laziness and immorality. It deadens the intellect, and may lead to insanity. It rather brings about idiotcy than direct lunacy. The insane or idiot may recover his mind if he gives up the use of charas; but the pristine power is gone, and gone beyond recall. I know, and have stated above, that men use charas to kill thought and find a temporary alleviation of anxiety in its use. But the habitual use of charas leads to idiotey and want of self-control and weakened intellect. 46.The habitual excessive use of these drugs is sure to bring about the deplorable results that follow, even from the moderate use, in a more marked degree and after a very short period of use. Excessive habitual use ends in insanity more strong than idiotcy, and develops a strong tendency for asthma. 47."Like father like son" is one answer to this question. I believe in the law of heredity, and hold that the son of a moderate habitual consumer has a tendency to use these drugs. The children of a moderate consumer, besides having some ante-natal tendency, also may learn to smoke charas, etc., by seeing their fathers or superiors indulging in the use of the drug. 48.He who uses these drugs excessively is sure to have his children come into this world with the stamp of the father's sin or vice. The habitual excessive user's children are generally puny weak- lings, and have ricketty constitutions. There may be exceptions to this rule. 49.Charas is, to my certain knowledge, used as an aphrodisiac. Inhaling large quantities of charas smoke enables voluptuaries to have long dalliance with women. It is used sometimes, not often, by prostitutes. The use of the drug for this purpose is more injurious, for the nerves are abnormally excited, and the reaction is dangerous. 51.(a) There is no doubt that a large proportion of bad characters are habitual moderate consumers of these drugs. Eight or ten per cent. of the popu- lation of cities may be charas smokers, though it would be difficult to get even one in a thousand in the villages. (b) In my opinion the moderate use of charas has no particular connection with crime in general. Charas smoking does not lead the smoker directly to any sort of crime, though it is possible he may indulge in untimely but innocent pranks. 52.The excessive use of the drug does nothing more but exemplify the above conclusions about moderate users in a stronger light. 53.Excessive indulgence may incite to crime, not violent in its nature, such as abusing others, breaking a window glass pane, tearing clothes, or doing some small mischief to the person or pro- perty of others or their own. We have not yet heard of any case in which charas smoking has led to temporary homicidal frenzy. 54.In my opinion criminals do not fortify them- selves for any premeditated act of violence or other crime by using these drugs, and as criminals311 vinces where they (i.e., each of them) are cultivated and consumed. Let us here examine the use of bhang (i.e., the seeds, fibres, etc., of the bhang plant) in Kumaon. Not only ganja is made of bhang, but it is made to serve many purposes here. Thus the bhang seeds are often pressed in a mill, and thus a kind of oil is got out of them, which oil is used for ghi by any people here. It is as useful as ghi itself. Thus, again, bhang seeds are pounded and mixed in water and used in cooking vegetables. This mixture, when boiled with herbs, gives them very good flavour, at the same time making them tonic in their quality, for they, when boiled with the said mixture, serve to keep and preserve the vital heat of the system. Again the fibres of the bhang plant are used for making bags (boras), which are very useful. Thus, again, people in some parts of Garhwal use these fibres in making a kind of coarse cloth, which is used for clothing and raiment. Thus the bhang seeds and fibres are used by the poorer people (as well as the rich) in many useful ways. If bhang cultivation be forbidden for the purpose of putting a stop to the use of charas and ganja, then, though it is quite possible that 10 per cent. of the smokers will give up the use of those intoxi- cants, yet is is certain that many useful things, as those abovementioned, will also be lost. Also it is a matter of consideration that those useful and innocent purposes that bhang serves cannot be served and replaced by other productions. In view of these facts, I believe that people in these parts will be more glad if ganja cultivation is allowed as at present than if it were forbidden. I would refer the members of the Commission to the Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal for 1839, where it has been shown that Indian hemp or ganja is a useful drug. The arguments in favour of bhang contained in the said Journal do not emanate from the brains of the few gentlemen who conducted these investigations at Calcutta, but were based on the testimony of eminent authorities, who knew its effects on the peoples of Africa, South America, Turkey, Asia Minor, Malaya and Burma, in which countries it J is largely used. In the pages of the said Journal is also recorded the testimony of some Europeans on the medicinal uses of bhang (though it is not culti- vated and used in European countries). In my opinion, therefore, the prohibition of the use of spirituous liquors, opium and other intoxicants is prudent and necessary, inasmuch as the use of these stimulants leads to the loss of reason and wealth, but to prohibit the cultivation of bhang simply because it may be abused by some is neither prudent nor necessary, because bhang is necessary in many manufactures, and many men, particularly the poorer classes, in these parts at least, derive their means of livelihood from the cultivation of this drug. Therefore, though we are ready to accept the decision of the Commission on this point either for or against this cultivation, yet we feel that the suppression of it is not altogether justifiable. 63. There are in these provinces shops for the sale and preparation of these drugs, where they may be consumed on the premises. In my opinion these shops are just as good as other shops. They are no kind of public nuisance as long as the present system of sale continues. 69. I do not know how far the wishes of the people of the locality are consulted. As long as the present system of retail vend continues, a charas shop does not mean a public nuisance. However, it will be by no means undesirable if local public opinion be considered before a shop is opened. 233. Evidence of MR. RICHARD WALL, Barrister-at-Law, Indian Civil Service (retired), Allahabad. 1.I was Commissioner of Excise, North-West- ern Provinces and Oudh, for about 11 years (April 1880 to October 1891). 2.Clause 3.312 contrary, some Bokhara and Yarkhand charas is imported into Kumaon from the plains. 23. I think not. 25. The use of charas was said to be on the in- crease throughout the North-Western Provinces and Oudh some 12 years ago. (See paragraph 5 of my report No. 696, dated 24th March 1881, page 3, Hemp Correspondence. No special reason, that. I know of, any more than there is for cigar-smoking by natives, which has increased much more perceptibly of late. Increased facilities for travelling, etc., probably lie at the bot- tom of this, and other innovations. The increase was ascribed in 1881 to the increase in the rate of duty in baluchar ganja; but since then a high rate of duty (Rs. 8 per seer) has been imposed on charas by the Government of Lower Bengal. So that the inequality no longer exists. 30. (c) I think not as regards ganja or charas. 31. (a) and (b) Not more so than in the case of tobacco-smoking. (c) Not more so than in the case of tobacco- smoking. 32. Bhang was used, it is said, at certain reli- gious ceremonies in the temples of Muttra, and there are some very ancient stone-carvings there, repre- senting the distribution of bhang, etc., at these cere- monies. 34. I think it would. 35. (a) No. Of none. (b) Yes. (c) It could not. (d) Yes. (e) Possibly. (f) Possibly. 36. I think not. See paragraph 39 of my Ex- cise Report No. 307 E.313 court-yards (Aghuns), but I do not believe there is an area amounting to one acre of ganja, cultivated in a single plot, in any district of the plains, in the North-Western Provinces and Oudh. 61. So far as I am aware, the only parts* of the North-Western Provinces and Oudh, where charas is, or can be produced, are Kumaon and Garhwal. I think a maundage duty should be imposed on charas in order to increase its cost, and thereby reduce and limit its consumption. 62. I think not; and I doubt if it would be feasible. 63. Yes (as regards charas and ganja); if a maundage duty were imposed, and if these drugs were warehoused, like country spirits, Govern- ment would be better able to increase their price, and thereby restrict their consumption, than is practicable under the present system of farming the license fees; and the effect would be to increase the revenue from hemp drugs, to obtain a more detailed knowledge of the drug trade, and to render the realization of the drug revenue steadier, easier, and more certain than is practicable under the present system. (See my answers to Nos. 58 and 61.) 64. Yes; the existing regulations governing the transport within the North-Western Provinces and Oudh might be, and would be, improved if a maund- age duty were imposed on ganja and charas. Until recently, there was no sufficient restriction, no check, no permit, nor pass shewing quantities, in force with regard to transport within the North- Western Provinces and Oudh; but of late, I under- stand that the opium-pass system has been extend- ed to the case of hemp drugs. 65. (a) in the North-Western Provinces and Oudh the revenue from hemp drugs is obtained by means of license-fees for vend of all, or any, of the the three drugs in question. (b) Yes. See my answers to questions Nos. 58, 59, 61, 63, 64 and 66. 66. The rates of taxation should, I think, vary with the value of the article, as in the case of Bengal ganja. It would be inexpedient to tax pathar ganja at the same rate as baluchar. The bulk of the tax should be realized at central depots and not at the frontier; otherwise, it will unnecessarily hamper the trade. 67. See my answers to questions Nos. 58, 59, 61, 63, 64 and 66. 68. There was nothing to hinder purchasers from smoking on the premises, in my time (1880 to 1891), though I am not aware that the privilege of local consumption was used to any extent. I see no harm in allowing consumption on the premises; what occurs in licensed shops can be better super- vised than what occurs in private dwelling-houses. 69. The proposed sites for all excise shops are proclaimed before the excise settlements are made; and if any objection is made, it is considered before the shop in question is licensed. I do not remember a single instance of an objection being made to the position of a shop for sale of hemp drugs. 70. Importation, or smuggling, of hemp drugs would only indirectly affect the Government revenue from drugs in the North-Western Pro- vinces and Oudh; it would injure the drug-farmer directly. The drug monopoly is farmed for a lump license fee, which is tantamount to a duty on hemp. There is no general use of untaxed drugs; the monopolist farmer, in his own interests, takes care to prevent any such loss, so far as the North- Western Provinces and Oudh Government is concerned. In addition to the advantages which a maundage duty on ganja and charas would confer on the drug revenue of the North-Western Pro- vinces and Oudh, a maundage314 to any effect on the eyes. The Chaubes of Muttra use bhang. This may be seen any day; and there are bas-reliefs showing this use at particular festivals from earliest times. I have never heard there or anywhere else of bhang leading to ex- cesses, acts of violence and the like. I do not say that the excessive use of bhang may not lead to injury to health. Tea itself does in excess. But I have no experience of the ordinary infusion of the leaf, known among us as bhang, injuring the health. I think that charas is the most potent form of hemp. Even as used (in smaller quantity) it is more potent than ganja. I never heard of the moderate use of either ganja or charas doing any harm to the health. I think I have heard of "Kaf" or phlegm being ascribed to smoking these drugs. I have not heard asthma or bronchitis attributed to them. I should say that the moderate use would relief such diseases. I do not believe that the moderate use would have any effect on the brain. I should say certainly not in a healthy man. I believe that the moderate use would cheer a man, and give him a fillip, if he were down. I do not know of any difference in effects from the different kinds of ganja. The baluchar is better and dearer than the ganja of the south. But I see no difference in effects any more than in different brands of tobacco. The moderate dose to one man is not always moderate to another. I think that the proportion of excessive con- sumers is small as compared with the moderate consumers315 All that Government has to do is to see that it rea- lises all the duty it should from drugs. No fur- ther interference is sound. I do not think that there is any other matter on which I should like to be specially heard. But I shall put my views on record in answer to the series of questions and submit them as soon as possible; and I shall enter anything I may have omitted. 234. Evidence of MUNSHI RAJKISHORE, Kayasth, Pleader, Jaunpur. 1. I am a pleader and Municipal Commissioner, and therefore I have had the opportunity of obtain- ing the information from men addicted to different sorts of hemp drugs in regard to which my answers are framed. 2. Three sorts of hemp drugs are known in this district, viz., ganja, baluchar, pathar and biarra; the first two are kept under a piece of stone before they are used. Bhang or sabzi is drunk by those who do not generally use liquor. 3. In Jaunpur ganja is not sown, but it grows spontaneously, though not abundantly. 5. Only rainfall is required, and not a good soil. 6. There is not any fixed rule; just as the seed falls dense or scattered. 7. In Jaunpur it is nowhere sown. 8. There is no area under cultivation; therefore there could be neither increase nor decrease. 10. There is no cultivation of hemp drugs here. 12. Yes; it is specially cultivated in the districts of Dinapur, Patna, and Nasik. Baluchar in the above places, pathar is cultivated in Nagpur and Bombay, and biarra in Nepal. 13. Yes; it is restricted, because license is given to thikadars. No; it is nowhere impossible. 14. No. 16. No; it is generally purchased. Yes; it can be prepared from hemp, wherever it is grown. 18. Yes; by keeping they deteriorate, and after one year they are reduced in quality and lose their effect. It keeps good for one year only. Dryness is the cause of deterioration. 19. Yes; they are used for smoking only. 20. Charas is smoked in the city only and not in villages. 23. Bhang is ever used for drinking only. 24. Hindus generally drink bhang, and ganja is used by Hindus and low class Muhammadans. 25. The use of bhang is on the increase because wine is becoming dearer and dearer. 27. Habitual moderate consumers are Hindus generally. 29. Tobacco is generally mixed with ganja. Badam and cardamom are sold for the use of bhang. 30. No; it is not usual for children to consume any of these drugs. 31. Yes; there is a tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. (a) Among the Hindus there is a holiday named Holi. On this occasion Hindus generally drink bhang, eat majun made of bhang (it is a sort of sweetmeat), and smoke ganja. (b) Both the above drugs are consumed more than usual on this occasion. On Holi day Hindus eat, drink and be merry. Yes; the use of drugs is regarded as essential in India. (c) It is excessive. (d) No; it is not likely to lead to the formation of a habit, nor injurious. 33. The consumption of these drugs is generally not regarded in a bad sense on the day alluded to above. There is a Hindu public opinion (religious) in regard to the practice, for on Serrad day bhang is offered to Mahadeo with many other things. In Jaunpur district there is no custom of worshipping the hemp plant on any occasion, except that bhang is offered to Mahadeo on Sheoratri day. 34. No; it would not be a serious privation to any class to forego the consumption of the drug they use. 35. Yes; it would bo feasible to prohibit the use of all these drugs. No; it would not be consumed illicitly. The prohibition could be very easily en- forced by a legislative enactment. No; the prohi- bition would not occasion a serious discontent among the consumers. No; certainly not. The discontent (if any) would not amount to a political danger. I think other drugs would follow the prohibition and not alcoholic stimulant. 36. There is no reason for thinking that alcohol is substituted for any of these drugs. There is no proof of its reality. 40. Ganja is sometimes used by those patients who suffer from rheumatism, and bhang is given to cattle only with intent to improve appetite. 43. No; they are not inoffensive. 51. Yes; thieves are habitual consumers, and the use of these drugs is often the motive of thefts. 52. Necessity has no law. The more want for money for these drugs, the more thefts to defray its expenses. 56. Dhatura is often mixed with bhang and ganja and thus given to victims for the purpose of committing crimes upon them. 66. Yes; in my opinion there should be different rates of taxation for different kinds of ganja, on the principle of quality of the article. 69. No; the wishes of the people are not con- sulted before a shop is opened in any locality. No measure whatever is taken for this purpose. O yes, local public opinion ought to be thus considered. vol. v. 2 X 2
316 235. Evidence of SHEIKH HIFAZAT HOSAIN, Zamindar and Pleader, Kanauj (Farukhabad). 1. I have read medical books, have personal knowledge and have made enquiries from persons who use the drugs. 2. These definitions may be accepted for this province. Ganja, bhang and charas are known by these names. Siddhi and patti are not known in this part. 3. Bhang grows spontaneously in Kheri, Bahraich, Gorakhpur, Basti, Bareilly and Saharan- pur. 4. Bhang is also called buti and sabzi. 5. Bhang grows in Terai lands, i.e., in sandy soil by the river side. No irrigation necessary. 6. Don't know. 7. Hemp plant is grown317 appetite. Ganja, charas and bhang cause dysen- tery, bronchitis and asthma. The drugs produce laziness, but not habits of immorality or debau- chery. Insanity is also produced by these drugs. 46. See answer to question No. 49. 47. It is not a hereditary habit. Children do not consume ganja or charas. They however con- sume bhang. 48. See anwer to question 49. 49. No. The moderate use is not practised as an aphrodisiac. It produces impotence. Some pro- stitutes use the drags. The moderate use of these drugs leads to excessive use. 50. See answer 49. 51. Cannot tell what proportion of bad charac- ters are habitual consumers. No connection with crime in general or with crime of any special character. 52. The moderate or excessive use of these drugs has no connection with crime. 53. The excessive indulgence does not incite to unpremeditated crime. Insanity produced by the excessive use of the drugs may lead to crime. 54. No. 55. Am not aware. 56. Dhatura is mixed with ganja and charas, in order to increase their power of intoxication. 57. See answers to questions 19, 37 and 39. 236. Evidence of GAURISANKAR SINGH, Chhatriya, Pleader, Azamgarh. 1. I have used the drugs ganja and charas for over a year from December 1873, and finding their effects most injurious to both body and mind, I determined to give them up. The circumstances which led me to the habit were curious and need not be set forth here, but I should say that I felt much difficulty and inconvenience in giving up the habit, which took me one full year, and not without having recourse to using bhang continuously in the beginning and occasionally towards the end of the said year. I have since then attentively watched the progress of administration and its effects on the consumers. 2. Yes. The bhang is also called buti and bijaya. 19. Yes, they are used only for smoking. 20. Hindus and Musalmans both smoke ganja and charas, and in all localities. Among the Hindus, sadhus, a class recruited by all the four caste-men, smoke almost wholly. Brahmans do not, excepting a few, who are therefore considered as immoral. I am not able to determine the pro- portion of smoking people among Kshatriyas, Vaisyas, and Sudras and Musalmans, but I think the ratio of such ganja smoking people now is 10 to 5 of them twenty years before. 21. The flat ganja, or baluchar, is preferred to the other two kinds, and the round to the chur. No; different kinds are used in different localities, at least in this province. 22. As charas is not a native of this province, foreign charas is used here. I have seen two sorts of charas318 recruited by the best educated, well read, and ex- perienced men whose lectures were the charm to gather people to enable the latter to do what was good for the country. Now the same recruitment of the now sadhu class has best been stated by the common couplet:319 these points, but for want of time I give an account of only two persons, Iswari Singh and Gokul Singh, both of Mehnajpur, Pargana Deogaon, and my relatives. The former, my class-fellow while at school, was employed in the Railway, Oudh and Rohilkhand Railway, at Lucknow. The ganja made him half mad and issueless, and at last, about a month ago, he has been imprisoned for two years. The record of his case will show of his madness, and all I have stated on the points of this question are inferences from his conduct and the course of his life. The other, Gokul Singh, was a constable in the police somewhere in the west. When addicted to ganja smoking, the first appearance of madness was that he became quiet and negligent and was dismiss- ed. His father, very badly off, brought him home. For one year he was at home like an inoffensive madman. He talked to none, did nothing, and took no food except parched grain (charban) some- times. People wondered how he lived. As he got no ganja for the poverty of his father, he was re- stored to his senses at the end of the year. He then began to roam among his relatives, and lived with me also. It seems he got at some places ganja again to smoke, and as a consequence he again was reduced to the same habit. I took special care of him this time, and he is now well enough to work, but very idle. 46. A major portion of the inmates of the luna- tic asylums, and of the mad and half-mad men out- side them, must surely be the products of the exces- sive use of ganja and charas, which including that of bhang, is sure to effect asthma, cough, debau- chery, nervous irritability, and sleeplessness, if not insanity, rendering the consumers thin, weak, lazy, and incapable of doing anything wordly well and in all fever epidemics they are first to be attacked and the soonest to succumb. 47. No, it does not appear to be a hereditary habit, but to some extent that of ganja and charas affects the children in making them of low vitality. 48. It is not hereditary, but that of ganja and charas is sure to make the issue weakly and falling easy victims to infantile diseases. 49. Yes, that of ganja and charas is so practised by inconsiderate men and prostitute women, which soon makes them imbecile. The use for this purpose is much more injurious, because the drugs do not possess quality to create manly power, but to ex- haust soon what it is in one, and hence the use of hemp drugs tends to produce impotency. 50. The excessive use of ganja and charas, if ever practised as an aphrodisiac at all, will be so practised, but for a very short time, because it will by itself produce imbecility, impotence or insanity. 53. Yes. No, I do not know of any such case. 54 and 55. Yes. 56. Such effects are not modified at all by the admixture of substances usually mixed. The object of the usual mixture is simply to make the smoking of ganja and charas more tenable, and the use of bhang drink or eatable. I have only once seen a sadhu eat dhatura seeds with bhang. Mischief- making people sometimes administer it to others without their knowledge. Dhatura makes the drug very strong, producing excessive headache. 57. I have never seen them eaten or drunk, nor heard it. 63. I would abolish the whole system and repeat here what I have stated in reply to question No. 35. 69. No. The wholesale contractor appoints a man of his own and deputes him to open a shop any- where he likes. It ought to be considered. Oral evidence. Question 1.320 census statistics. The sadhus live on charity. The increase in their number does not indicate a general increase of wealth in those who support them. The society of sadhus is frequented for the purpose of ganja smoking, and every visitor gives alms of some sort. In this way they are able to get their smoking cheaper than from the shop, where they have to pay money for it. Religious sentiment also enters into the alms-giving. The people get no benefit from the sadhus but the hemp drugs. People do receive things purporting to be charas and medicine from the sadhus, which implies that the sadhus have certain influence or powers. By "want of education,'' I mean that education is not suffi- ciently advanced to check the habit. The feeling of the educated people is against the influence of the sadhus. This should reduce the number of sa- dhus since education is advancing. Question 30.321 5. Wild hemp is found in wetty climate, rich or well manured soil, up to the height of 6,000 feet above the sea level. 6. Dense. 7. None, so far as I know, except in some part of Jaunsar, Bewar and Tehri Garhwal. 10. The hemp is said to be cultivated in the hills (Jaunsar, Bewar and Devalgarh side) generally by people who are considered low; they do not specially belong to any particular caste or class, as they be- long to Rajputs down to Doomras. 12. I do not know any such place or district where the wild hemp is specially cultivated for the production of ganja; nor do I think any such practice is in existence, though if it was, it would be necessary to extirpate male plants. 13. I do not think the plant is cultivated in our province. If it was, perhaps Dehra Dun would be the best place for it. 14. No. 16. No; people do not generally prepare or care to prepare bhang at their houses, though it would be possible to do so if they cared; yes, all the three drugs can be prepared from the wild plant, and fakirs living in the jungle sometimes do prepare one or other of the drugs from the wild plants; the production, however, is of inferior quality. 17. It is not confined to. any particular sect or class of people; the people making it are, however, generally considered of lower class (in the hills). 18. Yes, all the three. Yes, it quite loses its effect in time. The consumers have been known to think the drugs can be kept for three or four years. It is not known what special care (if at all) is taken to prevent deterioration. 19. Ganja and charas are, as a rule, smoked. It is said when a habitual consumer cannot find a chance to smoke, he will eat it. But it is so seldom done that it cannot be said either to be prac- tice or habit with any particular class. 20. Ganja is not so much used as charas. Fakirs, sweepers and sailors (mallahs) use one or the other of them very often; otherwise it is not confined to any particular class of people. Damp localities or cold countries (for instance, Badari Nath) are the places where people often take to using them. 22. In Dehra it is imported from the Punjab (Hoshiarpur). It is not produced here, and the wild plant found scattered here is not sought after for the purpose. 23. Bhang as such is seldom smoked. 24. Hindus, as a rule, have no scruple to the bhang as a drink. They are not, however, given to it, though the use of bhang is not restricted or confined to any particular class. It is both eaten and drunk; the only people that are known to take it as a rule are the Chaubes (Brahmins mostly liv- ing in Muthra and Mainpuri). Muthra and its neighbouring part of the country as well as hot places are the localities where it is generally taken. In places like Gya, bhang is also frequently taken322 34. Of course, it would be a serious privation to those who are given to its use. Fakirs, &c., would feel it very much, and others also will suffer pangs if they are prevented from having it, it being so painful to break the habit off. It is very difficult to give any appreciable idea of the number of the people belonging to each class. 35. (a) Yes, it is feasible to prohibit the use of all these drugs by making its use penal. (b) There can hardly be any doubt that attempts would be made to smuggle and consume it illicitly, but the penalty would operate as a check to a great extent. (d) and (e) The prohibition would no doubt occa- sion serious discontentment, but that discontentment will hardly amount to a political danger, for the simple reason that the consumers carry very little influence in the society or over the public in general, and will not at all be supported in their evil incli- nations if they tried to set up people against the Government. A few riots or affrays may take place here and there, but nothing more. (f): (a) I do not think people will, as a rule, take to the use of liquor, if the use of drugs is prohibited; and the reason is this, that the use of liquor is prohibited by religion, and people except those who have lost all regard for their religion will hesitate very greatly to take to liquor. Besides religion, society also will not tolerate any free use of liquor, and that will be a very great check upon the people; in fact, greater than that of religion. (6) Opium remains the only drag that might be resorted to, and it is possible people might have a tendency to use it, as there is neither religion nor social custom so much against its use as against the liquor. 36. I do not think it is true that alcohol is re- placing these drugs. It cannot be so for the obvious reason that religion and social custom and usages are to a great extent against the use of liquor. People have not the same freedom to use liquor as they have with respect to these drugs. Those persons whose religion and society do not prohibit the use of liquor have been known to take liquor when they could not get the drugs they were used to. 37. I do not know much about this. But I have seen charas-smokers suffering from cough as a rule. 38. Hiccough generally results from charas- smoking. Bhang-users do not catch any disease so soon as charas-smokers do. It affects a little too slowly for people to observe. But excessive con- sumers of bhang I have seen suffering from what is called "Tar-khansi." 39. Smoking is more dangerous and affects the smoker rather instantaneously than eating or drink- ing; the reason is obvious; the former affects the brain directly, whereas by eating and drinking the nefarious thing can affect the system only through the regular process of digestion. I have seen people become intoxicated as soon as they smoked charas, whereas it takes some time for bhang to show its signs. 40. (a) Bhang is the only thing I know which is prescribed by native "vaids and tabibs" in cases of piles. (b) The same thing is given to the cattle on certain occasions. 41. I do not think it is beneficial in any case. (a) The effect is felt only by those who take it seldom or occasionally, but not by those who become habitual consumers, whether moderate or excessive. Habitual consumers will lose all appetite if they do not get the drug they are used to. (b) As above. (c) People have been known to profit by a mode- rate use on such occasions. (d) I do not know any other use. Sailors and other persons living in malarious and unhealthy tracts use it for the purposes mentioned in (c). Yes, it is the modorate use I refer to. In the hills bhang is considered very useful: the fibres of the hemp plant are made into cloth called bhangila; the wood serves the purpose of a torch, as it burns like a torch in the dark. Oil is made out of the plant and used as a medicine in some cases of pain, &c.; the seed is also used as a spice. It is scorched and eaten like gram and maki, &c. Khali is also made from the seed and given to animals. 42. An habitual use of any of the drugs, whether moderate or excessive, is harmful in my opinion. The reason is obvious that it is almost impracticable to fix on a standard which can be considered mode- rate; there is such a tendency to exceed moderation that one can hardly stand the temptation. Moreover after a few days' use the same quantity of drug does not produce the same effect as it originally used to do, and hence the consumer is obliged to increase the quantity and thus become in course of time an excessive consumer. 43. They are as a rule. 44. It is refreshing and does produce a sort of feeling of uneasiness; creates appetite. The effect lasts from three to twelve hours. Yes, there are after-effects; uneasiness and long- ing invariably overtake the consumer. He becomes dull and unable to attend to anything properly. In fact, they sometimes lie down, and get fever until the drug is administered to them. But all these refreshing and other effects are only due to the weakness which consumer naturally lets himself into. His vitality is seriously suffering, and his health actually going down the hill when he flatters himself into the belief that he feels refreshed at the very dose of the drug that he gets. 45. (a) Yes. It is felt in course of time though. (b) Yes. (c) Yes, after some time a consumer finds he cannot take the same quantity of food as he used to do. (e) Yes. (f) Yes. Cannot describe the nature, kind or quality of insanity, as I have not myself seen any one suffer from it. I have only heard of it. (g) I do not know of any particular case. 47 and 48. No. I do not think so; the only thing that I can say is that their issue is generally of weak constitution. 49. It is not aphrodisiac, 50. It does tend to produce impotence. It dries up semen; in cases of moderate use the effect takes time to become visible and is not seen at all if there are other favourable circumstances that counteract its effect. In case of excessive use it is often toe visible to escape one's notice. 51 to 53. No. 54. Possibly. But as a rule consumers of these drugs are not mischievous; the feeling of indolence comes over them, and they become often unfit to commit any acts of violence.
323 55. (a) Yes, often. (4) Yes. 56. It depends on the other ingredients mixed with that. If they are soothing or ameliorating or counteracting in their effect, the drug does not prove so injurious as it otherwise does. If they increase and add to the injurious effects of the drug, then the drug becomes still more harmful; fakirs do sometimes use dhatura to increase the stupefying effect of the drug; and criminals sometimes use it for the same purpose to rob others of their property, etc. 68. There is none in Dehra. But I have seen such shops on the occasion of big Hindu fairs in some of the large cities, as a rule; such shops do not exist and should not be allowed to exist. 69. No. It is very desirable though to consult the public opinion. 238. Evidence of LACHMI NARAIN, Brahmin, Zamindar and Mukhtar, Kananj (Farukhabad). 1. I have personal knowledge, and have derived my information from native doctors and dealers in drugs. 2. The drugs are known by the ordinary names of ganja, bhang and charas. Bhang is also called "sabzi," "patti" and "buti." Ganja is of three kinds324 will be very rare. Sales and imports of ganja, bhang, and charas be prohibited, and restrictions should be placed on the sale of bhang in the same way as in sales of arsenic, etc. The prohibition will not occasion serious discontent or political clanger. The prohibition will not be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants. 36 and 37. Don't know. 38. Baluchar is the most intoxicating. Next comes pathar, and last of all chur. 39. Ganja and charas are only smoked. Bhang is eaten and drunk. No other mode of consump- tion. 40. Ganja and charas are not used for any medicinal properties. Bhang is prescribed by native doctors; also in cattle disease. 41. The moderate use of none of these drugs is beneficial. Occasional moderate use of bhang creates appetite, gives staying-power under severe exertion, and alleviates fatigue. Sometimes it is beneficial in epidemic cases of cholera, etc. Very few people use it occasionally. 42. See 45. 43. No. 44. Ganja and charas at once produce intoxica- tion, which lasts for half an hour or so. They are not refreshing. To some extent hunger is allayed. The after-effects are laziness and aching of bones. Bhang produces its effect rather slowly. It creates appetite to some extent. The rest of the effects are the same as those of ganja and charas. 45. The habitual moderate use of these drugs is noxious physically, mentally and morally. It produces laziness; also temporary and permanent insanity. The symptoms may reappear by use of the drugs after restraint from liberation. The use of the drugs has no beneficial effects on mental anxiety or brain disease. Can quote no case. Ganja and charas produce asthma and bronchitis. 46. See 45. Excessive use has the same effects as moderate use. 47. No. 48. See 47. 51. No large proportion of bad characters are habitual consumers. No connection with crime. 52. See 51. 53. No. Am not aware of any such case. 54. No. 55. Criminals do induce others to partake of these drugs in order to facilitate robbery, etc. The drugs can produce complete stupefaction without admixture. 56. Already answered. Have no special in- formation. 57. Already answered. 58. I do not approve of the present system of excise administration. For improvements, see answer 35. Oral evidence. Question 25.325 pounded, and mixed with sugar, and then taken. (2) In the form of majum (a sweetmeat). Drinkino.326 47 and 49. No. 51. Badmashes generally consume ganja and charas. 53 and 54. No. 55. Criminals do sometimes induce their victims to partake of charas either with or without dhatura. Complete stupefaction cannot, however, be induced by this drug without admixture. 56. I never heard that ganja and charas are eaten or drunk. 240. Evidence of KASHIPERSHAD PANDA, Brahmin Misra, Priest and Zamindar, Bindhiachal. 3. Hemp plant is self-growing and found abun- dantly in Bahraich, Basti and Gorakhpur districts. 4. It is known under various names such as bhang, buti, subzi and shiobodhin. 5. It requires good rains and grows in cold and moist countries. 6. It grows thick. 7. It is cultivated in Bahraich, Basti and Gorakhpur. 10. It is not cultivated by any special class of people. 14. Bhang grows in Bahraich and I know little about the others. 16. The plant may grow in private houses, but the drug of superior quality is not obtainable from it. 18. It is impaired if kept long. It generally keeps good till one year; but if more carefully kept and preserved from dampness it lasts for two years without being least spoiled. 19. Ganja and charas are only used for smoking purposes. Bhang is used as follows:327 241. Evidence of PARSOTAMPURI GOSHAIN, Panda of Debiji, Bindhiachal. 18. Bhang gets spoiled when kept long. 19. As far as I know, ganja and charas are used for smoking purposes. 20. Charas and ganja are generally used by low class people, such as chamars, mushars, dhanuks, kahars, ahirs, and gadarias. These are also used by sadhus and fakirs. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking purposes. 24. Hindus generally take bhang. 25. The use of these drugs is on the increase. I can give no reasons. 29. Bhang is used with following ingredients:328 diseases and disorders. The effect of intoxication does not last more than two hours; laziness, indol- ence and uneasiness from indigestion caused from over-burdening stomach follow. 45. Insanity, melancholy, asthma, loss of appe- tite, redness of eyes, headache, loss of intellect take place. Insanity, temporary first, becomes perma- nent afterwards. A little relief sometimes is felt by abstaining, but again followed keenly by re- suming vicious habit. 49. Yes, by men of loose character, as well as by prostitutes. Yes, more injurious, because ex- cessive discharge of sperma genitale results. 53 to 55. Yes. 56. Hemp is adulterated by surti only to in- crease its effect. Dhatura is added only to produce complete insensibility in a victim. 57. Ganja is drunk in western and southern India in the place of bhang. 58. Working shamefully. The system can be improved in many ways. Should not be supplied to every one without restriction. Individuals under 30 should not be supplied. Time of sale should be confined between 10 A.M. and 4 P.M., while at present it is sold till 9 P.M. like other articles of food. Smoking should not be allowed at the shop where it is sold. Number of shops be reduced. Police should be held responsible for every irregularity. 60. No individual should be supplied with more than two pies worth bhang or ganja and charas at a time. 68. In this district contractor has been only authorised to keep shops. 69. Wishes of the people are not consulted before a shop is opened. Local opinion should be con- sulted before a shop is opened. Oral evidence. Question 1.329 248. Evidence of KANTA PRASHAP, Kayasth, Petition-writer, Bhurtna. 1. I have consorted greatly with fakirs and habitual consumers of the drugs. 2. There are no other local names. The defini- tions may be accepted. 18. Ganja and charas are only smoked. 19. Low castes and fakirs smoke ganja, and this more in cities than towns. Charas is very rarely smoked. 21. Gol ganja is mostly smoked. 23. Bhang is never smoked. 24. (a) Brahmins, thakurs and baniyas chiefly eat bhang. (b) The above also drink it, but very little. 25. The use of all three is on the increase, as it is much cheaper since the introduction of railways. 26. (a) About one-third. (b) About one-half. (c) About one-quarter. (d) Nearly one-quarter. 27. Bhang is mainly consumed by Brahmin Chaubes to an excessive degree for the purpose of making themselves strong pahilwans. Bhangis, chamars, dhobis, etc., consume ganja and charas moderately. Fakirs consume ganja and charas immoderately. 29. Bhang is usually eaten with (a) pepper, illaichi, sugar and milk. Ganja and charas are smoked with tobacco. 30. All three drugs are almost entirely consum- ed in company. It is confined to the male sex, and usually consumed after the age of thirty. Children never consume it. 31. The habit of smoking ganja is easily formed, that of bhang not so easily. Ganja and charas are left off with difficulty, while bhang is more easily given up. The habit in all eases has a great tendency to increase. 32. I know of no such custom. 33. Charas and ganja-smoking is very badly thought of. Bhang is not thought to do much harm; charas and ganja are in bad repute, because they produce madness and bad habits. 34. It would be a serious privation to consumers of ganja and charas to forego their consumption, because a great craving for them is always present. The consumers of bhang would not suffer. Consum- ers of ganja and charas are one-half the popula- tion, and those of bhang one-third. 35. I do not think there would be very serious discontent among consumers if all these drugs were prohibited. There would be a certain increase in the consumption of spirits and a very large one in that of opium and drugs made therefrom. 36. No. The contrary is the case. 37. Charas is very much more intoxicant than ganja, and produces madness more easily; flat ganja is the most intoxicating and maddening, chur is less so, and round is the weakest of the three. 41. Bhang used moderately is beneficial in cases (a), (b) and (c); but ganja and charas are not so. 42. Bhang I consider to be harmless when used in moderation. It increases appetite and does not affect the brain. 43. Moderate consumers are never offensive to their neighbours. 44. Bhang produces immediate intoxication, which lasts for three or four hours. It produces a great appetite. The after-effect is often great slackness. Ganja produces still more immediate intoxica- tion, winch lasts for about one hour. It allays hunger and produces great lassitude. There is a great craving for it afterwards. The same is the case with charas. 45. Ganja and charas are injurious in every way. They injure the digestion and cause obstruc- tion to the bowels. It does not increase immoral- ity. It produces temporary insanity. The symp- toms are great blackness of face, bloodshot eyes, and much noisiness of demeanour. Bhang does not produce any ill-effects when taken in modera- tion. I do not think that insanity tends to a consumption of hemp drugs. 46. All these drugs are injurious when consum- ed in excess. Bhang when thus consumed produ- ces intense lassitude and sleepiness. 47 and 48. No. 49. Bhang is used as an aphrodisiac, but not by prostitutes. Ganja and charas produce impo- tence. 51. In my opinion there is no connection between bad characters and the moderate consumption of hemp drugs. 52. When hemp drugs are consumed excessively, crime may be the result, as the consumer's property is sold to pay for his drugs and he does not work honestly. 54 and 55. No. 56. (a) Bhang, when eaten with pepper, sugar, etc., is much stronger than when eaten alone. 244. Evidence of PIYAKI LAL, Kayasth, Petition-writer and Doctor, Khair. 1. I have practised as a doctor for seven or eight years. I have used bhang. I have used charas also in my youth, but not ganja. 2. Bhang is called bijia about here; warq-ul- nishat and warq-ul-khiyal in Persian, and qinnab in Arabic. 3. Bharatpur (very abundant). 6. Rather scattered. 14. (c) Have seen bhang cultivated and made to a small extent in Bharatpur. 16. Ganja and charas can be made anywhere. 18. Bhang spoils after a year, and also is injur- ed by cold. 20. Fakirs (about 70 or 80 per cent.); Kayasths (about 2 per cent., but not charas); Brahmins (about 8 or 10 per cent.); Banias (about 3 or 4 per cent.); Kahars (about 50 per cent.); other low castes (about 20 or 25 per cent.). 22. From Kandahar and Kabul. vol. v. 2 z
330 24. (a) People only eat bhang when they can't get the things to prepare it as a drink. (b) Brahmins about 10 or 15 per cent., Kayasths about 10 per cent., banias about 10 per cent., thakurs about 10 per cent., Nais and Kahars about 70 or 80 per cent., other low castes 20 or 25 per cent., low classes of Musalmans about 5 per cent. 25. People are using charas in this district more, because the land is now damper owing to the pres- ence of the canal. They use bhang less because of the same reason. It is not used in the rains. 26. (a) 25 or 30 per cent. (b) 7 or 8 per cent. (c) 15 or 16 per cent. (d) 5 or 10 per cent. 27. (a) Kahars. (b) Fakirs, Ghat Brahmins. (c) and (d) All castes. Kahars are refreshed and are intoxicated by use of these drugs so as not to feel fatigue. Brahmins take charas and ganja so as to render themselves impotent, and bhang to refresh them- selves and excite their imagination. 28. Bhang: (a) One pice worth, or 6 mashas. (b) One anna worth, or 1 chittack. Charas: (a) Two pice worth, or 3 mashas. (b) Two or three annas worth, 1½ or 2 tolas. 29. (a) Aniseed, black pepper, cardamoms. (b) For persons of a moist nature331 8. Wherever it grows, it increases and decreases. 9. Spontaneous. 10 and 11. Yes. 12. No. 13. It is not. It grows in Bijnor, Kheri, Kashmir, Amritsar, and in the north beyond the Sarda river. 14. No. 16. No. 18. If kept free from damp it may be kept three years ; otherwise one year. 19. Ganja and charas are smoked in the chillum. 20. Mendicants and bad characters mostly smoke them. 21. Flat ganja is mostly used for smoking. 22. Foreign charas is used ; it comes from Amritsar. 23. No. 24. The Muttra Chaubes mostly use bhang. Many respectable persons use. 25. The use of ganja and charas is on the in- crease. 28. Charas332 21. All kinds of ganja and charas are used for smoking. 22. The Yarkand charas imported from Amritsar, etc., is chiefly used in this country. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking. 24. The Brahmans mostly drink bhang. The other classes of people also use it, but to a less extent. 25. The use of ganja, bhang and charas is on the increase since the still-head duty was imposed on the liquor, which is consequently sold dearer. 26. I do not know the number of the consumers. 27 and 28. I do not know. 29. Dhatura is not ordinarily mixed with ganja, but the tobacco is so used. Any excessive smoker of ganja may be addicted to dhatura-smoking at times for want of ganja. Pepper, cardamom and sugar are mixed with bhang by those who can afford them. Others only powder bhang with water and drink it. 30. All three drugs are used in excess in company and less in solitude. Generally their use is confined to the male sex. Women do not use them. Very few children use them. 31. The habit of using these drugs is formed in company. To break off suddenly will cause un- easiness. It can be given up by gradual and steady decrease in the quantity, and similarly by in- creasing the quantity. The moderate habit devel- ops into the excessive. 32. No social or religious custom in regard to the consumption of any of these drugs. The use is mainly due to the habit contracted. 33. No social or religious opinion exists in regard to the practice. I do not think the use of any form of the narcotic is generally in disrepute. Hemp plant is not worshipped. 34. The number of any class of consumer is not known to me, nor does the use appertain to any particular class. Owing to the habit contracted, it would be a privation to forego the use of the drug to the consumer. 35. The prohibition to use these drugs would cause a little discontent among the consumers, but not to such an extent as to amount to a political danger. The consumer may probably use any other narcotic in lieu, of which I am not aware at present. 36. I do not know if any alcohol is now being substituted for any of these drugs. 37. As compared with ganja, the effect produced by smoking charas is pure and moderate. 38. The effect of smoking balucher ganja is high in degree, of broken ganja moderate, and of round ganja comparatively low. 39. I am unable to give an opinion on this point. 40. Bhang is generally used for medicinal pur- poses for men and cattle, but not ganja or charas. The oil of ganja seeds is also used and the stuff is thrown away. 41. The moderate use of any of these drugs is beneficial and the excessive use injurious. Bhang is digestive, and all the three drugs alleviate fatigue. Bhang is mostly used by the Brahmans, and the ganja and charas by Thakurs and low castes. 42. The moderate use of any of these drugs is not injurious, but the excessive. 43. They are inoffensive to their neighbour. 44. The moderate use of any of these drugs creates appetite for food. The effect of ganja or charas lasts for about an hour, and that of bhang for about three or four hours. 45. The habitual moderate use of any of these drugs does not produce any noxious effects333 247. Evidence of RADHA KISHUN, late Drug Contractor, Lucknow. 1. I had the opportunity of reading the report by Dr. Prain in connection with the Ganja Com- mission, in which these 70 questions are entered. Besides 1 have had personally to deal with these hemp drugs for the last 25 years. 2. All these three substances are produced from the cultivated and uncultivated hemp plant in the following manner :334 water, and mixing milk, sugar and perfumery in it, drink it. Poor people who can't afford all these spices to mix, drink it simply in water, mixing only pepper and aniseed with it. 17. There is no particular class of men. Charas saljehan is prepared by the hill tribes of Nepal, charas Yarkand by the Kabulis, ganja baluchar by every cultivator in Bengal, ganja pathari in Khandwa and Gwalior. Bhang grows spontane- ously, and men collect and sell it only to the au- thorised contractors. 18. Bhang can last ten years if filled in gunny bags and placed on elevated ground to preserve it from cold and wet. Ganja also lasts for the same period, if kept as carefully as bhang. If kept in a warm place, Yarkand charas lasts at least for five years ; saljehan for eight years, but that would sell as second class one; and the Kashmir charas lasts for ten years. In spite of this care, it begins to lose its efficacy after 3 or 4 years, but to test this is left in the hands of the Civil Surgeons in accordance with the Abkari rule. 19. Ganja and charas are smoked in a chillum (country pipe) by mixing it with dry or smoking tobacco with the aid of fire. Formerly in Lucknow City, charas, saljehan and Yarkand, was first mixed in butter (ghee), and then its essence was extracted. Then this essence was thrown in boiling sugar and round pieces (like reori) made of it. These pieces of charas compound were called "falak sair." But since recently this has been put a stop to. If in any year on account of heavy rains and wet weather bhang's efficacy seem reduced, then in that year the essence of ganja's chur is extracted by mixing it with ghee and a compound of this essence with sugar is formed in the shape of barfis called majum. 20. Mostly the fakirs who roam about in bands and low caste men and labourers use this in excess. I can't tell their exact number nor any particular place, as such persons have none. 21. In Bengal, North-Western Provinces and in some districts of Oudh, ganja, baluchar, pathar, chur, etc., is smoked in a chillum. There is no other way to smoke it. Ganja, pathar, chur, etc., is smoked in a chillum in some of the districts of the North-Western Provinces and in all the districts of Oudh, and also in some of the Native States and in Central Provinces. 22. No one cultivates the plant to make coun- try charas. The places of its import are fixed as is already said in previous answers. They are the Punjab, Ladakh, Yarkand, Kabul, Kash- mir and Bokhara. 23. Bhang is now here smoked in a chillum, nor are there any men I know of who do so. Perhaps where ganja and charas is not produced or is not procurable, it might have been smoked. 24. The Chaubes of Muthra and Brindaban eat bhang excessively in solid pill form, and also drink it in water : some fakirs also use it, but generally it is drunk not eaten. A. great proportion of men who live in Muthra and Brin- daban use bhang in excess. Often poets and bards use this simply to intensify their imagin- ative power. 25. The use of all these three substances is daily increasing, specially the abolition of chandu and madak shops have added much to the increase in their use. 26. The following is the proportion of con- sumers :335 always about them followers from 500 to 1,000, because these persons are very fond of these things and their life, as it were, depends on their use of these. The case with men who have families is different. They will not find any trouble if they are prohibited from using charas or ganja. They would easily substitute in their place bhang, as those who have been prohibited from using chandu and madak have substituted opium in- stead. 35. There would be felt some difficulty if the use of all these drugs is at once made penal. If it be so arranged, for instance, that the import of ganja or of charas be stopped at first, then the consumers will have recourse to either ganja or charas, and thus there would be less difficulty in putting a stop to the use of these drugs one by one. In this way both the public convenience and the administration will not suffer. The con- sumers will fall back upon such intoxicating sub- stances as bhang, tari, and juice of khajoor. The intoxication of these is quite innocent, and in no way injurious to the system in comparison to ganja and charas. In support of my above sug- gestions I draw the attention to chandu and madak. Since the use of them is stopped, their consumers some use opium and some charas. In the same way, the consumers of ganja and charas will have recourse to other substances like ganja and tari. 36. I cannot tell if any other intoxicating sub- stance is used instead of these, but so much I know, that tari and saindhi are also used excessively. As quite a distinct intoxication, of course, it is probable that if the use of ganja or charas is prohibited its consumers will have recourse to some other intoxicating substance. 37. The intoxication of ganja often produces heat and burning sensation in the eyes and brain ; charas does not produce more heat than ganja. The intoxication of charas saljehan is good, while that of Yarkand is bad. 33. Ganja baluchar and mora possess the same quality of intoxication, but chur is a milder form of it and produces less heat in the system. 39. The intoxicating substances that are obtain- ed from the ganja plant, for instance, charas, etc., is only smoked in a chillum ; to use it in any other way would be injurious, and the bhang which is obtained from the bhang plant is only eaten or quaffed. 40. Native physicians often prescribe bhang in medicine more especially for external use. It is also prescribed in cases of cattle disease. 41. The effect, good or bad, of the use of bhang, ganja and charas is as follows :336 the former is lesser in quantity than the latter. The excess of bhang after all is not so injurious as that of ganja and charas. 47. The habit of consuming these drugs is not hereditary. It is easily acquired by associating with the consumers. So much effect daily is noticed in the case of newly-born infants of the consumers of ganja and charas, that they are often troubled with boils and pimples till they become four or five years of old. 48. See answer 46. 49. Bhang intensifies with impunity the plea- sure of every thing that is done in its intoxication It is the most safe intoxication. Reverse is the case with ganja and charas The use of these thins the semen, produces impotency, and renders the system liable to be affected by the inclemency of the weather. The shops of ganja and charas are often kept by low class prostitutes, called saquins, and they obtain license to keep these shops from Government authorities. Females of low classes only use ganja and charas and sometimes bhang 50. Bhang is consumed more in quantity than ganja and charas, while the price of the quantity consumed is about a third of that of ganja and charas. For instance, in a district if bhang is consumed 600 maunds, the price which is Rs. 1,500, ganja 100 maunds, the price Rs. 3,200, charas 10 maunds, the price Rs. 4,000. It will be seen that if one substance is used more in quantity the others are more in value. This is the rate of increase for the present. But now since the abolition of chandu and madak, more increase in the consump- tion of these drugs is expected. 51. Mostly men of bad character use ganja and charas. In fairs and shows the shops of saquins, if ten persons be found smoking these, eight of them at least would be men of bad character of low castes. At the shops where bhang is prepared and sold in solid or liquid form there, out of ten men, who go to take it, eight would be of good moral conduct. These things can be taken with impunity up to the quantity allowed by law, and no wonder if at such places offences are committed by the consumers, as well as by the license holders, against the terms of their license. On the whole there is always an apprehension of a quarrel of some sort or the other at the shops of ganja and charas. 52. See answers Nos. 46 and 50. 53. In a state of intoxication no wonder if men commit offences on provocation, such as cut- ting off the nose or wounding with knife. 54. The intoxication of ganja and charas does not fortify one to commit any premeditated act, but he does whatever comes in his head at the moment to do. The intoxication of liquor is of course courageous. Ganja and charas dull the activity, what to say of courage. One forgets to say what he is about to say. 55. If a person who does not use these drugs uses them perchance, or is made to use them some- how, gets intoxicated very soon and remains sense- less for a longer duration than one who is habitual to their use. 56. Ganja and charas of themselves are intoxi- cating drugs whose effect is felt, instantaneously. They in ray opinion do not necessitate being adul- terated with dhatura (stramonium seeds), which is itself a poison. I have heard fakirs, those who worship Shiva, make an offering of dhatura and use some seeds of it themselves to propitiate the god. Formerly the robbers in the guise of fakirs and wayfarers used to administer dhatura and to offer it to travellers, and when they become sense- less robbed them of their property. But such cases are no more heard of now. 57. Ganja and charas are smoked in a chillum. Bhang alone is both eaten and drunk as a liquid. 58. The arrangements of Government for the sale of these drugs, which obtain at present, are excellent. Every year the Government fortu- nately gets a well-to-do man to become the highest bidder at the auction sale of the contract of these drugs, which in the chief cause of increase in the income under this head to Government. 59. If the Government wishes to make any other arrangement such that there may be no loss to the income and some check be put in the use of these drugs, I have to suggest the following course :337 65. There is no tax on ganja and charas or bhang which is sold in our province : only the license fee is realized from the contractors and no- thing is charged on the articles. In Khandwa perhaps there is some tax now on ganja. There is no tax on charas or bhang. The tax which is imposed on distilled liquor is very proper. In Oudh the owners of the land on which bhang grows spontaneously charge some tax for it. In short, by imposing a tax on these drugs, the advantage will be two-fold338 damp. Bokhara charas used to keep for four or five years. Yarkand charas keeps for a year ; in the second year it loses halfi ts effect, and after that it becomes absolutely useless. There is no way of keeping it good. It keeps much longer in a cold climate. 19. Ganja and charas are used only for smok- ing. Occasionally a fakir or two may eat charas in the cold weather, and fakirs occasionally give others a very small quantity to eat to ward off ague. They say that in 6uch case milk only should be drunk, as drinking water increases the fever. 20. Ganja is unknown here. Charas is 6moked by nearly all castes, but most by fakirs and labour- ers, such as kahars and mallahs. There are no special localities. 22. Almost entirely Yarkand, which is imported through Hoshiarpur and Amritsar. 23. There is no such custom. A man may, if he can get no charas in the jungle, rub a few leaves into his tobacco, bub that is all. 24. All classes drink bhang, chiefly Brahmins, then banias and Khatris : for the most part men of better quality (charas being used more by the lower classes). It is drunk chiefly in the hot weather. Often in the cold weather it is eaten as a powder or as a confection. 25. The use of bhang is much what it was before, but the use of charas has largely increased, because it is cheaper. 26. Bhang339 57. I have never heard of ganja or bhang being eaten or drunk. 58. I consider that it is working well, and I can suggest no improvements. 62. There is no necessity for any further con- trol. 63. I have no objection to the present system. 64. None. 68. There are none such here. 69. Their wishes are ascertained. 70. Considerable smuggling goes on from Rampur. The drug shops are there disposed of in separate interests, and competition reduces the price of the drugs. 249. Evidence of KUNDAN LALL, Agarwala, Drug Contractor, Nawabganj, Bara Banki. 1. As I go abroad, that is, in Nimar, Amritsar, Hoshiarpur, Lahore, Gwalior, and Nipalganj, in order to purchase drugs, and I have heard from some other people. 2. So far as I know, in this district as well as in other districts, they are known by these very names. 3. In the district of Bahraich, Nipalganj, and Hoshiarpur, bhang is produced in great proportion, and in other districts in small quantity. It grows spontaneously. 4. It is known by this very name, as set forth in this paragraph, that is, bhang bijia. 5. Bhang grows in Terai, and wild ganja grows in Terai along with bhang ; but this sort of ganja is less used. The ganja which is con- sumed is grown in places of which the climate is agreeable to its growth. If its seed is brought here it cannot grow, such as baluchar ganja. 6. Bhang plants, where they grow, are scattered and somewhat dense. It grows spontaneously. 7. In this district ganja, bhang, etc., are not cultivated. In the Terai of Ghaghra only bhang grows spontaneously. Some people secretly plant ganja in their gardens. 10. There are no special class of tenants. Every class of tenants plant these where they grow. 11. The seed of wild ganja cannot produce this ganja which is used. The cultivators sow plant separately for the production of seed, or take it from the plants cultivated. 12. In Gwalior State and Nimar district pathar ganja is cultivated, and its tree is cut when it is full grown. I do not know of baluchar ganja, which grows in Bengal Presidency. 13. In this district ganja used to be grown in Mahadeva through cultivators ; but its cultivation has now been stopped. The ganja which grows in one place cannot grow of the same sort in other place. 14. Nothing is produced. 15. Smoking tobacco is mixed with ganja and charas ; but some people mix tobacco, which is eaten and having filled it in a chillum they smoke. Bhang is taken after being reduced to powder and mixed with water. 16. Bhang is prepared generally by the people in their homes. 17. Every class of people can make. 18. Ganja, bhang and charas can deteriorate by keeping. Ganja, if carefully kept for seven years, and charas, if so kept for five years, as well as bhang, if so kept for seven years, cannnot lose its effect and can be used. There is no measure to prevent deterioration. 19. Ganja and charas are smoked in chillum. 20. Kahars, sweepers, dhobis, passis and chamars invariably smoke, as well as many thakurs and fakirs. 21. All sorts of ganja are smoked in chillum. 22. Charas bhuri is generally used, and is im- ported from Irak. 32. So far as I know, there is no religions sanction for the use of these drugs ; but custom has given them a place in the religious festivals of the Hindus, such as Holi and Shivratri. 33. Consumption of charas is regarded as an immoral habit. The hemp plant is not worship- ped. 34. It might cause serious inconvenience to the people addicted to the use of charas and bhang. 35. I am of opinion that the consumption of charas may be put a stop to by raising its price and restricting the sale. I completely disagree with those who apprehend any political danger arising from the prohibition of this drug. There is no doubt that some substitute for charas will be required by those who are in the habit of using it. 36. On the contrary, the poorer classes have substituted charas for liquor. 40. Bhang is often prescribed as medicine for piles, and is generally used for cattle-diseases. 42. Moderate use of bhang is harmless, but the use of charas, however moderate it may be, is decidedly injurious. 43. I believe they are. 44. I have never used it, so I don't know. 46. Charas is decidedly injurious to health, and its smokers are always subject to asthma and bronchial troubles. They are consequently short- lived. 47. Might be. 49. I suppose some use these drugs for that purpose, but I am not aware of any special qualities which these drugs possess. 51. I believe so. 65. In my opinion, the taxation of charas should be increased, if it is not entirely put a stop to ; but the taxation of bhang should be nominal. 69. Local opinion is never consulted as it should be. vol. v. 3 A 2
340 250. Evidence of SALING RAM AND JAGAN NATH, Contractors for Bhang, Charas and Ganja, Agra. 1. Eight years' practice as contractors of bhang, charas and ganja. 2. The bhang in this district is called bhang, sabzi, siddi and kamlaoti ; charas is called charas, and ganja is called ganja pitar, baluchar ; round and chapta (flat) ganja are the products of the eastern country and are sold there. 3. As far as we are aware, the ganja is grown in Antri, Raj Gwalior, Sipri and Jhansi, whence it is imported. It is also abundant in Khandwa. 4. In this district it is known by only one name341 20. Low castes in general everywhere. 21. "Pathar" in this district, because no other is imported. 22. Foreign ; from Samarkand ("Saljehan" from Nepal). 28. Never. 24. Hindus in general everywhere drink and sometimes, though not often, eat bhang. 25. Spreading ; they use ganja much more at social meetings. 28. (a) One tola per diem of bhang or ganja ; of charas two or three mashas. 29. (a) With bhang, sugar and milk (to render it more palatable), and with ganja or charas tobacco. I never heard of dhatura being so used. There is no bhang massala. 30. In solitude and in company indifferently. Children do not consume them. Consumption confined to the male sex. 252. Evidence of SARUPCHAND, Khattri, Hemp Drug Contractor, Lucknow. 1. I have been a drug contractor for twenty years. 2. Ganja, charas and bhang, are three separate plants ; with this reservation, I accept this defini- tion. 3. Bhang, in Nepal, Gonda, Bahraich, Saharan- pur, Bareilly, Kheri, and generally near the hills. In Nepal and Bahraich it is abundant. 4. Only bhang, ganja and charas, which are three different plants. 5. None. 6. Dense. 7. (c) Only in Hardoi, formerly to a great ex- tent, but now much less. 8. Decrease, because more is imported from Bahraich. 9. With wheat and barley. 10. Ordinary cultivators. 14. (c) Majum (confection) is made from bhang to a very small extent in the Holi. 15. Bhang mixed with ghee is put into water boiled and made into a confection for eating. Charas and ganja are smoked in the huka. 16. Yes ; as regards bhang. 17. No particular class. 18. They all deteriorate by keeping. They lose nearly the whole of their effect, and become but very slightly intoxicating. With ordinary care they keep three or four years, but. lose more and more of their intoxicating properties. Cold injures them ; no special measures can be taken. 19. Only for smoking. 20. Low castes, everywhere, smoke both. 21. Flat is preferred. 22. Saljehani from Nepal is sold in Lucknow ; that sold here comes from Yarkand. 23. Never. 24. Everybody drinks bhang, especially in Muttra. 25. On the increase. 28. (c) Bhang 1 tola; ganja and charas, 3 mashas. (b) Bhang, a quarter of a seer ; ganja and charas, one tola. 29. (a) With bhang, cardamoms, roses, pepper, kanair root, etc. Fakirs mix dhatura with it to make it intoxicating. There is no "bhang massala." 30. Ganja and charas mostly in company ; bhang generally in solitude. Men, rarely women, consume them. They are generally used by ado- lescents ; never by children. 81. Very easily, in ten or fifteen days ; not difficult to break off ; it does not tend so to de- velop. 32. None. 36. On the contrary, I think drugs are displac- ing alcohol, because they are cheaper, for the sale of liquor is decreasing and that of drugs is increas- ing. 253. Evidence of M. MAHOMEND HASSEIN, Drug Contractor, Lucknow. 1. Ganja is grown in Gwalior State, Pargana Gurd, Tahsil Atri, Hanmatgarh, Kalaras, Ean- war, in the neighbourhood of Khandwa, Dis- trict Nimar, as well as in the neighbourhood of Patna, whence baluchar variety is obtained. The growth of bhang is spontaneous. It is found in the Districts of Gonda, Basti, Bahraich, Nepal- gunj, Rajpurdan in Nepal State, Pilibhit, Saha- ranpur, etc. Round ganja, which is also known by the name of Mahadeva, grows of itself in places near Ghogra, and also in the strip of land lying between the district of Nawabgunj and Bahraich. 2. The account given by Dr. Prain as to the mode of production of ganja is correct. In the places named in reply to question No. 1, as well as in all other places where ganja is cultivated, it is customary with the cultivators to destroy all the male plants after they reach a certain height, so as to retain the female ones only. Their object in doing this is simply to root out the seed-yielding plants, because the seed is not liked by the ganja consumers. 3. Ganja is cultivated in the places enumerated in answer No. 1, but bhang grows spontaneously in the districts of Gonda, Basti, Bahraich, Saha- ranpur and Ujjain. 4. Patsan plant cultivated in Gwalior, District Nimar, is called ganja pathar, and broken ganja is called chur. Baluchar is cultivated in Patna, while round ganja or Mahadeva is obtained from the land on either side of the river Ghogra. Bhang grows of itself. 5. Suitability of climate as well as height above surface are both necessary ; neither ganja nor bhang grows anywhere except in the places named
342 above ; and if they grow at all elsewhere, they are of an inferior variety. 6. In either form, the cultivated patsan is not scattered, whereas the self-grown patsan is in some places scattered and in others as dense as a jungle. 7. Its cultivation is not carried on after the ordinary method ; the bhang plants of spontaneous growth are usually destroyed. (a) No. (b) No. (c) On the banks of the river Gomti, there are plants of spontaneous growth which are removed at the sowing season. (d) Hemp, patwa, bhindee are cultivated for their fibre, as also for seed, and which are utilized in place of san. Their leaves are not intoxicating. The following things are fibrous in this country, patwa, hemp, bhindee, bakeloo, kus, bankurs and moonj. 8. Patsan bhang has little to do with the culti- vated area, because bhang is a wild plant which the cattle even do not graze. 9. The seed grains of the self-grown plants of Ujjain and Malwa are gathered for cultivation in Gwalior and Khandwa. The dealers in ganja make advances of money to the cultivators to induce its cultivation like opium. In a season the crop is seen round by the cultivators so as to remove the male plants and retain the female ones, which yield pathar ganja. The crop when cut is well trodden over, and then heaped up so that the buds become rather flat, and hence called pathar. The twigs of baluchar ganja grown in Patna are pressed with stone weights and trodden over. They are then heaped up, giving layers of madar leaves, and heavy weights are then put on those piles. The madar leaves, on account of their hot nature, turn the colour of the ganja bud into a yellowish colour, which is then called baluchar, and sells dearer than pathar. The Mora or Mahadeva which is not much in use now-a-days, is also of spontaneous growth ; ganja does not germinate from ganja, rather bhang comes up instead, which does not form buds. 10. Its cultivators are Moraees, Kachhis, and sometimes Muhammadans. They grow ganja in the Gwalior State, Tahsil Atri, Khandwa, District Nimar, and Patna. But they are ordinary culti- vators and not mere ganja growers; rather there is no particular caste which can be said to grow ganja exclusively. 11. Wild patsan seed, called bhang, found in Ujjain, can by means of certain treatment, be sown to grow ganja. It is cultivated nowhere except in the districts of Gwalior and Khandwa, etc. 12. In the places mentioned in question No. 1, pathar ganja is produced from wild patsan seed. When the cultivators see that the plant begins to form buds, they remove them ; these are the male plants ; and if allowed to stand they would, of course, render the whole crop of the field use- less. 18. In the districts of this part of the country no cultivator has ever grown patsan ganja or pat- san bhang, and as these do not repay the cost of cultivation, no one cares to grow them. This is why their cultivation has not been introduced as yet. Whenever one or two patsan ganja plants were allowed to stand till maturity, they never yielded so good buds, nor were they found intoxi- cating. The Gwalior bel ganja is intoxicating indeed, but this appears to me to be due to the climate of the place. 14. (a) No. (b) No. (c) Is grown. Bhang weighing about 15 thousand maunds is produced from the self-grown plants in the district of Gonda, Bahraich, Basti, Kheri, and Pilibhit. 15. I had sown the Ujjain bhang seed in Luck- now, but it failed to yield such a nice bud as is imported from Gwalior. This fact shows that its growth depends upon the suitability of climate. People of this part of the country, who are addict- ed to use excessive intoxication, have recourse to charas. The moderate consumers use ganja ; but both ganja and charas are smoked in chillum and. in no other way. Bhang, on the contrary, is used with water, having been made fine by grinding at first. They mix sweets also with it often, and it is used in dry form as well. Good variety of ganja is obtained from cultivated patsan plant ; the self-grown plants do not yield a nice sort of it. 16. Hindu gentlemen use bhang within their own houses after it is finely ground with water. Patsan is imported from the districts of Gwalior and Nimar. and the seed bhang from Malwa and Ujjain ; the latter being cultivated to grow ganja. Charas cannot be produced from ganja, and is ob- tained from Yarkand. They say that the bhang of Yarkand, and the country round about it, is very intoxicating ; and that its leaves are trodden under foot so long as they do not give out a sort of sticky or glutinous substance; it is then put in leather bags, and called Yarkand charas. 17. Wherever it is grown, it is only the Kach- his, Mooraees, and sometimes Muhammadans that cultivate ganja, and they only know the manner in which it should be cultivated. 18. The ganja changes its colour after three years and with this change in the colour comes a loss in its intoxicating power. The greenness visible on its upper surface at first transforms into redness. The Yarkand variety dries up in three years, and men do not like it then; it deteriorates if it is kept in a wet or cool place ; and similar is the case with bhang. Persons do not like the old article in preference to the new one. 19. Charas and ganja are smoked in chillum, and also with the aid of a pipe like tobacco, They are used in no other way. 20. Chamars, Passis, Ahirs, Lodhas, Kahars, Sweepers, Dhobis, and Thakurs among the Hin- dus and Muhammadans in general, whoever are labourers or agriculturists by profession use it ; Hindus 50 per cent., and Muhammadans 10 per cent. 21. Baluchar and chutia ganja is used in Fyza- bad, Cawnpore, Allahabad, and Benares ; and in other places only chutia ganja, otherwise called pathar, is used. "Gol mora" and "chur" were much in use ten years ago, not at present. 22. Charas is imported from Yarkand in Kabul and is known as bhuri or Yarkand charas. This is consumed in a large quantity. Another kind of charas called "Saljehan" is imported from Nepal, which is used in Lucknow, not in any other district. Compared with other kind of charas, its nature is rather cold. 23 Bhang is not used in chillum in this coun- try ; the manner of its use has been described
343 above, viz., that it is first finely ground with water dry, and then used with certain admixtures. Tra- ders say the Yarkand charas is obtained from bhang, and that it is smoked in chillum. 24. Hindu gentlemen in general, such for ex- ample as Brahmans, use it as thandai344 sometimes called Mahadeva, are of course less intoxicating. The ganja consumers are not in favour of chur: 39. Ganja is obtained from the patsan plant, and is never smoked except in chillum ; its smoke enters the brain, and makes him go out of senses to some extent. It produces maddening effect if it is rubbed more than enough, consequently it is not generally used in a fine powder form. Bhang is never smoked in chillum ; it is, of course, made fine by grinding. The consumers of ganja, bhang and charas do not become senseless ; they remove idleness, and one finds himself ready for work under their influence. 40. Yes, it is applied in the case of piles, and also drunk ; the portion of the body where it is applied become dead to the sensation of pain. It keens the appetite, so that one can take more food under the intoxication, and get more sleep, than when without it. If this is administered to the lower animals when they perform long journeys, they fall to their fodder more eagerly and feel less fatigue. 41. Bhang is beneficial in its effect, provided it is used in moderate quantities345 drugs is quite sufficient, and needs no amendment. All orders are down in law books about them. 59. If contracts be given for five years at a time and the contractors are ordered to sell at one rate all through, and if severe punishments are awarded to the secret dealers, I think improve- ment can be effected. 60. Persons of this part of the country do not grow ganja, nor do they know the method of its cultivation. The plants of spontaneous growth do not yield as nice a bud as the Gwalior plants do Besides, these are not as much intoxicating. Potato and sugarcane crops supply an important portion of food consumption, hence cultivators are not induced to sow ganja, nor is its cultivation cus- tomary with them. But if its cultivation is in- troduced, no doubt a small quantity can be pro- duced, but this will tell upon the Government income, because it will then be indirectly placing that article within the reach of the public, and few will care to buy it in that case. This is gene- rally the case with everything, e.g., opium can be had here at Rs. 17 a seer, because it is cultivated in these districts, but in Calcutta a seer of opium would cost Rs. 30. 61. Charas is not produced either in this district or in its neighbourhood, nor does any body know how it is made. It comes from Nepal and Kabul ; and the manner of preparing it is known to the persons who live there. These men say, on en- quiry, that the bhang of those places is very in- toxicating, and that its leaves after they are well trodden under foot become rather sticky and then these are filled in leather bag and called charas. 62. No special care has to be taken of the pat- son plant. It grows like a wild herb in the dis- tricts of Bahraich, Gonda, Pilibhit, Lakhimpur, and the Terai Nepal. It is no use paying much at- tention to a crop which even the cattle do not graze. 63. Dealers in such drugs are paid in kind, and hence they should be permitted to receive payment in that way. Charas contains much of ganja in it, sometimes are both mixed together and then smoked. Bhang is used as majun, which is made by mixing with it sugar, khoya and ghee. Im- provement in income can only be had if the Gov- ernment takes the management in its own hands, and keep in its custody the whole quantity of these drugs, and fix its own rate. But the system of giving contracts should then be stopped alto- gether, and the secret sale prohibited. The secret sale of opium is possible as opium is produced here, but as ganja and charas are not produced here; and no one is expected to take the trouble of bring- ing them from such distances for secret sale. This will lead to Government income, which is possible also in case contracts are given for fixed periods of time. The area of Bahraich district is larger than that of Lucknow, and yet the contract of these articles in the former district is given for Rs. 2,200 a year and the latter for Rs. 33,000 a year, for the simple reason that in the former district these articles are produced, which is not the case in the latter district. 63. No objection. The present arrangement according to law is quite sufficient. 65. The tax charged in the districts is heavy enough, and requires no further enhancement, especially because another tax is charged by the States from which they are imported. The tax on liquors has been raised, hence the poor classes can afford to use it. as usual. They say that now-a- days the strength of liquors has been so much diminished that they cannot get sufficient intoxi- cation even though they have to pay higher rates, but as it is a matter of advantage to Government, they do not murmur. 66. The States in which ganja and baluchar are produced charge a kind of tax at the time of ex- porting, and when they are brought to the dis- tricts of British territory for consumption then contracts are given for each district, and the sale- proceeds of these contracts are thought a sufficient tax in themselves. In my opinion this is enough, because the people of India are very poor, and these drugs provide intoxication for them at a small cost346 think that estimate excessive. Adult non-consum- ers are few. Four out of five adult males consume the drugs. Question 45.347 Ganja348 51 and 52. Nearly all bad charracters consume drugs more or less, but consumption of drugs cannot be said to lead to crime ; it rather follows the commission of crime than leads to it. 53. Excessive indulgence in drugs is calculated to deaden the faculties, and to incite to violence. 54. No ; their tendency is to deaden the facul- ties, not to strengthen them. 55. Ganja and charas are not so used, nor would any victim partake of pure bhang. But travellers are sometimes stupefied by the admix- ture of bhang in sweetmeats, etc., and then rob- bed. 56. I know of no cases in which dhatura is mixed with hemp drugs. Effects of hemp are not altered by admixture with other substances, except in the same way as the effects of spirit are altered by its admixture with water. 57. 1 know of no cases of ganja and charas being eaten or drunk. 53. I can think of no improvements. 62. Cultivation should be controlled. Wild crops could be burnt and finally destroyed. It would be difficult to control cultivation, as it is to control cultivation of opium. Total extinction of the plant, wild and cultivated, would not be so hard. 63 and 64. I know of no objection. 65. Charas being an expensive article might be subjected to an import duty. No duty should be put on bhang. It would be too hard on poor consumers, and it does not do much harm. I think the taxation of bhang is fair as compared with the taxation of opium and liquor. 66. Flat and round ganja should be equally taxed ; chur ganja should be more lightly taxed, being less valuable. So also the baluchar ganja, which comes from Bengal, should, being more valuable, be more highly taxed than the pathar ganja, which comes from Gwalior and that part of India. Present rates are fair. 67. For fair taxation a duty should be imposed on charas349 27. Religious devotees are excessive habitual smokers. Low castes are moderate consumers. Severe bodily exertion leads to the practice as fatigue is dissipated. 29. Surti (chewing tobacco) is mixed with sania as a rule. Dhatura is occasionally mixed with ganja and bhang by habitual excessive smokers. Object: to increase the intoxicant power and to prolong the effect. Pepper, almonds, chillies, "sansip," are mixed with bhang, to prevent burning sensation. Called "thandai." 30. Bhang is consumed in private and in com- pany. Ganja only in company. Only men con- sume all those drugs, except women that have become degraded and have left their homes. Children do not consume. 31. (a) The habit gradually increases. (b) Only slightly difficult to break off and thus differs from opium. (c) There is no tendency for the habit to be- come excessive. 32. No social or religious customs. 33. The practice is looked down upon socially. No religious objection. Disrepute caused by men under the influence of drugs talking nonsense and doing stupid things. No custom of worshipping. 34. No privation. 35. (a) Prohibition feasible. (b) There would certainly be illicit consump- tion, (c) No suggestion as to how prohibition should be enforced. (d) There would be great discontent. (e) No political danger. (f) No other form of intoxicant would be taken. 40. Bhang is used in cattle medicines, especial- ly for distention of his stomach and after great fatigue. 4.2. Not beneficial. 43. Moderate consumers do not cause any in- convenience to others. 41. Lassitude after the intoxicant effect of bhang has passed off. No bad effect from charas or ganja. All these produce intoxication. They are refreshing after bodily exertion. Does not allay hunger. Ganja intoxication lasts for four hours ; bhang lasts for twenty hours. Abstention causes increased longing, but no harm to the man's physical or mental power. 45. (a) and (b) Ganja causes drying up of lungs and pain in the chest. Blood and skin turns black and physical powers becomes less. No mental effects. Excessive use causes decrease in sexual "desire. Above effects are only slight in a moderate consumer. (c) Ganja causes injury to digestion and slight increase of appetite. None of above apply to use of bhang. (d) Ganja causes dysentery and bronchitis and asthma. (e) Drugs do not cause insanity. 47. Not hereditary. 49. Not used as aphrodisiac. Ganja causes im- potence. Bhang has no such effect. 55. No, complete senselessness cannot be in- duced. 57. Ganja and charas are never eaten or drunk. 62. No control necessary. 63. Present system is very good and needs no alteration. 64. No objections at all. 65. Present taxation is reasonable. 66. Should be different rates, because the dealers get higher prices for the better articles. 67. No objections to present method. 68. No such places. 69. No necessity to take public opinion. 256. Evidence of SHIMBHU NATH, Ranker and Cloth Merchant, Harodi, Agarwala, Bania. 1. I held a ganja contract for one year. 2. Ganja, bhang and charas are three different plants. Otherwise, Dr. Prain's definitions are correct. 3. Bhang grows spontaneously in Katiari, Pilibhit, and Lakhimpur. 4. Only bhang, charas, and ganja (three sepa- rate plants). 7. (c) Only in Katiari, to a small extent. 8. Decrease, because the contractors used to make advances to the cultivators, and they have now discontinued the practice. 9. Sown in Katiari with wheat. 10. Ordinary cultivators. 16. Bhang is not generally prepared by the people in their houses. 18. They all deteriorate, but do not entirely lose their effect, with the exception of charas, which is thrown away. With care they keep for two years. Drying spoils charas, but lapse of time by itself spoils ganja and bhang. No special measures can be taken. 19. Yes. 20. Thakurs and low castes everywhere. 21. Flat ganja. 22. Foreign (there is no native) from Yar cand. 23. Never, 24. Every one. 25. On the increase.
350 257. Evidence of NARAIN DAS, Agarwala Bania, Mahajan, Bisalpur, Pilibhit District. 1. I am acquainted with this matter, as I took the drug contract on some occasions. 3. Ganja named baluchar is grown in Benares. That which is called pathar grows in Gwalior State, and that which is called only ganja grows in pargana Puranpur, district Pilibhit. It grows also in all places, excepting sandy ones. It is ex- tensively grown in the districts of Benares and Pilibhit and in Gwalior State and Nepal. 4. That which grows in Benares is named balu- char, and that which is grown in the Gwalior State is termed pathar. That which grows in Nepal and in the district of Pilibhit is called only ganja. 5. High ground containing soil mixed with kunkur and small pebbles. 6. Is not dense, but rather dispersed. 7. No cultivation. 8. Not known. 9. It grows in all places, excepting sandy places. 10. No separate class of cultivators. They are just like others. 11. Yes, they are raised from the seed of wild hemp. 12. It is no where specially cultivated, but grows spontaneously. 13. In my opinion it is not restricted to any particular province, but it is common to all dis- tricts, 14. In Pilibhit bhang is prepared to the extent of 500 maunds (pucca). 15. Not known. 1G. Bhang can be prepared, but charas cannot be prepared from the ganja which grows here. 17. Not known. 18. Yes, these three deteriorate by keeping. By ordinary care bhang can be kept for five years, and ganja three years, and charas of Yarkand three years, and charas of Bokhara eight years. Damp- ness is destructive to all of these, which should be avoided as far as possible. 19. Ganja and charas only are used for smoking to my knowledge. 20. Generally speaking, the mendicant class is more in the habit of smoking ganja and charas than any other class. They have no localities fixed for abode, but live where they please. No- thing is known about proportion. 21. In Oudh and Gwalior all three kinds of ganja are smoked. 22. Foreign charas is chiefly used and is im- ported from Yarkand. 23. Bhang is never used for smoking. 24. All classes eat and drink bhang ; there is no restriction for any class. 25. Use of charas is on an increase. No reason can be accounted for. 26. Proportion351 258. Evidence of CHARANJI LAL, Bannia, Contractor, Jagadhri, Saharanpur 1. I have been a drug contractor all my life. 2. These definitions may be accepted for bhang and charas. I know nothing of ganja. 3. Saharanpur, Umballa, Hoshiarpur, Kangra. It grows most abundantly in Saharanpur. 4. Bhang, buti, savi, thanai. All refer to the same plant. 5. It grows freely in sand on the banks of rivers. Coolness and moisture are also essential to its free growth. 6. Ordinarily scattered, except where there is a large amount of moisture. Maunds. 14. Bhang.352 Oral evidence. Question 15.353 41. The moderate use of bhang acts as stimu- lant and increases appetite, but ganja and charas are bad even it moderately used. 42. The first part of this question is replied in No. 41. 43. Not offensive. 44. According to different temperaments of consumers, to some it is refreshing and to others producing bad effects. Bhang creates a little appetite ; it generally varies on the quantity taken and the health of the consumer. After-effects are weakness and idleness ; it produces longing or uneasiness. 55. Yes, but in case of bhang by help of dhatura the consumer becomes senseless. 57. I never heard of any one eating and drink- ing ganja and charas ; they are generally smoked. 58. The present arrangement requires no modi- fication, and can make no suggestion for better arrangement. 59. Answered in 58. 63 and 64. None. 65. No suggestion to offer. 66 and 67. No. 68. The present arrangement of location of shops is satisfactory and requires no modification. 69. Yes, by local enquiry. Public opinion should be invited. 70. Can't answer ; no data to reply to this. 260. Evidence* of AGA FAQIR MAHOMED, Merchant, Dehra Dun. [Answers recorded by W. R. G. Moir, Excise Officer.] 3. Hemp plant growing spontaneously is abun- dant in Dehra and Mussoorie. 6. Is mostly dense. 7. No one cultivates the hemp plant in our dis- trict. (a) No. (b) No. (c) No. (d) Its bark is manufactured into ropes (sic). 17. By all classes of the people residing at the place who may have a liking for it. 18. Ganja, bhang and charas deteriorate by being kept in a wet place for a long time. They can keep good long with ordinary care. Protec- tion from exposure to air (atmosphere), etc., is also necessary. 20. Mostly Hindus, and among the Muham- madans354 Sometimes the dry leaf is eaten with or without sugar, and a draught of water is taken subse- quently. 16. Bhang (the decoction) is prepared in the manner described above by people in their houses. It can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown. But in fact the plant that grows in the khadir and is picked in September is of greater potency and is preferred. The poor only use the plant which grows in places other than the khadir. 19. Charas is only used for smoking. Ganja is not smoked at all in this district. All castes take charas ; fakirs are the chief consumers. Witness calculates that 1 per cent. of the popula- tion take charas. 22. Charas is imported from Yarkand. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking. If it were, the results would be disastrous, as madness would ensue. 24. Bhang is taken only by habitual consumers in the cold weather ; in the hot weather its use is general. Only 2 or 3 per cent. of bhang consum- ers eat the drug, mostly fakirs. Habitual con- sumers are found among Banias, Brahmans, and Musalmans. About 8 per cent. of the people, witness calculates, are habitual consumers. About 80 per cent. take bhang as a cooling drink in the hot weather. (Witness's knowledge is confined to the area of Muzaffarnagar. 25. Witness thinks that the use of charas but not of bhang is on the decrease, as people cannot afford the luxury. 27. The excessive consumers are mostly drawn from fakirs. "Witness formed his habits of drinking charas in his youth, from a licensee with whom he associated. He learnt to drink bhang from his uncle, who be- longed to a well-known family of bhang con- sumers. The uncle was a patwari. 28. Habitual excessive consumers of charas use from 1 chattack to 2 chattacks a day, i.e., 0-10-0 to 1-4-0 per day. (This seems excessive ; witness refers to fakirs.) Habitual moderate consumers take 1 tola or 1½ tola a day, i.e., 2 or 3 annas worth. Habitual excessive consumers of bhang take 1½ tola or 2 tolas, i.e., 1½ pies or 2 pies worth. Moderate consumers of bhang take 3 mashas to 6 mashas, i.e. ¼ of a pie to ½ a pie's worth. 29. The ingredients of bhang (used by those who can afford them) have been mentioned (ques- tion 15). They are taken as a cooling drink in summer. In the cold weather sont (ginger), ajwain, and almond are mixed with bhang to warm the body, Dhatura is not used. Sheira (molasses), to- bacco are mixed with charas. 30. Charas is usually smoked in company of three or four smokers. Bhang is often taken in solitude, but often in company of two or three drinkers. Men take charas, not women. The habit is acquired from 15 years to 20, not after. Some women of prostitute class take bhang ; men of age of 18 upwards take bhang ; children con- sume neither drug. 31. The habits of taking bhang and charas are easily formed. The former habit, but not the latter, is easily broken off. Witness used to smoke from six mashas to one tola of charas when he got it from the friend, the licensee, for nothing. He now smokes three mashas a day. There is no tendency for moderate use of either drug to de- velop to the excessive. 32. The society of fakirs leads to the habit of drinking bhang and smoking charas. Boys visit fakirs' shrines in hopes of having their prayers answered. The fakirs impress on them the spirit- ual benefit to be derived from smoking charas at the shrine. 33. The use of charas is generally regarded as disgraceful, but not that of bhang. Witness attributes the sentiment to the high price of charas, which reduces those who habitually indulge in it to poverty. Charas and bhang are often indulged in at fakirs' shrines, and there is a custom of first offering them to Siva. This offer- ing does not save the drugs from consumption. 34. It would be a privation to forego the use of charas. Bodily pain, coughing, would be caused for some forty days. To leave off bhang would cause slight inconvenience. Witness speaks from the personal experience when he has been obliged to forego charas. He felt pain in the legs and coughed and spat phlegm, 35. Witness would view with great satisfaction the prohibition of the use of charas and bhang, and this feeling is shared by all the Banias and Brah- man consumers in the city of his acquaintance. His character and his capacity for making a live- lihood have both suffered. Witness would not be driven to the use of alcohol or any other drug. 40. The use of bhang is prescribed by native doctors. 41. Charas enables the habitual consumer to digest his food. It takes away the desire for food except of dainties. It does not act as a febrifuge. Bhang stimulates the appetite. Bhang is a febri- fuge, when occasionally taken. Kahars who have to plant singhara in ponds in the cold weather take charas in order to lessen the effects of their immersion. 42. The moderate use of charas is harmless. Witness states that he got into the society of a fakir woman with whom he used to smoke 2 or 3 tolas of charas a day and he got ruined and injur- ed in constitution. The moderate use of bhang is beneficial. 43. Neighbours are afraid of moderate consum- ers of charas ; in case any one should speak to them when they are intoxicated and should be abused. 44. The use of charas is followed by a glowing sensation all over the body, which lasts for some two hours. When the effects wear off there is a desire for taking more of the drug. The use of bhang also causes a stimulating sensation to the body. 45. The moderate habitual use of charas does not impair the constitution. It causes bronchitis asthma, but not dysentery. The desire of grati- fying the longing for the drug causes people to disregard the rights of property and to steal. Laziness, immorality, and debauchery are not induced by the habitual moderate use of charas. The moderate use of bhang has no bad effects mentioned. 46. Witness learnt to use charas from a drug licensee of Muzaffarnagar. This man used to take charas and bhang and also liquor in excess, and he got insane at age of 30, and became a violent lunatic and died 18 months after. Genda, a nai of Muzaffarnagar, drank 1 tola of bhang and smoked 2 tolas of charas every day.
355 He got insane at the age of 22. He still takes charas, opium, and bhang, as much as he can get from his mother, who supports him. 47. The habitual excessive use of charas does not induce habits of debauchery or immorality ; nor does the excessive use of bhang, 48. Witness's sons do not consume either drug. There is no hereditary predisposition. 50. Prostitutes use bhang, not charas, as an aphrodisiac. Witness has two sons and one. daugh- ter. The use of hemp does not produce impotence. 52. Criminals are not as a rule consumers of charas and bhang, 53. Excessive indulgence in bhang and charas induces a languid stupor356 49. The use of any of these drugs is not hurt- ful, and is not prevalent amongst prostitutes. 51. Large proportion of bad characters are habi- tual moderate consumers of these drugs, and they commit both general and special crimes. 53. The excessive use of these drugs sometimes incites to crime. 54. The criminals use these drugs to fortify themselves to commit a premeditated act of vio- lence and other crime. 55. The criminals in order to further their designs induce their victims to partake of charas, and so stupefy themselves ; and complete stupe- faction can be induced by this drug without ad- mixture in cases of those who never use it. 57. Ganja and charas both are generally smok- ed by chillum, but the latter is also rarely eaten, and produces effects similar to those of dhatura. 58. The present system of excise administration is excellent. 263. Evidence of THAKUR HIRA SINGH, Retired Resaldar, Kabgarh, Moradabad. 4. Here it is called ganja pathar. 5. A moist climate, such as the Terai. 6. Generally dense. 7. Not in this neighbourhood. 14. Bhang is prepared in the Terai ; ganja and charas come from other parts. 16. Bhang can be prepared wherever grown. 17. Not confined to any special caste. 18. Bhang keeps for five years, but is spoiled by moisture ; charas and ganja deteriorate after a year. 19. Only for smoking. 20. Chiefly fakirs. 21. The only kind of ganja used here is called pathar, which is used only by poor people. 22. Almost entirely Yarkand. 23. Never here. 24. Hindus in general, and chiefly fakirs. 25. Yes, to some extent among rich people, who consume European spirits more than for- merly. 26. Chiefly among such fakirs as live five or ten together, and such castes as do not consume spirit. 28. Ordinary consumers of charas do not take less than an anna a day ; bhang consumers not less than 1½ pie and ganja consumers 3 pie. 29. Dhatura is used with bhang to increase the intoxication. Also pepper, cardamoms, cucumber seeds, almonds, etc. 30. Bhang is often consumed in solitude ; ganja and charas always in company if possible. 81. The habit is very difficult to break off in the case of excessive consumers only. 32 and 33. None. 34. Certainly ; it would be positively harm- ful. 35. It would bear very hardly on consumers. They would not appreciate spirits. 37. Charas has a less hot effect. 39. Bhang has no bad effect ; charas and ganja smoking has. 40. Bhang is frequently used as medicine both for men and animals. 41. Bhang is exhilarating, digestive, increases hunger, and alleviates fatigue. Charas also al- leviates fatigue, and the poor smoke it for this reason ; but it affects the blood. 43. Yes. 44. Charas produces an immediate effect, which lasts three hours. Bhang does not take effect for half an hour ; but the effect lasts six hours. Bhang increases hunger. 45. Ganja and charas are harmful all round ; bhang has no bad effect, mental or physical ; ganja and charas produce asthma, produce impotence and weakness of intellect. 47. It is not a hereditary habit, and does not affect the children. 49. Excessive use of ganja and charas pro- duces impotence, which is the reason why fakirs consume them ; bhang is exhilarating. 54. Drug intoxication does not produce courage. 55. Drugs do not produce insensibility with- out the admixture of arsenic or dhatura. 57. Not here. 58. I consider it works well. 59. The income from drugs could be increased by cheapening them. 62. No control is necessary. 63 and 64. None. 65. Spirits are more heavily taxed than drugs. 68. There are none. 69. The contractor will not open a shop where there is no custom. Public opinion need not be consulted. 70. Drugs are smuggled in from Rampur. 264. Evidence of ALI MAHOMED KHAN, Pensioner, Bareilly. 1. I was in company with those smoking charas, etc. 2. These definitions do not apply. Bhang grows in hills and comes here from hills for sale. Charas comes from Punjab and Kabul. Ganja grows here spontaneously on the bank of rivers. Ganja is not cultivated here. It is indigenous. 7. Yes, patsan is cultivated in this province simply for bark and seed. 16. People generally do not make it here. Dry leaves come from hills. 19. Ganja and charas are smoked. No other mode of using them. 20. Nearly all castes and tribes smoke them.
357 Kahars, Murao and other low castes use them extensively. 22. Foreign charas used. It is imported from Punjab and Kabul and is sold here. 28. Bhang is not smoked here. 24. Not restricted to particular classes. The Hindus and Brahmins use it extensively, and con- sider its use very useful. 25. Ganja, bhang and charas are on the increase. Now the Muhammadans have also adopted it. The number of smokers and users of bhang is al- ways increasing. 30. Respectable people and those who are reli- giously forbidden to use ganja, bhang, charas use it privately and secretly. Generally they form parties of 10 or 15. Boys do not use it. 31. The habit is easily formed. When the habit is once acquired it is very troublesome to give it up ; but when they do give it up, they do not become ill. Generally they do not use it in travel and feel no ill consequences. 32. No religious or other custom exists as to its use. Bhang is regarded by the Hindus as something auspicious. In Holi festival they use sweetmeats containing bhang. Charas and ganja are not necessary for the festival, and the use is generally moderate. 33. All these three articles are regarded as very bad. Those very persons who use them prohibit their consumption by others. A few Hindu castes regard bhang as auspicious, but the general public regards bhang and charas or any intoxicating articles with shame. Sons of respectable people ruin themselves and become unfit for any work. They daily lose their strength, and lose all idea of respectability and honour. They devote some attention to their food, but pay no attention to their wives, families and children. The plant patsan or flax is not worshipped. Only a few Hindu tribes regard bhang as auspicious. 34. A little trouble may be experienced when habit is contracted, but no harm whatever is caused to health. 1 have seen that consumers of bhang, charas, etc., discontinued their use, and for about one or two days they felt some uneasiness, but after that time their countenance brightened and they became healthy and robust. 35. It is quite possible that these articles could be entirely prohibited. A time may be fixed and a notification issued that after such and such date no sale of these articles would take place, and that the consumers should at once give up their habit. It is most probable that people would not use them secretly ; but it is also probable that a few tribes of Hindus would secretly use bhang. The consumers will express no great dissatisfaction, and those who have a little common sense will thank the Government. And, of course, there is no danger possible to the administration. Those who are given to intoxication can use intoxicating drinks for the time. And intoxicating drinks is a hundred times better than these drugs. 36. Some people have even now given up the use of these articles and begun intoxicating drinks. Those who want to leave this habit do it by means of intoxicating drinks, and these do not feel any trouble. And then gradually they give up the intoxicating drink itself. 40. Bhang is sometimes prescribed by Yunani practitioners simply for intoxicating properties. Bhang is also sometimes used for cattle disease. The Yunani doctors use smoke of bhang in case of piles. 41. (a) Charas and ganja neither promote diges- tion nor add to nutriment. Bhang produces hunger. (b) After hard toil, trouble or exhaustion people generally use bhang. (c) These articles are never used here for the purposes mentioned. 42. In my opinion all these articles are injurious to a very high degree. People have died while smoking charas and ganja. They lose strength and their blood dries up. They lose all their energies. 43. The neighbours are always in trouble. The strong smell of charas and ganja is very offensive to the neighbours. Its smell sometimes brings on vomiting. Even after smoking these articles the smoker carries the smell with him, which is offen- sive to the person with whom the smoker sits. Salivation or intense flow of saliva from his mouth takes place, and his face becomes languid. 44. An unaccustomed person gets intoxicated the moment he smokes. One who uses bhang gets intoxicated after some time. As bhang is intoxi- cating, the user does not feel any trouble for the time being. Bhang causes some appetite. Ganja and charas leave their intoxicating effects for an hour or half: an hour, but the bhang intoxication lasts for some time. If nourishing food is not obtainable, those who use bhang, charas and ganja grow pale and weakly day by day. If they get nourishing food the strength is sustained for a time, after which the man becomes very weak. The effect of all these three articles is highly in- jurious to body and mind. 45. The smoker of charas and ganja loses strength daily and he gets asthma. He is always subject to attacks of cough. His sense of hospi- tality and social qualities leaves him. He is enervated, wants ease and luxury, and is idle. He is unsocial and dull. His brain becomes very weak. When the brain becomes weak it leads to insanity. 46. As the effect of bad company is always bad, those who keep company of ganja and charas smokers always fall a victim to them and learn the habit. The ganja and charas smoker knows that he is looked down upon by society. So his aim and ambition is to convert all men to his brotherhood and learn the vice. He thinks that if all men learn this vice he will not be looked down upon with shame and contempt. Thus the number of smokers is always increasing. 47. The habit is not necessarily hereditary, But if children see their parents indulging in this vice they always learn it and practise it them- selves. This is verified by practice. Thus it be- comes hereditary. 48. This has been replied to in No. (46). 49. Prostitutes use it for its astringent qualities, so that they may be able to sustain their strength for some hours at a time. (In filthy language, to prevent quick discharges, to prolong dalliance.) None of these articles are stimulating. In this way the use is still more injurious. Stimulation depends upon blood, and as they reduce blood, it follows that there is no stimulation. 51. Bad characters use bhang, charas and ganja generally, and their resources are generally limited. They invent many ways to procure money by illegal means when their income fails them. In this way crimes are increased. 53. By excessive use a man loses his sense of right and wrong. In a state of intoxication they
358 plan out and commit different crimes, which they hate when sober. They do not remember any- thing done by them. It is often heard that mur- ders have been committed in such a state. Hurt and grievous hurt are small matters for these people. 54. Thieves and other bad characters use them. They plan out some device, and by this intoxica- tion they fix their attention to it exclusively. 55. As far as I have ascertained, it is known that robbers compel travellers to smoke ganja and charas. As the travellers are not used to them, they fall almost senseless and they are robbed. Sometimes dhatura is also mixed with them. Dhatura causes more pain, convulsions and sense- lessness.
359 EVIDENCE OF PUNJAB WITNESSES. 1. Evidence of MR. C. M. RIVAS, Officiating First Financial Commissioner. Oral evidence. I have been twenty-nine years in the Civil Service, all in the Punjab. The parts of the province with which I am best acquainted are the Jullunder Doab, the Kangra District and the Lahore Division. I am now Financial Commis- sioner. I am not in charge of the Excise Depart- ment. The growth of the hemp plant is exceed- ingly common all over the Kangra district, especially Kulu. I think it is a rain crop from the growth I saw the other day in the Kulu in October. There is no other district with which I am acquainted in which it grows abun- dantly. But I imagine it does so in the hill parts of Hoshiarpur and Gurdaspur. I cannot say that the effects of charas or bhang have come before me in respect to the health or well-being of the people. Occasionally, as when a lambardar has had to be dismissed, I have heard that the reason of a man's going to the bad has been that he has taken to drugs. This is a gener- al statement, and I have not verified it. "Drugs" might, of course, include opium. I should say certainly that liquor has come more prominently to my notice than these drugs in its effect on the health and well-being of the people. But even in the cities the effect of none of these intoxicants is appreciable, so far as I know. Certainly in the villages a man who takes to drugs or liquor to excess is a notorious object ; but the cases are few and far between. I must except Kulu, where the people are much addicted to their favourite liquor. It is a light brew. But this is a marked feature of Kulu. I have not observed any connection between hemp drugs and crime. I cannot say that any cases have come to my notice. I cannot think of any in particular. I have never heard of a case of running amuck under the influence of hemp in the Punjab. I have read of such cases in the news- papers ; but no such case has come to my personal notice. I think that Government is bound to control the manufacture and sale of intoxicants by imposing pretty high excise duties. This is the present policy of Government and works well. The duties must not be so high as to encourage illicit manu- facture or smuggling. Apart from that the duty may be as high practically as Government chooses. I am not aware of any worse intoxicants in the Punjab than opium drugs and liquor. In regard to both hemp drugs and liquor, it has to be remem- bered that their maunfacture is very simple and can very easily be carried on. I think that in this country Government ought to control the manufacture and sale of intoxicants ; for I think that they are deleterious when taken in excess. They are to this extent deleterious that this amount of interference is justifiable and proper, apart altogether from revenue considera- tions. But I think a very strong case would have to be made out to justify prohibition. I mean this on general principles, apart from the very great practical difficulties of prohibition. You could prohibit charas without much practical difficulty, as it is an imported drug ; though some charas would certainly find its way into India. It is in regard to bhang that there would be the great practical difficulty, as it grows wild in so many parts of the country. I do not consider that such a strong case as would justify prohibition can be made out in regard to either charas or bhang, certainly not in the Punjab. I think that hemp drugs are insufficiently taxed in the Punjab. Certainly as compared with liquor, both charas and bhang are insufficiently taxed. Further taxation of charas, in the form of an import duty under the new Act, is in con- templation. I believe that difficulties have been raised by the Kashmir authorities about levying a tax on the frontier, and that the idea is to levy the tax at central warehouses. But I cannot give details, as the subject is not in my department ; nor can I give any opinion as to the best method of taxing the drug. I have not considered it sufficiently. I understand that the Kashmir authorities object that it would destroy the trade. I have formed no opinion on that point. In regard to bhang, anything further in the way of taxation would be very difficult. I cannot go into the matter. All I can say is that, if it could be done, it would be well to impose heavier taxation. The control at present is very little, as the plant grows wild and is easily manufactured. It would be difficult to control. 1 do not think that a considerable increase of taxation would materially reduce consumption. But certainly the article is not adequately taxed ; and if more taxation could be imposed on it, it would be well. 2. Evidence of MR. G. M. OGILVIE, Officiating Second Financial Commissioner. Oral evidence. I have been thirty years in the Government ser- vice, passed entirely in the Punjab. I know Upper Punjab and the frontier best, and I have some acquaintance with the Delhi division. In fact I have experience of all parts of the province except the Jullundur division. I am at present officiat- ing as Financial Commissioner in charge of ex- cise. I know from reports that the plant grows wild in the Gurdaspur district, though I have not seen it there. It grows also in the Dera Ghazi Khan district, both wild and to a small extent cultivated. My experience of the effect of the hemp drugs upon the health and welfare of the people is limited. It is chiefly confined to the Dera Ghazi Khan district, where I served for two years. In that district the consumption of both bhang and
360 charas is very common ; and regarding the dele- terious effects of both, and especially of charas, there is no doubt whatever. I have known many individuals in that district who were physical wrecks from consuming them, especially charas. In other parts of the province my attention has not been specially directed to the effects of the drugs. The individuals of whom I was thinking were Govern- ment servants of the lower class, such as chapras- sis and policemen. They were residents of that part of the country. I formed the belief that persons had got into this condition from the effects of the drugs, from personal knowledge of them. They would acknowledge it themselves. The number that came under my personal ob- servation was of course small ; but from hearsay I am under the impression that the habit of taking the drugs was very prevalent among the lower classes of population of Dera Ghazi Khan. I can recall the case of one of my own chapras- sis. He was a Saiad, and originally a flue ath- letic man. He became useless and afterwards died. He became physically useless, and also fell into a state of mental stupidity. He had the appearance of a man who had a disease from which he was gradually wasting ; but to the best of my knowledge, he had no disease. He was never medically examined. His mental weakness showed itself in listlessness, apathy, and what 1 should call nervous depression, which is probably the symptom generally induced by these drugs. He openly confessed the use of both charas and bhang. He was not, to the best of my knowledge, an eater or smoker of opium ; nor, being a Saiad, would he drink liquor. I daresay I knew of a dozen such cases here and there throughout that district. The man I have mentioned was never removed from the service. He was off and on in my service for some five years. His physical deterioration came on gradually, not suddenly. I do not know of his having been given to any other form of excess. He was about 35 when he died. I know of no peculiarity of the Dera Ghazi Khan district which should render the hemp habit more prevalent there than elsewhere. The habit appears to be spread over Dera Ghazi Khan and Multan, but I can give no reason for it. It is true they are especially hot and dry districts. I have not met any natives whom I could call physical wrecks from alcohol, though I have known hard drinkers. I have, however, heard of cases of dismissal brought about by drink. The effects of excess in drink are seen in men getting into trouble from that indulgence. I am unable to trace any connection between the hemp drugs and crime, and cannot form any opinion on the subject. In my large experience as a Magistrate, I cannot recall any cases in which the crime was due either to the hemp drugs or to opium. Nor do I remember having ever had to punish natives for drunkenness or offences associated with it. My impression is that riots in towns may sometimes arise from liquor, and that Cantonment Magistrates might tell a differ- ent story, At certain native festivals, such as the Holi, breaches of the peace due to excitement caused by liquor are not unfrequent. I think that the system of levying an excise both upon liquor and other intoxicants, including under that head both opium and hemp drugs, is entirely defensible according to the principles which regulate the administration of civilized countries. The main question, it seems to me, that can arise in this connection is whether any particular liquor or intoxicant is so deleterious that, on grounds both of morality and utility its consumption ought to be prohibited by law. In the case of opium, at least of opium eaten and not smoked, my opinion was that the consumption of the drug was not by any means proved to be so deleterious as would warrant any Government in prohibiting its consumption by law, or in taking such measures as would in any indirect manner practically stop its consumption. I would even add to this that, in the case of opium, I came to the conclusion that, as used by the natives of the Punjab, this drug was even to a certain degree beneficial. As regards the hemp drugs, I am inclined to hold the opinion, though I am not quite satisfied on the subject, that the use of charas is so dele- terious that it might be permissible, both on grounds of morality and utility, for its use to be prohibited, or for the price of the drug to be so artificially raised, or to confine its consumption to a very small number indeed. The reason why I say that I am not quite satisfied on the point is because I feel I have not sufficiently investigated the facts. All that I can, therefore, say with certainty is that my opinion tends to the direction above indicated. I would add, too, with regard to charas, that the prohibition of its use would not be a matter of much practical difficulty because the drug is an imported article, and it would, of course, be possible either to prohibit its import or to place upon it a practically prohibitive duty. But I could not give a decided opinion on the point without further consideration of the question whether the above measures would or would not be nullified by smuggling. I am inclined to think, however, that the difficulties arising from smuggling would not be considerable. I would observe, however, with regard to the Yarkand trade, that the imposition of a duty so high as to be practically prohibitive would very consider- ably injure that trade, because the Yarkandi trader, in exchange for the charas, takes back the products of the Punjab to his own country or to Kashmir. The extinction or serious injury of the Yarkand trade would, of course, be a very regrettable circumstance. On the other hand, from my personal knowledge as Deputy Commissioner of the Dera Ismail Khan District, I would say that no harm would accrue to general trade on the western border from the prohibition of charas. As regards bhang, my opinion is that it can hardly come under the description of a drug which is so deleterious as to warrant the prohibition of its use by Government. That the drug is deleterious is, I think, generally admitted ; but I very much doubt if it can be described as deleterious to that extent. There is another very important consideration in the case of bhang, which is this : that the prohibition of its use is practically impossible owing to the extent to which it grows wild and the ease with which it can be manufactured for consumption. After giving some consideration to the point, I have practically arrived at the opinion that the present system by which this drug can only be sold by licensed vendors is probably the only practicable system of taxing it. By saying that a tax should be practically pro- hibitive, I mean that it should he fixed so high as to place the commodity beyond the reach of any but very rich people. Where prohibition is not necessary, on the other hand, I would fix the tax as high as possible consistently with leaving the commodity within the reach of the majority of the people. In the latter case, the object would be the object of all excise, viz., to derive
361 revenue and at the same time to lessen consump- tion. In both cases restriction comes in, though in a less degree in the one case than the other. It is not my object that restriction should be con- fined to the poor ; but I would observe that a tax which tends to raise the price of a commodity of necessity places that commodity out of the reach of the very poor. I think charas is certainly not taxed sufficiently high with reference to other intoxicants. At present the only tax upon charas is that derived from licenses for sale. If any fees are levied on passes for transport, they are of very inconsider- able amount. There formerly existed a legal difficulty regarding the questions whether an import duty could be put on charas ; but the passing of the Act No. X of 1893, to amend the Excise Act, has removed that difficulty. Under this Act, it is within the power of Government to impose a duty on any intoxicating drug brought by land from beyond the limits of India into any territory to which the Act extends ; and it is now in contemplation to impose such a duty, though the exact amount of the duty and the method of its collection have not as yet been finally decided. I think that the duty should certainly not be fixed at such an amount as to extinguish the Yarkand trade ; and I am inclined to the opinion that a moderate duty should be first impo ed which might be gradually raised in succeeding years. Of the alternative methods of taxing in the frontier, and of taxing at depots in which the imported drug should be warehoused, I should be in favour of taxing the charas coming from Afghanistan on the frontier, the object being to discourage, as far as possible, the import from that direction. On the other hand, with regard to the charas imported from Yarkand, I may mention that a strong representation has been made to the effect that the Yarkandi traders would be unable to pay any duty directly on the frontier, and as it is the policy to foster this trade, I am inclined to think that it might be necessary to adopt the second alternative, i. e., to make arrangements for the realization of the tax at the places where the charas is sold, and for the grant of passes to the merchants to transport it to those places. As to the question whether the present taxation of bhang is high enough or not, I am inclined to think that, although it is certainly not high euough, yet that to materially increase it would be excessively difficult on account of the extreme facility with which the drug can be prepared. I am not prepared to give an opinion on the point whether cultivation of bhang should be prohibited without license ; but owing to the exceedingly small extent of the existing cultivation, I think that there would be no difficulty about it. With regard to the proposal to impose transit duty on bhang, i. e., on transport from places where it grows wild to other places where it does not grow wild, I am inclined to think that the practical difficulties in the way of imposing such duties would be insuperable. 3. Evidence of MR. S. S. THORBURN, Commissioner and Superintendent, Rawalpindi. 1. Only from supervision of excise matters as part of the regular duties of a Revenue Com- missioner, and formerly as Deputy Commissioner of Dera Ismail Khan and Rawalpindi, 2. I think so, as far as bhang and charas are concerned. Ganja is, I believe, practically unknown in this Division, unless included under the general name of charas, or used as a conver- tible expression for the name of that drug. 3. In all the hilly and submontane districts of this division362 it is probably picked up in childhood from the I parents, as is the habit of smoking, on which no restriction is placed by such parents. 32. No information. 33. Charas is reprobated. Bhang not so. It is said to produce a pleasant sensation and to promote hunger. Therefore (in moderation) it is regarded as beneficial rather than as injurious. 34. To deprive habituals suddenly of the use of charas would probably be a serious privation. It would probably cause very great nervous and physical prostration and great mental lassitude. 35. I doubt it. If repressive measures were adopted they would be evaded, and in the case of bhang easily so, since the plant grows wild so profusely. If strictly prohibited discontent would be caused among the religious class of consumers, who greatly sway the opinions of the more ignorant classes of natives. Whether it would cause "political danger" it is difficult to say. There would be discontent. Prohibition would doubtless drive habituals to opium or liquor. 36. It is very doubtful. People addicted to drugs may also use alcohol ; but I doubt if they would give up the drug, entirely at any rate. 39. The smoking of charas is said to be parti- cularly noxious. Its immediate effects are in- sensibility ; and its after-effect, so far as a non- professional person can say, is enervating, includ- ing apathy and laziness. Its abuse is said to cause impotency. As to bhang, I believe that the immediate effects are exhilarating and there are no after- effects. This is hearsay. Bhang seems to be up here the poor man's substitute for opium or spirits. 41. (a) Doubtful. Bhang is said to increase the appetite. (b) Charas, no. Bhang may. 42 . The moderate use of bhang may and pro- bably is as little harmful as a similar moderation in the use of opium or spirits. It is said to im- prove the appetite and to have no after-effects. 43. The effect of charas smoking seems to be stupefaction. Under these circumstances, except in so far probably as they disgust their neigh- bours by their habit, they may be said to be inoffensive. They are probably more reckless of consequences to themselves than desirous of harming any one else. 44. Charas seems to intoxicate ; some it sti- mulates in a lazy way. Bhang, I think, exhila- rates to the extent of intoxication or its verge. Bhang is said to increase appetite ; charas pro- bably kills it. I should say it does or there would be no repetition. 45. They probably act differently on different constitutions. I doubt if insanity is produced by the mode- rate use of hemp drugs any more than by the moderate use of alcohol. The difficulty is to know what constitutes "moderate use." What is "moderate" for some would kill others. (Only three cases of reputed insanity from the use of hemp drugs have been363 sumption at least of the more deleterious drug, and in that case recourse would assuredly be had to other intoxicants. In this case the income from one would increase at the expense of the other. 66. Not applicable to the Punjab. 67. There is no present method of "taxing" these drugs. They are merely liable to license duty. If a heavy import duty were placed on charas (it would have to be gradually introduced and frequently raised to its maximum in the Punjab), the present system of license fees on re- tail sales is unobjectionable and should be con- tinued. The license duty would doubtless suffer at first, perhaps, in proportion to the incidence of the tax ; but if the tax and license fee duty did not decrease consumption, license fee would soon recover itself. 68. No ; the system is simply the establishment of shops for retail sale, where purchasers may consume on the premises or not according to the will of the licensee. 69. Local option has not been introduced. If it were, the result would probably be a demand for more shops. 70. There may be and probably is a little smuggling of bhang from Jammu, but it must be insignificant. Nothing noteworthy. Only as re- gards indigenous bhang, of which we have no official information. Note.364 different. The former causes abstraction, while the latter excites. They cause people to do very peculiar things. As to the effects on the health of the people generally, I have observed very little. I have only observed such individual cases as I have indicated. And in discussing the effects on I the health of the people, it is very difficult to distinguish between the effects of opium, liquor, and drugs. I have seen cases in which people were undoubt- edly mad for the time being ; and on inquiring as to the cause, I have been told that it was temporary madness due to these drugs. I had a case in my own compound, a servant, who went suddenly mad. They said it was bhang. I sent him to hospital. He escaped, and 1 have not seen him since. I never suspected him of the use of the drugs before. So far as effects have come to my notice, the effects of liquor are infinitely worse than those of drugs. I have seen infinitely worse effcets from liquor than those which I have been told were due to drugs. I look on all these things in much the same light. Use in moderation does not harm, but in excess it does, In regard to the connection of the drugs with crime, I have known cases of men running "amok" who, I was informed at the time, were under the influence of the drug. None of them came before me officially. But I have heard of such cases. And I remember one case in which a Gurkha belonging to the regiment to which I was then attached ran "amok," and killed or cut down some four or five people in the bazar. This was in the "sixties." The case was connect- ed with a woman. There was jealousy. So far as I recollect, his wife had gone o(F with another man. But it is too long ago to recollect details. This is the only case of running "amok3" with which I am personally acquainted. 1 have heard of other cases. In no other way does my personal experience lead me to connect the drugs with crime. I have heard of murders which were said to have been connected with the drugs, but I have never come across any. I have tried many cases of murder and other serious violent crime as Committing Magistrate from 1S70 to 18S9. During these nineteen years I have taken up the bulk of this class of* cases either as Committing Magistrate or as Deputy Commissioner acting under section 30, Criminal Proceedure Code. I have had the drugs pleaded in a careless kind of way occa- sionally in excuse ; but there has never been any proof of it. I have had lots of cases where rows and fights, in which the results have been serious, have occurred after liquor ; but not with hemp drugs. That is, it has never been brought before me as a Magistrate that the crime was due to hemp drugs ; but it has been brought before me that it was due to drink. In regard to the policy which Government should pursue in respect to intoxicants, I think that our liquor system is the kind of policy required for alcohol. In regard to bhang, I think that the difficulties of restriction owing to the wild growth are so great that any attempt to restrict would lead to greater evils than the drug itself. There would be such a plague of locusts in the shape of excise officers, spies and informers, that the evils would be worse than result from consumption. This applies to places where the plant grows wild. Elsewhere you might tax bhang by transport duty. But it is a ticklish thing. By making bhang more expensive you would touch the people on a very susceptible point as regards fakirs and mendi- cants. 1 would not, however, oppose a transport duty on that ground alone, if it could be imposed without further excise establishments. The watching and espionage would cause great annoy- ance and discontent. The cultivation of bhang could bo stopped with the greatest ease in the Punjab; but there is so little that it would not make much difference. 1 ought to add that to make bhang more expensive, or to prohibit it, has this additional danger, that people might take to other things that are worse. And so far as I know, there is no need for the restriction of bhang. Charas is imported from Yarkand and by way of Kashmir. There would be no harm in taxing charas, except that as it became more expensive, people would take more to bhang, that is, a certain number would not cease to use hemp, but would merely turn from one form of hemp to another. I am not sure which is the worse form ; but I am informed that charas is. As to the feasibility of taxing charas, I am clearly opposed to the introduction of a customs lino. Charas comes in from Yarkand and by way of Kashmir and Ladakh. The only system would be to have centres to which the people could go with their drugs to pay duty, It would be necessary to have convenient places on the trade routes. At present they are bound to bring their drugs to certain places and register them and get passes, but this provision is evaded. Such central places would be places where the duty could be paid, either by the importers or the contractors who purchased from them. The drug would not bo allowed to pass on without payment. I cannot express any opinion as to what the effect of this would be on the Yarkand trade. 5. Evidence of MR. W. COLDSTREAM, Deputy Commissioner, Simla. 1. I have served in districts where the hemp plant grows freely in a wild state, and in districts into which charas is largely imported. I have also recently taken steps to collect special inform- ation on the subject of hemp drugs, in respect principally of the district of Simla. 2. The dried leaves have various names. Bhang is the most common. Súkha seems to be a com- mon name for the dried leaves. The green leaves (or the plant) are sometimes called buti súkhi, or bhokar. In Bashahr both the green and dried leaves are called bhangúra. The seeds are called bhangúra throughout a great part of the Simla Hills, and in Baghát, bhangúlú. Ganja, I should imagine, is not much used in the Punjab. Charas is largely imported from Yarkand and neighbouring tracts via Kulu and Bashahr, and used to a certain extent in the Punjab. Bhang is the dried leaves of the hemp plant.
365 3. (1) Simla district up to at least 7,000 feet and Simla Hill States. (2) Hoshiarpur district. (3) Gurdaspur district. 4. I think there is only one plant which pro- duces what is known in the Punjab as bhang, viz., Cannabis saliva. Bhang is the common name, sabzi (sabji in Punjabi), and búti (or Shibji-ki buti, the plant of Shiva, the destroyer) are other names for the plant. The emulsion of the leaves is also called buti or sukhi. In Bashahr the plant is called bháng or bhaláng. Near Kasauli, bha- láng is the name given to the male flower, while the female flower is called bhang. 5. It grows, I think, most readily in climates with a fairly good rainfall : and seems to be specially common in the rich soil of waste places near villages (thus growing under somewhat simi- lar conditions to the nettle). It grows on the Himalayas up to 7,000 or 8,000 at least. 7. In the Simla district (as generally in the Punjab submontane) hemp is commonly grown for its fibre, which is made into ropes for ordinary use. So far as I know, hemp is not cultivated in the Punjab for the production of charas or ganja, or for use as bhang. I have, however, seen it culti- vated as a drug or food in the State of Bashahr, at 7,000 or 8,000 feet where it produces a resin. Here and elsewhere its seeds are sometimes mixed with food. 8. Villagers in the hills in the cold season occasionally roast its seeds and mix them with parched wheat or báthu (amaranthus), or with rice. This they call múra or muri. Ropes are made of the fibre both of the culti- vated and wild plants ; but the fibre from the culti- vated plant is much stronger. Bhang can be procured from both cultivated and wild plants. In Bashahr its seeds, parched and crushed, yield an oil (bhang ka tel). In some villages of Bashahr the ripe seed is mixed with spirit to make the latter more intoxi- cating. Towards the upper part of Kanáwar (Sutlej valley) the use of charas disappears. 9. I am given to understand that the soil is turned up only once and the seeds sown, No particular care is taken in the cultivation. 11. Hemp is not grown in Simla district for ganja. 14. Ganja and charas are not prepared, so far as I know, in the Punjab; though the resin of the terminal leaves and seeds is collected in a rough way in Bashahr State (see my note of 25th September on this subject, sent the Secretary to the Hemp Drugs Commission). Bhang is very commonly used ; but no special preparation of it is required : the leaves, simply dried, form the drug. 15. (A) Charas, of a kind, is made in these hills, though, 1 think, not to any very large extent, by rubbing the fresh leaves and seeds of the plant between the hands, scraping the adher- ent resin off the hands with a knife, and making it into little pills for smoking in the huka. (B) The seeds are eaten, and appear to be parched or roasted before being mixed with food. (C) The leaves are dried and kept in some vessel, commonly perhaps in the Punjab in a matka, or earthen jar, till required for use. The drink is prepared by pounding up fine the dry leaves, mixing them with water in a rough stone mortar (kundi) with the end of a thick stick used as a pestle. The mixture is diluted with water to taste, strained and drunk off. The refuse of leaves after straining is called nogdah. 16. The dried leaves are called bhang, and are collected in some parts of the Punjab, and used to make a drink as above described. Bhang is, I believe, generally prepared by people in their houses, or by pujáris and devotees in the temples and dharmsalas, and can be pre- pared from the hemp plant wherever grown. 17. Some of the Sikhs, both of the agricultural and religious classes, are much addicted to the use of bhang, e.g., it is used by the akalis at Anand- pur-Mahkhowal, by Sikhs at the Posi dharamsala (Garhshankar tahsil), and I believe at Derail Baba Nanak (Gurdaspur district). There is a Sikh dharmsala near the Ravi, for the use of which I have heard that Sir. Donald MacLeod, as an exceptional case, permitted a boat load of charas to be transported annually, free of duty, down the river from the submontane tract, where the plant grows. Fakirs and wandering mendicants are fre- quently addicted to the use of bhang. Hakims and baids sometimes employ it as a medicine. 22. To the Central and Eastern Punjab charas is brought from Yarkand and the neighbourhood ; in the rural parts of the Simla district there are probably very few habitual smokers. It is, how- ever, occasionally smoked when the cold is intense. 23. Bhang is not smoked so far as I know. 24. Many Sikhs, agriculturists and devotees, and some of the shop-keeping class in the Punjab, e.g., in Gurdaspur, Amritsar and Hoshiarpur dis- tricts, indulge in bhang drinking, particularly, it is said, in the summer and rainy reasons. I am not aware that bhang is eaten. 25. I beg to refer the Commission on this point to the results of an enquiry which was made by (I think) Sir Robert Egerton in 1880 or 1881, which results must be in the Financial Commis- sioner's or Government Secretariat Office. An intelligent native official whose home is in the central part of the Punjab, on this point says : "I believe the habitual consumption is on the de- crease. Only the religious vagabonds (sadhus, etc.) are accustomed to it, because, I believe, an habitual smoker or drinker of the drug is socially condemned (except in case of sadhus, who by some ignorant, people are reverenced according to the quantity of the drugs they consume). More- over, wine is taking the place of these drugs among the middle and well-to-do classes." 27. Bhang is, as above said, very commonly used by Sikh devotees (akális, nihangs, and others). Says one of my native informants. "Charas is consumed habitually only by sadhus, and a very few other people, who are generally considered to be lazy, etc. " The connection of bhang with the national life of the Sikhs in their fighting days is worth men- tioning. The Sikh religious warriors (for the worship of cold steel was part of the religion of the Sikhs), such as nihangs, were much given to the use of bhang. One great band or confederacy from this habit obtained the name of the Bhangi. Misl ; and no doubt much of its prowess was due
366 to the fanatic ardour inspired by draughts of hemp. This Misl had a famous cannon of vast calibre used by Ranjit Singh at the siege of Multan, called "the bhangi top." It is still to be seen in Lahore, and (like Mons Meg in Edinburgh) is one of the popular sights of the place. The virtues of bhang are recorded in the follow- ing old Punjabi dohas or couplets :367 and dryness of body ; laziness ; insanity (pro- bably this result is not unfrequent). It is not considered to produce habits of debauchery, but is apt to demoralize a man. 49. Yes ; I think so (in the form of a sweet- meat called majún perhaps) ; and it is stated to have a distinct stimulating effect on the sexual organs. Very probably its continued use might cause impotence ; but I have no evidence of this. 54. I am informed that it is a common belief that the drugs are so used. I would refer to what I have said in a note annexed on the subject of its use by the Sikhs. 55. The sweetmeat prepared from hemp drugs called majún. I have heard of its being used for such purposes ; also charas mixed with dhatura. 58. I think the system is satisfactory. There was indefiniteness in the rules regarding the im- port of charas ; but this has, I think, been attend- ed to. As far as I am aware, there is nothing likely to extend unduly the sale of hemp drugs ; and the aim of Government is, doubtless, to keep the sale of these drugs within necessary limits. 64. I think a heavy import duty on charas would be beneficial, because it no doubt does more harm than good in the province. 69. I would open no new shops. None have been opened for some years in Simla. If shops are opened anywhere, local public opinion should must certainly be considered. 70. See paragraph 27. Brief Note on the system of Excise on Hemp Drugs in the Simla Hill States, put in by MR. COLDSTREAM. 1. As in the Government territory of Simla district so in the Native States ganja is not used and therefore is not imported. Charas is imported into Simla district (includ- ing the Native States) from Hoshiarpur district* by way of Amballa and Kalka, and sometimes by way of Nalagarh and Bilaspur. It comes in varying quantities. Thus in 1892-93 the quanti- ties imported from Hoshiarpur are reported to have been as follow :368 6. Evidence of MR. DENZIL IBBETSON, Deputy Commissioner, Jalandhar. 1. I had no previous knowledge whatever of the subject ; though I know that wild bhang grows in small quantities along the Western Jamna Canal (or at least used to grow along the old canal) in the Karnal district, from seed brought down from the hills by the Jamna water. But it grows in enormous quantities in the northern portion of the Jalandhar tahsil, and I have therefore made inquiries on the spot. I am writing in the centre of a tract where many thousands of acres have bhang at the present mo- ment springing up all over them. It is the tract where the chohs, or shallow hill-streams from the Siwaliks, tail out over the country, The seed is brought down in the first instance by the water from the hills ; but as it flowers and seeds in this district, much of it is locally self-sown. It is most plentiful where the first flood has not been strong enough to carry away all the seed from the surface, where the water has collected or been obstructed, and has dried up, leaving the seed on the surface, where the flood has deposited fertilising loam, and where last year's weeding was badly done, so as to leave many plants to shad seed. The paint is said to have a slightly different habit from that of the hills ; it is more open and spreading in its growth, and is not sticky to the touch. It grows up with the spring crops. Much of it is weeded out, and given to the cattle without injury, together with the other weeds. Much of it is cut together with the crops, and is then valueless, not having acquired its specific properties. The supply is chiefly obtained from the plants which are, at harvest time, so small as to escape the sickle. The crops removed, they shoot up rapidly under the hot sun, and attain a height of often six to seven feet, or even more. They flower and seed I between the middle of May and the end of June ; and are then cut for use by the Chamars and other menials, the stalks being used for fuel in the village bakeries, and the leaves sold to contractors at a rate of about four annas a maund. The first rain renders the standing plant useless, as it de- prives it of its strength. A field of good soil will, if favourably situated, and not cultivated, become covered in two or three years with a thick growth of bhang which it is exceedingly difficult to eradi- cate. The plant is known by the name of bhang, buti and sabji. It grows still more plentifully in the Hoshiarpur district (through which the chohs come to us) ; and the bhang of Ambota, in the Una tahsil, is es- pecially famous 369 "If you don't want a 'head,' put one drink on top of another." But the characteristic effect upon which many people from whom I have inquired in many places lay stress without exception is, the timidity induced by bhang. There are two proverbs, of which I have unfortunately lost my note, one of which compares the effects of the different narcotics, and describes the bhang-drinker as "a little child ;" while the other says that if a leaf falls on his head, he thinks it a tiger. The idea, derived from I know not where, which I always entertained, that the Ghazi, or the man who ran amuck, used bhang to stimulate his courage, is scouted by everybody as the exact converse of the truth. 3. Karnal, Jalandhar (northern part) and Hoshiarpur. Abundant in the last two. 4. Bhang, buti, sabzi. 5. Ample moisture and a good loam seem essen- tial. 6. Dense under favourable conditions. 7. I have been told of individual fakirs sowing a few seeds near their houses, to use the leaves as bhang. I know of no more extensive cultivation. 16. Yes, in the tract where it grows wild. Not here, apparently, All agree that charas comes only from Yarkand, etc. 23. Occasionally a fakir will roll the fresh leaves between his palms and smoke them. 24. For this and following questions, see para- graph 1. 33. I think the habitual use of bhang is looked on with some disfavour. Not so its occasional use. 35. Not as regards bhang in a tract where it grows wild. Yes, it would be consumed illicitly. Incessant search would be necessary, which, even if possible, would produce very serious discontent. 51. [The answer to questions 51 to 55 are given after consultation with and local enquiry by my police staff.] (a) No. (b) None so far as I can ascertain. 52. As above. 53. No; it is said to produce timidity as its most marked effect. No. 54. Not within my knowledge. 55. Have never known any such case. 68. In the villages, the drug-shop is usually an ordinary ata-dal shop, whose proprietor holds a license, or acts as the agent of the contractor, for the sale of drugs. No drugs are, in such eases, consumed on the premises. 69. I have never opened a new shop. But, if this Commission were not sitting, I should close a number of my shops in which the sale is absolutely nominal. Oral evidence. I have been twenty-four years in the service. Question 59.370 bhang is so cheap that (while there is no licit consumption where it grows wild) the induce- ment to smuggle it is non-existent. It is not worth while to carry it to where it can be got so cheaply in any case. Directly you increase the taxation you increase the limit of the area to which it would be worth while to smuggle it. And smuggling would largely increase. You would directly have a regularly organised system of smuggling. I think this would be serious. The only effective way to prevent it would be incessant search, which would be a grave evil and lead to serious discontent. I do not think there would be any difficulty (answer 7) in prohibiting the cultivation of bhang. There would only be the risk of a patwari or policeman making a false charge of cultivating. But this, of course, would not be possible in districts where it does not grow wild. The only district, which I know where the wild plant is found only occasionally and not abundantly, is Karnal, where the stuff grows only on Government land by the banks of canals. The seeds come from the hills. It either spreads luxuriantly as a wild plant, or the seed is carried as by canals. I doubt whether people could be held responsible to exterminate the plant on their own lands. Take my district Jullundar. No one would dream of compelling a man to be res- ponsible for the plants on his fields in the north of the district, where it grows in profusion as a weed. And I do not see how you could draw a line and say : north of this a man is respon- sible for the plants on his land ; south of it he is not. My position is that the holding of a man responsible for plants on his own land is in- expedient, because it is either where the plant grows wild and the order is impossible, or where it does not grow wild and the order is unneces- sary. Besides the order would lead to laying down hard-and-fast lines, which would appear to the people unjust. There is no rule against cul- tivation that I know. So long as a man does not pluck and "possess" more than quarter of a seer at a time you cannot reach him. 7. Evidence of LIEUTENANT-COLONEL J. A. L. MONTGOMERY, Deputy Commissioner, Sialkot. 1. I had very little knowledge regarding hemp drugs before the receipt of these questions, nor can I say that I have much practical knowledge even now; though I have made some general enquiries. 2. Ganja is practically unknown in this district. Charas and bhang are known by these names. 3. I have seen the hemp plant growing abun- dantly in the submontane districts of Hoshiarpur, Gurdaspur, Sialkot. It was more especially abun- dant in Hoshiarpur. 4. The plant, so far as I know, has always been called bhang. 5. The plant seems to grow best in damp rich soil, and thrives best in submontane tracts, where the rainfall is abundant. 6. Ordinarily scattered. Sometimes dense in patches. 7. Hemp is only cultivated, so far as I know, for its fibre. 14. Neither ganja nor charas are prepared here. Bhang only is prepared from the wild plant. 15. I have already stated that no preparations are made, so far as I am aware, from the cultiva- ted plant. The preparations from the wild plant are for eating and drinking only ; not for smoking. (B) Eating.371 28. Bhang. Rs. A. P. (a) One tola worth less than . . 0 0 1 Massala worth less than . . 0 0 2 TOTAL . 0 0 3 (b) 10 tolas worth . . . . 0 0 6 Massala worth . . . . 0 1 0 TOTAL . 0 1 6 The cost can of course be largely increased by the use of expensive massalas. 29. Bhang. By ordinary people. (a) Black pepper or saunf ; (b) Sugar, seeds of pumpkins, etc. By rich people, almonds and other expensive ingredients. These things are mixed to give special flavour. Dhatura is only known to be mixed for the purpose of committing a crime. Bhang massala not known. 30. (a) Generally in company. (b) Used more by males than females. (c) Use by children said to be extremely rare. 31. The habit once acquired is said to be not very easy to break off. But it can be so broken off more easily than the opium habit. 32. It is said that the use of bhang is enjoined in the Sikh Granth. When used by Sikhs before a religious ceremony, it is generally taken as a drink (sardai). 33. Except in Sikh "bungas" the consump- tion of bhang and charas is generally in disrepute. 1 have not come across any custom of worshipping the hemp plant. 34. The fakirs and others who habitually take charas and bhang would undoubtedly consider it a serious privation if they had to forego the con- sumption of these drugs. 35. Seeing that the wild bhang grows spon- taneously in many places, it would, in my opinion, be impossible to prohibit its use. If prohibited, it would certainly be illicitly consumed. It would be well to put an import tax on charas and thus reduce its consumption. To prohibit the use of bhang altogether would cause discontent, and it would still be used. 1 am not prepared to say that there would be any political danger from such an order. The order would be useless. 36. Bhang is still cheaper than alcohol. It is said that the richer people who used to take bhang are now more inclined to take alcohol. 40. I am told that bhang only is sometimes used medicinally by native doctors ; it is also prescribed in some cattle diseases. 41. Mahta Duni Chand, Civil Surgeon, says that the moderate occasional use of bhang only is beneficial if taken in very small quantities372 (c) There is, if I remember right, some desul- tory cultivation of the plant in small plots in Multan, and I am told also in Jhang, but the latter fact I do not remember noticing. 12. No. 13. No. See answer 5. I believe that there is hardly any part of the Punjab where hemp culti- vation would be impossible. 14. (a) and (b) No, not as far as I know. Bhang is prepared probably more or less in every district where it grows. 15. The method of preparing bhang (whether wild or cultivated) is very simple. Coolies cut the roots, dry the leaves, and whip them off the stems. At time of drinking these leaves are simply soaked in cold water for a short time, ten or fifteen minutes. Then the water is drunk. 16. No, I believe not, though doubtless fakirs do in some places. It is generally done by the contractor at or near the place where the plant is cut. About ganja or charas I do not know. 17. 'Jhiwars' are generally the men who work as coolies. The contractor keeps the dry leaves by him for use. 18. Bhang does deteriorate by keeping, but if kept dry will, it is said, remain good two years. 19. Charas is smoked ; this is the only way in which I believe it is used, 20. Chiefly fakirs, both Hindus and Muham- madans as a class, but many others individually. Gamblers too generally smoke it. 22. Foreign, from Yarkand. 24. Fakirs, many Sikhs too, drink bhang, and others of different castes, Hindu and Muham- madan. The district population may be taken as 940,000 of which some 85,000 are Sikhs : of these about 8,000 are consumers. Hindus 396,000, giving perhaps 15,000 consumers. Muhammadans 460,000 will give about 18,000 consumers of bhang. These are the closest figures I can obtain from experts. 25. No increase so far as is known. The people themselves say there is a decrease, but I am not able to gauge this. 26. Bhang :373 58. I think the system works well, and am not able to suggest any improvement. 62. I think the question should be considered by experts whether, if Government expended a certain sum say Rs. 5,000 or Rs. 10,000 yearly for some years in systematic uprooting of the bhang plant except in certain narrowed limits, this cost might or might not be more than recouped by a monopolist treatment of the drug, 63. The question is impossible to answer until the actual limits of the habitat of the plant are accurately ascertained. If once the spontaneous growth of the plant could be curbed, I do not think the people would grow a prohibited plant any more than they do opium. 65. I would have the price of charas and bhang as high as possible consistently with the preven- tion of illicit dealing or smuggling, but as things stand now, it is difficult to do more ; perhaps charas may bear a rise in import duty. 68. No. I think such houses and shops would be most harmful. " How oft the sight of means to do ill deeds, Makes ill deeds done." 69. Yes ; the wishes of the villagers are con- sulted through their headmen. I think this is fair. Oral evidence. I am in my twenty-third year of service, and have served in all parts of the Punjab except the frontier. Question 3.374 Question 51.375 Hoshiarpur district. Formerly it was imported from Afghanistan. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking in this dis- trict. 24. All classes of the population are represented among the bhang-drinkers376 62. It would not be necessary to introduce a very elaborate system in this part of the country. Mo cultivation should be permitted without a license, and there should be an acreage rate, as in the case of poppy cultivation. 63. I have no objections to the present system of wholesale and retail vend of bhang and charas. 64. I have no objection to the existing rules. 65. The price of bhang being so low, the reve- nue raised by taxation might well be increased by a tax on cultivation. 67. I think the price of bhang is too low, and that a further revenue might be raised for Gov- ernment. 68. There is no prohibition in the licenses against consumption on the premises. Such con- sumption is in fact not practised, and might be forbidden in the licenses. I should regard the growth of the practice with disfavour, as the shops would probably become centres of dissipation. 69. I have always been in the habit of ascer- taining the wishes of the people before opening new shops, and they would be regarded as far as practicable. Such points are enquired into by District Officers when on tour in their districts, and headmen and local notables have no objection to expressing their views freely on such points. More than this is not required in my opinion. 70. I do not think there is any smuggling from Native States in this district, but no doubt a great deal of untaxed bhang is consumed by cultivators and their friends and neighbours. Appendix TO MR. DAMES' evidence. Memorandum on the petition for some reduction of the sentence of transportation for life pass- ed on Kalu Khan on the 23rd February 1892. This petition was brought to me at Fort Munro by the assembled Tumaudars of the Dera Ghazi Khan and Thal Chotiali district in September 1892. They asked that the petition might be 6ent on to Government on the plea that Kalu Khan was intoxicated at the time he committed the murder. I promised to give the matter my consideration, and in the meantime I directed Sardar Bahadur Khan, who was more interested in the matter than the other Tumaudars, to obtain copies of the judgments of the Sessions Judge and of the Chief Court. This has been done, and the copies of judgments are attached to the petition. The facts of the case are as follows :377 ing him blood money. Jalal at present remains obdurate, but there is every reason to believe that if clemency is shown to Kalu Khan there will he no difficulty in satisfying Jalal by the grant of land or money either by private arbitration or by the award of a jirga. R. E. YOUNGHUSBAND Dated 9th April 1893. Copy of a letter No. 229-8., dated 16th June 1893, from R. E. Younghusband, Esq., Officiating Junior Secretary to the Government of the Pun- jab, to the Commissioner and Superintendent, Derajat Division. In reply to your memorandum dated the 4th ultimo, I am directed to say that, in deference to the strong opinion of the local officers, the Lieute- nant-Governor has consented to commute the sen- tence of transportation for life which was passed upon Kalu Khan Isani Khosa, and to remit all the sentence in excess of seven (7) years on the fol- lowing conditions :378 case of bhang, there is no tendency to increase. In the case of charas I am doubtful. 32. Bhang in some shape is presented to Mahadeo. I have seen it myself given on the occasion of a Rathjatra in Delhi to all the people following. But this question 1 cannot answer J in detail. 33. A charsi is considered a low worthless fellow, and the custom of smoking charas is gener- ally considered reprehensible. I am not sure whether this opinion is based on the observed evil effects of the drug in certain cases, or merely on the fact that it is only the poorer classes that indulge in the habit. There is certainly not the same feeling in regard to bhang. 34. I believe it would be a serious privation in the case of fakirs and other poor people who are accustomed to smoke charas, but 1 believe it would not be so great as giving up opium. 35. We might prevent import into the Punjab. There would then be great demand for bhang. Dhatura would be substituted for charas by the very poorest, and bad spit its would be taken by those who are better off. There would certainly be great discontent: fakirs would especially object, and they would bring pressure to bear on others, and there might be a political agitation, though not of a serious nature unless it got associated in some way with the other political agitations. 36. I believe this to be the case. There has been a greater sale of cheap Indo-European liquors and of cheap French (?) brandy than before. It is also said by people generally that English spirits are being much more largely used, and natives of position have assured me that this is the case. 37 and 38. I have no knowledge of the effects of ganja-smoking, 39. I am not able to answer this question. I believed until recently that the use of bhang would not cause insanity, or rather that bhang and insanity were not associated. But at my last visit to the Lunatic Asylum a man was brought up who said he had used only bhang. 40. 1 leave this to the professional witness, but I am told bhang is efficacious in piles, also in in- digestion. Charas is, I believe, eaten in asthma. 41. The use of bhang is certainly considered bene- fiicial as a digestive or stomachic, and also in over- exertion and in great exposure it helps the drinker to stay. 1 here refer to the moderate occasional use, and the use in the hot months. Such use is not, I believe, injurious, and it is common. Any attempt to prevent it would probably drive the consumers to liquor. Charas is also a stunulant, and the man who without a smoke would be useless has at once after his smoke life and energy. 42. The moderate use of bhang is probably bene- ficial, certainly harmless. I have said it is very common, and we see no evil effects. 1 have spoken to wealthy persons who use bhang, and they have not suffered. 43. I have never heard of a case where a man who took only bhang was charged with making any disturbance or assault. The same is probably the case in charas also, but charas has got a bad name. 44. Bhang is said to be sustaining, and charas is also taken by fakirs to make them indifferent to privations of all kinds. 45. This is a question more for the physician than the Magistrate, but whether it is cause, or whether it is effect, insanity and charas are often connected; and I have been given to understand that insanity is caused by the use of charas. I would say, however, that it was only the excessive use of charas that had this effect: many charas- smokers are in full possession of their senses. If the moderate use caused insanity, our Lunatic Asylums would not hold all the persons sent to them. 46. See No. 45. 47. No ; so far as I know, it is not hereditary, and I am not aware that children are affected in any special way. Mere association will account for the habit being so common among certain classes. 48. I have no remarks to make. 49. The moderate use of charas and bhang is said to be an aphrodisiac, and they are used by prostitutes. It is said that the excessive use of charas tends to produce impotence, 50. See No. 49. 51. Charas-smokers and crime are associated just as poor people and crime are associated. There is, so far as 1 know, no connection between the use of the drug and any special form of crime. 52. The excessive use of charas is said to lead to crime of violence. The belief is general, and I believe well founded. 53. Crime of violence and the excessive use of charas are associated together. The records of the Lunatic Asylum will give numerous ca?es where charas-smokers have run amuck. 54. Bhang, I am told, is used for this purpose, just as a burglar might take a glass or two of gin. 55. Bhang is said to be used, but I have never myself had to try such a case. I have had to try at least one case in which dhatura was used. 56. I am not able to answer this. 57. Charas is eaten I believe in asthma; it is used as an expectorant. 58. The only suggestion I have to make is the taxation of charas, and that matter is already under consideration. The transport of bhang might also he taxed, that is, the light to move it from the district where it is grown to another dis- trict, or from province to province. The posses- sion of bhang for sale is subject to license already. 60. Ganja is not produced in this province. 61. I know nothing of the production of charas in the Punjab. I believe it is all imported. 62. I doubt if any steps can be taken to prevent the growth of the hemp plant. It grows wild, I adhere to the opinion expressed as Assistant Commissioner of Kulu. 63. No ; the excise administration in the Punjab, so far as charas is concerned, needs no improve- ment. I have already advocated a duty on charas. 64. I have no remarks to make. 65. The tax on charas is at present only the license duties ; it is certainly light, and charas and bhang are both cheap, but charas is used almost exclusively by poor people, and any great increase in taxation would be felt very severely. It might, however, stop or tend to stop consumption, and that would he a gain so far. But at the same time those who can afford it will not give it up, or will take to country liquor, and the poor man will
279 drink bhang in greater quantity, All the same in my opinion the tax on charas is too light. 66. I have no knowledge of ganja. 67. A duty on charas and a license duty for sale, these two together, are in my opinion the best method of taxation. 68. As a rule, in Delhi the shops of the retail vendors are small, and there is no room for smokers, except in one case; but it is not forbidden. There would not in this district be any objection to its being fordidden, but also no gain. 69. This is answered by the Punjab rules. No new shops have ever been opened in any district where I have been Deputy Commissioner. 70. There is in my opinion a great deal of smug- gling into Rajputana. The permission of the Darbar to import is necessary, and it is so difficult to get that no doubt the rule is evaded. Just as it is next to impossible to prevent the smuggling of opium from Rajputana into the Punjab, so it is about as difficult to prevent charas going from the Punjab into Native States. I have never heard of charas being smuggled from Rajputana into the Punjab. Memo. as to the restrictions on cultivation of hemp for production of bhang and charas. Answers to questions in Financial Commissioner's Circular No. 13 of 1880. (a) In Kulu Proper, including Plach. the area under hemp cultivation is reported to be 72 acres, viz., 33 acres in Kulu, and 39 acres in Plach. I have been unable to test in any way this estimate. in Lahoul the extent of cultivation has been roughly calculated at 1 acre. Almost every house has a small patch near it, a long strip beside a hedge or a small bed, a few square yards in area. Some of the patches were such that no accurate idea could he formed of the area; and as I have said the estimate is very rough. (5) The hemp plant grows spontaneously in all three parts of this sub-division, and considerable areas in Kulu and Plach ; but if it is difficult to form an accurate estimate of the extent of culti- vation, how much more difficult in case of spon- taneous growth, when the plant is found on hill sides in the jungle. The areas reported are : 380 The drug is very little used in Kulu. Some of the bairagis and the fakirs, who have come up here on pilgrimage, are the principal consumers. It is con- sidered to be more suitable for warm than for cold climates. (e) There is no export nor import of hemp leaves. Kangra Proper also produces the wild plant in great quantity. Charas passes through this sub- division from Yarkand and Ladakh ; but charas is not referred to in the circular. (f) So far as this sub-division is concerned, any restriction on the cultivation is in my opinion uncalled for. The area under hemp cultivation is small, and with the exception of bhangolu, no part of the plant is used for purposes of intoxication. It is cultivated exclusively for fibre, and the use of the seed is a mere accident. If licenses were required, zamindars would be obliged to buy the fibre or turn to the nettle plant which in Kulu grows to a considerable height, and which supplies a fibre already used for common purposes. The hemp fibre is here used principally where strength is required without great bulk of fibre. As to regulation of the sale and storing of the wild hemp leaves, that seems to me an impossibili- ty or nearly so in the hills, were the plant grows spontaneously in such quantities. The evasion of any rules laid down would be so easy, and any attempt to carry them out would involve so much interference that they would probably remain a dead letter. The revenue would not henefit to any extent, nor would the consumption be reduced. The use of the drug in Kulu is not so excessive as in itself to call for interference. I am not sufficiently acquainted with the circum- stances of other districts to be able to express an opinion as to the general question, but there are always and in all places two great differences between the poppy and the hemp plant; the former does not grow wild, the latter does; the former is cultivated only for the drug it produces, the latter is cultivated for its fibre as well as for its drug. These differences are so radical that they appear to me to show that hemp cultivation must be put on a different footing from poppy cultivation, and cannot be made subject to the same restrictions. 11. Evidence of MR. E. B. FRANCIS, Deputy Commissioner, Officiating as Director, Land Records and Agriculture. 1. No special opportunities at any time except that as Junior Secretary to the Financial Commis- sioner in 1884, and one or two previous years I compiled excise reports. For the last nine years I have had nothing to do with excise matters. 2. I believe that ganja is hardly used in the Punjab, and I am not acquainted with it. Charas is imported from Yarkand and bhang is produced locally ; some charas also comes from Khorasan. 8. In most hill and submontane districts of the Punjab I believe the wild plant is abundant. 4. I am not acquainted with the hill districts where it grows, and know no other names for the plant but bhang. 5. I cannot say, but believe it grows from 1,000 to 7,000 feet. 6. Certainly dense in places as on the banks of the Jhelum in Kashmir. 7. I have not seen the hemp plant cultivated except in small patches in the hills and about fakirs' huts. 8 to 11. No information. 12. I do not think ganja is produced in the Punjab. 13. See last answer. I cannot answer the two last parts of this question. 14. Charas is imported. Bhang is prepared from the dry leaves by infusion when wanted for use. 15. Bhang is prepared by infusing the leaves in cold water and straining the liquor. This is for drinking. Charas is smoked in a huka, so far as I have seen. 16. Yes, by those who use it. Yes, to second part of question. To third part no information, but probably charas cannot be prepared from the wild plant, or this would be done in Punjab districts where the wild plant is plentiful. 17. Bhang is prepared by the users. The other drugs are not made in the Punjab. 18. Cannot say at all. 19. Charas is, so far as I know, only used for smoking. I know nothing about ganja. Bhang is made into sweetmeats called majun. Possibly charas is made up into some such forms also. 20. Purbias or down-country men, especially syces (or grooms), are smokers of charas. Also fakirs and loose characters generally. No inform- ation about ganja. 21. Not known. 22. Yarkandi or Khurasani ; there is no native charas. 23. Not so far as I know. 24. Fakirs, especially Sikh fakirs (udasis and nihangs), drink bhang. No information about eating it, except in form of majun (?). 25. It is sometimes said that the increased excise on spirits has increased the consumption of charas which is a cheap intoxicant. 26. In cases both of charas and bhang nearly all the consumers may be regarded as habituals. The proportion of excessive consumers to moderate perhaps one to three. Bhang is occasionally used by most Hindus at the Sheoratri festival, but in small and harmless quantity. 27. See answers 20 and 24. No further details known. 28. Charas sells at about 8 tolas to the rupee ; about a tola is smoked in the day by a confirmed smoker. Enough bhang may be obtained for one pice to intoxicate 4 or 5 men. 29. Not known, 30. Usually in company ; confined I think to grown men. 31. Charas-smoking I believe irritates the lungs at first, and the habit is formed with some difficulty. It does not seem difficult to make charas-smokers leave off their habit when they get into gaol. Yes, the consumers of these drugs tend to exceed moderation. 32. None known, except that a little bhang is, I believe, commonly drunk by most Hindus at the Sheoratri festival, as stated in answer No. 26. 33. Bhang is believed to assist fakirs in abstrac-
381 tion of mind. Charas is certainly in disrepute. So is bhang except among fakirs. No such custom known. 34. I think not. Perhaps 20,000 in the Punjab take bhang and 10,000 charas. 35. Bhang could hardly be stopped near the hills where it grows wild; charas might easily be stopped. Stoppage would cause no danger. It might cause recourse to spirits by those who could afford them. 36. No. I think rather the contrary is the case. The consumption of charas in the Punjab has nearly doubled in the last 10 years, while the con- sumption of liquor has increased by only about 50 per cent. 37. Not acquainted with ganja. 39. Smoking charas is more injurious I should say than drinking bhang in the ordinary way, but bhang is perhaps as injurious as any drug when taken in excess. 40. Not known. 41. Cannot say. Never heard any good of these drugs. 42. Moderate use of bhang nearly harmless. If moderate use is exceeded, it causes feebleness of mind and incapacity for business. 43. Yes. They are merely hilarious. I refer to bhang-drinkers. 44. Moderate use of bhang renders a man light-hearted for the time382 from both wild and cultivated plants. Ganja and charas are not prepared from wild plant. 17. There is no particular class of people. 18. Charas can be kept for four years. After- wards it deteriorates or loses its effect. Second year its effect is less than first year. After eight years it totally loses its effect. The cause of de- terioration is that its juice is dried up, and when dried up completely it becomes useless. It can be kept for the period above specified if placed in a leather bag and protected from exposure. Exposed charas loses its effect very soon. The drink pre- pared from bhang becomes useless and injurious in a few hours. Leaves of bhang, if protected from rains, do not deteriorate. Old leaves are less effective and are not liked. 19. I know nothing about ganja. Charas is here ouly used for smoking. If the smoker can- not get a huka, he occasionally eats a small pill of charas; but this is not a common practice. 21. Not used here. 22. Charas is not prepared here, but it is im- ported from Hoshiarpur and Amritsar. The va- riety used is that produced in Yarkand. 23. Bhang is not used for smoking, although sometimes it is smoked as a substitute for charas but such cases are very rare. 24. No particular class of bhang-drinkers. Poor people often use it. The total number of bhang- drinkers is about 600 and that of charas-smokers about 300 in the district. 25. The use of charas and bhang is on the in- crease for the following reasons:383 13. Evidence of MR. J. R. DRUMMOND, Deputy Commissioner, Gurgaon. 1. I have served in the Punjab Commission since December 1874, and have had my attention turned to the administrative and social aspects of the matters dealt with in my answers, while serving in different capacities in a number of districts from time to time. I have had most of the questions raised before the Commission as regards charas and bhang practically before me in the course of my official business as384 the tops, according to requirements, is taken and washed, or steeped for three or four hours in a stone or earthen pipkin (kundi). Sometimes, after being cleaned by picking out the stems and blackened pieces, the fresher leaves are washed several times to get rid of sand and so forth, and then steeped and strained. The tops are further slightly squeezed, and excess moisture removed by exposure in a draught, and the next step is to pound the wet pulp in a stone mortar with a wooden pestle (sotha), or triturate it, in the same way as curry powder is prepared, on a slab of stone or slate with a wedge or block of the same (sil- batta). The fine pulp then has water poured upon it, and the mixture is strained through a piece of coarse cloth to remove all but the finest particles of the plant. The cold infusion thus prepared is ready for use. Among the Hindu Jats of the south-eastern districts as well as among the Sikh communities of the same nation in the tracts along the Sutlej an earthen firkin (matka) is kept always replenished in the assembly room (Chaupar- baugla or baitak) of the village or ward; the farmers take the provision of the bhang and the brewing of the infusion in turns, or an attendant of the meeting room is charged with the replenishment and expenses charged to the village fund (malba, etc.). Well-to-do people have the infusion prepared in their own houses, and for home consumption it is often mixed with black pepper or milk, and served with rose leaves floating in the mixture. Sugar is sometimes added to disguise the taste, which is peculiar, and, to many consumers even, perman- ently unpleasant. Bhang is also used to flavour cream cakes and the like, by trying the leaves (tops) in ghee, and mixing the ghee thus flavoured with sugar. It is used in the form of a confection (majun) and of lozenges (mufarrah) also. Sweetmeats flavoured with bhang are made at home, or by confectioners (Halwai). Majun and lozenges, I believe, are prepared chiefly by apothecaries (Pansari). In the hills about Simla it is put in a sort of pudding called halwa which is sometimes like the halwa (plum-pudding) of the plain, but oftener a kind of hasty-pudding or brose. This is a sacri- ficial usage, mainly at least. Bhang is also used to flavour various other kinds of sweetmeats (kachouri, etc.) at Hindu weddings. The most universal preparation, however, is the cold infusion, which is used by different classes, chiefly of the rural population, in different parts of the province, the chief consumers being the Jat peasant proprietors, by whom it is known and praised under the names of thandai or sardaiyan, from the Jamna to the Ravi at least. Charas is smoked, always or almost mixed with a little fine tobacco to prevent too rapid burning away, in a specially constructed pipe (chillum) with a short straight stem at an acute angle with the bowl, or without a stem at all from the bowl itself, a wet rag being commonly employed to protect the face and lips. The hemp smoke is inhaled with a long rather severe inspiration, and this appears to be the origin of the cant name for charas smoking, viz., lamba damra, or, the long pull. I should add, as to bhang, that the Chaube Brahmans, who are found in places in the south- eastern districts of the Punjab as immigrants from the Mathra country, take bhang in the form of pills. The Orwal jewellers (largely Jains) are also said to use such pills to clear their eyesight. 16. Bhang is usually infused by all classes in their own houses. It is bought of the licensed vendors in the form of the dried leaves, and the potation made at the home; pretty much as one buys tea at a grocer's and has it brewed when re- quired. I am speaking of the bhang infusion; in this sense bhang is usually prepared at home or at least socially. This question is already met in my reply to question 15 preceding. 18. The dried hemp leaves improve by a little keeping. They are said to lose effect after a time. They will keep in an ordinary Punjab district, it is said, up to eighteen months, and retain their average narcotic efficacy. Charas is alleged to deteriorate rapidly in the eastern districts, and this is attributed to the action of the seasonal rains upon its resinous properties. 19. So far as I know, charas is used in this province for smoking only. 20. The proportion of the population which smokes charas in the Punjab must be small. For Sikhs it is forbidden by their traditions. Muham- madans also are much less addicted to it than to other narcotics as a body. Among Hindus even who are not restricted by any sanction, the practice is very little known among natives of the province. Charas-smoking is most common, and most carried to excess among the different Saiva orders of Hindu sadhus; and among these again, with those that are sedentary or collected in monasteries. Nagas, gosains, bairagis and jogis, both Hindus and Muhammadan jogis, are commonly given over to charas-smoking. Of Muhammadan fakirs the Benawa and Madari orders are understood to indulge in it. Besides these classes the bulk of the charas smokers in this province are probably to be found in cantonments, large stations, and great centres, where there is an appreciable admixture of people from the lower provinces (Purbias). Grooms, sweepers, native valets, and other menial or domestic servants who hail largely from Oudh, Behar, and the districts bordering on the province of Lower Bengal, and belong to the skinner (chamar), weaver (Julaha kori), and water carrier and bearer (kahar) castes, or analogous subdivisions, and also washermen (dhobi) from the same country, are often and excessively at times addicted to the charas habit. I question if the proportion of charas smokers for the province reaches 1 per cent. of the total population, and 2 per cent. even in urban localities. I should not think it is anything like 1 per cent. in rural areas. 22. So far as I know, the charas used in the Punjab is all imported from Turkestan. It used to be brought by Kashgaris, Andijanis and others, and by Sikh traders by the Ladakh route over the Karakoram, Bara Lacha and Retang Passes. In 18S3 I believe this trace was diminished by the Chinese trade policy; now the trade is principally, I think, through Afghanistan. I think His Highness the Amir Abdul Rahman has lately exercised a monopoly of the export trade to India from his territories. He had a charas agent at Delhi in 1890, I remember. 23. I am not aware that in this province bhang is ever used for smoking. 24. The answer to this question has been given
385 in great part already under question 15. All Hindus, including women, partake of sweetmeats, flavoured with bhang, on particular occasions and at certain ritual seasons. The Jat nation throughout the province (whether Hindus or Sikhs, claim the local repre- sentatives for their religious pale) is devoted very largely to bhang. In the social economy of a Jat village, in the Palwal Tahsil of the Gurgaon district, or on the borders of the Ludhiana and Ferozepur districts, the bowl of hemp infusion is an essential feature in the place that serves as the council room and guest house of the community. I understand that bhang is also much consumed among the Muslimized tribes of the south-western Districts. It is most difficult in a matter of this sort to estimate percentages; but I think it may be said that taking the province as a whole a majority of adult Hindu and Sikh population of both sexes occasionally partake of bhang in one form or another; and further, that in the principal seats of the Jat race, there are very many village commu- nities, in which every grown man is, as a rule, a habitual consumer of the hemp-infusion. In the Punjab Himalaya both sexes often use this narcotic. In the plains it is seldom habitually taken, or even prepared, by women; but women who belong to the bairagi order of ascetics, whether as disciples, or in the families of married bairagis, prepare the pulp, and share in the infusion. 25. The use of bhang, allowing for greater vigilance in the excise administration, appears to be on the increase in the south-eastern districts of the Punjab. This may be due in part to caste movements against alcohol, and to the increased cost of spirits, but it is mainly an inevitable result of growing prosperity among the agricultural population, particularly the Jats. 26. For bhang roughly speaking and as an approximate apportionment386 indulgences which are familiar to the European mind, and commend themselves more readily to European tastes, such as alcohol or tobacco. A more just comparison might be made perhaps with such a universal Indian luxury as pân supari (betel nut and pepper leaf). Few are votaries of charas; there are a hundred slaves of pân, and it is difficult and distressing to relinquish the latter indulgence. Or we may take opium smoking again. I am disposed to regard charas with disfavour; hut rom all I have been able to ascertain with any approach to accuracy, I should be inclined to make the charas smoker as a far more harmless member of society than the slave of opium smoke or chandu. Magistrates and Medical officers, and officers of Police, are open to a fallacy as regards the case of charas, and in a less degree, of bhang, in this way that ill-regulated, turbulent and criminally disposed persons and incipient insanes often "turn fakir" or indulge to excess in narcotics in their houses; and this is apt to lead one to assume the narcotic to be a cause of vice or crime when it is really only a concomitant. 32. All Hindus are supposed to partake of bhang at the Holi and at the Sheoratri. The Holi season for bhang-flavoured sweets covers ten days. Banias take bhang in different forms at the Dewali also. It is an essential in the course of certain rites, notably the Chandi-ka-pat, or service of a certain incarnation of the consort of Shiva (Mahadeo), known otherwise as Durga or the Devi. It is a custom also to serve sweetmeats in which bhang is an ingredient at Hindu weddings. Such customs are regarded as essential by large sections of the inhabitants of this province; they are sometimes more binding in practice than a purely religious observance. The use of bhang on such occasions by lay people is moderate. There is about as much or as little harm in it as in the use of liqueurs and ratafia for christening or wedding cakes in England. The Holi ushers in the Hindu new year as Christmas does with us. It is a season of relaxation and good-will, though less refined than one might wish at times in its ex- pression: and in respectable families the use of bhang at the Holi is no more likely to betray young people into bad habits, or to hurt any one in any other way than the burning of spirits over a plum- pudding. 83. The consumption of bhang occasionally, or in moderation, is regarded as respectable, by all but a few persons in the large towns. Muhamma- dans profess as a whole a mild disapproval of bhang, but this is because it is associated with idolatrous or at least polytheistic or pantheistic practices and creeds. The excessive use of bhang is very indulgently viewed by the great body of Hindus. The well- known Saivic legends, of course, contain the key to this feeling. There is a growing feeling, partly would-be patrio- tic, partly reasonable, in support of bhang as a substitute for alcohol. This is pretty far advanc- ed in certain quarters, among the Kayasth commu- nity for example. Charas on the whole is disreputable. I think this is partly because it is apt to interfere with business and with labour. It is rather a repulsive mode of smoking too, and charas smokers have the credit of being quarrelsome. I do not recollect any instance of honour being paid to the hemp plant; but it is very likely worshipped by the hill people and by villagers in the south-eastern Punjab. Village women will worship almost anything. 34. Assuming that the question deals with physical as distinguished from purely emotional consequences, I do not think that the enforced withdrawal of bhang from a habitual moderate consumer could involve any lasting or very serious privation. I have never, for example, known a prisoner's health or mental balance obviously suffer, as happens in the case of persons deprived of opium in jail. Privation of chains, I under- stand, sometimes produces physical and even men- tal derangement. 35. The use of bhang and charas could of course be prohibited; but the prohibition could not in practice be enforced. Illicit consumption would be greatly increased, and people who do not use bhang now might not improbably take to it as a forbidden luxury. To enforce the prohibition of bhang, we should have to arrange for the extirpa- tion of the plant, to maintain an army of in- quisitors and preventive agents, and to subsidise domestic spies; and then our agents would be corrupted, and after all we should fail. 1 think in extirpating the plant we should not impossibly provoke disturbances. Serious discontent would be produced among all classes of the native popu- lation387 by (b). The essential properties of the hop family including hemp seem when fairly used to furnish a specific antidote against the insidious begin- nings of sun and marsh fever throughout the Punjab climate. 42. I consider the moderate use of bhang to be quite harmless. The Jats, who indulge in it in certain parts of the Cis-Sutlej tract, are physically a fine race, and morally no worse than their neighbours in any way. 43. Absolutely, as regards bhang. The use of bhang among the peasantry tends to no more mis- chief than the use of beer in Westphalia or Bav- aria, so far as I have opportunities of judging, and to a deal less evil than beer-drinking in certain English countries where I have mixed with the corresponding class. The case of charas is different, I consider. 46. The habitual use of charas helps to demoral- ize ill-regulated and depraved, or criminally-inclin- ed persons, especially idle mendicants. I cannot quote any individual case conveniently, but my ex- perience as a Magistrate and District Officer tends to this conclusion. 49. The moderate use of hemp as an aphrodisiac is fairly common, and it is recommended as such by the Yunani faculty. I have never heard of prostitutes avowedly using any sort of aphrodisiac. Hindu women of a certain class use hemp drug as a kind of Bacchanalian rite, temple dances and the like. The abuse of bhang is supposed popularly to produce impotence; but Asiatics are prone to attribute the results of excess produced by want of moral decency or self-control to imaginary physical causes. 50. I have not heard of charas as a provocative, or as hastening the loss of virility. 51. There is no perceptible connection between bhang and habitual crime in this province, but in such towns as Batala, Gurdaspur district, and other places in the Punjab proper, bad characters hang about the quarters of Sutra Shahi fakirs and others where drugs are had, much as one would look for thieves in certain low beer shops in some English towns. 52. The excessive use of bhang is apt to turn the scale in the case of 6uch excitable classes as the Rajputs and certain Brahmins, when tempted to a criminal revenge. The excessive use of charas tends to deepen the lawless tendencies of morose natures, I believe, in some cases. Menials again are tempted to steal and pilfer to supply the charas craving. 53. Excessive indulgence in charas tends to enhance, I think, certain forms of homicidal im- pulse, but this is a very obscure point, 1 should say, from cases that have been before me as a Magistrate. 54. Bhang is the natural recourse of a Rajput, or of any member of these classes, who model their fashions on Rajput tradition, when he has an insult to avenge upon individuals, or on society at large, which can only be wiped out by slaughter. It is prescribed by his traditions as a kind of sacrificial draught, to brace the nerves, and work the sufferer up to confront all odds, and perish without evincing fear. 55. The hill people, and also peasants in the plains, are sometimes duped by professional cri- minals into taking the dhatura dose under cover of bhang-flavoured portions, sweetmeats, sacrificial puddings, and the like. An expert in dhatura drugging, now or lately undergoing transportation for life, stated to me that bhang by itself would not have answered his purposes. In the first place it could not readily produce due stupefaction. In the second place its effect passed off too quickly and did not leave the peculiar idiotcy which discredits the recovering victim of dhatura, in case he complaius. 56. A few ascetics or devotees are said to mix dhatura with bhang or charas in their half insane orgies. As a rule persons of this stamp do not live long or they become permanently insane I believe. It is a hot unusual step for a peasant, especially among the Jats, on the first working of latent insanity, to join one or other of less soberly conducted orders of ascetics, so that it is difficult to say how far in such cases the ultimate catas- trophe is due to the morbid use of certain drugs, or merely hastened by that, or altogether independ- ent. 58. I consider that the present system of Ex- cise Administration in the Punjab in respect of hemp drugs is capable of improvement. 59. As regards charas, the facilities for smug- gling are considerable, and the system of license fees is open to objection. Licenses for the use of charas should be granted sparingly: and a fixed fee should be charged, graded in classes. The location of charas shops should be settled once for all on the report of District Officers for each dis- trict, by the Revenue Board on the recommenda- tion, duly revised, of the Excise Commissioner; and alterations should not be permitted without the sanction of the Local Government, subse- quently. The opening of charas packages en route should not be allowed to merchants. Wholesale depots should he fixed at suitable centres, and the licens- ed retail dealers should receive from a particular depot in each circle. Convenient circles of course would have to be defined. The depôt, if in the hands of a wholesale agent, should be under double locks, one being under the control of the Excise Department. Charas consigned by rail should be packed in special receptacles of easily identifiable pattern, and accompanied, or taken over by an Excise official. A duty per seer should be levied at the depôt from the retail dealers. It would be better to dispense with any import or frontier duty. Otherwise there is an incitement to smuggling. But all foreign charas might be required to be brought to depôts at Peshawar and Jullundur respectively, and the possession of more than a fixed quantity (private consumption stand- ard), except in inland transit packages of the stamped pattern, could thou be made punishable except on certain defined and limited routes or on specified conditions. As to bhang, the ideal plan would be to put a fair average duty on cultivation, and to require deposit of the growth in depots under the joint control of the Excise Department. Here too I would urge the abandonment of the present system of auctioning monopolies. I would give licenses for bhang rather freely, especially to apothecaries (Pansaries), and aim at healing up the vested interests of the (Kalal) hereditary agents. It is the competition of this class within itself or against big speculators that forces up the cost of the retail trade, and so tends to some extent to the drugs being forced upon the public, or to the levying of illicit fees by the monopolist for conniving at illicit importation, sale and consumption. The principle that is now partly aimed at in the administration of the liquor excise is the right one for charas and bhang also, if it can only be vol. v. 3 C 2
388 applied389 14. Evidence of MR. JAMES WILSON, Deputy Commissioner, Shahpur. 1. My experience regarding hemp drugs is practically confined to the Shahpur district, of which I have been Deputy Commissioner for the last seven years. 2. Ganja is unknown in Shahpur. Bhang and charas are used as described in the question. Bhang is also known as sukha. 3. It grows spontaneously in the Shahpur district, but only in the Salt Range. 4. Only known as bhang. 5. It grows in the Salt Range from 1,000 to 5,000 feet above sea level, with a rainfall of about 17 inches per annum, chiefly in comparatively moist places. 6. Usually scattered, but in places fairly dense. 7. In the Shahpur district the hemp plant is not cultivated for production of ganja, charas, fibre or seeds, but only for use as bhang. The area so cultivated is very small, not more than five acres in the whole district. 8. None. 9. Cultivated on land irrigated from wells. No special method of cultivation is practised. When ripe, the plant is cut and dried, and its leaves and small twigs removed to be used as bhang. 10. No special class. Only Hindus cultivate it here. 11. No ganja grows here. 14. In this district only bhang is prepared. 15. For bhang only the leaves and small twigs of the dry plant are separated by beating with a stick. 16. Ganja and charas cannot be prepared from the wild plant here. Bhang can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown here. It is generally prepared by the people in their own houses. 17. No special class. The Hindu producers prepare the dry leaves for sale, and the drinkers themselves prepare the bhang for drinking. 18. Charas is said to lose strength greatly in the rainy season owing to damp. It deteriorates also by exposure to the air. It is therefore kept closed up as much as possible. Bhang, if kept dry, does not deteriorate rapidly. 19. Charas is only used for smoking here. 20. In this district ganja is not smoked. Charas is smoked only by religious devotees, both Hindu and Mussalman, and that chiefly in large towns. Not one in a thousand of the total population smokes charas. 21. Not smoked here. 22. Only foreign charas, said to come from Yarkand. 28. Bhang is only drunk. 24. Bhang is very seldom eaten, and only when it is not convenient to prepare the drink. It is drunk chiefly by religious devotees, both Hindu and Mussalman; seldom by Hindu shopkeepers, and almost never by Mussalmans who are not fakirs. It is hardly ever consumed, except in large towns, where perhaps two per cent. of the popula- tion consume it. For the whole district perhaps five in a thousand drink bhang. 25. No very marked change either one way or the other. Charas. Bhang. 26. (a) Very few. One-fourth. (b) Almost all. Half. (c) None. One-fourth. (d) None. None. 27. Almost all the smokers of charas and almost all the habitual excessive consumers of bhang are religious devotees, and the reason they take to it is said to be that they often sit without employ- ment; in fact, have nothing better to do. Many begin by following the example of fakirs. The moderate consumers of bhang are many of them Hindu shopkeepers, who drink it for its cooling and appetising effect, especially in the hot weather. 28. Charas390 discontent, which would be confined to the habitual consumers, would be of little importance. Prohi- bition would certainly diminish the consumption greatly. A certain number of consumers would take to alcohol or other drugs; but the actual total consumption of intoxicating liquor and drugs would be diminished. 36. No reason here to think that alcohol is being substituted for these drugs, bhang being much cheaper than alcohol. 37. No ganja smoked here. 38. Nil. 39. Smoking charas is said to be much more rapid and deleterious in its effects than drinking bhang. A man who smokes charas can hardly avoid taking it to excess, while bhang may be taken in moderation. 40. Charas is not prescribed. Bhang is some- times prescribed for diarrhoea or piles. 41. Charas has no beneficial effects. Bhang is said sometimes to assist digestion, but never to give staying-power or act as a febrifuge. Its moderate habitual use is sometimes said to assist digestion, give an appetite, and cool the body. Its effects are described as "drying and cooling." 42. A number of consumers, especially Hindu shopkeepers, consume bhang moderately without injurious results; but there is danger of the habit growing on them. 43. Inoffensive, 41. It is cooling and refreshing, produces slight intoxication, creates appetite, does not allay hunger, If taken in moderation, the effects last only for an hour or so, and there are no after-effects or longing. 45. Charas is seldom taken in moderation. The habitual moderate use of bhang appears to have none of the noxious effects mentioned in the question. 46. The excessive use of charas or bhang impairs the constitution. It is said to dry up the blood. It causes constitutional paleness, causes indigestion, greatly impairs the moral sense, and makes its victim incapable of ordinary thought or exertion, deadening the intellect, and in some cases producing insanity. I have seen a considerable number of excessive bhang and charas consumers. They have all an unhealthy, bloated look, yellow vacant eyes, and a listless appearance. Nothing interests them, except the prospect of getting some of their favour- ite drug. Cases of insanity seem few; but one man, Panditta Bera of Bhera, age 35, son of a sweetmeat seller, has become insane, apparently owing to the effects of charas, which he smokes to excess. His habits are filthy, and he ill-treats his mother. Another man, Sit a Ram Brahman of Bhera, age 28, smokes charas to excess, and has been more or less insane. He has squandered his property, beats his parents, and has lost all moral sense. 47. No. 48. No. Apparently there is no hereditary ten- dency. 49. Not used as an aphrodisiac. These drugs are said to tend to produce impotence. 50. As above. 51. If by bad character is meant persons given to crime, there seems no evidence connecting the use of these drugs with had characters. The consumers in moderation are just like their neigh- bours; neither more nor less given to crime. 52. Similarly, although persons addicted to these drugs in excess lose all sense of shame, and beg for means to allay their craving with blessings and curses, they are not specially addicted to crime. 53. Certainly not in this district. The univer- sal remark is that the use of bhang or charas makes a man ridiculously timid, so that even the flight of bird or the fall of a leaf startles him. 54. Never in this district. 55. No 6uch case known here. 56. Dhatura is not mixed with bhang or charas. The admixture of black pepper with bhang is said to prevent flatulence. Sugar is mixed to make it more intoxicating; milk to make it less dry. Other articles are added to give it a more pleasant taste. 57. No such custom here. 58. Capable of improvement. 59 As charas is universally admitted to be injurious and not beneficial, I would prohibit its importation and consumption, or at all events impose a high tax on it. Bhang also is much more injurious than beneficial, and I would make an attempt to prohibit it, beginning with selected districts and beginning with taxation. 60. Not produced here. 61. Not produced here. 62. The cultivation of the hemp plant could be entirely prohibited without much difficulty by simply making it punishable with fine and impri- sonment. A tax per acre should certainly be im- posed, as is done with opium in the Punjab. 63. I should like to see the experiment made in selected districts of prohibiting trade in charas and bhang altogether. In any case, I think fewer retail licenses should be given, that an import tax should be put on charas, and a transport tax on bhang, the cultivation of which should be taxed. 64. Only that the import of charas and the transport of bhang should be taxed to make them dearer and thus discourage consumption. 65. Certainly charas and bhang should pay some taxation, as alcohol and opium do. At present in this province they pay very much less in proportion than those intoxicants do. 66. No ganja used here. 67. Only that it should he increased. 68. It is not usual here to consume these drugs on the premises, and such consumption should he forbidden. 69. Local public opinion should certainly be considered. I have declined to open any new shops and closed some old shops, where the amount bid for the license was very small, showing that there was little demand. 70. Nil. I should think very little charas is sold except in licensed shops. No doubt a good deal of bhang escapes taxation altogether. Oral evidence. Question 1.391 not the sowing of it. I saw a good crop only a few days ago. I put in a note on cultivation by my Excise Assistant, Mr. Kirthee Singh:392 sold the licenses for shops separately, and I found that the prices bid for some of the shops which had formerly been established were very low, and this I thought sufficient justification for reducing such shops. Formerly there were fourteen shops for the whole district, and now there are only six. The total amount paid for licenses has not, how- ever, fallen off in consequence of this reduction. The inference I draw from this is that the places for which licenses have now been granted are the places where the consumers principally live, and that shops at other places are not required. I have no experience whatever of ganja. There is none consumed in the Shahpur district. If through the restriction of charas people wished to take to ganja it would have to be imported, and it could be restricted in the same manner as charas. I recently had all the intelligent and respectable Hindus of the district assembled in connection with the ascertainment of their tribal customs. I asked those who wished to have opium restrict- ed to stand up, and no one stood up. I then asked those who wished the present system of dealing with opium continued, and they all stood up with acclamation. I then put the same ques- tions regarding charas and bhang, and nearly the whole assembly stood up for prohibition; for con- tinuance of the present state of things only one or two stood up. These said that fakirs would suffer, and the others said that would not matter: they would soon get over it. Some of the assembly, even of those who declared for prohibition, were themselves moderate consumers of bhang. They had clearly bhang as well as charas before their minds. Several of the persons were dealers in opium, and very few, if any, dealers in the hemp drugs. There were about 100 present at this meeting, mostly shopkeepers, from all parts of the district, and representative of the best feeling of their class. A number of the more respectable object to charas, because their young men get tempted by the fakirs to use it and ultimately join that body. Some of the excessive smokers of charas have themselves expressed regret to me that they ever took to the habit, much in the way that excessive consumers of liquor will do. These men were fakirs; but a fakir in Shahpur is not only a re- ligious devotee, but often an idle good-for-nothing who assumes a religious character. 15. Evidence of LALA MULRAJ, Extra Judicial Assistant Commissioner. 2. These definitions are correct. In the Punjab bhang is called also vijaya, buti and sukha. Charas is also called sulfa. 3. Hemp plant grows spontaneously in the Kangra, Gurdaspur and Rawalpindi districts. 4. The plant is known by the name of bhang. 18. Ganja, charas and bhang deteriorate by keeping. These drugs keep good for a year if kept with ordinary care. 24. Idlers in all classes drink bhang. Among Sikhs and 6adhus generally, the proportion of persons who drink bhang is relatively greater than among other people. In winter bhang is more generally eaten than drunk. 29. Ordinarily black pepper is mixed with bhang in drinking, and sometimes almonds, poppy seeds, cardamoms, seeds of melons, aniseeds, salt, sugar and milk. 30. These drugs are used by the male sex. 33. The smoking of charas and ganja is consi- dered disreputable. 35. The prohibition of the use of these drugs would occasion discontent among the consumers. The prohibition would not be followed by recourse to alcoholic stimulants. The use of alcohol is considered objectionable from a religious point of view among the generality of people. 40. The use of bhang is prescribed on account of its medicinal qualities by vaids. 41. The moderate use of bhang may be benefi- cial and promotes appetite, 43. Moderate consumers are inoffensive to their neighbours. 49. Bhang is sometimes used as an aphrodisiac. 51. Bad characters generally use these drugs. 16. Evidence of Mr. J. A. Robinson, Excise Officer, Lahore. 1. As Excise Officer of Lahore district for several years. 2. I have always been given to understand that the tender leaves of the hemp which contain this resinous matter are pounded and made into charas. Ganja is not used in the Lahore district. Charas is also known here as "soolfa." Bhang as "booti" by Muhammadans and as "sookka" by Hindus. 6. Scattered in places where it grows spontane- ously in this district (Lahore). 7. My experience is of two districts only, in both of which hemp is not cultivated. 15. Charas undergoes no preparation for smok- ing; bhang is pounded and made into a drink with addition of pepper, sugar, almonds, melon seeds, etc. A sweetmeat, majun, is made with sugar, and the active principle of charas or bhang obtained by cooking with ghee, which is then strained and mixed with the sugar. 16. The drink is. Yes. Not charas. Ganja not used here. 17. Charas is imported and needs no prepara- tion for smoking; bhang is also imported and consumers make the drink for themselves. Majun used to be made by sweetmeat sellers, but its preparation has been interdicted, the men being unlicensed. 18. Charas and bhang. Yes, keep good for about three years (though gradually deteriorat- ing); after three years is not of much value, and after five or six years utterly valueless. 19. Ganja not used in this district. Charas for smoking only. A very limited quantity of charas used formerly to be used in the manner described in answer to question 15. 20. Principally lower classes and fakirs. Can't say what proportion; few among the middle and higher classes.
393 21. Not used in this district. 22. Foreign. From Yarkand. 23. Occasionally only by 6ome Hindu fakir6. 24. By classes referred to in answer 20. 25. Charas and bhang Said to be slightly on the increase. 26. No reliable information available, but ap- parently the largest proportion are the habitual moderate consumers. 28. Bhang394 63. I think as an experimental measure licenses for retail vend of charas might be restricted to large towns and cities. 64. I think there should be an import duty on charas so as slightly to enhance its cost. 66. Ganja not used here. 68. Yes, as regards charas, I think these charas-smoking dens might with advantage be closed. Facilities for smoking and companion- ship tend, I think, to increase consumption. 69. Existing shops are in localities where they have been for years past. In respect of new shops local public opinion should, I think, be considered. 17. Evidence* of SARDAR BAHADUR LACHMI SAHAI, Extra Assistant Com- missioner, Amritsar. 1. In ancient times my ancestors were men of authority and note, on which account I had oppor- tunities of meeting many people during my youth. For fourteen years I held the post of Tahsildar in the Ferozepore, Gujranwala, Lahore, Sialkote, and Gurdaspur districts, and then I was promoted to the post of Extra Assistant Commissioner, and remained attached to the Gurdaspur and Hoshiar- pur districts, and now I am posted to Ludhiana. During this period I acted as Excise Officer on certain occasions, and as such had opportunities of coming in contact with excise contractors, con- sumers of these drugs, and traders, in consequence of which I am able to answer these questions, as far as my knowledge goes. 2. Ganja is not manufactured in the Punjab at all, nor is it generally used in this province, and therefore its varieties cannot be defined. In this province charas is known by two names, i.e., (1) charas, and (2) sulfa. 3. Bhang grows spontaneously in the Gurdas- pur, Hoshiarpur, Kangra, Simla and Jullunder dis- tricts, in the Mandi, Suket and other Hill States of the Simla and Kangra districts, and in some villages of the Kalsia estate, in the Umballa dis- tricts. It is abundant in the Hill States named above, and grows in large quantities in the Kangra, Simla and Hoshiarpur districts. 4. The different names by which bhang is known are (1) bhang, (2) sabzi, (3) buti, (4) sukba, and (5) bijia. 5. Plants of wild hemp have not been seen on the high peaks of mountains. It generally grows in habitations at the foot of the hills, and humid climate and damp soil are also necessary for its growth. 6. The growth is generally dense. 7. I have never seen or heard the cultivation of this plant in any district. (a) No. (b) No. (c) It is used as bhang, of course. (d) No. 8. See reply No. 7. There is no special area under such cultivation in this province. 9 and 10. See reply No. 7. 11. Ganja is not produced in the Punjab. This question has been answered by a part of answer No. 2. 12. See part of answer No. 2 for reply to this question. 13. There is no restriction, nor is ganja pro- duced. 14. In these districts (sic) ganja and charas are not prepared from bhang. I have, however, heard that the Kotkhai and Kotguro ilakas round Simla, and in the Rampur and Jubbal States in the Himalayan range, some people crush or rub the green leaves of the plant between their hands, and the juice which sticks to their hands by this process is taken off in small sticks by rubbing the hands, and from these sticks charas is manufac- tured in very small quantities, and a limited number of persons prepare it. I have never seen or heard this charas imported into these (Punjab) districts for sale, nor is it considered good for intoxication, and hence it has not been brought in use. In the province of Kashmir a small amount of charas is prepared from bhang and is locally consumed. 15. See reply No. 14. Charas is largely con- sumed for smoking only, and a small quantity used in medicines. Bhang is used both for eating and drinking. There are two ways of eating it, i.e., (1) by mixing it with sugar, etc., and (2) by taking it in the preparation called majun. 16. People cut the plants from the jungle and collect them in their houses. Nothing else is done to prepare them for use. Ganja and charas are not prepared in this prov- ince, except in the extraordinary way in which charas is prepared in the Simla Hills, vide reply No. 14. 17. Ganja and charas are not manufactured in this province. As regards bhang, the cultivators cut it from their proprietory land, and in most cases the excise contractors of villages have it gathered by paid coolies. The zamindars generally take nothing for the bhang thus collected, because its plants do not grow on their culturable lands. 18. In cold countries, such as Ladakh, where charas is stored for traffic with India, it does not deteriorate for three years; but when it is export- ed from Ladakh to hot countries, like the Punjab, it loses its intoxicating effect after one year, and, if kept for a longer period, it becomes quite useless. It begins to deteriorate after one year, generally on account of heat. In order to prevent its de- terioration, it is sent to cold climates in the hills, and this, too, can protect it for two years only. During the second year it loses its effect. 19. Charas mixed with tobacco is used only for smoking, and is smoked in a huka or chillum. It is also seldom U6ed as a medicine, according to the Vedic mode of treatment. 20. The following classes of Hindus and Muham- madans use charas throughout the Punjab:395 the Punjab 1,020 maunds, 5 seers and 10 chittaks of charas was sold by retail sale, and so the average consumption per head was three mashas. 21. Not used. 22. Native charas is not produced in this prov- ince; but charas of foreign countries is used here, which is imported from Yarkand viâ, Ladakh and Kulu, and is also imported into the Rampur State via Kanuri. During the Loi Pair, at Rampur, in the mouth of Katak, the Kanuris bring charas from Ladakh for sale at the Rampur Fair, but larger quantities of charas are imported from the Ladakh market (sic). 23. No person uses bhang for smoking. 24. The consumers of bhang in this province generally drink it after pounding it (in water); but if any one cannot get a mortar for pounding it, he is obliged to crush in it his hands, mix a little gur with it, make it into a large pill, and swallow it. The well-to-do people take it in the form of majun. The number of consumers is grossly about 1,60,017, of which 64,000 are habi- tual consumers, and of these one per cent. eat bhang. 25. The use of bhang is not on the increase or decrease on account of its price since the last many years. The increase or decrease in the con- sumption of charas depends on the rates at which it is sold; because in 1890-91 the average rate was Rs. 11-7-1 (per seer), when 817 maunds 25 seers and 5 chittacks were sold in 1891-92, when the price fell to Rs. 7-1-10 (per seer), the quantity sold ran up to 1,020 maunds 22 seers 9 chittacks, and nearly an equal quantity was sold in 1892-93, when the price was Rs. 6-2-5 per seer. Charas. Bhang. 26. (a) Habitual moderate consumers . . 24,002 16,322 (b) Habitual excessive consumers . . 24,003 16,322 (c) Occasional moder- ate consumers 1,12,012 3,627 (d) Occasional exces- sive consumers . 12,012 3,627 Classes (a) and (b) use bhang daily, regardless of seasons, (c) and (d) use it during the summer months, and a limited number of them during winter also. The average daily consumption per head is 3 mashas. As regards charas, classes (a) and (b) use it daily, and (c) and (d) occasionally during the winter months. 27. The Hindu and Muhammadan fakirs mostly use bhang and charas, as well as those people who have no interest in wordly affairs, and who do not require to work with wisdom and intellect. Licentious people generally contract such habits, and particularly those who have a tendency for devotion use the drug in small quantities. 28. The average daily consumption of charas is 2 maunds and 27 seers, because in 1892-93, according to the report of the Excise Commission- er, 1,020 maunds 5 seers and 10 chittacks of charas was sold. The average allowance of bhang is 10 maunds per diem as, according to the Excise Commissioner's report for 1892-93, 3,640 maunds was consumed. The average daily allowance for classes (a) and (b) is 3 mashas. 29. The ingredients ordinarily mixed with bhang are the seeds of water melon, pumpkins, carda- moms, black pepper, almonds, sugar, and milk. All the consumers do not mix all of the above ingredients. Some put them all, while others some of them; but black pepper is generally mixed. 30. Of the consumers of bhang and charas, 10 per cent. use it in solitude and 90 per cent. in company. Boys above the age of twelve use these drugs, and women do not use it at all. Of course women of loose character indulge in these drugs in very rare cases. 31. People get the habit of using bhang and charas from each other's company, and then to forego the consumption of charas causes serious privation, while the consumers of bhang suffer less. Moderate consumers have a tendency for excess. 32. Bhang and charas are never used to any large extent in connection with any social or religious custom. In the worship of the god Shiva, the Hindus occasionally use bhang. 33. Respectable people of this province look down upon charas-smoking. Some respectable people, however, use bhang during the summer. The bhangis and charsis are generally in disrepute. The hemp plant is not worshipped according to any religion. Some Sikhs attribute the use of bhang to their superiority. 34. It would cause serious privation to the con- sumers of charas and bhang to break off their habit, and there is apprehension of their suffering from the following diseases: In case of charas, from cough, asthma, and hiccups, etc.; and in cases of bhang, from palsy, rheumatism, and weak- ness of the bladder, etc. The consumers of charas will suffer much more, and the probable numbers of each class are, bhang 24,603, and charas, 16,322. 35. The prohibition of charas is feasible, because its export from Ladakh can be easily stopped there. The prohibition of bhang is, however, difficult, because in some of the Punjab districts named in reply No. 3 it grows spontaneously, and, if prohibited, people would consume it illicitly. The prohibition would occasion discontent among the consumers, but such discontent would not amount to any political danger. The discontent among the Nihang Sikhs (consumers of bhang) would, however, be dangerous to some extent. People would be inclined to have recourse to al- coholic stimulants and opium to a small extent if prohibition is made. 36. Such has not been the case up to this time. In extremely rare instances, however, wines and opium may have been used for these drugs. 37. When ganja is not used at all in this prov- ince, the difference of effect of charas-smoking from that of ganja cannot be explained. 39. In smoking charas, nothing except tobacco is mixed with the drug, nor do the consumers wish to mix anything else with it. It cannot be less injurious in any form. 40. Bhang is medicinally used in cases of diarrh396 There are no special classes of people who use the drugs for the purposes indicated in the ques- tion. Of cour6e the Hindu and Mahammadan fakirs who are habitual moderate consumers do use them for the said purposes. Charas is not beneficial for alleviating fatigue and hard labour; but the moderate use of bhang does alleviate fatigue. 42.The moderate use of bhang is neither bene- ficial nor injurious; but even the moderate use of charas is not harmless. 43.The moderate consumers of bhang are in- offensive to their neighbours. The claras con- sumers, however, are offensive to their neighbours, inasmuch as the obnoxious smoke of the charas, their coughing and prattling are very troublesome. 44.The habitual moderate consumers of bhang feel pleasure when they form the habit. It is re- freshing, produces intoxication, and increases ap- petite. The intoxicating effects remain the same as long as the consumer continues to drink. On the contrary, charas, on account of its heating and arid qualities, affects the appetite, produces cough, and also uneasiness for want of subsequent grati- fication. 45.The habitual moderate use does not produce any noxious effects397 18.Evidence of RAI BAHADUR BHAGWAN DAS, Extra Assistant Commissioner, Amritsar. 1.I have had the opportunities of being in Kangra, Hoshiarpur, Jallandbar, Muzaffargarh, Gurdaspur and Amritsar districts, where I had been able to gather the information regarding the hemp drugs, on which my answers to the questions are framed. 9.The names of the preparations of the hemp are known by the same names in this province as given in Dr. Prain's report. 3.It spontaneously grows in Kangra, Hoshiar- pur and Gurdaspur districts. 4.It is known by the following different names:398 43.Yes, they are inoffensive to their neighbours. 44.The immediate effect of the moderate use of bhang and charas is to cause an exhilaration of mind. Charas and bhang are refreshing in their moderate use. They produce intoxication when used moderately, but to a slight extent. They do not allay hunger; they create appetite. Their effects last for about three hours. Indigestion and dullness of mind are their after-effects; the want of subsequent gratification produces uneasiness. 61.The habitual moderate consumers of the drugs are not the bad characters in a large pro- portion. No connection with any crime. 54.The consumers of bhang and charas are timid; therefore they have no courage to commit any violence. 58.In my opinion the present system of excise administration is working well in this province. 59.See answer to the question 58. 60.This province does not produce ganja. 61.Charas is not produced in this province. 62.No cultivation of bhang in this province. 63.No objection to the present system of wholesale and retail vend of bhang and charas. 64.No objection. 65.No taxation in this province on the export and import of these drugs. 66.Ganja is not imported into or exported from this province. 67.See answer to the question No. 65. 68.Yes, there are shops known by the name of Sakikhanas where these drugs are consumed on the premises; these shops are not separately licens- ed but the drugs are supplied to them by the general contractor of the tahsil or district. 69.The public is never consulted before a shop is opened in any locality for the sale of the drugs. No consultation, as far as I can think, is necessary. 19.Evidence of ARJAN SINGH, Sikh, Extra Assistant Commissioner, Dera Ghazi Khan. 1.I was Excise Officer at Umballa, Rohtak, and Dera Ghazi Khan for several years. At present I am engaged in the Dera Ghazi Khan Settlement as Extra Assistant Settlement Officer. 2.The definitions given here apply to bhang and charas. My information does not extend to ganja. Bhang is also known by the name of sukha. 3.It grows spontaneously in Hoshiarpur, Dera Ghazi Khan, and Amballa districts. It is very abundant in the Amballa district. 4.The plant, so far as I am aware, is known by the name of bhang. "Sukha" is applied to bhang as prepared for drinking, when it is called bhang too. 5.Copious rainfali and proximity to hills imply- ing necessarily a high elevation, would appear to be necessary to the growth of the wild plant. 6.Scattered, I think. 7.Some thirty acres of land are cultivated every year in the Dera Ghazi Khan district. The hemp plant so cultivated is intended to be used as bhang. 8.There has been no considerable increase or decrease in area recently. 9.The hemp plant is cultivated like other chahi, Hahei crops on chahi, Hahci or Sailaba lands. The land is ploughed several times and receives several waterings. The seed is sown broadcast between October and January. The crop ripeus in March, and is cut at night to prevent a loss of seed that would otherwise occur. Ten seers of seed are sufficient for an acre of land. 10.No; they are of the same class as other agricultural cultivators. 12.I have no reason to suppose that this is the case. 13.I don't think there is any restriction in this respect. But, at the same time, hemp does not seem to be anywhere cultivated in the Punjab for producing ganja. 14.Bhang is prepared by the consumer himself or for him about the time of consumption. This remark applies to the whole Punjab. Charas is used as imported from outside. 15.The way in which bhang is prepared from the cultivated as well as the wild plant is one and the same. The quantity to be used is put in a mortar and reduced to thinness with a pestle, some water being mixed with the bhang at the same time. The whole becomes a pulp. Some more water is then mixed with it, and the mixture is passed through a piece of thin cloth to remove all traces of solid matter. Sometimes sugar and milk are mixed with the beverage as prepared. At other times almonds, cardamoms, etc., are also mixed with the bhang. A majun for eating is prepared by mixing bhang and poppy, sugar and ghee. 16.Bhang is sometimes prepared by the people in their houses, but more frequently at Dharmsalas, Thakardwaras, and at other public places where the person in charge keeps the necessary vessels for the preparations of bhang, the consumers bringing their own supplies of the dry plant. At the houses of some of the Tumandars in the Dera Ghazi Khan district, bhang is prepared and issued to all the visitors. Bhang can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown. 17.This has been already answered. The con- sumers generally prepare the drug themselves, though the persons in charge of Dharamsalas and other religious buildings or places of public resort offer facilities for its preparations. 18.Prepared bhang deteriorates very soon. Dry bhang can be kept in good condition for two or three years, provided that it is frequently ex- posed to air and light. Bhang that, deteriorates almost loses its effect in time. 19.I think these are used for smoking only. 20.Hardly any one in the Punjab smokes ganja. Charas, too, is used by very few persons. In the Dera Ghazi Khan district the number of charas smokers is about eight hundred. The use of this drug is confined to fakirs, Purbia grass- cutters and a few bad characters. The rural popu- lation hardly use charas at all. 22.I think the charas used in the Punjab is foreign, being imported into the Punjab from Yarkand. 23.No. 24.In the Dera Ghazi Khan district about sixty per cent. of the adult male population drink bhang either occasionally or regularly. The
399 Hindus as well as the Biloches take it more fre- quently than the other classes. In the other districts of the Punjab where I have been, hardly ten per cent. of the adult male population drink bhang. Everywhere, however, the fakirs, sadhus, as well as men frequenting disreputable houses do drink bhang. Few females or children are addicted to the use of bhang. Bhang is sometimes eaten in the form of majun, but on rare occasions, and then, too, by well-to-do persons. 25.In my opinion the use of none of these is on the increase or on the decrease. Weakening of the social restraints is being counteracted by moral ideas and the spread of education. 26.In the Dera Ghazi Khan district the pro- portion is, 1 think, as follows:400 cally, mentally as well as morally. The habit induces laziness and deadens the intellect, though I don't think it often produces insanity. 46.The habitual excessive use of these drugs is even more harmful than the moderate use. 47.I think it does not. 48.The children are not affected, except so far that they are necessarily of a weak constitution. 49.Sometimes. The prostitutes do use it (bhang) on occasions for this purpose. I don't think the use of hemp tends to produce impo- tence. The use of bhang as an aphrodisiac is more harmful than its ordinary use, as the effects of the stimulated lust are added to the ordinary consequences. 50.The evils emanating from the moderate use of bhang are intensified when it is taken in excess. The use of charas as an aphrodisiac in excess is even more harmful. 51.No. In my opinion there is hardly any connection at all between the two. 52.As above. 53.No. 54.No. 55.Very seldom. Complete stupefaction can, 1 think, be induced by this drug without admix- ture. 56.Cardamoms, sugar and almonds as well as milk make bhang milder in its effects. Dhatura is mixed with it on occasions of Shiv- ratri, but in very small quantities. 58.I think it is capable of improvement. 59.In the direction of prohibiting the sale of charas. I would not tax bhang any further, as the raising of its price would, I am afraid, make it more "fashionable." Many persons, who con- sider it beneath their dignity to drink it at present, would take to it if it becomes dearer. This is against the recognised canon of taxing the intoxicants, but with a drug hitherto consumed by the poor people and shunned by the wealthier classes (leaving aside the case of the Dera Ghazi Khan district) the danger is that an enhancement in the price of bhang would make it more popular with the middle as well as the higher classes. 60 and 61. It is not produced in the Punjab. 62.I don't think it should be controlled as the cultivation is very small, and the increase in price would be detrimental to the best interests of the people. 68.I have no objection to the present system, except that I would advise the prohibition of the sale of charas. 64.No objections. But charas should not be allowed to be imported. 65.I think it reasonable. Apparently bhang yields less than its due share, but for reasons given opposite question No. 59, an increase in its price would be followed by evil consequences 67.No. 63.There is no prohibition in the licenses. As a matter of fact, however, the consumption does not take place on the premises. It would be better to prohibit consumption on the premises formally. 69.The wishes of the people are consulted and considered before a new shop is opened anywhere. But local public opinion is sometimes of no value, as where the residents of the locality are given to smuggling and they would not agree to a shop being opened in their neighbourhood. 70.No. Oral evidence. I have been ten years in the service, nine years as Extra Assistant Commissioner. I have been on settlement duty for five years. Question 3.401 20. Evidence* of SODHI ISHAR SINGH, Sikh, Extra Assistant Commissioner, Hoshiarpur District. 2.Ganja is neither produced in the Punjab nor used. If it is used in the Punjab it is only by the people of other provinces of India who come to the Punjab and bring it here with them. If one wishes to buy ganja in the Punjab it is not procurable. 3.In the Gurdaspur and Hoshiarpur districts. 4.In addition to the names mentioned (in the question) the Muhammadans call it buti and the Sikhs generally sukha. 6.The growth is according to the fertility of the soil. It is generally dense. 7.I have never seen bhang being cultivated in this district. 10.Neither is there any class nor other agricul- turists. 11.I know nothing about it. 12.This question does not concern the Punjab. 13.This question does not appear to concern the Punjab. 14.Ganja and charas are not manufactured. Bhang leaves are collected from the wild hemp plant in great abundance in the Gurdaspur district. I cannot state the quantity, but it amounts to hundreds of maunds. 15.I know nothing about the cultivated plants, nor can I state anything about its preparations. As to the wild hemp plant, the plant is reaped before ripening and kept until it dries. Its leaves are then separated, and these are called bhang. (A)Nobody smokes it. (B)Some people eat dry bhang. (C)It is often drunk after being pounded. 16.Those people who drink bhang or sell it, can prepare it in their own houses. Bhang can be prepared from any hemp plant wherever grown. But the bhang obtained from hemp plants grow- ing on certain tracts is superior in quality, and that of other tracts is of an inferior quality. I can give no reply regarding charas and ganja. 17.The bhang referred to in answer No. 16 can be prepared by every one who likes to prepare it. It cannot be stated which particular class of men prepare it. 18.Nothing can be said regarding ganja. Charas keeps good for three years, during which it gradually loses its effect as time goes on, until after four years it becomes absolutely useless. It does not deteriorate at all for one year. It also de- teriorates if kept under the sun or in a warm place. The natural effect of charas will, as a matter of course, decrease during the periods above referred to, no matter whatever care is taken. It should be kept in a cool place to prevent dete- rioration. If it is exposed to sun within the periods above referred to, it should then be kept in a cool place to avoid deterioration. I can state nothing about ganja. Bhang naturally does not lose effect for one year, no matter whether it is kept in a cool or warm place. It, however, deteriorates if it is drenched. 19.No answer can be given about ganja. Charas is smoked in a huka. I can state no other method of smoking it. No particular place can be mentioned where the use of charas is prevalent. 20.I know nothing about ganja. Charas is generally used by jogis, sanyasis and suthras, and also by other fakirs (with the exception of Sikhs), whether they be Hindus or Muhammadans who live in takias, thakurdawaras, shiwalas and devit- dawaras (Hindu temples). It is also used by those shopkeepers who are addicted to its use, and by the gamblers to a great extent. Such people exist more or less in every part of the country. If the fakirs be added to their number, it comes to 5 per cent. more or less of the population in the Punjab. The percentage is, however, high in cold countries. 21.Ganja is neither imported into nor used in the Punjab. 22.Charas is not manufactured here. It is imported from Yarkand. 23.So far as I know, no body smokes bhang. 24.(a) Bhang is eaten by Nihangs, a free sect of the Sikhs; other fakirs, called aghoris, and such people who have formed a habit of drinking bhang pounded in a large quantity of water. (b) Hindus and Sikhs generally, and to a small extent the Muhammadans also drink bhang. The number of the people who drink bhang is very small and cannot be exactly stated. Bhang is drunk in every part of the Punjab, and especially in the Multan, Lahore, and Amrit- sar districts. 25.With the exception of ganja, the use of bhang and charas is on the increase on account of the expansion of the population and the spread of liberty. The other reason is that charas was for- merly imported into the country. It was im- ported to a very small extent from Kashmir; but as it was very inferior in quality, the people smoked it very little. The use of charas has in- creased since its importation from Yarkand has commenced. As regards bhang, the reason is that as the population of the country has increased, the use of bhang has also proportionately in- creased. It is also a rule that a consumer of bhang or charas offers the drugs in small doses to those who are sitting about him when he consumes them. As bhang prevents malarious diseases, the people are compelled, out of necessity, to use it in the hot i and the rainy seasons, which are very unhealthy in this country. 26. As regards charas402 The above answer refers to bhang also. 27.Mostly those people who associate with the classes of consumers mentioned in answer 26, or those who wish to become members of that congregation. 28.Charas403 of intoxicating drugs, the injuries done by which are daily smoothed by the diet taken. The moderate use cannot prove injurious for the reason that the loss of any particular substance of the system is made good by the diet. 43.They are certainly inoffensive. 44.The immediate effect of the use of these drugs on the habitual consumer is that until he gets his dose he is depressed and has a great desire to gratify his craving, and as soon as he takes bis does it gives him intoxication and re- freshes him. It does not allay hunger, but creates appetite, and the effect of the drug lasts more or less until the time for his next dose comes round. The first effect is strong and powerful and gradu- ally abates, until the time for the next dose arrives, when it totally disappears. The want of subsequent gratification produces uneasiness and weakness. I have seen that habitual consumers, when they come out of jail after undergoing their sentences, give up the habit. 45.In my opinion no change takes place in the constitution of any of the moderate consumers of charas and bhang; nor does the moderate use pro- duce any of the effects mentioned in question 45. The moderate use also does not induce debauchery. The moderate use produces no injurious effect to health. It is, however, injurious to those who have a phlegmatic and arid temperament; but the moderate use on the whole imparts no injury to those men who, as mentioned in answer No. 42, repair the injury done by it. It is difficult to answer this question, as it concerns the science of medicine. Men are often inclined to use bhang and charas for the sake of refreshment, but I can give no instances. Note.404 21. Evidence of SHEIKH DIN MAHOMED KHAN, Extra Assistant Commissioner, Sirsa. 1.I have served in many districts of the Pun- jab. For about three years, I was Excise Officer in the Ferczepore district. 2.I have never come across ganja in the pro- vince; I know nothing about it. Charas is only known as charas. Bhang is also known as subzi, sukha and pati. I cannot answer any other parts of this question. 3.In Hoshiarpur. In Hoshiarpur it is abun- dant. 4.It is only known as "the bhang tree." 6.Dense. 7.(A) No. (b) No. (c) Not as a commercial enterprise. In some places in the Ferozepur district I have noticed that fakirs, both Hindu and Musalman, grow a few yards of bhang in front of their dwelling-houses for their own use. (d) No. 10.See 7 (c). I only referred to isolated cases, and not to classes. 11.Not to my knowledge. 12.No. 14.(a) No. (b)No. (c)Yes, in certain places, but I have not suffi- cient acquaintance with the subject to give evi- dence on it. 15.(a) Not cultivated in this province. (b) (A) Not prepared in this province. (B)People pluck the leaves, boil them down to extract the essence and then put the essence into sweetmeats. (C)The leaves are pounded up in water. Spi- ces and condiments are added; more water is then added, and it becomes drinkable. 16.Bhang is generally prepared by people in their houses. Where it is grown, there it is pre- pared. 17.No special classes. 18.As far as I know, charas keeps quite good for one year, When it deteriorates, it loses its intoxicating effect and becomes injurious to smoker. I know of no measure to prevent deterioration. Bhang keeps for two years, if it is kept dry. If it gets damp, it becomes worthless at once. About ganja I know nothing. 19.About ganja I know nothing. Charas is only smoked. 20.About ganja I know nothing. Regarding charas:405 smoked. In my opinion smoking charas is a far more harmful practice than either drinking or eating bhang. My reason for this opinion is that the effects of charas are much worse than that of bhang. 40.I know that Native Hakims use bhang medicinally, but not charas. I believe that bhang is used in the treatment of cattle disease. 41.Re ganja, I know nothing. Re bhang, (a), (b), (c), yes; (d) not that 1 know of. Re charas, (a), (b), (c) and (d), no. 42.No. 48.No, except that the smoke of charas is offensive to those who do not use it. 44.Re ganja, I know noting. Re bhang, it is pleasant, refreshing, only slightly intoxicating; it does not allay hunger, it creates appetite, its effect is very temporary, the after effect is that when the intoxication has worn off, it leaves the man in a worse state than he was before he took it; there would be a great longing if a con- sumer could not obtain it. Re charas, the im- mediate effect is a state of unconsciousness, it is not refreshing, it produces intoxication or rather stupor, it allays hunger, it does not create appe- tite, its effect is only temporary, the after-effect is as above described for bhang; there would be a great longing if a consumer could not obtain it. 45.Not being a medical man, I cannot answer these questions. 47.and 48. No. 49.Not being a medical man, I cannot answer these questions. 51 to 54. No. 55.I know that criminals administer those drugs to travellers in railway stations and serais to stupefy them, when they take their property and decamp. Complete stupefaction cannot be induced by these drugs without the admixture of dhatura. 56.Dhatura is mixed with hemp by persons who wish to increase the intoxicating effects of the drug. Also see answer to 55. 57.Re ganja, I know nothing. To my know- ledge charas is only smoked. 58.I consider the present system works well, and I can suggest no improvement. 60.Not produced. 61.Not produced. 62.No. 68.No. 64.No. 65. I consider the taxation reasonable and pro- portionate. 66.I know nothing about ganja. 67.No. 68.There are none that I know of. 69.The local authorities fix the localities in which shops are to be onened. Local public opinion is not consulted. I do not consider that there is any necessity to consult it. 70.No such facts have ever come to my notice. Yes; duty is paid. There is no general use of untaxed drugs that I know of. 22.Evidence* of LALA LAKHPAT RAI, Extra Assistant Commissioner, Rawal Pindi. 1.I have had experience as I was for some years in charge of the Excise Department in the Sialkot and Rawal Pindi districts, and also a reve- nue officer. 2.In addition to Dr. Prain's remarks in his report of 21st June 1893, the leaves are also known by the following names in the Punjab:406 18.Both bhang and charas deteriorate and absolutely lose their effects by long keeping. The former keeps good for three years, and the latter for four years with ordinary care. Charas dete- riorates by exposure to the sun, dew and rain. Bhang deteriorates by damp. In order to prevent its deterioration, charas is generally kept in a place protected from excessive heat, dew and rain. Bhang is generally kept in safe places after being put into bags or vessels. 19.Charas is only smoked. 20.Charas smoking prevails among different orders of Hindu beggars such as jogis, sanyases, oudasis, bairagis, nirmalas, suthras, etc., and among Muhammadan sects such as rind, malang, etc. Common people also smoke it to some extent. The fakirs live in different parts of the Punjab, but their exact proportion cannot be stated. 22.Foreign charas is the one smoked in the Punjab. It is imported from Kashghar, Ladakh and Yarkand. 23.Bhang is never smoked. 24.Among Hindus bhang is specially drunk by the following classes:407 hilarated after the dose. Charas smoking allays hunger, while bhang sharpens the appetite. The effect lasts so long as the heating and exhilarating power of the drug remains. When the intoxica- tion abates, reaction sets in. The consumer be- comes dull and languid. According to physicians, the immediate effect of bhang and its preparation is heating and exhilarating, and its after-effect is cooling, arid and depressing. So all the compo- nent elements of the drug produce their effects. 45.The moderate use of charas certainly in- jures both constitution and brain. The reason being that it sucks the blood, and the result is that the natural heat of the body diminishes. The constitution is thus undermined. Weakness of digestion, loss of appetite, langour and laziness also follow. The moderate use does not impair the moral sense, nor does it cause dysentery, asthma or bronchitis. 46.According to books on medicine, excessive charas smoking produces insanity of a temporary character. The patient can recover his soundness of mind by foregoing the habit and undergoing medical treatment. The symptoms may be rein- duced by resuming the habit. No such particular instance can be given. 47.Neither the moderate nor the excessive use of any of the intoxicants is hereditary, nor does it affect, in any way, the children of the consum- ers. 49.The moderate use of bhang and charas is practised as an aphrodisiac by prostitutes and immoral women. Its use for this purpose is more injurious than its use as an ordinary narcotic. The excessive use of bhang certainly produces impotency. 50.The hemp plant generally grows in cold and temperate countries. According to the Greek system of medicine, the immediate effect of bhang drinking is heating and exhilarating, latent effect* being arid and depressing. So when it is taken, it first produces a kind of warmth in the body, and this warmth stimulates the animal passions. But aferwards, its latent property produces arid and cool effect and lessens the vital power of the body. Prostitutes and immoral women use the drug as an aphrodisiac. The use of these drugs produces coolness and aridity in the system of the male consumers, dries up the semen and thus pro- duces impotency. It is generally seen that the excessive consumer cannot perform the duties of the husband, nor can he do any act of bravery. Such persons generally while away their time in solitude or in company of their fellow-consumers. 51.Bad characters, such as gamblers, etc., are generally addicted to the use of bhang or chara6. The number of such persons is, however, not very large. 63.As far as my experience goes, the excessive use of any of these drugs is not practised with a view that the dose may incite the consumer to commit an unpremeditated crime, violent or other- wise, nor does the consumption of any of the drugs produce such an inclination. 54.As far as my knowledge goes, none of these drugs is used by criminals to help them in com- mitting crime. 55.Indeed some gamblers, pick-pockets and treacherous persons, in order to further their de- signs, do induce their victims to share the dose of charas or bhang, and thus stupefy them. Com- plete stupefaction is, however, not produced with- out the admixture of dhatura. Whenever, there- fore, criminals intend to rob any person, they mix dhatura with bhang or charas and induce their victim to partake of the dose. 56.Bhang becomes more intoxicating if mixed with sugar or parched in a copper vessel [lit. along with copper pieces). The admixture of dhatura makes bhang more arid, whether taken in moder- ation or in excess, or kept for personal use or administration to others. In every case the ad- mixture of dhatura imparts an heating and arid effect to bhang. Bhang alone produces aridity and flatulence in the system and giddiness in the head of the consumer. The excessive consumers, therefore, mix dhatura with bhang, so that, if taken in winter, it may not prove injurious. 57.In this province, ganja and charas are neither eaten nor drunk. 58.The present excise system works well. It is, however, not mentioned in the excise rules, whether a person whose land produces wild hemp has a right to sell it to a contractor on a certain payment. The prevailing custom in the Punjab is that a lessee can reap wild hemp through his own servants without making any payment and sell it. Some rules should be framed on this subject. 59.The only reform that deserves consideration is that suggested in answer to question No. 58. 60.Ganja is not produced in this province. 61.Charas is not produced in this province. 62.The hemp plant is not cultivated in the Punjab. In my opinion, the wild hemp too should be controlled, The control can be exer- cised in this way that a village Patwari may be provided with a register, so that he may at the time of his girdwari enter in his register all areas producing wild hemp. 63.I have no objection to the present system of a wholesale or retail vend of bhang, charas and ganja. 64.There is no objection. 65.The present taxation on ganja, charas and bhang in the shape of license-lees is reasonable. Indeed it is proper to impose some import duty on charas, 67.There is no objection. It is judicious to impose some import duty on charas, 68.In every district of the Punjab, there are shops licensed for the sale of bhang and charas. The drugs are, however, not consumed on the. premises. In my opinion, it is necessary to have such shops, 69.The wishes of the people are not consulted in connection with the opening of such shops. In the Punjab leases for the retail vend of the drugs are sold by auction for each tahsil sepa- rately. The lessees at the beginning of the year obtain the permission of the Collector to choose a locality for opening shops. In my opinion, the wishes of the local public should be considered before a shop is opened. 70.There is nothing to which attention may be drawn.
408 23.Evidence* of SARDAR BALWANT SINGH, Extra Assistant Commissioner, Gujranwala. 1.To add to my personal knowledge and ex- perience, I have consul ed the sellers, consumers and other persons who have a special knowledge of the use and the effects of hemp, drugs. 2.Charas and ganja are not the products of this province. Charas is imported. Ganja is not even imported or used in this province. Bhang's definition of Dr. Prain is correct. Bhang is known by the following names in the prov- ince:409 34.To habitual excessive consumers, such as fakirs and suthras, etc., it would be a serious privation to forego the use of charas and bhang, but the percentage of such persons is very low. 35.It would be feasible to prohibit the use of charas. There is very little fear of charas being used illicitly, if its import is stopped, as it is not a product of the country. Its prohibition may be enforced by making the import and sale of this drug an offence. It will certainly incur discontent among excessive consumers; but there is no political danger involved in its prohibition, as its consumers have not the sympathy of the gener- al population, and their number is also small. There is no fear that its consumers would have recourse to the use of liquor, because they are, as a rule, incapable of finding funds for the purchase of costly liquor; but it is quite probable that they will have recourse to the excessive use of bhang. It wouldnot be feasible to prohibit the use of bhang, as it is used by a much larger population and by a better class of people, and is not looked down upon so much. Moreover, it is a sponta- neous product of the country, and the prohibi- tion would be difficult to enforce. 36.No. 37 to 39. Not known. 40.Hindi and Unani doctors prescribe bhang for medicinal purposes. 41.Charas is never, but bhang in certain cases is beneficial. (a) Bhang is considered as an incentive to appetite. (4) No. (c) Yes. (d) Not known. Moderate occasional use of bhang is referred to in the above answer. 42.Moderate use of bhang is harmless. The experience of the witness about moderate consum- ers of different stations of life and society con- firms this opinion. 43.Moderate consumers are certainly inoffen- sive to their neighbours. 44.To a habitual consumer of bhang a particu- lar thirst and restlessness begin to trouble just before the appointed time, and when he has taken it, the thirst and uneasiness give way to a sort of relief, and by degrees he begins to feel an intoxi- cation; consequently it is refreshing to him. It increases hunger. The effect lasts from three to five hours, according to the fineness in grounding the bhang. Inasmuch as it creates a sharper appetite, and if the consumer eats to satisfy it, he feels indigestion. The want of subsequent grati- fication produces' longing and uneasiness. Charas smoking results in immediate intoxica- tion. It is refreshing. It allays hunger. Its effect does not last more than two hours. Its after-effect is to create lethargy. Certainly the want of subsequent gratification produces longing and uneasiness. 45. The habitual moderate use of bhang and charas produces noxious effects physically and mentally, but not morally. Charas emaciates the body. Bhang and charas injure the digestion; the latter to a greater extent. Both of them create laziness, but not immorality or dabauchery. Charas produces insanity and weakens the intellect. 46.In case of habitual excessive use of any of these drugs the results are more serious, and in case of charas it invariably results in insanity. 47 and 48. No. 61.A large proportion of bad characters are habitual moderate consumers of charas. Moder- ate use of these drugs (bhang and charas) has no connection with crime. 52.Excessive use of bhang and charas decreas- es power to commit crime. 58.No. 54.No. 55.Sometimes criminals induce their victims to partake bhang with dhatura seeds in order to stupefy them, but not bhang and charas separate- ly. Bhang alone can induce complete stupefac- tion. 56.The admixture of sweet with hemp increas- es intoxication and that of almond and melon seeds and milk abates it. Excessive consumers of bhang sometimes mix dhatura for personal consumption to heighten its effect, and some criminals administer it with bhang to stupefy their victims in order to facilitate their crime. 57.Not known. 58.Excise administration in regard to bhang is working well; but in respect to charas it is capa- ble of improvement. 59.If import duty were levied on charas it can be borne without difficulty, as it is cheap already. 60.No. 61.No. 62.As bhang grows spontaneously, it is not feasible to control its production. 68.There are no wholesale licenses for the vend of bhang and charas in this province. This should be introduced in order to distin- guish between retail and wholesale vendors. 64.As far as I know, there is no such ob- jection. 65.There is no taxation for bhang and charas separately to allow of any comparison thereof being made with each other, or other alcohol and intoxicants. 66.Not known. 67.No, as far as I understand. 68.No such houses or shops exist in this pro- vince. 69.The wishes of the people are never con- sulted before opening a shop in any locality; but the people should be consulted. 70.Bhang and charas being nearly equally cheap everywhere, they are not smuggled into this province. Bhang being the product of the country may escape duty, but to a very small extent. Oral evidence. Question 1.410 is not cultivated in fields, but grows in the waste places near habitations, generally in patches not exceeding 2 or 3. "maralas." I may have seen a patch as big as 1-16th of an acre. The people collect it. A fakir in a dharamsala near my house used to cut it and dry it on his roof. It was not collected for sale. Malik Khazan Singh, a contractor, told me he used to send out and collect it. I do not know where he collected it, or whether he paid anything for it, Question 20.411 17.Hindu and Muhammadan fakirs are the only classes of this district people who produce "patti" and seed for drinking only. 18.Bhang deteriorates if kept for, say two years. It loses its full quality. It loses its total effect, it is said, in three years. If kept with ordinary care it keeps good about two years. It should not be exposed to wet and must be kept in bags. 19.Jhang people do not use ganja or charas. 20.Purbia syces, khidmatgars and Suthra fakirs who visit this district use charas. 21.Not known. 22.Foreign. It is imported here through Amritsar. Most probably from Bokhara or say Central Asia. 23.It is not used for smoking in the Jhang district. 24.Hindu and Muhammadan fakirs drink bhang particularly; towns people drink more than villagers ordinarily. 25.Use of bhang in this district is stationary. 26.Very few people drink bhang in this district. 27.Brahmans among Hindus, Sayads, and Marasis among Muhammadans, drink bhang much. Young lads visit Hindu and Muhammadan fakirs' abodes for fun's sake. Every afternoon bhang must be ready here. It is offered to the young visitors as charnamat (sacred liquid). The young people accept the offer, and in time they become habitual to drink. Hindu fakirs worship Shib-ji god with bhang. It is necessary every day for them to offer bhang to Shib-ji. People think that as it was used by Shib-ji Maharaj, so it must be a good stuff. Hence the practice. 28.(a) About an anna a month. (b) From annas eight to one rupee a month. 29.Luxurious drinkers who can afford put in almonds, cardamoms, pepper, sugar, milk, etc., to make it good to taste, and to get its withering quality deteriorated to a certain extent. "Bhang massala" is not known in this district. It is, however, optional for drinkers to buy from shop-keeper the following ingredients if they like:412 39.Bhang drinking is better than eating. If eaten, it withers brain more than if drunk. 40.Yes. Hakims use bhang in its medicinal qualities. Bhang is also used in the treatment of cattle. 41.No opinion about ganja or charas. (a)Bhang is neither accessory nor digestive. Only makes young drinker eat too much, but when the effect is past the stomach is felt to have been overworked. (b)Bhang drinker is not fit to undergo severe exertion or exposure. It does not alleviate fati- gue, but to a certain extent it makes forget fatigue. (c)Bhang is certainly considered so, (d)Not known. All classes of natives consider it for (c). Moderate occasional use of bhang is considered beneficial in malarious and unhealthy tracts. 42.Moderate use of of bhang by poor people is harmless. Man is fond of intoxication and nothing can be had cheaper than bhang. 43.Yes, they are. 44 It (bhang) refreshes him. It intoxicates him, makes him eat. He feels appetite only when drinks. Effect lasts well for six hours. If he does not drink in proper time, life is burden to him. He is longing and uneasy until he drinks. No opinion about ganja or charas. 45.No opinion about ganja or charas. (b)It (bhang) impairs constitution. Makes man uervous. (c)and (d) No. (c)No, not moral sense. Induces laziness, but not habits of immorality or debauchery. (f) Does not deaden intellect or produce insani- ty as far as people believe in it. Doctors may have different opinion. 46.Same remarks as above. Habitual is more nervous and more laziness in him. 47.No. No effect upon children. 48.In my own village in Amritsar district there were two habitual excessive drinkers413 Out of 100 charas consumers414 temperate. It certainly leads to the formation of habit to the Brahmins, etc. There is no religious custom in regard to the use of charas. However, as a matter of social courtesy among the kahars, dhobis, saises and sweepers, etc., etc., charas is more than often offered as a luxury on occasions of panchayats and marriage gatherings by the persons calling the panchayat or the host mostly in the cold weather. Such use is temperate and not essential. It may lead to the formation of the habit in in- dividual cases. 33. The consumption of bhang is generally regarded among the Hindus as an innocent luxury and sometimes useful beverage. It is also con- sidered a refreshing drug. However, the excessive use of bhang is in disrepute, as it makes the con- sumer unfit lor work so long as he is under the effect of the drug, and blunts his mental powers, as also causes the loss of energy, and, as a conse- quence, begets idle habits. Among the Muham- madans, however, its internal use is forbidden by their religion, like those of other narcotics or intoxicants, except as medicine in urgent cases. On the whole public opinion is in favour and not against bhang. The use of charas is generally regarded as a bad thing; the idea being that the charas is a drug for the use of lower order of men, also because it spreads an offensive smell about the place where it is smoked, and because it dries up the blood, takes away the freshness from the body, and gives cough. I know nothing about worshipping the plant hemp. 34.It would be a serious privation to give up bhang and charas to the classes of people addicted to the use of bhang, as the habit of consuming bhang and charas becomes a second nature to them. It would be extremely hard for them and for a vast number of people who consume these drugs as the only and cheap luxury. It is difficult to give probable number of such classes, but as a matter of fact thousands and tens of thousands or many more consume bhang and charas in one province. 35.It would not be at all feasible to prohibit the use of bhang and charas. The drugs would be consumed illicitly; the prohibition could only in my opinion be enforced either by declaring their consumption a legal offence or by stopping the importation and growth of the hemp plant. The prohibition would decidedly occasion serious discontent among the consumers, etc.; such dis- content would certainly amount to political dan- ger. The prohibition would be followed by re- course to alcoholic stimulants or other drugs. 36.I believe there is no reason for thinking that alcohol is now being to any extent substi- tuted for any of these drugs, for the simple reason that a person in the habit of consuming any of these drugs must take that particular drug, and would never be satisfied if offered to take alcohol as a substitute. He may take al- cohol in addition (as it is sometimes done) to the drug he is used to take. In fact he can never be satisfied with alcohol, nor can he enjoy it until ho takes the particular drug. The peculiarities and effects of one kind of intoxicant cannot be relished in the. other. Those who use can only know the difference. Young men of the present age, who are not in the habit of taking any of these drugs, and have a tendency to take intoxi- cants, prefer alcoholic drinks to these drugs. 40.The bhang is prescribed on account of its medicinal properties by the schools of native doctors known as yunani hakims and baids. Bhang is used in the treatment of cattle diseases. 41.The moderate use of charas is beneficial in its effects for the time being415 produces slight intoxication. It does not allay hunger. It does only create appetite, but it also makes one eat while under its effect a larger quan- tity of food than by any other medicine. It is clear from the following saying that bhang or bijiya is styled in a metaphorical language as a mother who naturally desires to nourish and keep her child comfortable, saying: "Come, mother bijya generous to all, and keep in the same way as a mother to her son." This is one of the sayings used at the time of taking bhang. Its effect lasts about five or six hours. It has no after-effects. The want of subsequent gratification does not produce any longing until the fixed time arrives at which the consumer is usually in the habit of using the drug. 45.The habitual moderate use of charas pro- duces noxious effects gradually416 26. Evidence* of FAKIR SAYED JAMALUDDIN, 417 21. I know nothing about this. 22. Charas is not manufactured here. That im- ported from Kashmir is called gardah; but the Yarkand charas is regarded as superior. 23. I have never heard of bhang used for smok- ing. It appears not to be so used in this province. 24. Bhang is drunk by all classes of people. Paper, pakoura, and majun, having a mixture of bhang in them, are mostly used by Hindus. In Multan, Bahawalpur and other localities bhang is drunk by nearly all the people. Nearly half the people, especially Hindus, are consumers of bhang in this province. 25. I do not think it would be on the decrease. It stands on the same footing as it has always done. Perhaps there are scarcely any Hindu shopkeepers who do not drink bhang in the afternoon. They are perhaps led to its use by their sedentary habits, it being considered to be digestive and exhilarat- ing. 26. (a) The number of habitual moderate con- sumers (of bhang ?) may be put down as about 50 per cent. (b) Of habitual excessive consumers, 25 per cent. (c) Of occasional moderate consumers, especially among Hindus, I should think 60 or 70 per cent. (d) Of occasional excessive consumers, 25 per cent. 27. Bhang is generally drunk by people of se- dentary habits. Its excessive cousumers are to be found among keepers, of takyas and dharmsalas and people without employment. The same may be said of charas, for one becomes generally unfit for work after smoking charas. 28. I do not know. A pice worth of bhang may be said to suffice for 10 or 12 habitual mod- erate cousumers, and double of that for habitual excessive consumers. 29. Ordinary consumers (of bhang) mix aniseed, black pepper, almonds, etc., and salt or sugar (with the drug). All these are sold by attars (apotheca- ries). Dhatura is not generally so used, except perhaps by excessive consumers requiring strong intoxication. 30. The consumption of bhang is very common. I should think 50 or 60 per cent. addicted to it. It is consumed in company at takyas, dairas, dharmsalas, etc., and almost all shopkeepers, es- pecially Hindus, take it in solitude about evening. Charas, too, is smoked in company at takyas, dairas, etc., but its use is not so common as that of bhang. 31. The habit of consuming it (?) is not formed rapidly. For those long accustomed to its use, it is difficult to give it up. It is, however, not im- possible, as is the case with the habitual opium eater. The habit of consuming bhang, ganja and charas commences with small quantities of them; but as one gets accustomed to their use, he be- comes an excessive consumer. 32. Bhang is commonly used among Hindus on days of fasting; but it is perhaps not a part of their religious ceremony relating to such occa- sions. It seems to be a matter of custom. So far as I know, such use is not regarded essential in connection with the ceremony. Among Mu- hammadans its use is prohibited religiously. Its habitual excessive consumption gives rise to vari- ous diseases, such as palsy, stupor, paralysis, spas- modic contraction, and other diseases of the brain and muscles. Excessive consumers are indeed generally stupid. 33. Among Muharomadans its consumption is not regarded as a good habit, and I think genteel Hindus too do not look upon it with approbation. If that be so, they must look upon the habit with disapprobation in consequence of the mischief done by it. So far as I know, the hemp (plant) is not worshipped by any sect of people. Excessive con- sumers of bhang, however, who have religiously retired from the world, are said to practise certain rites in veneration of it at the time of cutting and drinking. For they think that by means of its intoxication they are advanced in the spiritual world, and that their attention is concentrated in contemplation and is not distracted. The follow- ing verse is an instance of their views about it:418 the foot in one stirrup (while about to ride a horse) should produce intoxication by the time of placing the foot in the other stirrup. Thereupon they invented the practice of smoking charas. The story is, however, not supported by any book authority. 40 Yunani physicians prescribe bhang and charas in exhilarating prescriptions. Some physi- cians prescribe small quantities of its powder in cases of remittent fever. It is administered to horses as a food accessory. It is also administer- ed to unruly horses; also when there is heat in the system, or when they make urine of a reddish colour. It is perhaps also administered to oxen. 41. (a) Bhang is consumed as a food accessory. (b) It is also drunk to give staying-power under heat and alleviate fatigue. (c) Its use as a febrifuge has been noted above. It is regarded as beneficial during malarious seasons, and is commonly used during times of pestilence. The object is perhaps to remove the fear of pestilence and divert attention therefrom. I do not know any particular class, but the idea prevails among people in general. Habitual con- I sumers, of course, use it at all times. The number of occasional moderate consumers is also large. It is, however, the masses who do so; well-bred people seldom take it. 42. I have never observed or heard of any in- jury done to an occasional consumer. It is said to be rather beneficial. 43. Moderate consumers are not offensive to their neighbours, unless they are mischievously inclined. Even those addicted to its use are inoffensive; they do not indeed become pertina- cious, as is the case with akaliyas (a sect of Sikhs). 44. Thequot; immediate effect of the drug is a false appetite and fear of every object. Should a bird pass by, the consumer would suspect a brick to have been thrown by some one. Imagination is rapidly at work, and hence it is called vark-ul- khiyal (i.e., exciting the imagination). In the case of moderate doses, the intoxication lasts three or four hours. A habitual consumer feels a sort of perturbation when the intoxication abates, but not such as is felt (by a drunkard) when the intoxi- cation of alcohol abates. 45. The smoking of charas as well as of ganja does produce physical, mental and moral effects of a noxious nature. The body becomes lean and disfigured. There is a false appetite during the commencement (of the habit); but there is a loss of appetite subsequently. Cough and asthma follow, and moral discernment is also impaired. One becomes lazy, wilful, and envious. It does not, however, incline the consumer to debauchery. A predilection is produced for sweetmeats, milk, and other rich diet. It does also induce insanity, especially if the habit be contracted during youth, Many people have been seen to have become per- manently insane. The excessive use of bhang does also produce such effects, as tremor, palsy, and other diseases of the muscles. Those who possess a control over themselves may be cured by giving up the consumption of the drug on the first appearance of the symptoms of these evil consequences. The kind of insanity corresponds to the temperament of the consumer. Some become subject to melancholy; others to fitful madness; others still to mania. People do take bhang to allay mental anxiety; but 1 have not fully understood the meaning of the last portion. I cannot mention any particular case; but my statements agree with my general observation. 47. As a general rule, the habit does not appear to be hereditary. Of course, if the children of an habitual consumer always sit in the father's society, it is possible they may contract the habit. But there are also those who spurn the use of such narcotic drugs notwithstanding such society. People of both kinds have come under my observ- ation. 49. Many people do take bhang primarily as an aphrodisiac, but become impotent when they get addicted to its use. Females also do occasionally take it; but I have not come to know that all prostitutes take it. Women are rarely charas smokers, but there are more of them drinkers of bhang. Drunkards, too, when the intoxication (of liquor) abates, sometimes drink bhang to re- move the after-effects. 51. No particular class of bad characters is known to me to be the habitual moderate consum- ers of any of these drugs. I have not heard that the moderate use (of these drugs) has any connec- tion with crime in general, or with crime of any special character; Consumers of bhang and charas are, generally speaking, not habitual crimi- nals, for a boldness and activity are indispensable for the commission of crime, whereas habitual consumers of these intoxicants are generally timid and lazy. Akali people, who were, during the Sikh rule, noted for their excessive consumption of bhang, did commit highway robbery and other crimes, but not in consequence of their being addicted to the drug. They were in reality pro- fessional criminals and consumed bhang in excess. I have not come across any such instance in modern times. Chuhras (sweepers) are indeed bhang drinkers as well as professional criminals. Their criminal profession, however, is due to their natural inclinations, and not to the consumption of bhang or charas. 53. If the consumer of these drugs be naturally wicked, he may commit violent crime. Habitual consumers of bhang have sometimes been seen perpetrating murder on slight provocation. Such a deed is, however, not done under frenzy, but through pertinacity, for habitual excessive consum- ers of it do become of a pertinacious character. The excessive use of bhang brings into play the natural disposition of the consumer, and even makes the characteristic peculiarities stronger. 54. I think these drugs are not used by crimi- nals, because they would not fortify them, but would rather make the criminals timid. 55. They may do so. I have not seen any such case. Complete stupefaction would be induced if an excessive quantity of the drugs was taken through carelessness. Dhatura is mostly used for such purposes. 56. Moderate use does cause injury, but of an imperceptible nature, especially so if almonds, aniseed, endive, and milk, etc., be mixed as correct- ives. I do not know of any case of dhatura being mixed with bhang for personal consumption. It may be mixed for administration to others ; but I possess no particular information on the subject. 57. Charas is mixed with (compounds called) majuns, which are intended to serve as aphrodisi- acs. The result is as noted already. Taken in excess, even as a medicine, it produces injuriou
419 results in the end. The excessive use of charas produces insanity. I have seen many cases of insanity through charas smoking. I have seen cases in which insanity was reinduced. 58. In my opinion the present system of excise administration in respect of hemp drugs is work- ing very well. No better system seems to me to be possible. If illicit trade or smuggling is prac- tised to any extent, it is detected sooner or later and the culprits are punished. What else could be done ? 59. This question has been answered under question 58. Coutrol is exercised by issuing cir- culars from time to time. 60. Ganja is not produced in this province; hence there is no control of its preparation. 61.Similar to the above, i.e., charas is not pro- duced in this province. 62.As a general rule, the plant is not cultivat- ed in this province for the production of bhang, If it were so cultivated, a control similar to that over the cultivation of poppy would do. 63. None. 64.None; the regulations work well. 65. In my opinion the taxation is reasonable. 66.In my opinion there should not be different rates. The import and export duty should be uniform. The duty on production where ganja is produced must of course be different. The import and export of drugs is conducted under passes, and the rates of their duties, etc., should be uniform. 67. I have no objection. The heavier the duty the less will be the use of the drugs. 68. All these drugs are sold at the shops of licensed vendors. 69. The wishes of the people are, I think, not consulted in any special manner ; nor is it neces- sary to do so. When this is done, it is done openly. No complaint has ever been heard. 70. There are, in my opinion, no such facts which call for attention. Duty is levied on all sales and purchases that take place openly. Smuggling is also practised, for it is impossible to absolutely check smuggling. It is adequately punished. 27. Evidence of MUHAMMAD BARKAT ALI KHAN, KHAN BAHADUR, Retired Extra- Assistant Commissioner, Lahore. 1. Although I have no personal experience, yet I had several opportunities, while in the service of Government, of seeing some friends and the residents of takias and dharmsalas as well as the habitual moderate and excessive consumers use charas and bhang, hence 1 state below whatever I know about the drugs in question. 2.It is not usual to consume ganja in this province, and therefore I can say nothing about it. 3. The wild hemp plant grows in abundance in the Gurdaspur and Hoshiarpur districts, and it is known by the following names in the Punjab :420 ince, should be destroyed every year. Certainly the prohibition would cause serious discontent among the consumers, and would not be strange if political dangers arise. Well-to-do consumers will have recourse to alcoholic stimulants and the poorer classes will use the dhatura seed. 36. Country and English liquors are being sub- stituted for bhang and charas among the educated and wealthy classes. 40. Native physicians generally use bhang in medicines for the treatment of men and cattle. 41.Moderate use of bhang is beneficial. (a) Yes. (b) Yes. (c) Yes. Brahmans during the saradhs, fakirs and sad- hus in jungles, hills, and while travelling, and other people at fairs, etc., and dharmsalas and takias use the drug for the above purposes. 46. The habitual consumers of charas are gener- ally pale and suffer from bronchitis, asthma, and debility, and are also subject to insanity. 47. Among the purbia grass-cutters, dhobis, etc., the habit of using charas is hereditary. The habit of using bhang is often hereditary among Brahmans, fakirs, sadhus, suthreshahis, takiadars, fakirs, and sweepers. 58. The present system of Excise Administra- tion is working well and requires no improvement. 60. Ganja is not produced in this province. 61.Charas is not produced in this province. 63. No objection. 67. No objection. 68. There are licensed vendors at whose shops these drugs are available for sale. On the open- iug of a new shop in the villages the wishes of the lambardars are consulted. 28. Evidence of COLONEL L. H. E. TUCKER, C. I. E., Officiating Inspector General of Police. Oral evidence. I am Officiating Inspector-General of Police. I have been in the Punjab Police since September 1864, and served in all parts of the province, but mostly on the frontier. There does not appear to me to be any direct connection between the hemp drugs and crime, but that class of habitual criminals who administer stupefying drugs for purposes of robbery and take the disguise of fakirs nearly all smoke charas. The drug is of use to them, as it enables them to invite people to smoke, and charas serves to hide the administration of dhatura in a way that tobacco would not. The connection between charas and this sort of crime is therefore indirect, casual rather than causal. I do not think the better class of the people use bhang or charas. Bhang is taken as an intoxicant like liquor, and the better class of people who can afford it prefer the latter. Beside the criminal class I have described above, 1 know of no class which habitually consumes charas. The habit is held in contempt by the more respectable people, and the term " charasi " carries that meaning. Bhang is not, I should think, held in as bad repute as charas. It is used as a tonic and medicine as well as an intoxicant, I have never known the intoxication of charas to be pleaded as a defence by persons charged with crime. But I think I have known the plea to be raised as regards bhang ; but I cannot recall any serious case in which the plea was raised. Lots of cases have occurred in which men have been arrested for riotous conduct or obstructing the police, and have been reported to have been in- toxicated with bhang. These are like ordinary drunk and disorderly eases at home. 1 cannot recall any particular cases of this kind. I will look up my records to see if cases of serious crime have arisen from bhang. Similar cases arise in connection with liquor, but they are fewer, because the class which consumes liquor is less given to riotous conduct than bhang drinkers are, for the reason that liquor costs more money. There has certainly been the idea that fanatics have taken bhang before running amuck, and I know that it was currently reported that the 300 Ghazis who came down upon the 32nd and 23rd Pioneers at Ambeyla in 1863 and were cut up to a man were under the influence of bhang. I saw the attack, and the fanatics appeared to come on like half-drunken men as they leapt down shouting from terrace to terrace. They were, at all events, under unnatural excitement. I have seen a man brought out to be hanged show the same kind of demeanour. The probability that bhang had been taken is supported by the fact that the fanatics were not Pathans but Hindustanis from the Malka colony, who came originally from the plains of India. On the other hand, it is improbable that the Akhund of Swat would have encouraged them to take intoxicants in a holy war. They might, howevor, have done it without asking the Akhund. The alleged effect of the use of bhang in causing timidity may be true of the man who has steeped himself in bhang as it would be true of a man suffering from delirium tremens from alcohol; but the first effect of a dose of bhang may neverthe- less be stimulating. Whether the excitement of the Ambeyla fanatics was due to the fact that they were devoting themselves to death, or partly to that and partly to bhang, I cannot say. I can recall no other case to give support to the idea that bhang causes the excitement under which men run amuck; but I will look up the records on the subject. The hemp drugs are very rarely used by mem- bers of the police force. We have had very few cases. A few " charasis " have had to be got rid of because they could not be relied upon to keep awake on sentry go or do other duty ; but it is quite rare. In a district with a force of 1,0 00 men, five years might pass without such a case coming before the Superintendent. I should get rid of a man known as a charasi on account of the habit. Such a man would be an habitual excessive consumer and quite unfit for duty. I don't know the moderate habit. It either does not exist or one does not hear of it. On the other hand, I should not get rid of a man known as a drinker of liquor or an eater of opium unless he committed some specific breach of duty. A man does not get the reputation of being a " charasi," unless he has carried the habit to such
421 a length as to make him unfit for work. I should not enlist a " charasi," for if he had not carried the habit to great lengths, he would not have earned that name, and I should not bear of his having the habit. I do not remember it having been brought against a man that the took bhang in particular as distinguished from other in- toxicants. I do not know much about the habit of bhang-taking; but I imagine it goes with charas, or with other intoxicants. The mere men- tion of the opium or alcohol habit would not necessarily prevent my enlisting a man who showed no effects of the habit in his physique, and in whom the Civil Surgeon could discover no bad effects from the habit. Letter from COLONEL TUCKER appended to his evidence. I have the honour to say that, in compliance with the wishes of the Commissioners, I have caused the special reports of the following offences committed in the province during the five years 1889 to 1893, inclusive, to be searched, without finding a single instance in which these crimes were committed by persons intoxicated with bhang or charas:422 in our lunatic asylums have been charas smokers. I cannot call to mind any particular instances. 49. Charas is said to cause impotence, and for this reason is used by some fakirs to conquer their passions. 51. I do not think that the use of hemp drugs has any connection with crime. I have not known any cases in which crime has been caused by such indulgence. 53. 1 believe the Kukas, who attacked the butchers at Amritsar and at Raikot in the Ludhiana district in 1872, were said to have fortified themselves with bhang; but the habitual use of bhang takes away courage and renders a man nervous. There is a saying423 without motive under the influence of: these drugs. But the cases are so few and far between that it would be difficult to find them. I remember one man (a Police Sergeant) about the beginning of the seventies (1874 or 1875 I think) becoming violent from the use of bhang and charas. Had he got a sword, there would have been injury. He had been brooding over being passed over for promotion. I cannot remember the particulars of any other case. There may have been isolated cases, in the Force, of men having incapacitated themselves from duty thorugh charas and bhang ; but I have had very few cases brought to my notice during my connection with it; now I have six hundred men under me at Sialkot. I could not tell you whether any man indulges to even a moderate ex- tent. I have had more instances of alcohol cases brought to my notice. I am constantly among the people and know them well. I believe that the upper classes of natives are decidedly opposed to these drugs. They are most generally used by fakirs, sadhus, and lower classes both of Hindus and Muham- madans. Charas is much used by Pathans. There is no general use at festivals. I think the drug is used to a considerable extent among the Sikh agriculturists generally in the Punjab. When there is a Jat village, five or ten per cent. might indulge in bhang. They take it only as a stimu- lant not so as to be intoxicated. The religious and the Kukas take the drug to produce abstrac- tion. The Kukas did not, I think, get the idea from fakirs. In Guru Govind Singh's times, I think, the permission to use bhang instead of alcohol was given, and this was carried on in the Sikh nation and was the origin of the use in the Sikh army. 31. Evidence of MR. R. SALE BRUÉRE, District Superintendent of Police, Karnal . 1. I have been now in Government service for the last thirty-two years, and during this period my duties as a police officer have from time to time given me opportunities of obtaining informa- tion in matters connected with hemp drugs. 2. Yes; the definitions may be accepted for this province, Punjab. 3. Bhang grows spontaneously in a few places in the limits of police stations Guhla and Pahewa in the Karnal district. 4. It is known by the names of bhang, sukha, buti, sabji, bijia, and kumla patti. These names all refer exactly to the same plant. 5. Moist place, banks of rivers and canals are necessary for the growth of bhang. 6. The growth of wild hemp is generally dense ; but only in places where the soil is damp. 7. As far as is known the bhang plant is not cultivated at all in this district. 14 and 15. Majun is prepared in this district from bhang in very small quantities. The process is as follows :424 41. Moderate use of bhang may be beneficial as indicated in (a) to (c). Menial classes use it for the purposes above referred to. 42. Occasional moderate use of bhang for the purposes set forth in paragraph 41 (a) to (c) would be harmless. 43. Yes. 44. It does not refresh ; lassitude ensues, it intoxicates; is said to increase the appetite and not to allay it. The effect lasts according to the amount taken and differently on all persons. After- effects are said to be laziness, indifference. Yes; a longing or uneasiness is occasional. 45. The habitual moderate use of bhang and charas produces noxious effects425 consists of melon, cucumber and pumpkin seeds, rose petals, cardamoms, almonds, black pepper and poppy seeds 30. The drugs are commonly consumed in com- pany in the same way that alcoholic drinks are consumed by Western nations. Females use the drugs, but not commonly. They are rarely re- o-tilar consumers. The lower classes of prostitutes are, however, large consumers. The children of fakirs not uncommonly take to the use of the drugs early in life. 31. The habit is probably easily formed, and as regards ganja and charassmoking there is, I fancy, a tendency to increase the quantity con- sumed. The discontinuance of the moderate use does not occasion more than moderate discomfort. 32. At the time of Jag, bhang is given by Brahmins to all persons visiting the shrine of Mahadeo. The use of the drug on this occasion is not regarded as essential ; but it is considered that its use is pleasing to Mahadeo. The use at this ceremony is temperate and not likely to lead to the formation of habit. 33. Fakirs and sadhus commonly use the drugs with the objects of allaying sexual desire and of fortifying themselves against exposure. Among the better classes the use of bhang in moderation is not considered disreputable. Any one smoking ganja and charas sacrifices the respect of his fellows. It is considered unmanly for a young man to use these drugs. I suppose, however, chamars and other low class people may use them without suffering socially. Speaking generally a charas smoker is considered by native society to be a dissipated fellow. 34. 1 fancy fakirs and other excessive consum- ers would feel it to be a serious privation to fore- go the use of the drugs. But ordinarily the dis- continuance of the drugs does not involve more than moderate temporary discomfort. 35. The plant from which they are obtained grows so commonly in parts of the country that the use of the drugs could hardly be stopped without great difficulty and increase of expendi- ture. However, it is to be remembered that the majority of the consumers in this province are Hindustanis inhabiting our large cities and can- tonment bazars. 36. I am not prepared to offer an opinion on this point. The general impression among natives appears to be that the use of alcohol has increased and is increasing. The people of every country use some intoxicant, so that it comes to be a choice of evils. 39. From the inquiries I have made I have no doubt whatever that the smoking of ganja and charas is much more likely to prove injurious than bhang drinking. Intoxication is much more quickly and effectually produced by either charas or ganja than by bhang. Bhang is commonly taken as a beverage, whereas charas is commonly taken for the purpose of producing intoxication. 40. Yes. Hakims commonly use bhang com- bined with other drugs in the treatment of dysentery, diarrh426 56. Charas is not uncommonly mixed with tobacco for the sake of the flavour of the latter. Bhang is, as already stated, commonly mixed with " bhang massala " and used in the form of sherbet in the hot season by the well-to-do. 57. A case recently occurred in one of our jails in which a convict ate a large quantity of charas with the object of producing insensibility. 33. Evidence of SURGEON-MAJOR W. COATES, Civil Surgeon, Lahore. Oral evidence. I have been seventeen years in the service, nearly twelve in civil employ. I have been employed in various parts of the Punjab north of Lahore. I am Superintendent of the Lunatic Asylum, Lahore. I have held this office for eight mouths. I have not specially studied insanity, nor had special experi- ence regarding it apart from that in the Lahore Asylum. I cannot refer to any literature dealing with the physiological effects of the hemp drugs, nor do I know of any literature referring to the pathological appearances of excessive doses on con- sumers, nor to hemp-drug insanity. Before I came to the asylum I had no experience of hemp-drug insanity, except that in Peshawar I had seen a few cases of insanity attributed to hemp drugs, and sent them on to the asylum in the ordinary course of work. I mean cases stated (as a rule by the police) to be due to hemp drugs, but about which I had no opportunity of making up my own mind. There are no diagnostic signs of hemp drug in- sanity. With a view to see whether there were any such diagnostic symptoms I got together all the cases attributed to hemp drugs in the asylum and examined them. I found nothing diagnostic. The diagnosis, therefore, depends on history. Without a history it would be impossible for me to diagnose a case of hemp drug insanity. The value of history as ascertained in asylum cases is very little, I should say. I discredit the histories generally, because I think them unreliable. I have asked the police and relations also occasionally why they have assigned hemp drugs as the cause, and they have not given me satisfactory reasons. Also, in the further in- quiries recently made in the 1892 cases, the police have been found to have entered hemp drugs, though the relatives, etc., deny their use by the lunatic. There is no special character in the cases of established insanity attributed to hemp drugs. They are just like the other cases in the asylum. In recent cases there is greater excitement ; but that of course also is common to all forms of insanity. There is no special character that I could see either in the recent or chronic cases. I know the form of insanity known as " happy mania"; but I have not found this more common among hemp drug insanes than others. I do not think hemp drug cases give a peculiar character to our asylums, not to the Lahore Lunatic Asylum at any rate. My experience is limited. In regard to the 1892 cases I regard case No. 7 as a doubtful case, in view of the fact that opium, hemp and syphilis are all possible causes, and it is impossible to say which was the cause. Case No. 8 is also doubtful, as we have liquor, hemp, grief for the loss of all her legitimate and illegitimate children, prostitution and hard life as possible causes. Case No. .9. When I say that the cause is " doubtful" in this case, I mean that I am not cer- tain what the cause was; but I have no suspicion that it was hemp. Case No. 11. This is a case of juvenile insanity. The boy went wrong very early in life. By " vicious " I mean that he was addicted to intoxicants and gambling. Taking all the 1892 cases, I think that four cases (No. 1, No. 6, No. 11 and No. 12.) may reasonably be attributed to hemp ; that in three cases (No. 2, No. 4 and No. 9) there is no suspicion of hemp ; and that in five cases (No. 3, No. 5, No. 7 No. 8 and No. 10) the cause may be regarded as doubtful. That year there were 78. admissions to the asylum from all causes. I was not in charge of the asylum when Maula Dad (No. 4) and Jinda Shah (No. 12) died. I have never conducted any post-mortem on a hemp drug insane. I have sent in one annual report. The cause given in Statement VII is based on the descriptive rolls. If there were reason to change the cause in the asylum we would change it ; but we have not better means of judging as a rule than those who make these entries. I know of no change being made. In all my twelve years' experience I have seen nothing (apart from the lunacy cases above referred to) of the evil effects of hemp (so far as I know) on the people of the country427 28. I have no personal knowledge in this matter. 29. I have only known of dhatura being mixed with bhang to increase its intoxicating effects. 30. Never in solitude. The smoking of charas or drinking of bhang is always practised in company and generally on special occasions when it is desired to produce an exhilarating effect on those assembled. Seldom used by women or children. 31. I have often noticed that charas smokers on first admission into this Asylum miss the habit very much and crave for the indulgence. 36. I think among the more educated classes alcohol is certainly taking the place of other intoxi- cants, for the reason that it is pleasanter to the palate and because its consumption is supposed to be a more civilised habit. A charas smoker is generally looked down upon by the educated natives of India. 37. I am not aware of any difference beyond the fact that charas-smoking impairs the appetite while bhang-drinking rather improves it than other- wise. 39. Among my asylum lunatics I have certainly found a much larger number of cases of insanity among charas smokers than among bhang drinkers. 41. (a) Moderate use of bhang increases the appetite. (b), (c) and (d) No. 42. I have known several natives who occasion- ally use bhang as a drink and seem to be none the worse for it. Charas smokers on the contrary nearly always appear more or less weak-minded, have bad memories and are eccentric in their habits, if not actually insane. 44. Some stupefaction and exilaration of spirits. Bhang is said to be refreshing as a drink and im- proves the appetite. The effect lasts a few hours. 45. Charas smokers, even in moderation, are generally emaciated and in poor health and are de- praved creatures both mentally and physically. This is not the case with moderate consumers of bhang as far as I have been able to gather. The excessive habitual use of charas and bhang does, in my opininon, tend to produce insanity in indivi- duals who have a predisposition that way, but I do not think the drug would cause insanity in every case, even when indulged in very largely. It is the exciting cause, not the predisposing cause. The insanity is nearly always of an excitable noisy kind. The patient talks incoherently, is restless, sings or weeps, and is never still for a moment. He has no particular delusions or hallucinations, but loses all sense of modesty and decency, is filthy in his habits and often abusive and violent, though I have never known a lunatic of this kind do any actual harm to any one. He is seldom or never homicidally or suicidally inclined. There are no symptoms peculiar to this form of insanity. The large proportion of cases I have seen were people of low caste and with little or no education. I do not think mental disease or anxiety tends to make a man resort to hemp. Toxic insanes always readily admit having used the drug. The insanity is temporary and the patients always recover if kept away from the drug, but there is a tendency to a return to the habit when released from the asylum, and in such cases the patient generally becomes insane again after a short time. Cases Nos. 1, 9 and 10, particulars of which accompany* this report, are typical cases of toxic insanity due to the use of charas. 47 and 48. I do not think so. 49 and 50. From what I can gather the use of charas has no direct effect one way or the other on the virile powers. The habitual use of charas im- pairs the general health, and thus indirectly leads to impotence, though the sexual passions return as soon as the patient discontinues the use of charas and is restored to health. 3. I have seen the plant growing in great profu- sion in the Kangra valley and also in the Doon below Mussoorie. 5. A somewhat damp climate with a moderate temperature appears to be most favourable for its growth. 6. Dense jungles of the wild plant are to be seen in the Doon. 20. Charas is smoked almost entirely by the lower classes and the uneducated. A charas smoker is looked down upon by educated natives. 25. The general impression appears to be that the use of charas and bhang is on the decrease, for the reason that alcohol in some form is talcing their place. 33. Charas smokers, as before stated, are despised by the better classes, though bhang drinkers are not as a rule considered so despicable. The reason no doubt is that a charas smoker is generally more or less insane and good for nothing while bhang drinkers are not so. 43. Moderate consumers of bhang as a drink are certainly inoffensive to their neighbours. I do not think the same can be said of moderate smokers of charas. 53. I do not know of any case of insanity due to the use of hemp leading to temporary homicidal frenzy. Oral evidence. I have been over fourteen years in the service. I have had no special experience in regard to insanity in this country beyond what I have indicated in my written answer. I had no official experience of a special character in regard to insanity at home ; but I devoted myself specially to the study of insanity for about a year, and frequently visited the Bickton Asylum while engaged in this study. I know of no special literature dealing with hemp drugs insa- nity. I have not been able to lay my hands on any. I can say nothing about the pathological changes winch may occur from the hemp drugs. I have made several post-mortem examinations of persons with charas history, and made naked eye inspection of the brains, but I have found nothing. None of them were deaths in the acute stage. I made the post-mortems with the view of ascertaining whether there were any pathological changes, and found none. I did not use the microscope. I have not studied the physiological action of hemp beyond what is given in text-books. I cannot refer to any book where the effects of a continued course of hemp drugs are treated. I have been unable to find any. Of the ten hemp drug cases admitted in 1892, three cases (shown as No. 4, No. 5 and No. 6) have been proved not to be due to the drugs, for the lunatics were not addicted to them. One case (No. 8) is not, I think, a hemp-drug. case. There is no evidence as to the lunatic's habits ; but the case is in no way like a hemp-drug case, and I do not so classify it. In regard to case No. 3, I have no recollection. I am not sure whether it was a case of dementia. * Vide Vol. II, Appendices. vol. v. 3 M 2
428 I can find nothing about the case, and can give no information. In two cases (No. 2 and No. 7) we have not very full evidence ; but it seems clear that the lunatics used charas, and the symptoms are consist- ent with the theory that the drug was the cause of insanity. In three cases only (No. 1, No. 9 and No. 10) I have been able to get full and clear inform- ation. This is given in detail at the close of my report. The questions (ten in number) were sent by me to Deputy Commissioners, and they recorded the answers, except in case No. 10, where I recorded them. These answers contain all the information that I received from Deputy Commissioners. I have not asked any question as to any other cause. The only questions that might touch other causes are question 8, as to whether the man showed any signs of insanity before he took the drug, and question 6, as to whether the resumption of the drug led to recurrence. I have not touched the question of heredity or epilepsy or other cause. But in question No. 5 I have asked about the "form" of the mania, so as to judge whether it was really like a charas case. My object was not precisely to eliminate all other causes, but to get full inform- ation about the cases. That is, I started with the presumption that they were hemp drug cases, because they were so entered in the asylum books ; and I desired to get all facts about them, so that we might have full history and details of hemp drug cases. The process of enquiry has led to the elimination of several ; but in respect to the others it has given us facts of value in connection with hemp drug insanity. I would specially instance the recurrence of the insanity in two cases with resumed charas habit, and the complete cure in the third case. In the majority of cases, these hemp drug cases come before me in the acute stage. The symptoms described by me in my answer No. 45 (end of paragraph 1) are those of acute insanity due to charas. These symptoms are peculiar to this form of insanity and are quite diagnostic, I consider. I think that all these symptoms found together indicate toxic insanity of this kind. I would specially draw attention to the kind of violence. The man knocks himself about, is violent, and cannot be restrained ; but I have never seen him do harm to any one else. I do not think that any one symptom is peculiar to this form of insanity ; but I diagnose the case not by one symptom, but by the whole train of symptoms. You always get all those I have mentioned in my answer. The lunatic perhaps does not both sing and weep, but he does one or other ; and he has all the other symptoms more or less, though you do not, of course, get two cases exactly the same. I do not think all these symp- toms can be present in other insanity. I have never found them all without a distinct history of charas-smoking. I have never found in any case with established charas history exaltation as a symptom, i.e., the idea that the man is some- thing great. The duration of these cases varies a great deal. I have had some that lasted in a state of violent insanity for several months, and some only for a few days, but the tendency is always to improvement, though they may last for months. I do not think there are any typical symptoms in the chronic forms of insanity associated with hemp drugs. I think that in the majority of cases I could diagnose the case in the acute stage without the history. I could diagnose and get the history afterwards. In the chronic cases history is dis- tinctly necessary. The chronic cases amount simply to dementia, In calling charas the exciting cause only, I mean that I do not think charas would cause insa- nity without a predisposition to it. In other- Words, I think a predisposing- cause is necessary. I am acquainted with the forms of insanity known in Europe as " transient mania." The differ- ence between transient mania, as I have seen it in my Indian experience, and toxic insanity is that there seems to be a particular hallucination or delu- sion in the former. The man will give you a plau- sible, though perhaps imaginary, explanation of his making a noise, or tell you what his grief is; the toxic lunatic will not. He will not answer you at all ; or, if he does, he will talk incoherent nonsense. I think there is a sharp line of demarcation in the symptoms. I have had a great many cases of transient mania in the asylum. I have had a case of transient mania with a history of hemp drugs. I have such a case now with a history of an occa- sional use of charas abandoned for some time. I have had in the asylum cases of temporary mania with boys of about ten or twelve years (even younger). It had all the symptoms which I have described in answer No. 45, and there was a dis- tinct charas history. I do not think mania other than toxic mania is found in children, though idiotcy is. Taking the cases of 1892, the determination of cause rested on the descriptive rolls. We always enter in the column about alleged cause what the papers say. Where the papers say "charas,'' I would enter charas as the alleged cause simply because it was alleged. I do not understand the entry of " ganja" as the cause in several of the 1892 cases. It was no doubt in the police papers, probably loosely for " hemp." But history subse- quently ascertained in one case (No. 2) shows that he did smoke ganja as well as charas. I have never seen ganja. I have seen charas constantly. My impression is that ganja is not used in the neighbourhood of Delhi. I can only speak with certainty about that neighbourhood, as I have not studied the matter elsewhere, Question 45.429 35. Evidence of SURGEON-MAJOR J. A. CUNNINGHAM, Civil Surgeon, Simla. 1. I have been for six months in charge of the lunatic Asylum at Delhi, eighteen months in charge of that atLahore, and have been for over twelve years in the service in India. 2. Yes ; charas is locally called also soolfa and arkandi. Bhang is also called booti, sooka and sowi. It is also, by cooking and admixture with other things, converted into majun and ' bhang ka pakouri'. Ganja is very little used or known in this province. 14. Charas and bhang are; ganja not at all or rarely. 19. Charas is used only for smoking in the Punjab. Ganja when used is used also for smok- ing. Occasionally charas is said to be used as a local application in toothache. An oil prepared from ganja is said to be used in the treatment of scabies in Bengal. 22. Charas is largely imported from Yarkand. 23. Bhang is said to be only very seldom used for smoking by sadhus and others when they run short of charas. 21. Fakirs as a class are addicted to the use of bhang chiefly by (b) drinking in an infusion or mixture. 28. (a) Habitual moderate consumers take about430 makes the person happy and gay. It is refreshing. In the form of bhang mixture it excites appetite; as charas or ganja smoked it allays appetite. There are no marked after-effects from the moderate habitual use of it. The want of it produces a long- ing, but not nearly so great as that for opium, morphia or alcohol. 45. The habitual moderate use in a person liable to insanity would tend to bring on insanity. It also tends to wasting of the tissues and emaciation. No moral defects. The constitution is weakened. Charas and ganja smoked would impair digestion. Charas and ganja smoked cause chest affections, but not dysentery. It would induce laziness and want of thrift, which is a moral defect. Would not induce active immorality or debauchery. It dulls the intellect, and in predisposed persons pro- duces insanity of the mania type, usually tem- porary, unless some organic cause also exists. In temporary cases symptoms would be reinduced by use of the drug. There are no special symptoms. Insanes who were addicted to the use of the drug admit this and crave for it. I do not think that the moderate use of the drug would induce insanity in a person of strong and healthy intellect, but in unstable people I think it might do so. I do not think that weakness of intellect often leads to the use of the drug in this country; but when such people use it, they are likely to lose their balance. Having severed my connection with lunatic asy- lums before the appointment of this Commission, I made no special enquiries or investigations on this point, and my impressions gained during ordinary observation guide me in the opinions above express- ed. 46. The excessive use of the drugs would have a much greater and more deleterious effect than the moderate use, and would probably be quite sufficient to cause insanity, or serious disease in originally quite healthy people. It would greatly impair moral sense and tend to debauchery, just as exces- sive indulgence in alcohol notoriously does. 47. It appears not. 48. I have never heard of the failing being hereditary, but the children of persons who are wrecks from over-indulgence, begotten after physi- cal deterioration had set in, would be weak, puny creatures. I saw an example of this to-day431 form of infusion or decoction generally. Decoction is however, not so frequently resorted to. Dry leaves are rubbed between the palm, mixed with gur and eaten by some people. A form of sweet- meat called majun is also prepared. On marriage occasions bhang is mixed with several dishes in small quantities, to make fun of the guests. For smoking it is sometimes mixed with tobacco. 16. (c) Yes. 17. There is no special class. 18. Yes. Charas loses its effect after one year, and bhang after two years. Damp air causes deterioration. To prevent it, bhang should be kept in a dry place, and carefully preserved from mois- ture of all kinds. 19. Ganja and charas are used chiefly for smoking. Sometimes they are administered in food, etc., and to this fact much of the secret poisoning met with in India is due, and I may mention that this cri- minal use of ganja is the origin of the word assassin as follows. This drug in the East is known by the name of " hasheesh," and those desperadoes who used it were called " hashasheen," hence the word assassin. 20. The use of ganja is practically confined to Bengal, which province consumes about five times as much as all the rest of India put together. Charas is smoked in the Punjab by jogis, fakirs, palki-bearers, Hindustani syces, suthra fakirs, and low caste people. 22. Foreign charas is chiefly used, and is import- ed from the valleys of the] Himalayas and Thibetan territory. 23. Occasionally, by the uneducated class of peo- ple in Dera Ismail Khan, Multan, and Jhang dis- tricts to the extent of half an ounce. 24. Brahmins, fakirs and uneducated people, especially those who have nothing to do, drink and sometimes eat it throughout the province. 25. On the increase, as they are cheaper than opium and country spirits. 26. (a) 60 per cent. (b) 20 432 natural state. Ganja and charas are almost always inhaled by smoking, and the symptoms produced are disorder of the alimentary canal, indigestion and diarrh433 elsewhere as shown in my written answer No. 1. I have never made any special study of the subject of insanity, nor have I ever been attached to a lunatic asylum. After receiving the questions I collected information in Jhang. I collected con- sumers and talked to them. These were policemen, Brahmans and jogis. I also sent for a drug con- tractor and talked to him. Before that I had made no special study of the subject. I had before that read books : I had seen Lyons' Medical Jurisprudence. Lyon states that hemp drugs cause insanity, that it is temporary, and that it recurs when the drugs are resorted to again after discharge from the asylum. I do not re- member whether Lyon gives typical symptoms. I have also seen Chevers' Medical Jurisprudence for India, which tells us that the excessive use of hemp drugs does not lead to unpremeditated crime. The Indian Medical Gazette, quoted in my answer No. 53, also gives this information. I have also read Chambers' Encyclopaedia about hemp and about its physiological effects. I have also read the Indian Pharmacop434 whatever for believing that it results from the moderate use. My five cases were : one case in Karnal (1881-84), two in Leya (1869-79), and two in Ludhiana (1890-93). I went from Ludhiana to officiate in Karnal for certain periods. The Ludhiana cases were, I think, one in 1884 and the other in 1889 or 1890. I cannot remember whether any of these cases went to the asylum ; but I do not think so. The last case was ten or fifteen days under treat- ment and became perfectly well. He from time to time went off his head from the use of hemp. I have seen him so three times. This is the only case I have had in the last ten years. Question 44.435 of the intellect, and but seldom to permanent in- sanity. 40. Yes ; baids and hakims generally prescribe bhang poultices to relieve pain, and native jeras (surgeons) administer bhang internally as an an- esthetic before performing the operation of cir- cumcision, and agriculturists administer bhang in the form of a bolus to their cattle in cases of dys- pepsia and colds and coughs. 41. (a) Bhang is used as a digestive. The Brahmins, who are notorious gormandisers, always drink bhang before going to a dinner party in order to eat voraciously. (b) Under severe exertion, and after exposure, bhang does give staying-power and alleviates fa- tigue. (c) I have known baids administering bhang in cases of malarial fevers. 42. Moderate use of bhang is harmless, inasmuch as it creates appetite, alleviates fatigue, and makes the consumer forget, so long as the effect lasts, all cares and troubles. 44. The immediate effect of bhang on a moderate consumer is refreshing. It does produce intoxica- tion, which does not last long. There are no bad after-effects. Bhang is almost always used in the afternoon after a hard day's work. The consumer eats better and sleeps better, and gets up in the morning quite refreshed, and resumes his daily work quite cheerfully. But such is not the case with the charas smoker. After the effect is over he becomes lazy, and feels quite ex- hausted and uneasy and a lodging for the gratifica- tion. But in case of bhang drinkers, the longing and uneasiness are not so great. 45. Charas.436 38. Evidence of ASSISTANT SURGEON SAHIB DITTA, Arora, in medical charge of Hospital, Mullan. 1. During my service of over twenty-six years I have known many people who consume hemp drug (bhang particularly). Information has also been obtained from vendors of the drugs and from my friend Lala Hari Chand, Personal Assistant to the Excise Commissioner, Punjab. 2. Yes. As far as I have ascertained, these definitions appear to be correct. Bhang is also known as sukha, booti, sabzi, savi, bijoa; and when made into a drink, sardai, thandai, charna- mat. 3. In hilly and submountainous districts, as Simla, Kangra, Hoshiarpur, Gurdaspur and Jullun- dar. In the latter it is abundant. 4. Bhang, sabji, booti, sawi, sukha, bijua. 5. Damp, cold and hilly climate, in soils with little sand, river or stream banks and heavy rainfall are necessary for the growth of the wild plant. 6. Said to be scattered. 7. (a) and (b) No. (c) and (d) Yes. (e) For use as bhang in the frontier districts Dera Ismail Khan, Dera Ghazi Khan, Muzaffar- garh, and to a limited extent in the Multan district. (d) In Kangra and Simla for fibres and seeds. 8 and 9. Not known. 10. Fakirs, jogis and mirasis, who are habitual consumers of bhang, cultivate it if they have any bit of land of their own. 11. Ganja is not prepared at all in this pro- vince. 12. No. 13. Ganja is not prepared in any district in the Punjab. 14. (a) and (b) No. (c) Yes. Bhang is prepared more or less in many districts in the plains in this province, but is mostly pre- pared in the Jullundur district. 15. Not known. 16. (a) Yes, sometimes in small quantity. (b) Yes. (c) No. Neither ganja nor charas is prepared in Punjab. 17. Bhang alone is prepared from the hemp plant in this province, mostly by low class people as chamars. 18. All the three drugs deteriorate and lose their effects after two years. Exposure to damp atmos- phere is said to be the cause of deterioration. Charas, if allowed to remain unpacked in the leather bags in which it is imported, may keep longer than two years. 19. Yes; only for smoking. I have also heard that charas is sometimes eaten too mixed with bhang is some districts. 20. Low class people, chamars, mehters, grass- cutters, also fakirs and Pathans in the frontier districts; but to what extent is not known. 21. Not known. 22. Foreign charas is used in Punjab. It is imported from Yarkand and Ladakh via Kullu and Kashmir. Small quantity, it is said, is also im- ported from Afghanistan via Peshawar and Kohat 23. No, as far as I know. 24. Consumers of bhang mostly drink in almost all the districts of Punjab. Very rarely (say one in two hundred persons) it is eaten in the form of powder or sweetmeat (majun), and this only when mortar and pestle to rub and make it into a drink are not procurable. 25. Not known exactly, but the use of bhang is probably on the increase. 26. Cannot be stated exactly but presumably437 Ganja is seldom used in this province. 29. Nothing is mixed with ganja or charas as far as I have ascertained. (a) Ordinarily with bhang are mixed black pepper and almonds, and those who can afford mix almonds, cardamons, milk and sugar, and in addi- tion also the usual bhang massala, or what is also called sardai, which consists of aniseed, kasni, charmagz, khurfa and poppy seeds. (b) Exceptionally, saffron, nutmeg, rose* water and bedmushk are mixed. In Multan parched gram and Multani matti is often mixed with bhang. 30. Generally the drugs are taken in company. Male adults mostly use them ; in very few districts adult females, such as prostitutes, use bhang only. I have never known children using them, except when prescribed for by hakims. 31. (a) Yes. (b) No. (c) Yes; probably so. 32. There exists no custom, as far as I know, either social or religious, in regard to the consump- tion of charas or ganja, except that charas is smoked by all who mix with the society of fakirs who are in the habit of using it. As regards bhang I know there are places, such as Baba Atal in Amritsar city, Sultanisahib village near Khasa in the Amritsar district and Apchala Nagar, in Hyderabad Dukkan, and several other places which are the head-quarters of the Jogi fakirs, where bhang drink in large quantity is prepared at fixed hours regularly and distributed among all present at the time ; and in the case of Apchala Nagar, which is 10th Sikh Gooroo Gobind Singh's place, its distribution is regarded as re- ligious and no one present is supposed to refuse it when offered. If these places are frequented oftener, a habit is likely to be formed, but no in- jurious effect is said to occur if small quantity is taken. 33. Consumers of ganja and charas, except the fakirs, are generally not respected. They are not trusted to any important duty and are regarded by the public as idle, lazy, and neglectful chaps, but no such opinion is ever held in regard to the con- sumers of bhang. Hemp plant, as far as is known, is not worship- ped by any sect. 34. I think no serious effect whatever is pro- duced by giving up the habit of using hemp drug. People can easily forego the consumption of charas, bhang and ganja, but not that of tobacco. From my experience with prisoners in some of the Punjab jails I know that the people in the habit of using hemp drugs when free seldom felt worse for them when came into the jails as convicts. In fact not a single case of introduction of any of the hemp drug into the jail has been brought up before me in any of the several jails where I have acted as Superintendent among the various articles in- troduced into the jails, the use of which was not allowed by the prison rules. On enquiry being made recently I find that the six prisoners out of 700 in the Multan District Jail confessed having used hemp drugs when out- side, and one of the six said that he had felt for charas on admission into the jail ; the others said they had no severe craving for either of the drugs, although they had used one or the other for years when free. 35. In my opinion the prohibition of all the three drugs is quite practicable, and none will be consumed illicitly. The use can be prohibited by legally preventing the import of ganja ana charas into this province and stopping the cultivation of the hemp plant. I don't think any serious discon- tent or political danger will be caused by doing this. In my opinion, opium and alcohol will be substi- tuted for hemp drugs when the use of latter is prohibited. 36. I do not think that alcohol is now being substituted for bhang. On the contrary, I know few instances where people have given up alcohol drink and taken up bhang drinking. 37. Nothing known on this point. 38 and 39. Not known. 40. Yes. Native hakims prescribe bhang for internal use as sedative, diuretic, anodyne, aphro- disiac, refreshing, etc.; and for external use in the form of poultice and infusion in painful swellings and piles, and as insect killer in maggots and lice, also for foot-bath. Charas. is also sometimes prescribed as aphrodisiac. Excessive habitual use of bhang and charas is said to cause impotence. Yes, bhang is used in the treatment of cattle disease. 41. (a) Yes, bhang is often used for this pur- pose. (b) Yes, charas also. (c) Yes, bhang particularly, it is said. (d) As anodyne and intoxicating drug in some painful diseases. Brahmins and high class people for (a) purposes in habitual moderate or excessive doses. Labourers and fakirs who expose themselves to all weathers without sufficient or any covering or clothing use the drug for (b) purposes in habitual moderate or excessive doses. Travellers and pilgrims for (c), cither habitually or occasionally in moderate doses. (d) Bhang is also used as aphrodisiac, anodyne, and hypnotic in painful diseases. As intoxicating drug, it is used to be given by native hakims to children and adults undergoing surgical operation as circum- cision, lithotomy, etc. The exact proportion of the above classes cannot be said. 42. I have never seen any harm being done to the moderate consumers of bhang. 43. I have never heard them offending their neighbours. 44. In the case of bhang it is said to be stimu- lant, refreshing, creating great appetite, (hypnotic) sleep and intoxication. These effects last for about 12 hours. Feelings of fatigue, peculiar uneasiness are said to be experienced by the habitual consumers before the repetition of subsequent dose. The effects of bhang as creating great appetite are known to every native, and there are many verses said on this point in Punjabi language. 45. (a) Yes, ganja and charas do, but not bhang (b) and (c) Yes, ganja and charas do. (d) Not known. (e) Ganja and charas, it is said, do. (f) Yes, it is said so. Not known. (g) Not known, 46. I remember a case of a Sikh in whom mania was produced after excessive habitual use of bhang, and in another case also a Sikh where temporary mania was thought to be the result of excessive in- dulgence in bhang. 47. Not known.
438 49 and 50. (a) Yes, bhang and charas are treed for this purpose. (b) Yes, bhang. (c) Not known. (d) Yes, ganja and charas tend to produce im- potence. 51 and 52. (a) Yes, bad characters in large towns are often moderate habitual consumers of bhang, charas, etc. (b) None known to mo. 53. No, as far as I know. No. 54. None to my knowledge. 55. During my service of over twenty-six years a case or two did come under my observation, I remem- ber, in which bhang was administered to boys for unnatural offence, and also two or three case in which the same was given as stupefying drug with an object of robbing in which complete stupe- faction was induced and no admixture of dhatura or other narcotic discovered. Bhang is also said to have been administered where rape was designed. 56. I know of one or two instances in which dhatura seeds were mixed with bhang and adminis- tered by criminals to their victims for robbing them, and where delirium, great intoxication and afterwards insanity were the symptoms. I do not remember having ever met with a case where dhatura was mixed with ganja or charas for drink- ing purposes, though it is sometimes given with tobacco. 57. Nothing known to me on this point. 58. J am not acquainted at all. 60 and 61. Is not produeed in Punjab. 62. I don't think the cultivation of hemp plant for the production of bhang needs any control, but, if considered necessary, it is quite practicable and can be done in the way as is done in the case of poppy cultivation. 63. I know nothing of the present system, of excise. 64. Cannot say anything on the subject. 65 to 67. Can't say anything to this. 68. No such shops in the province. 69. No, the wishes of the people are not consult- ed. No measures are taken. Yes, local public opinion ought to be considered. 70. Not known. 39. Evidence of RAI BAHADUR THAKUR DAS, Assistant Surgeon, Ferozepore. 1. From the people who use the drugs. 2. In this province the products are known under the following names, i.e.439 (C) Drinking purposes. The dried leaves and flowers of cultivated or wild plant are washed once or twice in cold water to free it from grit, dirt, seeds etc., and are well ground with a few black pepper seeds, and gradually water in drops is added. The process of grinding is assisted by others to ex- tract more resinous matter. More water is freely afterwards added after it is finely ground, and then strained in a piece of gauze or coarse cloth, the strained liquor holding in suspension the colouring and the resinous matter is quickly drunk after repeating different verses in its praise. Sometimes, to avoid delay, after washing, the leaves are pressed in a piece of cloth and dried in the sun and preserved for future Use. Another mode of preserving is by grinding it into a very fine state with the least possible quan- tity of water, and the mass divided into small irre- gular balls called burree. Such processes were called into operation when the long journeys by road were under contemplation before the extension of railways. These burrees could be easily dissolved in a glass full of water and drunk after straining. The above simple modus operandi is followed by poorer classes. The better classes mix, along with the black pepper, seeds of almonds, cucumbers, pumpkins, melons, sugar, milk and scented water, such as keora, bed-mushk and rose water to make the beverage more agreeable. 16. Bhang is prepared in houses for well-to-do or middle classes. The poorer classes resort to dharmsalas, tukias, temples, shrines, and other places of such gathering, and is prepared from all plants without any distinction. 17. As stated elsewhere, ganja and charas are not prepared in this province. Other preparations of bhang, such as majum, were made by confec- tioners and purveyors before the introduction of excise rules, and now it is made and sold by the vendors only. 18. Bhang and charas deteriorate after three years, after which it quite loses its effects. With ordinary care it can be preserved for three years, and saturated moist air spoils it quickly, and should be kept closely covered to prevent deterioration. 19. Charas is chiefly used for smoking purposes, but in small doses it is also used as medicine which acts as an aphrodisiac. It is used to alienate pain in cases of rheumatism, and to lull the pain during a surgical operation, such as circumcision amongst Muhammadans, and is thus used in Persia, Afgha- nistan, and here and there in the Punjab frontier districts. 20. Ganja is said to be a favourite of Bengalis, and charas is smoked throughout India, chiefly by fakirs (both Hindus and Muhammadans), bad cha- racters, mirasis, some camp followers, Afghans, and those who keep their company, be he from any grade of society. 21. Not known. 22. Yarkhand charas is much prized and liked by the people. It is imported into Punjab via Kulu (in Kangra district), Kashmir, and in small quantities through other Himalayan passes. 23. I have never heard bhang being smoked in Punjab. 24. Bhang is mostly drunk in Hindu and Sikh centres. The Pandas of Muthra and Brindaban, Sikh fanatics and Muhammadan gangs living in shrines are probably its chief devotees. Fakirs of all denominations and sects similarly take, though in small quantities, though Suthra fakirs indulge more and regularly. In towns and cities many shopkeepers, traders and others occasionally use it, specially during summer. In the frontier, Derajat, Multan and Jhang the percentage is higher. Amongst the Muhammadan community Afghans, fakirs and mirasis are habitual drinkers. 25. Charas is rather on the increase. Bhang, on the contrary, is on the decrease. It is said that during Ranjit Singh's time it was distributed gratis as "suda burat" both by Government and certain other chiefs, and was used by most of the chiefs and sirdars themselves, and their example was followed by others. Upper classes now-a-days think it degrading to resort to the use of bhang, and therefore it is on the decrease. Charas is on the increase, as it is now freely pro- curable ; while before the British Government, there was hardly any trade worth the name in or beyond the passes on account of no roads, insecurity of life and property, etc. 26. (a) Bhang in Sikh and Hindu temples is used by about 90 per cent., Hindu fakirs about 40 per cent., Muhammadan fakirs about 60 per cent. (b) Sikh fanatics, i.e., Akalis and Nehangs, about 80 per cent. Muhammadan fakirs, 40 per cent. (c) Shopkeepers, traders, others (including Brah- mins), 10 per cent. (d) Rare. 27. Devotees, ascetics, Nehangs, Akalis and fakirs acquire the habit through association, on being initiated to those societies, and use it to con- centrate their thoughts. Shopkeepers, labourers and others as a prophylactic against diarrhoea and cholera. Pandas and Brahmins to help their diges- tion. Fakirs, who live on alms, and are in charge of tombs and shrines, temples, etc., and many others partake it while in their assemblies. 28. (a) Charas ½ to 1 tola (from 9 pies to 1½ anna), bhang 6 mashas (one pie). (b) Charas 1 to 5 tolas (from 1½ to 7 annas), and bhang 10 tolas (six pies). 29. (a) Black pepper is mixed with bhang to prevent flatulency, and tobacco with charas is mixed to help ignition and to mitigate its strong intoxi- cating effects, (b) Seeds of almonds, pumpkins, cucumbers, milk, sugar, rose-water, etc., are mixed by well-to- do classes with bhang. Dhatura seeds are sometimes mixed to increase its narcotic effects, and is used by some old con- sumers, and sometimes by bad characters to commit crime. In the Punjab, no other bhang massala is sold or used, as far as is known to me. 30. The use of bhang and charas is more prac- tised in company, and is chiefly confined to grown up people. Prostitutes use bhang moderately, and children (descendants of those who are in the habit of taking it daily) rarely, and of course in very small quantity. 31. The habit of drinking bhang and smoking charas is easily formed by mixing with those who are addicted to the use of these drugs, as at every occasion, as a matter of courtesy, it is offered to those who may happen to be present at the time with advice such as is contained in the verse noted below:440 Son, if does not indulge in bhang, is not a son but a daughter. Bhang consumers can abstain from it without much unpleasant effect, and is said to be the least prejudicial of all the intoxicating beverages used. Among the Akalis, Nehangs and fakirs in charge of shrines and temples, the habit from moderation to excess is easily formed. The former acquire the habit purposely, and offer to their visitors as a sort of entertainment, or it is offered by the visitors who prepared the same. The same applies to charas. 32. On Shivratri day, which falls in February each year, bhang is used in small quantities by Shivites after it is offered to Shiva, and from this custom alone its name, Shiv-ki buti, is derived, and this is considered religious. Socially, bhang in different forms is used on the occasion of "Holi" days, etc. It is temperate, and does not lead to the formation of habit, nor it is otherwise injurious. 33. Different sects of fakirs think it a part of their religious duty to take a dose to compose their mind and thought, as other intoxicants, such as spirituous liquors, are strictly prohibited (except in one or two sects, i.e., Suthras and Jogis), accord- ing to their religious beliefs. Charas is rather in disrepute, especially in its large doses, when it becomes abuse, as it then has a tendency of deteriorating health mentally and physically; otherwise the consumers of hemp drags being inoffensive, no sentiment of disrepute is attached to them. Bhang plant is never worshipped, at least in this province, as far as I know. 34. It would undoubtedly be a serious privation, especially to fakirs, Nehangs, Akalis and Pandas and Brahmins, because the majority of them cannot use alcohol, which is strictly forbidden, socially and religiously. Regarding the probable number of each class who will suffer, I beg to refer to No. 26. 35. The Indians as a rule being a law-abiding people, it is feasible to prohibit the use of these drugs, and in very rare instances it would be con- sumed illicitly; but such a course will lead to serious discontent amongst the classes which use them, and in a way the said classes have more or less a hold on the general public. Again, its prohibition may be followed by re- course to more harmful narcotics, such as dhatura and muddak or alcohol; the latter amongst classes who can use it. 36. It is a known fact that formerly the people were more bound to orthodox doctrines, when the use of alcohol was considered more degrading, both socially and religiously, and therefore the other innocent narcotics were brought into use; but now- adays, in upper classes, the use of bhang is con- sidered below their social position, and therefore alcohol was substituted; but even the use of this latter is now falling off, especially in the educated community, which is due to liberal English educa- tion441 (c) Not bhang. (d) Not bhang, but abuse of charas brings on bronchitis and asthma. (e) No ; except probably slight laziness in those who already enjoy sedentary habits. (f) Long-continued use of charas contributes a fair proportion to the inmates of lunatic asylums. They are generally maniacs, and in many cases it is temporary. The symptoms may be reinduced by use of the drug. I have known insanes confess use of charas. (g) In mental anxiety and brain diseases bhang is useful for its soothing effects. 47. No. 48. It is only a personal habit, which is ac- quired as a part and parcel of initiation to any of the sects who habitually use the drug or by others who constantly remain in their company. 49. No ; except charas as a medicine given or prescribed by a hakim. Majum and butter were prescribed for the upper classes. Bhang is used in moderation by prostitutes. I made enquiries from them; but no satisfactory reply was received as to the purpose for which it was used by them. Excessive continuous use, amounting to abuse, of charas brings on impotence, though bhang rarely, if ever, acts so. 50. I have known cases of bhang consumers who used to take large doses of it blessed with children. Charas primarily has aphrodisiac effects but its constant excessive use impairs the brain, attended with loss of appetite, etc., resulting into impotence. 51. Yes; majority of them are; but there is no connection between its use and crime. 52. As bad characters have no honest callings, they pass their time in idleness and in the society of gangs at the shrines and temples, where they acquire the habit of consuming the hemp drugs ; otherwise the use of hemp is considered rather to discourage the committal of any crime. 53. No. 54. No. 55. All the poisoning cases that I have treated during the last twenty-three years, none of them was poisoned with bhang or any of its preparations alone, which shows that there is not much reliance or confidence placed in its powers of complete stu- pefaction, which is momentary. 56. Criminal classes or some bad characters in the garb of fakirs may offer dhatura seeds along with bhang to their victims ; but happily the classes are under the impression that dhatura seeds in whole or powder have only stupefying effects, and therefore its use along with hemp drugs (bhang and charas) to commit crime is rare. 57. I have no knowledge beyond what is men- tioned in native medical works regarding the internal use of charas when it acts as aphrodisiac, narcotic, etc., and is prescribed in cases of spermatorrhoea or impotence and rheumatic affections. 60 and 61. It is not produced in this province. 62. There ought to be no control whatever. It is quite feasible and can be controlled by patwaris and other members of the superior revenue establish- ment, just in the same way as poppy cultivation is controlled. 63. At times the drugs sold are very inferior in quality, the reason being that there is no competi- tion. The number of licenses are limited, and, as a rule, are generally secured by one vendor, and there- fore the consumers are at their mercy. I would suggest in the way of improvement, not to allow the whole number of licenses secured by one person but by many, as it is only in the latter case that each license-holder will keep articles of fair quality. 64. Have not studied the subject. 65. Not prepared. 66. Ganja is not imported in this province. 67. At least bhang ought to be freed from all taxation, as it is chiefly used by the people, who are mostly poor and live on alms. 68. Licensed shops only sell these drugs, but not for their being used on the premises. 69. At present the people are not consulted, and in my opinion the opinion of the consumers is essential before a locality for the sale of these drugs is fixed or a shop allowed to be opened. 70. None. 40. Evidence of RAI BAHADUR MEHR CHAND, Khatri, Assistant Suryeon, Civil Hospital, Amritsar. 1. I have been in Jullundur and Amritsar dis- tricts for the past eighteen years, where I obtained information regarding matters connected with hemp drugs. 2. Bhang in Punjab is known by the names of subzi, buti, sukha, and jiwan buti, and Sheo-ji-ki- buti. Charas is the name given to the resinous exuda- tion of the hemp plant in this province. Ganja is not used in this province, consequently its different varieties are not known to me. 3. The hemp plant grows spontaneously in Jul- lundur, Kangra, Hoshiarpur, and Gurdaspur dis- tricts. It grows abundantly in the last two men- tioned districts (Hoshiarpur and Gurdaspur). 4. It is known by the names of bhang, sukha, buti, subzi, jiwan buti, and Sheo-ji-ki-buti. 6. Wild hemp ordinarily grows dense. 7. No. 8. I have no personal experience. 9. No. 10. No cultivation of hemp in this province. 11. to 13. No. 14. Only bhang is prepared in this province chiefly in Gurdaspur and Hoshiarpur districts. 15. I know nothing personally about the prepar- ation of bhang. 16. People prepare bhang in their houses as well as in the places where hemp plant grows spontane- ously. 17. Not known to me. 18. Bhang keeps its effect for two years, after that period it deteriorates. No measures can pre- vent its deterioration. 19. Charas is chiefly used for smoking. Ganja not used in this province. 20. Charas is chiefly used by fakirs and beggars vol. v 3 o
442 of both Hindu and Muhammadan communities throughout this province. 21. Ganja is not used in this province. 22. Foreign charas is chiefly used, which is im- ported from Yarkand. 23. No. 24. In big cities bhang is used as a refrigerant drink, as well as it is taken internally in the form of a sweetmeat called majun. 25. The use of charas is on the increase, the quantity of imported charas having considerably increased. 28. Charas :443 Question 45.444 27. Of the habitual consumers of charas the majority may be said to belong to poor workmen and labourers who, after they are done with their day's work, seek some sort of enjoyment which they do by forming a kind of society of their equals and smoking charas freely among them. 2ndly.445 As majun, it is eaten for its aprodisiac quality, the hakims of the well-known Mahmud Khan's family prepare a majun which they call falak ser and give as a strong aphrodisiac. 41. (a) Moderate use of bhang increases appe- tite and assists digestion; the excess produces ap- petite'to a morbid extent but deranges digestion. (b) Smoking of charas in moderation and the use of bhang in small quantity do give the individual some staying-power under severe exertion and alle- viate fatigue like other narcotics (tobacco and opium). The excess of either of them makes the person feel disinclined to do any work. (c) Bhang, when taken in moderate quantity and with its other ingredients does act as a refri- gerant drink and there are many who take it during hot weather only, and leave it off in winter. It appears to act as a preventive of fever to some extent and is often drunk for that purpose during the time when malarious fevers are prevalent. For such uses, it is taken by many poojaris (Brahmin) of the temples and others, who lead sedentary lives. (d) Like other substances of this nature, such as alcohol, opium, etc., these drugs also in moderation exalt the spirits and banish sorrows and anxieties for a short time. After the first effects are over, sleep supervenes. A person under its influence has a tendency to laugh much, even when there is nothing to laugh at. This peculiarity of the effect of bhang is more or less observed in many persons. 42. Occasional moderate use of these drugs is quite harmless. I have taken bhang myself on several occasions and it did me no harm. On one or two occasions I took it in excess and then it made me stupid for a few hours and produced in- digestion for a day or two after its effects were over. Some can take bhang in very large quantity without feeling much of intoxication, while a few cases have been observed to have a peculiar idiosyn- crasy to its effects. My mother cannot take it even in very small doses. I gave her once very little of it for her headache which made her maniacal and delirious as long as the effect lasted. Twice in my life I remember to have smoked charas ; once when I was a student, and once lately for the sake of experiment. It made me giddy for the time I was under its influence, but I was all right afterwards. Habitual use of either of these drugs even in moderation, affects the mind to some extent. I know a good many of the habitual consumers, and I have noticed that they are dull-headed and have bad memories. Several of them are eccentric and seem to have some aberration of mind. 43. The moderate consumers are quite inoffensive to their neighbours. Many of them are living in the same street where I live, but I have never seen or heard any of them doing harm to his neigh- bour. 44. On these points I can have no better evi- dence than that of a gentleman whose tenant I am. He is an old fashioned man of seventy years of age- and takes bhang as infusion in moderate quantity since a very long time. He says its moderate use, as he does, is refreshing and does not produce in- toxication. But only a little exhilaration of spirits. It gives him appetite and the effect lasts for about three or four hours when he goes to sleep (he takes it in the afternoon). In the morn- ing he gets up quite refreshed and feels no bad after-effects. If he does not take it any day he does not feel any longing for it, but feels somewhat uneasy and in bad spirits. He has a fairly strong frame and keeps good health in spite of his old age and sedentary life. This gentleman has a servant who habitually smokes charas in moderate quantity, but sometimes smokes in excess too. His. servant says when he smokes his usual dose it keeps his spirits up and he feels very happy and does his work well, but excess produces intoxication. The effect comes on immediately after smok- ing and lasts for about an hour. He eats much under its influence and feels no bad after- effects, provided, he says, he does not do any excess. If he does not take it at all, he does not feel any appetite, coughs much and does not feel inclined to do his usual work. If he does not smoke con- tinually for several days he feels much longing for it. 45. The moderate habitual consumers of bhang are found to have a healthy appearance and strong frame. They are not usually intelligent, but are rather lazy. Their digestion remains good. Their morals are not bad as compared with those of the same standard and community who do not take it. The habitual use of it deadens the intellect to some extent. The charas smokers (even moderate) do not look strong and healthy. As the use of this is among the low classes whose morals are doubtful even prior to its use, it cannot be said with certainty whether charas smoking causes immorality sometimes seen in them or the influence of society. Their mental powers become deranged and bronchitis and asthma are often met with in them. 46. The excess of both bhang and charas dete- riorates the system both mentally and physically. The habitual excessive consumers of bhang (bhangars) are dyspeptic, often suffer from bowel complaints and are dull, unable to do any mental or physical work. Bhangars often become charsis after a time. Excessive use of charas produces lung affections and insanity. I have seen many charsis who, though not so insane and violent as to be kept in a lunatic asylum, have some mental aberration. They wander about the city, and wherever they find any party of charsis mix with them and smoke. They keep themselves on begging. Some of these are considered to be men who have acquired super- natural powers. They are called fakirs of the high order and worshipped wherever they go. In connection with the use of these drugs and insanity, I may mention the case of a man whom I know from my boyhood and who lives in the same street where I live. He is a Brahmin by caste and his name is Gojar. He has been several times in Delhi Lunatic Asylum. He was a very strong man before be commenced charas smoking (a regular pahlwan446 When he is all right he does his work very well and speaks very civilly to everybody. The first symptoms of the disease are shown by his consider- ing himself a king or a god and by his going to Marghat, a place near Jamna river where Hindus burn their dead bodies. 42. Evidence * of HOSPITAL ASSISTANT JASSU RAM, Arora, Dera Ghazi Khan Dis- pensary. 1. I am serving in the Dera Ghazi Khan district as native doctor since the last thirty years. My information is based on local knowledge and on personal experience gained by coming in contact with the general public. 2. In this district bhang is known by the names (1) bijia and (2) sawi. The plant with the seed in it is used here, and not the one without seed. Cultivators, however, mix both for sale. The male plant gives strong intoxication, and the female plant is * called " khidar." Charas is not manufac- tured in this district, but is available for sale in the Hoshiarpur district, and therefore nothing is known about its manufacture. Ganja is neither prepared nor consumed or sold here. 19. Charas is only smoked in a kuka, and is not put to any other use. 23. Bhang is never smoked. 28. The average allowance per diem is as fol- lows :447 47. The habitual moderate use of bhang or charas is hereditary. It cannot, however, affect the children of the consumer, provided their education is properly directed. The children of the con- sumers are generally weak and sickly. 48. The excessive use of charas or bhang is neither hereditary, nor does it affect the children of the consumer more than what has been stated in the preceding answer. It rather injures virility. 49. The moderate consumption of bhang or charas is sometimes certainly practised as an aphro- disiac by prostitutes and immoral women. The use of the hemp plant produces impotency. 50. The excessive use of bhang or charas is seldom practised as an aphrodisiac. Very few im- moral women use it in this way. The effects of the excessive use are quite different from those re- sulting from the moderate consumption. 56. The moderate use of bhang, with the ad- mixture of dhatura, is less injurious than the ex- cessive use of the drug alone. 43. Evidence* of HOSPITAL ASSISTANT JHANDE KHAN, City New Branch Dis- pensary, Amritsar. 1. In private practice I have often treated patients who were habitual consumers of the drugs (bhang, charas and ganja), and am therefore in a position to answer the question by my personal experience. 2. As ganja and charas are prepared in the hills or other places where hemp plant grows, I have no personal knowledge or experience regarding their manufacture. 19. The Hindu fakirs, etc., smoke ganja and charas in a chillum (pipe), and the Muhammadan fakirs, &c, smoke it in huka. I know of no other mode of using the drugs that I may explain. 23. I don't know. 28. I don't know. 29. Ordinarily almonds, black pepper, aniseeds, encumber seeds, musk melon seeds and water melon seeds are pounded with bhang strained and mixed with either sugar or salt before the draught is used. Sometimes consumers add black henbane seeds to the spices to make the intoxication stronger. To make it stronger still, path dhatura is prepared by the following process :448 44. Evidence of HOSPITAL ASSISTANT KARM ELAHI, Lwatic Asylum, Lahore. 1. By practice of twenty-five years, out of which for thirteen years I have had charge of the Civil Hospital at Jhelum, with a population of 16,000 souls. 2. The definitions given in the body of question are accepted in this province. The three narcotic articles449 of Hindus and inferior classes of Musalmans use these drugs moderately, in order to obtain refresh- ments. There is no distinction regarding the classes of any of the races who use these articles occasionally in excess or moderate. As far as I think, it is used for medicinal purposes, but all through ignorance. 28. The average daily amount of bhang taken by a habitual moderate consumer is from six mashas to one ounce, and from one masha to six mashas that of charas and ganja. The cost for bhang from half pie to three pies per day, charas from one pie to six pies per day. Ganja not known. That for habi- tual excessive consumers from one ounce to two ounces, bhang; from six mashas to two tolas, charas and ganja per day. The costs are : bhang from three pies to six pies per day, charas from six pies to two annas per day, ganja not known. But this quantity is not taken at a time; such people take it from two to four times a day. 29. The poorer classes of people take (drink) the bhang alone, and an addition of a few black peppers and a little common salt is considered as a luxury in them. The well-to-do classes mix badam, kaho, kasni, khashkhash and sugar, in order to make it a cooler and delicious drink. Dhatura is exceptional- ly added with bhang and only by jogis and fakirs, the object being to make it stronger in its effect. The undersigned does not know whether opium, nux vomica, cantharides or betelnut are ever used as an admixture. No admixtures of ganja and charas are known to the undersigned. There are not any pre- parations known as bhang massala in this part of country. The articles mixed here with bhang are called thandai (cooling agents), which contain the following ingredients, viz., badam, kaho, kulfa, kasni, kheyaren and gulsurkh. 30. Generally speaking all the three drugs are used in company and moderately, but speaking of them separately, bhang stands first and charas as second, and ganja the third or the last. Besides this, their uses differ in extent in different parts of the province, especially that of bhang, which is commonly used in the hill stations and in the south- western parts. Charas is more common in hills or throughout the province in south-western districts, and the ganja is nearly unknown in these localities. All these drugs are mainly confined to the male sex, but in exceptional cases amongst females, and speci- ally the charas and ganja, which is taken by the females but very rarely. In exceptional cases the bhang is given to children, but ganja and charas are never given to children or in any form. The bhang is used till very old age, but ganja and charas are hardly used above fifty. 31. Yes, the habit can easily be formed and is not so difficult to break it off. Yes, there is a ten- dency in all of these drugs to develop into the exces- sive from moderate habit. 32. Actually there is no such custom, social or religious, in regard to these drugs being consumed. But still amongst some classes of Hindus, on some religious festivals, the use of bhang is considered as a religious custom. Amongst Sikhs at some of their religious stations the bhang is used very freely and offered to every one present there. Un- dersigned has heard on several occasions that Guroo Gobind Singh, the great leader of Sikhism, has praised it on some occasions. Of course when Sikhs were fighting against the Mughal army, they were able to stand their fatigue, hunger and exposure to heat and cold through the influence of bhang, and the practice prevailing amongst Sikhs is probably to that effect. 33. The consumption of these drugs is religiously unlawful for Musalmans, Hindus generally hate its habit, and the Sikhs are at liberty. The public opinion of all the classes, whether social or religious, for this practice is not in favour generally. The reason for disrepute of the consumers is that they are in general lazy, inattentive to their business and always fond of bad society. Undersigned does not know regarding the worship of the hemp plant by any of the classes of the people. 34. It would not be a serious privation whatever to any class of the consumers to forego the con- sumption of the drug they use; if any, it would be for the excessive habituals, but only the matter of a few days, as no ill consequences are produced after leaving the practice. The consumers generally con- fess that after a few days' trouble they can leave the habit altogether. The probable number of each class has been given in question No. 26. 35. It is feasible for the Government to prohibit the use of these drugs, excepting bhang. It would be possible that they would be consumed illicitly after their prohibition. The country itself produces bhang without its cultivation, and charas is a foreign drug whose import can be stopped by the Govern- ment. In prohibiting these drugs no serious dis- content is expected among the consumers; if any, it would be for a few days. No political danger is expected from their discontent, excepting that they would long for it and raise a noise for a little while. The prohibition would not be followed by recourse to (a) alcoholic stimulants or (b) other drugs, be- cause the former are expensive and the latter not equal in effect. 36. No. 37. The effects of smoking the charas are nearly the same as those of ganja, and those of the bhang differ so much that they come on gradually and last longer; while those of the charas and ganja come on immediately after smoking, and are very strong than those of the bhang and fade away very soon. 38. Ganja is rarely used in this province. 39. As the smoking of any preparations of the hemp is speedy and stronger in effect than those used by drinking and eating, hence the former are more injurious than the latter. After smoking the hemp preparations soon affect the nervous system, so that the consumers feel giddy and hardly able to keep up their position; very soon after they fall down, become unconscious for a few minutes; while by drinking and eating of the preparations the effect is gradual and slowly goes off. In this way a sudden change and greater shock is rendered to the nervous system, while it is far less in eating and drinking. The smokers are generally found weak, anæmic and with their sickly faces, while the constitution and general appearance of the drinkers and eaters of bhang is not affected to such extent. In excessive use of hemp prepara- tions there is tendency to intellectual defects and insanity, which is found more amongst smokers. 40. Only bhang is used in some instances for medicinal purposes. It is supposed to increase the appetite. Its poultice is used to allay the pains in cases of piles, boils, abscesses and in other painful local diseases. The bhang is also used for the treatment of cattle diseases in dysentery, in dyspepsia and diarrhoea. 41. If not made a habit, then450 (c) Yes; I have observed in several epidemics of malarial fevers that the bhang drinkers do not suffer the fever to such an extent as the abstainers. The bhang drinkers themselves also confess that they can stand the severities of different climates better, and only for this reason the Sikhs undertake the moderate use of bhang drinking, while among the ranks in foreign countries. 42. The habit of moderate use of these drugs is not without a harm. The habit of these drugs weakens the constitution and energy and makes lazy. The subjects of the habit become indifferent in temper. Their faces become withered up and pale, eyes peculiar, and not fully attentive to their work. But bhang does not affect the system to such extent as ganja and charas. 43. They are not altogether inoffensive to their neighbours. The neighbours think of them of their suspicious character; they do not deliberately join their society and prevent their children not to follow them. 44. The immediate effect of moderate use of these drugs on the habitual consumers is refresh- ing and pleasant, especially bhang when used with the ingredients described in question No. 29, but after a while they turn into intoxica- tion. The effects of bhang last longer than those of charas and ganja; the habitual excessive consum- ers of course take more or require more in quan- tity, as well as in frequency. Only the bhang is known best to create appetite, and so much so in the beginners. The effect of bhang remains for some hours. But in charas and ganja it soon gets over. The after-effect results into laziness and slumber ; when the consumer requires a subsequent dose and if the want is not satisfied, he feels uneasy and longs for it. 45. Yes; the moderate use of these drugs to some extent produces the noxious effects, physical, mental and moral. Yes ; it weakens the constitution. Yes ; it injures the digestion and causes loss of appetite subsequently. I have not seen a single case of dysentery caused by the practice; of course cases of chronic coughs and asthma. Yes, it impairs the moral senses and induces laziness or habit of immorality or debau- chery, whether through the influence of the drug or of the society. Yes, it affects the intellects and to some extent is productive of insanity, if taken in large quantity and for a long time. Under these circumstances, as far as I can think, it serves as an exciting cause, because the insanity has only been noticed amongst men previously indifferent in temper or rather of melancholy appearance. The insanity caused by the bhang is of a mild type and often temporary; the sufferer is liberated after giving up its use, and under proper treatment. The syptoms may reappear after liberation if resort to its use taken again. The typical symptoms are that the patient has peculiar eyes and face, talk incoherent words, laughs without reason, often melancholy, becoming violent to attack others, dirty in habits. I have never met with any insane who ever confessed the use of ganja. I cannot say that I have sufficiently considered the cases in which there was connection between insanity and the use of hemp drags. But insanity may often tend to by indulgence in the use of hemp drugs, by a person who is deficient in self- control through weakened intellect. (1). From the cases I remember, there is one Alla Ditta in the habit of charas smoking. As long as he is indulged in smoking, he is occasionally excited, at a time melancholy, at another laughing without reason. When alone, he thinks that angels come to see him with whom he talks incoherent words, at the same time does not attend his work, and remains lazy. After that he leaves off his smoking charas, he is looked well in his mental state. Since some years I have not heard of him. (2). In the district of Rawalpindi there was one (name not known at present), a Sikh, aged about 24 years, married; he addicted himself to bhang drinking and so became indifferent in temper, One day under excitement he caught hold of the nephew, eight or nine months old, and throttled him. I do not know at present what became of him. (3). One Ranjah, a beggar, aged about 30 years when commenced charas smoking. After one or two years he became indifferent in temper, always melancholy, silent on questioning, occasionally laughing without reason, often naked and dirty in habit, but harmless. If any one gave him some- thing in charity he used it in smoking. Since a long time I have not heard of him, because he became a wanderer afterwards. (4). A Hindu fakir suddenly turned excited and violent. His friends stated that for some days pre- viously he became excessive in charas smoking; the symptoms were usual for a few days. He was taken a proper care not to use charas or bhang, after which he was quite sane. I do not know about this man also what became of him afterwards. 46. The habitual excessive use of any of these drugs is more likly to cause insanity in those persons who are naturally weak in their intellects. 47. It does not seem to be a hereditary habit or to affect in any way the children of moderate consumers beyond the constitutional effects to which the children are liable. 48. The same is the case with the children of the habitual excessive consumers. 49. None of these is ever used as aphrodisiac. The effects are generally mumsik or the seminal retainers than aphrodisiac. It is used by some prostitutes also, and more so in south-west districts, not for increasing the desire of sexual intercourse, but for keeping them quiet and lengthen their enjoyments. As long as the consumers are young in age and well up in health and strength, they enjoy the use of it, but otherwise it weakens the erections and occasionally a failure in such attempts. 50. The excessive use brings on the above results more markedly than by the moderate use. 51. In cities and towns the individuals of bad character, i.e., gamblers, pocket-pickers, house- breakers and others committing petty thefts are generally charas smokers. It cannot be certainly said that whether the ill-character is directly through the influence of charas or through want and poverty, or through bad company. 52. The habituals of excessive use of any of these drugs are not over energetic enough to commit such crimes described in question No. 51. 53. In answering this question I can refer to case No. 2 in question No. 45. 54. The habitual consumer criminals only fortify themselves to commit a premeditated act of violence or other crimes, but it cannot be said certainly that whether the object of fortifying themselves is actually to gratify their longings or to commit the crimes.
451 55. Yes ; the criminals keep these drugs ready made in their possession; in some instances they use bhang prepared in sweetmeats and cakes for eating purposes; in others they use charas and dhatura in tobacco for smoking. In many cases complete stupefaction is effected through bhang or charas only. 56. The undersigned does not know the effects of the hemps used in moderation or in excess, modified by the admixture of other substances as mentioned in the question, whether for personal consumption or for administration to others. 57. Ganja and charas are known to the under- signed to have never been eaten or drunk to such an extent as worth taking any notice of. 5S. The undersigned is not well acquainted with the administration, taxation and control of these drugs. Oral evidence. Question 1.452 46. The habitual and excessive use of charas certainly produces toxic insanity. 47 and 48. Not at all. 49 and 50. I never saw any one who uses these drugs as aphrodisiac. Several men use hemp drugs for pleasure only. I have seen many patients for impotency who have used these hemp drugs ex- cessively and habitually. 56. Please see answer No. 29. 57. Only a few persons eat charas and drink milk afterwards, as already stated in answer No. 19. Further paper put in by GOPAL DAS. 3. I have seen hemp plants grow in Simla valley. 4. Bhang, sabzi and vegia. 7. In several districts, hemp is cultivated only for use of bhang and its majun. 10. The same classes as other agricultural cultivators. 14. Bhang and majun are prepared in several districts of the Punjab. 16. Bhang is prepared in the field and majun by the sweetmeat sellers in their shops. 20. Charas is smoked often by the lower classes. 24. Poor and rich all drink bhang in all pro- vinces. I know with my experience that the use of charas and bhang is on increase. Ganja is not used in the province. 43. The moderate consumers are not inoffensive to their neighbours. 46. Evidence of DR. H. M. CLARK, Medical Missionary, Amritsar. Oral evidence. I am a Doctor of Medicine and Master of Sur- gery of the University of Edinburgh. My ex- perience of India is confined to the Central Punjab. I have been a medical missionary in connection with the Church Missionary Society since 1882, with my head-quarters at Amritsar, and have done a great deal of work in the villages of the Amritsar and parts of the Sialkot and Gurdaspur districts. The hemp drugs are true narcotics like alcohol and opium. As far as my experience goes, the effects of hemp are always and altogether bad. It is neither a food nor a work-producer. It is a stimulant of the worst sort. If it is smoked in the form of charas, its effects are very much more speedy and the ruin more complete than if it is drunk or eaten as bhang or majum. Majum is the least deleterious of the three, as it is eaten, while bhang is drunk and charas smoked. I can find no other word to describe the effects of charas than that they are frightful. It is ruinous men- tally, morally and physically. It produces a peculiar emaciation which can never be forgotten when once seen. It is largely a determining cause of insanity in this country. The effects of the drug, as eaten and drunk, do not appear so soon and are not so well marked, though they are the same in kind. All, if persisted in, produce ruin in the man. As regards charas, I think there can be no such thing as moderate use, if we mean such use as will not leave any permanent bad effect on the system. In whatever quantity it is used it is bound to be deleterious. My experience is probably wider among the private life of the people than among patients at dispensaries. The former sort of inter- course has been principally in the villages, because it is there that I meet fakirs and devotees, who are the chief consumers. The peasantry do not use the drug to any large extent. My impressions are based both on my experience and my medical knowledge. My experience of the effects of charas is mainly derived from cases of consumption by fakirs and other religious devotees. I have not had any of these persons under pro- longed observation, but I have observed them long enough to form an estimate of their health. You meet a person, talk with him for half an hour and examine him physically, and that is quite enough to tell what the state of his health is at the time. Of course one cannot say what his health has been in the past, but I have time to observe what his health is. At the same time the symptoms of charas are so marked that they can be detected at a glance. I have never watched the career of a consumer of the drug, for they are a floating section of the population. I should say that three years was enough to kill any consumer of the drug; for I have seen men who could not live more than three months and who have, in answer to my questions, told me that they began the habit about three years before. I never saw the begin- ning or end of these cases, and I have no ground for the opinion beyond the statement of the men themselves. I have studied the circumstances of fakirs, and I find them better off than the ordi- nary run of the population. It is possible that exposure, privation, and irregularities of life, which are common among them, may accelerate the evil effects, but the symptoms of the drug are unmis- takeable. I have met cases of hemp-drug emacia- tion among the other sections of the community453 course of various diseases; but the whole group of symptoms is pathognomonic of the charas habit in its full developments. I have met a large number454 48. Evidence of BABU HEM CHANDRA-SEN, Medical Practitioner, Delhi. 1. I have had frequent occasions to treat con- firmed charas smokers, and cases of insanity brought about by ganja smoking, as well as cases of bhang poisoning with dhatura. 2. The definitions given in Dr. Prain's report are acknowledged in this part of the country. They are locally known as bhang or subzi ; charas, of which there are three varieties (a) Churiya, (b) Huttoo, (c) Bokhari. Ganja is not sold in the Delhi market. The best bhang that is sold here is called thatiya, which comes from Bhurtpur. There are also some other kinds which come from Meerut, Jagadhiri, and Moradabad. 19. Charas and ganja are only used for smoking in this part of the country. But charas is some- times used in making aphrodisiac medicines by hakims of Delhi. 23. I have never known bhang to be used for smoking in this part of the country. On local enquiry, nobody here knows of bhang being smoked. 28. The daily average allowance of bhang to moderate consumers is ½ tola a day, and it costs about from 1 pice to 4 pice a day along with sugar and other ingredients. The daily average of charas is 6 mashas by moderate consumers, and it costs about 4 to 5 pice. The daily average allowance of ganja is 3 mashas, and it costs about 3 pice. When taken in excess bhang costs 4 annas, and charas and ganja smokers sometimes enormous quantities and it costs about one rupee a day. 29. Charas smokers mix opium and tobacco oc- casionally. But ganja smokers use only tobacco. The ordinary bhang massala that is used455 the maniacal fits after a year. In that case family predisposition was also traced. 46. I have seen cases of habitual excessive use of ganja, but never treated any, so cannot give my experiences. 47. I cannot say much on this point, as I have never seen such cases; but from enquiry of excessive ganja smokers, no signs of heredity have been found. 49. I have already said before that it is generally used as an aphrodisiac in the first instance ; but gradually they lose all seminal power. Those that use it as a narcotic also suffer from similar effects. This is brought about gradually. 56. Dhatura is sometimes mixed with bhang to poison people as well as to cause more intoxication. Opium is sometimes mixed with charas for produc- ing aphrosidiac effects. Cases of dhatura poisoning with bhang have been seen in the Punjab. I know of three or four cases. 57. The effect of charas, when eaten, is the same when smoked. In conclusion, in my opinion these hemp drugs should be prohibited from being sold, which will be doing good to humanity. 49. Evidence* of MATHRA DAS,456 chittak of the latter, if it be intended to possess light intoxicating power, and with double that quantity of ghi if a stronger intoxicating power be required. If still stronger intoxication be desired, the water extracted from a chitak of poppy-heads (dipped in water) is added. Saffron and carda- moms would be added if it were desired to make it odorous. 30. When consumed in private, the usual quantity of bhang and charas is taken by the con- sumer ; while in company one takes a larger quantity than the habitual dose. I have had occasions of observing several people drinking bhang or smoking charas in company. On enquiry, they answered that one could not object (to taking an overdose) in company as it would expose one to shame. These (drugs) are consumed by women as well as men; but it is only the low class women that do so. Genteel women, too, sometimes use bhang for (begetting) offspring, as it possesses a peculiar property. There is no restriction of age; it is used, how- ever, generally by those of the rising age. It is never allowed to be taken by children. Indeed, those addicted to bhang may foolishly give a spoonful of it to their sons. 31. The consumption of these drugs for a time leads to their habitual use; but the habit is not easily formed. It is not so very difficult to break off the habit of bhang-drinking ; but one would feel a great deal of trouble by giving up the habit of charas- smoking. It is a peculiarity of the charas habit to grow from the moderate into excessive; but it is less so with bhang. 32. There is no particular custom, in which its use is considered essential. On the Shivratri day, indeed, which is a Hindu day of worship, it is regarded meritorious by some Hindus to use bhang. Even those who are not habitual consumers take a spoonful or two of it; and the god Shiva is pro- pitiated with it. 36. Alcohol is substituted for bhang. A patient of mine was once suffering from rheumatism, brought about by the excessive use of bhang. I caused him to use liquor instead of bhang during illness, and he recovered thereby. He became thereafter a habitual consumer of liquor instead of bhang. 37. As I possess no accurate information about ganja, I cannot describe the difference between the effects of charas and ganja smoking. There is indeed a great difference between the effects of charas and bhang. In point of intoxi- cation they are alike, but there is the following difference. Bhang greatly operates on the stomach, the intestines, the vital organs or parts, and the organs of generation; charas on the heart, brain, eyes, stomach, and lungs. The operation of bhang on the stomach consists in increasing the appetite for food to such an extent that one can never feel satiated, because it dries up the humidity in the stomach, which is contracted in consequence; and this very contraction of the stomach produces the feeling of hunger. In connection with the organs of generation, bhang is used in cases of spermatorrhea, gonorrhea, and nocturnal emissions, and also for procreation and retarding the discharge of the semen. Many people become habitual consumers through their use of it for the last- mentioned object. It condenses the semen, and it is evident that a condensed thing will flow out more slowly than a more liquid one. In its effects on the vital parts, it produces forgetfulness and impairs the thinking and grasping powers. In its operation on the intestines it (bhang) cures diar- rh457 Swelling (or inflammation).458 Further paper put in by MATHRA DAS. 3. Wild hemp grows abundantly at Bhimbhar, in the territory of His Highness the Maharaja of Jammu and Kashmir, and to a small extent in the Rawalpindi district. Bhang is generally exported for sale into other districts from Bhimbhar. 4. It is known by the following names : bhang, sabzi, sukha, buti, kunb, and bijya. 6. The wild hemp plant grows dense. 7. (c) Produced for use as bhang. 19. (Charas is used for the purposes of smoking only). It is, however, occasionally used in medicines for retarding the discharge of semen. 20. Shiahs, jogi and bairagi fakirs often use the drugs. Some Brahmans and Khatris also use thorn. It is used everywhere, and is not confined to any particular locality. 22. Foreign charas imported from Bokhara and Yarkand is consumed here. 24. Fakirs and Brahmans use bhang. The number of habitual consumers is unlimited. 25. The use of bhang and charas is daily on the increase, and this is due to the practice of using the drugs in company. The use of the drugs is first made for the sake of sexual pleasures. 33. Indeed, according to their religion the Muhammadans look upon the use of intoxicants with contempt, and so do the Arya Samajists of the present day. The Hindus use it (bhang) with pride, particularly on the occasion of Shivratri festival. 43. Indeed the moderate consumers are inoffen- sive to their neighbours. 51. The sect of suthras, who are generally bad characters, one and all, use these drugs. 54. The intoxication of charas can indeed fortify (the consumer to commit crime). Excessive bhang and charas can stupefy a person who is not used to take these drugs. 68. As far as I know, these drugs are not con- sumed in the houses or shops where they are sold. 50. Evidence of PANDIT MAHADEO, Brahmin, Hakim, Amritsar. 19. Charas and ganja are only used in smoking. Some people use ganja like bhang, but this fact should be enquired into in Bengal and Allahabad, where ganja is produced. 23. Bhang is never used in smoking. 29. In general charas is smoked with tobacco. The following ingredients are used in a simple manner with bhang :is, keeps them warm on these cold nights ; and the farmers in cold places, when irrigating their fields during the night, often use charas, and work most part of the night without any complaint. In these cold countries English and other persons of consequence or merchants use wine, tea and warm clothes, and keep chimneys lighted to protect themselves from cold. Yet they complain of the same, and those poor people who scarcely get these things for their convenience, only use charas and ganja and spend their cold nights accordingly. If charas and ganja be disallowed, the poor people can hardly live. In consequence, in these cold countries the serving man will not be procurable. 44. The use of these drugs is beneficial, as it gives appetite, health, strength and energy to those using it moderately. But their long and im- moderate use weakens the man and makes him restless and constipated. 45. Their long use weakens the system and produces dryness in the brain and body, and are generally destructive to the manhood of a person. The use of charas often creates cough and dama (asthma) and reduces the man's intellects. It often produces lunacy, and if its use be continued, this disease often becomes incurable. 47. These drugs do not in any way affect the children of the persons using them ; but one is habituated to their use by the company of such men. 51. Evidence* of HAKIM SALIMULLA, Pathan, Native Physician, Lahore. 1. I have personal experience of the use of bhang, and am also acquainted with its prepara- tions. I have myself treated patients suffering from the injurious effects of charas and bhang, and have also visited the assemblages of five, ten or more smokers of charas and witnessed their condition, not with a view to prepare myself for giving evidence regarding the use of the drugs, but with a view to acquire a complete knowledge of the subject, so as to be able to treat such patients. I have also attended the fairs in which bhang is excessively used; for instance Shibji ka mela, Bhaddar Kali ka mela, Bhairon ke Asthan ka mela. I have also visited Bhai Koman Singh's re- sidence (in Sathlani), which place is considered sacred by the Sikhs. One boat load of bhang is exempt from duty to this place since Sir Donald McLeod's time. In all districts of the Punjab in general, and particularly at Lahore and Peshawar, which places I myself have seen, bhang is drunk after being pounded and charas is only smoked. Sometimes pounded bhang is eaten. I will explain this more fully futher on. 2. Ganja is neither prepared in the Punjab, nor have I ever seen it used. My evidence, therefore, deals with bhang and charas only. The quantity of bhang consumed in Lahore is imported either from Hoshiarpur or Gurdaspur, the climate of the districts being unfavourable to the produce of bhang. Charas cannot be manufactured from it It can only be produced from the hemp plant grown on loamy soil, which is not to be found in this province. The kind of charas now in use in the Punjab is imported from Yarkand or Kashghar by traders. The charas called garda, which was used here some fifteen years ago, is not imported here since a long time. That now in use is of an earthy colour and a little greasy. The names of bhang given by Dr. Prain in his report on the cultivation and use of ganja in Bengal may be in use in that province, but here the consumers call it bhang or zamurrid or subja. In the Multan and Lahore districts it is generally known by the name of sawi. I do not consider it necessary to give the names of the plant in detail. Most people eat bhang after parching and mix- ing sugar with it. Moderate consumers of this kind of bhang can take from 1 to 5 tolas at a time. Commonly bhang mixed with almond and cardamom is pounded and drunk after being mixed with sugar and milk. But where bhang is distributed as offerings made at shrines, it is only pounded with a small quantity of black pepper and salt. On occasions of marriages or other such ceremonies, bhang is jocosely given (to guests) mixed with sweetmeats and kachauries (a kind of pastry filled with bruised pulse). Excessive con- sumers also eat it cooked with meat. A prepara- tion of bhang called majum is mostly made here by the following process : Ten seers of bhang is put into two maunds of water, and after thus keeping it for two or three days, it is boiled so as to reduce the water to 20 or 25 seers. This water is then mixed with five seers of ghi and cooked until it becomes thick. It is then cooled, and ghi, which becomes condensed, is extracted and the water thrown away. This ghi is then mixed with a thick paste of sugar, which, after cooling, becomes condensed, and its slices are called ma- jum. Its intoxication is generally pleasant, This kind of ghi can also be used in producing sweet- meats of other sorts. 19. Charas is only smoked by putting it in a chillum between two layers of tobacco. 23. Where charas is not procurable, consumers smoke bhang mixed with tobacco. Its intoxica- tion is almost similar to that of charas. 28. (a) Habitual moderate consumers460 syrup prepared of medicines used as curative of certain diseases, suoh as diarrh461 which is religiously forbidden to them, and con- sequently they cannot smoke charas. Mental or brain diseases are well known to the native physicians, who never prescribe bhang in their treatment of these diseases. The medicinal use of bhang allowed by Hindu physicians is confined to the improvement of phy- sical strength only. 46. The habitual excessive use of these drugs produces noxious effects on the body. It causes debility, shivering of limbs, weakness of nerves, delirium, insanity, anguish of mind, mania, cowardice, laziness, loss of appetite and sexnal power. It deadens the intellect, injures digestion, blackens the blood and complexion, and weakens the retentive power. If the consumer is cured of the above symptoms, they are reinduced to some extent by the use of bhang as soon as res- traint is removed, but not so much as in the case of charas. 47. The habitual moderate use of these drugs is not a hereditary habit, and does not affect in any way the children of the moderate consumer. 48. The same is the case with the habitual excessive use of these drugs, but excessive use of charas is apt to destroy the spermatozoa. 49. I repeat my answer already given, viz., mod- erate use of these drugs cannot be said to be aphrodisiac, and the prostitutes do not use them for any special purpose. The moderate use of bhang does not affect potency, provided the con- sumer gets wholesome food. 50. The excessive use of bhang and charas is physically injurious, as stated in my answer to question 46. 56. The quantity of bhang mixed with other substances for medicinal use has been fixed after various trials. It will be used moderately, and its use will not only be less injurious, but will, as far as I know, be beneficial physically. Dhatura is mixed with charas by criminals only. 57. I never heard that charas was sometimes eaten. I have given my experience, and there are no opinions which I desire to lay before the Commis- sion. 52. Evidence* of NARAYAN DASS, Brahmin, Shopkeeper and Physician, Rawal- pindi. 1. Seventeen years' practice and experience. 2. Dr. Plain's statement about the hemp plant is correct. Ganja and charas are not manufac- tured in this province, and the former is not even consumed here. Charas alone is consumed in this country, and it is imported from the direction of Yarkand and Kashmir. Bhang is a produce of this country. 19. I know nothing about ganja, as it is not used in this province. Charas is smoked, and there is no other use to which it is put. 23. Bhang is only drunk and is not smoked. 28. (a) One tola. (b) Five tolas. 29. (a) Musk is mixed with charas for per- fuming it and is then smoked. (b) Dhatura, opium, vomic nuts, etc., are not mixed with charas for the sake of strong intoxication. Dirt, dust and small leaves of bhang are often mixed with charas. 30. These drugs are generally consumed in company. The habit is not confined to any time of life. It is not usual for children to consume them. 31. The habit of using bhang and charas is easily formed, and it is not difficult to break it off. There is a tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32. There is no social or religious custom which enjoins the use of charas or bhang. In Hindu temples, however, small doses of bhang are offered to visitors as a sacred thing and the habit is thus gradually formed. There is no such custom in respect of charas. 36. No. 37. As ganja is not used in this country, I cannot state the difference of its effects from those of charas-smoking. The intoxication of bhang is stronger and lasts longer, but the intoxication of charas is instantaneous. 39. The eating and drinking of charas and ganja can in no way be less injurious. The effect in both forms is alike and does not injure the constitution. Excessive use, indeed, creates melancholia and weakens lust. 40. Charas is not used medicinally; but bhang is so used for the treatment of men and cattle. 41. Some people use bhang462 46. The excessive use of charas is injurious on account of its heating and arid qualities, because the brain weakens, and at the end the consumer becomes impotent. 47. No. 48. As I am not aware of any instance, I can- not discuss this question. 49. No; prostitutes also use the drugs for the sake of intoxication. The excessive use of charas ultimately makes the consumer impotent. 50. According to medical science, the use of these drugs weakens the brain, causes melancholia, loss of virility and impotency. 56. The moderate use of hemp drugs is not attended by any bad effects. When, however, the drugs are used in excess, they weaken the brain and cause loss of virility, and melancholia. Dhatura, opium, vomic nuts, etc., are not mixed with these drugs for personal consumption, but for administration to others for robbing them of their property by highwaymen, 57. Charas is not eaten but only smoked. Ganja is not used in this province. Further paper put in by NARAYAN DAS. 3. It grows spontaneously on the banks of brooks in the Gurdaspur district. 4. Bhang, sabzi, sarwari, sukha, charas, suta, dam, and ganja. They all refer to the hemp plant. 5. Heavy rains during the spring, banks of the rivets, and damp soils are necessary for the growth of bhang, 6. The growth is dense. 7. The hemp plant is not cultivated in this pro- vince. 8. Cannot be ascertained, as it is not cultivated. 9. There is no special method in this province. 10. No. 11. Ganja is not produced in this country. 12. 1 have no reason to give, because the plant is not cultivated. 13. Cultivation of hemp is not restricted. It is impossible to cultivate it in the hottest part of the country where water is scarce. 14. Ganja and charas are not manufactured in this province. Bhang only grows wild. 15. Charas and ganja are not prepared from the wild plant, but it is prepared from the cultivated plants in foreign countries. Bhang only is obtained from the wild plant for drinking pur- poses. 16. Bhang is not prepared by the people in their houses, but it can be prepared from the wild hemp plant. Ganja and charas cannot be pre- pared from the wild hemp. 17. By none in this country. 18. Charas and bhang deteriorate by getting old and drenched in water, but it can keep good for five years if carefully kept in a dry place. 20. Fakirs and idlers who generally reside in takias, temples and dharmsalas use charas and ganja. 21. Ganja is not produced in this country. 22. Foreign charas, imported from the direction of Yarkand, Kashmir, etc, is consumed. 24. Fakirs, who reside in different places. 25. The use of charas and bhang is not on the decrease. 26. (a) and (c) Fakirs and idlers. (d) Associates of fakirs and idlers. 27. They are not peculiar to any class. The habit is formed by the company of fakirs and idlers. 33. The use of charas and bhang is regarded with contempt by the general public. The hemp plant is not worshipped by any sect. 34. It would be a serious privation to fakirs if they cannot get charas. Numbers cannot be esti- mated. 35. It is possible to lawfully prohibit charas as it is imported from foreign countries; but it is difficult to prohibit bhang, because it grows wild on waste lands. The consumers would be discon- tented ; but there is no political danger. The consumers of charas and bhang cannot have re- course to alcoholic stimulants. 38. Ganja is not used in this country. 43. Moderate consumers of charas and bhang are inoffensive to their neighbours. 51. Bad characters do not use bhang and charas for committing crimes, because the use of these drugs makes the man a coward. 52. The consumers of charas and bhang cannot perform any courageous act. 53 and 54. No. 55. Criminals do not use bhang and charas to further their designs, nor can complete stupefac- tion be induced by these drugs without admixture. 58. As far as my knowledge goes, the present system in respect of the sale of charas is working well (sic), but as bhang grows wild it can be exempted (?) from this matter (sic). 59. As regards charas, the present system re- quires no improvement, and as bhang grows wild it is difficult to improve the system of excise in respect to it. 60. Ganja is not consumed in this country, nor is it imported from foreign territories, and there- fore there it no reason for controlling it. 61. Charas is not produced in this province, nor is the hemp plant cultivated, and hence there are no reasons for controlling them. 62. There is no necessity to control the cultiva- tion of the hemp plant, because it grows sponta- neously, and it is difficult to control its growth. 63. The present system is correct in respect of charas, but objectionable in respect of bhang, which is general on account of its wild growth, and it is difficult to make proper arrangements for it. 64. None whatever in respect of charas. 65. The present taxation requires no altera- tions. The tax on charas should, however, be increased. 66. As ganja is not produced in this country, I have no opinion to offer on the subject. 67. The tax on charas should be increased, so that its incidence may tall on the Consumers, and the advantage gained by this would be twofold, i.e., (1) the receipts from tax would increase, and (2) the number of consumers will decrease owing to high prices. 68. In towns there is only one fixed place where the licensed vendor sells charas and bhang; but there are no arrangements for consuming the
463 drugs on the premises, nor is it usual to allow this. 69. People do not express any desire that a shop be opened in the city where charas may be sold and also consumed on the premises. 70. Charas is imported from foreign territory for sale. I do not know about smuggling. It is generally imported after payment of duty, and further information can be afforded by Govern- ment offices, 53. Evidence * of PANDIT JENARDHAN, Brahmin, Baid, Lahore. 1. I have been practising as a baid for the last thirty-four years, and during this period I have had several opportunities of acquainting myself with the effects of these drugs. 2. I concur with Doctor Pram's opinion. 3. According to my knowledge, hemp plant grows spontaneously in the Gurdaspur, Kangra and Hoshiarpur districts. It is, however, to be found in abundance in the last-named district, 4. Bhang is also known by the following names:464 35. The prohibition of bhang, if enforced, would occasion serious discontent among the consumers, and the drug would be consumed illicitly. It is much feared that the discontent would amount to a political danger, because the use of this drug has also some connection with the Hindu religion. It would be a serious privation to the consumers of ganja and charas if the use of the drugs is pro- hibited, but their number is very small. The habitual consumers of these drugs cannot have recourse to alcoholic stimulants, as they are very costly. 36. Alcohol is not being substituted for any of these drugs. On the contrary, the consumers of spirituous liquors take one of these drugs when they have not enough money to buy alcohol. 37. Ganja is not used in this province. Ac- cording to medical science, ganja is a more in- ebriating drug. 38. Round ganja is more intoxicating than the flat one, which is better than chur. 39. The intoxication of opium is not injurious in any way, because its consumer becomes active after its use. All other intoxicants are very per- nicious in their effects, the spirituous liquors being the worst. 40. Bhang is prescribed for use in the following complaints :465 22. In Lahore charas is generally exported from Ladakh, etc., by licensed contractors. 2 4. The consumers of bhang are generally those lazy fellows who sit idle in takias all the day long; or those people who are called vagabonds, and use it on account of bad society. The number of such persons is very small because such persons who consume bhang or charas are contemptuously looked down by the people, 25. The use of charas is on the increase among such people who are vagabonds, or desert their houses on account of bad society, as no person has influence upon such people on account of liberty allowed by the law, and they publicly use bhang and charas in places where these drugs are consumed. Another cause of the increase is the facility with which such drugs can be pur- chased at licensed shops in different quarters of the city. 26. (a) More than 2 or 4 per cent. in towns, and in villages not even 1 per cent. and this too among the vagabond class. 27. The habit of using these drugs is formed on account of bad company, and sometimes on account of the inducements given by ignorant people that these drugs are beneficial. 31. The habit of smoking charas cannot be easily formed, because those who do not use it hate its bad smell; but a man can become used to it by living in company with a charas consum- er for some time. Bhang is very rarely used without other ingredients. It is often pounded with musk melon and anise seeds, and then used as a sedative and digestive by dums, mirasis, musicians and their companion takia nashins. Those persons who have a strong will are prudent, and understand its bad effects, can break off the habit at once without any provocation. 84, As such people are weak-minded, it would be disagreeable to them to abandon the habit at once, There is a very small number of the habi- tual consumers. 35. The people would certainly get up means for the illicit consumption of these drugs if their use is authoritatively prohibited. Those perrons who do not like to break off their habits will try to procure the drugs by every means, or will re- sort to alcoholic stimulants as a substitute. 36. The use of liquor has now reached to such a degree, and is still on the increase, that if the Government does not adopt measures to check it, it will be impossible to remedy the pecuniary and physical injuries done by it to the people. As the consumers of bhang are generally people of low status, they do not use alcohol as substitute for bhang, because the former is costly and the latter cheap, but some persons have been seen who use both liquor and bhang together in the form of the admixture called lurka. 40. Bhang is sometimes used as an auti- periodic in intermittent fever. An oil, called kinb oil, is also prepared from it, and is used in certain refrigerent prescriptions. 41. Almost all the persons first begin the use of bhang as a refrigerent and accessory to digestion. Some of the Hindu shopkeepers, especially the cloth merchants and grain-sellers, etc., use it as a than- dai in the afternoon daily, Bhang is also used as a febrifuge. 42. There are more takias outside the Mochi Gate, Lahore, than in other parts of the city, which are reserved for the consumption of such drugs; and as the resorters to these takias geuer- ally come to me for treatment, and as none of them has during the last twenty years complained to me of having suffered from any disease in conse- quence of using bhang or charas, it shows that the moderate use of these drugs is harmless. 43. The consumers of bhang are inoffensive to their neighbours. The charas-consumers can, however, prove offensive to their neighbours, on account of the bad and disagreeable smell given out when they smoke charas. 44. The immediate effect of bhang is that it produces appetite and is refreshing. Its intoxi- cation lasts for two or three hours, and the want of subsequent gratification produces no uneasiness. 45. As above stated, I have not found even a single person during the last twenty years who com- plained of these drugs. It is, however, stated in books that the excessive use of bhang weakens the intellect and produces impotency. One person, Sayad by taste, who is still alive, became insane on account of the excessive use of charas ; but he also used bhang and liquor, and it is therefore uncertain by the effects of which of these intoxi- cants he became insane. 49. See answers Nos. 20 and 24. A very small number of the bhang and charas consumers use them as aphrodisiac. Notable and rich prosti- tutes do not like to smoke charas, which is used by the prostitutes of lower class only, who are looked on with contempt. It is mentioned in medical works that bhang produces impotency, but I have never come across any patent during the last twenty years who complained of his having become impotent by the use of bhang. 53. The consumer of bhang becomes coward, and has therefore never been seen committing any crime. The son of Sayad Raza Shah, Rais, has been found to have become insane by the use of charas. But he was licentious, and used charas, bhang, liquor and all, 54. No, they are not used for this purpose. 55. I have heard that criminals commit thefts by stupefying their victims who are unaccustomed to these drugs by inducing them to smoke charas mixed with dhatura. 58. The existing excise administration is all right, but in allowing charas-khanas and madak-khanas (houses where these drugs are smoked on the premises ) to be opened, conditions and restrictions should be laid to prevent shops being opened in the thickly-populated parts of a town ; so that the people are not induced to visit such shops by seeing a great assembly of con- sumers in them. 67. In my opinion the taxation should be in- creased, so that the people may not be induced to use these drugs on account of their being procur- able at cheap prices. 69. The wishes of the people, though they should be, are not consulted in opening these shops. vol. v. 3 R
466 55. Evidence* of SHAH NEWAZ, Hakim, Rawalpindi. 1. I have acquired my knowledge regarding the hemp drugs,467 of population both high and low earn money, therefore they prefer to use superior intoxicants to inferior ones. This change is attributed to the following causes: Alcohol does not emaciate the body or weaken the powers or injure the senses or bring on idleness. As for the proof of this state of tilings, I can adduce my own experience and daily observation. 37. The effects of smoking charas differ from the effects of drinking bhang in this, that the narcotic effect of charas is instantaneous, but bhang takes some time to produce its effects. The nar- cosis produced by charas is heavier than that pro- duced by bhang. Charas smoking does not pro- duce appetite for food so quickly and so sharp as does bhang drinking. Bhang drinking does not produce so much dryness as does charas smoking. Charas smoking produces burning of the chest, bhang drinking does not. The bhang consumer, when under its influence, sees small objects large, such is not the case with charas smokers. Charas smokers become thinner and thinner every day, but bhang drinkers do not. Smokers of charas become pusillanimous, but not the bhang drinkers. Charas smoker's colour becomes yellow, but of bhang drinker's red. Bhang drinker becomes sulky, but not so the charas smoker. Charas smoker becomes bold, but not so the bhang drinker. 39. I have not answered this question. 40. The more learned among the native physi- cians employ bhang and charas in many diseases on account of their medicinal properties, for instance, they put these drugs in pills and confections and in stimulant mixtures to check speedy discharge of semen. In pills the whole plant is used, and in confections and stimulant mixtures, sometimes the whole plant and sometimes the oil, and sometimes an infusion is mixed in them. On the tumours of bleeding and bilious piles poultices are applied to the annus, and bhang leaves warmed are also used as fomentations to relieve the pain, for bhang is an anodyne. On bilious and vascular sore-eyes, bhang poultice is applied to the back of the eyes. In bilious and vascular headaches embrocation is applied to the forehead. Bhang leaves used as snuff clear the brain. The leaves of the wild hemp are used as insecticide, for killing lice. In earache the juice of the leaves is dropped into the painful ear. The eating of the leaves dries up the mois- ture of the stomach and also that of the abdomen. The leaves are diuretics and they heal up sores. For want of time I have not been able to mention the uses in detail. 41. Since the leaves of bhang possess a variety of powers, that is to say, as they are stimulant and intoxicant, and in the commencement as bhang and charas excite the virile powers and lust and act as digestive and fatten the body by collecting the humours, therefore in the commencement they increase appetite for food, give staying-power under severe labour and exposure to cold and heat. Besides those who use bhang get rid of fatigue as soon as they use it, and the diseases which origi- nate on account of foul air are also prevented, such as epidemic fevers and cholera loose much of their virulency by using bhang and are also useful in sickly localities, and they may be useful in other ways also, for instance, bhang leaves with a little water, and after being warmed and placed over a leaf of the castor plant and applied to the testicle reduce the swelling of the organ. 42. If the moderate use of charas and bhang does no good to one who is accustomed to the ex- cessive use, then these drugs are harmless, and since he has not been able to obtain his accustomed and desired dose, so as to establish a habit, there- fore the drugs are beneficial to him, and if the moderate use is not beneficial to one who is not accustomed to the use of charas and bhang, then they are not harmless also. The reason is obvious. 44. The immediate effect of the moderate use of charas and bhang on the habitual consumer is that he gets intoxicated and feels satisfied. If he is very hungry then he can sustain himself for a long time, and if he has no appetite then he feels hungry. Slight narcotic effects last for six hours. When the effect is over, then craving for the drug comes on again and he feels uneasy. The state of the habitual moderate consumer can be gathered from my above statement. There is no room from writing further about this subject. 45. The following are the evil consequences of moderate habitual use of charas and bhang :468 14. Bhang is prepared by drying the leaves of the hemp plants. Charas and ganja are not manufactured here. 15. I don't know. 16. Every one can prepare bhang at every place where wild lemp is found. I know nothing about ganja and charas. 17. I don't know. 18. Both charas and bhang deteriorate if kept for a long time. With ordinary cave they will, however, keep good for one year, after which they totally lose their effects. I am not aware of any process by which deterioration can be prevented. 19. These drugs are smoked in a huka or chillum. 20. Naths, suthras, jogis, fakirs, idle Khatris, mirasis and other people who have no cares use the drugs. I am, however, unable to give their number. 21. I am informed that ganja of whitish colour is preferred for smoking 22. Charas is imported here from the hills. That imported from Ladakh is the one preferred by the smokers. 23. Bhang is drunk after pounding. The classes of people that drink bhang are sadhus, fakirs, mirasis, etc., already stated. 25. Yes, the use of the drugs is on the increase. 26. I don't know. 27. The habit is formed by associating with the consumers of the drugs. 28. Not known. 29. Charas is smoked after being mixed with tobacco. Bhang is drunk in a liquid form. People addicted to strong intoxicants pound bhang with dhatura seeds. 30. Charas is smoked in company when the con- sumers assemble. Both in the case of boys and young men the habit of using the drugs is formed by associating with the consumers. The average consumption for each consumer is :469 charas and ganja from the wild bhang. (Hindu) fakirs and sadhus generally use these drug3. 8. There is no increase or decrease in area. Its growth depends on rainfall. 9. It is not cultivated. 10. No one cultivates the plant, and on the con- trary the cultivators destroy the plants which grow on their cultivable lands. 11. No. 12. It is not cultivated in this district for the production of ganja. I know nothing about the other districts. 13. It is not restricted in this district, and I cannot say in what other districts. There are no special conditions for its cultivation. It grows on good and level lands where rainfall is excessive. 14. Ganja and charas are not manufactured in the Una tahsil. Bhang only is prepared. 15. Wild hemp only grows in this district and is used in drinking by Hindu sadhus and fakirs. About its use for smoking I know nothing. 16. Sadhus and fakirs generally bring small quantities (of green leaves) of wild bhang to their houses and use it for drinking. Ganja and charas are not prepared from it in this district. The stalks of the hemp plant when dry are used for fuel. 17. By none, as far as I am aware. 18. Bhang if kept in a house and protected from vain and winds gives more intoxication. It generally loses its effect in a year or two if not protected from rain. 19. I do not know anything about this ques- tion as it is objectionable according to our Sikh religion. 20 and 21. I know nothing. 22. It is imported into the Una tahsil from the Kangra district, etc., and people use that. 23. 1 know nothing. 24. Generally sadhus and fakirs drink it. I cannot say what proportion of the people. 25. It is on the increase to a small extent. 26. As I am on tour I know nothing, but had I been at head-quarters I would have given a satisfactory answer after enquiry. 27. Sadhus, fakirs and nihangs generally use bhang. There is no danger of life in using it. Charas and ganja are also smoked by sadhus and fakirs, but not by nihangs (Sikhs), and there is danger of life (in using them). 28. I am just now on tour. If I had been at head-quarters, I would have answered after en- quiry. 29. Habitual excessive consumers mix copper and dhatura with bhang to make the intoxication strong. 80. It is generally practised in company. It is mainly confined to the male sex. 81. The habit is formed by company, and it is difficult for habitual consumers to break off the habit at once as it proves injurious. 82. It is not lawful according to any religion or custom. Bhang is not injurious, but ganja and charas, however, are. 33. Hemp plant is not worshipped in this dis- trict. The habit is regarded bad, because it makes the consumer insensible. 84. Certainly it would cause privation to habi- tual consumers. 35. Prohibition is feasible if enforced by the authorities. If it is unlawfully carried out, I think people would be discontented, but their dis- contentment would not amount to any political danger. Prohibition would be followed by re- course to alcoholic stimulants, etc., by the well- to-do persons only and not by the fakirs and poorer classes of consumers. 37 to 39. I am on tour just now and cannot answer without enquiry from the consumers. 40. Charas and ganja are not used for the treatment of any diseases; only bhang is used for the treatment of men and cattle. 41. Only bhang is used as a digestive or pre- ventive of the effects of unwholesome water. There are no particular classes of people who in general use it. 42. Ganja and charas are injurious to some extent, but bhang is harmless. 43. Yes. 44. It (bhang) is refreshing, produces intoxica- tion, creates appetite, and the effect lasts for two or three hours. The want of subsequent gratifica- tion causes uneasiness. 45. Ganja and charas produce noxious moral and mental effects, injures the digestion, causes loss of appetite, bronchitis and asthma. The appearance is changed and the intellects are affected, the moral sense is impaired. It also in- duces laziness and produces temporary insanity. If the habit is given up, the insanity disappears, 46. Bhang is harmless. 47. Not a hereditary habit. 48. Bhang is excessively used. 49. Bhang is aphrodisiac. Prostitutes generally use it, and it does not produce impotence. 50. Bhang is excessively used. 51. I know nothing. 52. Bhang is consumed excessively and the consumption of ganja and charas is moderate. 53. Ganja and charas consumers are often quar- relsome. 54. I know nothing. 55. Bad characters stupefy their enemies (sic) by inducing them to take bhang in which they mix dhatura, etc. 56. Bhang gives strong intoxication by the admixture of copper and dhatura and completely stupefies the consumer. 57. I don't know. 58. The present excise system is working well. 59. No. 60. Ganja is not produced in the Una tahsil. 61. Charas is not produced in the Una tahsil. 62. Control is very difficult, because bhang grows spontaneously, and damages crops, for which reason the cultivators destroy its plants. 63. The present system is working well. 64. I have no objection. 65. 1 can offer no opinion for alterations in tax- ation. 66. I can offer no opinion. 67. No objection. 68. Licensed vendors only sell the drugs in a shop or house wherever they like, and there is no harm in this. 69. People are not consulted. The licensed vendor opens a shop where he chooses. 70. The farmers sell the drugs. Cases of smuggling are handed up to justice by the farmers and the offenders punished.
470 58. Evidence of AMIR HAIDERSHAH, Honorary Magistrate, Rawalpindi. Bhang is not cultivated in the Rawalpindi district. It grows here spontaneously; and neither charas nor ganja can be prepared from it. It is generally used by fakirs, sadhus, and sants who live in takias or thakur-dowaras. Other people also use it, but its use is not beneficial. It has often been observed that those who consume charas become greatly emaciated, live in takias and temples, become lazy, alwaya remain in a state of intoxication, and are finally reduced to such straits as to beg from door to door. Charas is not prepared in this district. It is imported from Kashmir, Ladakh, Yarkand, etc., and sold here and in other towns. It is only smoked and not eaten or drunk. No sooner is it smoked than the consumer becomes intoxicated. It is generally used by sadhus, fakirs, jogis, san- yasis and Afghans. The brain is greatly injured by its use. Charas produces much aridity and consequently causes insanity. The consumer be- comes lean on account of the blood being dried up, and he generally becomes lazy and lives in takias, etc. Charas is a most injurious thing, and its use is increasing every day. The imposition of a reasonable duty upon the imported charas would prevent the daily increase of its use. Ganja is neither prepared nor used in this district. 59. Evidence of SARDAR SOOJAN SINGH, RAI BAHADUR, Honorary Magistrate, Rawalpindi. The use of hemp drug (charas) is generally most injurious. It produces insanity, and ganja smokers become weak and emaciated and even in some cases impotent and unfit for any work. Its use should most certainly be prohibited. As regards madak and chandu (made up of opium mixed with burnt straw or bhusa), although they have no contract for them from Government, several persons prepare these drugs secretly in their own houses and use them. Their use is even more injurious than that of charas, and special arrangements should be made to put a stop to their use either publicly or privately. Oral evidence. I am a large contractor in Rawalpindi. I take contracts of all kinds in connection mainly with the Commissariat. I have also held the Rawal- pindi district drug contract. I have never seen ganja, but the word ganja is sometimes applied to charas. In my opinion charas should be prohibited. Its effects are bad. Insanity even is produced by the excessive use. I have also seen smokers who seemed to me the worse for it, and some smokers have told me that it has affected them injuriously. I have seen one or two men violent for periods varying from three to ten days and tied up. I have been informed that they were consumers, and they were notorious as such. So often as they used the drug to excess they became like this. I have heard that this is not an uncommon result, though I have only seen one or two cases. I am 52 years of age. I think that there is injury from the moderate use as well as the excessive, because they smoke in company, and they go on smoking till there is excess. Charas does no good to anybody, and it is only injurious. The one or two men I have mentioned above were men who took the drug twice, or four times, or ten times, as often as they could get it Kahars take charas. Those who take it go to the bad. They are not many. The Purbias among them take it. They take tobacco regularly, but charas only occasionally. It is when they go on to excess that they go to the bad. Some only take in moderation and it does them no harm. Those who mainly suffer from it are the fakirs and a few others. The Hindus take it less than the Muhammadans. The city people have the habit more than the country people. And the association of city men in this leads to other evils, such as theft and the like. They sometimes get people with money among them and give them charas, sometimes mixing dhatura, until they are insensible, and then rob them. I do not remem- ber any case, but I have heard of two or three instances, and believe this is done. These people do not take dhatura themselves, for it is a danger- ous drug. He who takes much of it dies. I have not heard of any one taking dhatura volun- tarily for the sake of greater intoxication. As to bhang, it is not so injurious as charas. It makes men timid if taken to excess. Beyond this there is no harm from it. And indeed it aids digestion when people eat too much. And, when taken in company, it produces happiness and laughter. Liquor is more expensive than bhang, and also more injurious. The habitual drinker of liquor will die. I think that it should be prohibited as well as charas. For neither would I recommend immediate prohibition. My idea would be to put on such a tax, and gradually increase it so, that the common use of these intoxicants might be gradually reduced. My idea is so to raise the price that the majority of people may find it im- possible to buy them at all. I have never sent to Yarkand for charas. But I have bought it from importers. They are either Yarkandis or people of our country. In the latter case, they are traders who have taken goods to Yarkand and bring back charas. I have never heard of charas being made in Kashmir. There is a kind of charas or garda made in this country. I do not know in what places. This is because people cannot afford to buy Yarkaudi charas, and so they make this from the wild bhang. I do not know how it is made. If a tax were put on, it should not be levied until the stuff is sold to the contractor. It can- not be sold to any one else than a contractor. Government could take the charas into its own hands, or it might administer it through a con- tractor. Charas is cheap at present, and there is room
471 for taxation. Bhang grows wild in jungles, fields, kassis, etc. The thikadars sometimes, but very rarely give a price to cultivators for the stuff. I am talking of Rawalpindi. Charas is imported in the hot season. Only the shop licensees buy it from the importers. 60. Evidence * of Nawab Mohamed Khan, Leghari, Zamindar and Tumandar of the Leghari Tribe, Choti Zerin, Dera Ghazi Khan District. 1. I have had very little opportunity of obtain- ing information, as a few persons say one or two per cent. drink bhang here. 3. In the hilly tracts of my ilaka the wild hemp grows here and there to a small extent, but no one consumes it. Sometimes bad mashes, how- ever, administer it, from evil motives, to another person without his knowledge. 4. The wild hemp is known in this country by the name of " Kola-bhang," and the cultivated hemp is called bhang only. 7. Any one cultivating the plant does so for his own use. 10. There is no particular class of cultivators of bhang in this ilaka. The agricultural classes sometimes cultivate one or two marlas of their land with bhang. 19. In this ilaka bhang is only used for drink- ing after being pounded. It is not used in any other way; ganja and charas are, however, smoked at Dera Ghazi Khan. 20. In the Dera Ghazi Khan district there is no particular class (of people) who smoke either ganja or charas. Debauchees and bad characters, however, use the drugs. I am not acquainted with any particular locality (where it is smoked). 22. Charas is imported by traders from Kabul into this district. It is not manufactured here. 28. The entire amount of bhang consumed in my ilaka does not exceed 2 seers. 80. Boys without guardians alone take to these drugs in their boyhood by associating (with con- sumers). 31. Even the moderate use of bhang for sis months or a year confirms the habit, 32. In this district the use of bhang is pre- valent among the Hindus. It is however not known whether the custom is religious or social; probably it is religious. The use generally being moderate its injurious effects on the consumers have not been heard off. 33. I know so far that the Hindus drink bhang as an act of religious merit and call it sukha. 35. The prohibition of these drugs will cer- tainly occasion discontent among the consumers, but there is no possibility of the discontent amounting to political danger. If the use of any of the drugs were prohibited, the consumers would probably have recourse to other intoxicants. 43. The moderate consumers are certainly in- offensive. * Translation. 61. Evidence* of BEHRAM KHAN, Zamindar and Honorary Magistrate, Rojhan, Dera Ghazi Khan District. 3. As far as I have heard, the wild hemp grows abundantly in some districts of the Punjab, such as Lahore, Rawalpindi and Amritsar. It grows to a small extent in the trans-Indus districts of the frontier. 4. In this district the wild hemp plant is known by the name of bhang. It is also called bhambor, which is the correct name. I have seen the plant myself, and it is known by the same name throughout this district and among the Biluch tribes. 5. As far as I have heard, humid climate is necessary for its growth. It grows in tracts where the rainfall is excessive, and the land is fertile and brought under wheat cultivation. 6. Dense. 7. In this district the hemp plant is cultivated for the production of bhang. Charas and ganja are not manufactured. I do not know anything of other districts. 10. There is no particular class of people who cultivate the hemp plant. The consumers them- selves cultivate it on their own lands and are themselves cultivators. 14. Bhang and charas are prepared from the hemp plant in this province. I know nothing about ganja. I cannot state in which particu- lar districts of the Punjab charas is manu- factured. Bhang is, however, produced in almost all the districts and is of two kinds: (1) cultivat- ed and (2) wild hemp, which is called bhambor. 15. The hemp plant (bhang) is generally drunk. If charas is manufactured, it is smoked in a huka. If the preparation railed majun is prepared, it is used in eating. These persons, however, eat majun. Two things are produced from the cultivated hemp: (1) bhang, and (2) majun; the former is drunk, while the latter is eaten. Three drugs can, how- ever, be prepared from the wild hemp : (1) bhang, (2) charas, (3) majun. In this district and the other frontier districts bhang is cultivated; but in the trans-Indus districts the wild hemp called bhambor grows. Charas is smoked in a huka. 16. Bhang or charas is prepared at houses, and sometimes in the fields after the hemp plant is reaped. 17. In this district bhang is cultivated by agriculturists, who are themselves the consumers. 18. Bhang deteriorates if kept for two years. According to the consumers of bhang it loses its effects (by keeping). Care should be exercised to keep it secure from drenching. I do not know anything about charas and ganja. * Translation.
472 19. Ganja and charas are smoked by the people. The practice generally prevails in almost all the districts of the Panjab. 20. On this frontier charas is smoked by the beggars, Pathans and Hindus. The consumption of ganja is very rare. I cannot state the num- bers. By the frontier, I mean the frontier dis- tricts of the Punjab. 22. The consumers give preference to the charas imported from Afghanistan or Khorasan. In this province both native and Khorasani charas is con- sumed. 23. As far as I know bhang is not smoked in this district. 24. The fakirs, Hindus, Muhammadans, and even the Biluchis, drink bhang; but the practice obtains to a smaller extent among the latter. In this district the Sayads, who follow the profession of beggars, generally drink the drug. The num- ber, however, cannot be stated. 25. As far as I have heard, the consumption of bhang and charas is on the increase. 26. My reply refers to the consumers of this district only. (a) It is generally the Hindus who drink bhang in moderation. (b) Muhammadans, fakirs and Sayads use it ex- cessively. The proportion cannot be stated. 28. Regarding bhang473 derately. The moderate consumer is one who regularly consumes bhang during the day; but the person who drinks it twice or thrice a day and in large quantities is considered by me an habitual excessive consumer. 47. The habitual use (of any of these drags) does not appear to be an hereditary habit with any consumer, nor does it affect in any way his children. 49. In the beginning the use of bhang or charas is practised as an aphrodisiac. It is so used by prostitutes. It is generally used for intoxication, and is not injurious. The excessive use does not produce impotency, but causes loss of virility, 51. The bad characters use these drugs very seldom in this district. 53. The use of charas or bhang makes the con- sumer frantic and leads him to commit a violent and unpremeditated crime. Here is an instance. Two years ago a person of the Khosa tribe, while under the influence of bhang, murdered one of his tribesmen in the Khosa ilaka in this district. 54. The intoxication of bhang does not give courage. The drug is generally known to be a timid intoxicant. This drug interferes with the action of the heart and the brain. 55. The use of bhang or charas, without the admixture of dhatura or other intoxicants, does not induce stupefication. Criminals who use it for this purpose mix it with dhatura or other stupefying drugs. 58. I have no objection to the (present) tax- ation and control. I cannot suggest any improve- ments. Notes. 1. The delay has occurred in answering the questions on account of my having been away with the District Officer. To-day I despatch my evidence after recording it. 2. According to the instructions, I record my evidence as far as my information and experience go. 3. I have not answered the questions of which I know nothing, and consequently the space opposite these questions has been left blank. 4. As I have no information or personal experi- ence about ganja, I do not give any answer with regard to it. 5. By the hemp plant I mean bhang. In this district the hemp plant is known by the name of bhang. The hemp plant is cultivated in the month of Kuttak along with the rabi crops. It is reaped in the month of Baisakh with the rabi harvests. After being reaped it is called bhang. The seeds are generally drunk along with leaves (after being ground). A small amount of seeds is kept for cultivation. It is said that bhang pro- duces greater intoxication if it is mixed with seeds. 6. The wild hemp which grows in the Rawal- pindi and Amritsar districts, etc., of the Punjab is known by the name of bhambor. I have refer- red to it in answer to question No. 4. There is (some) difference (in the effects of) the wild and the cultivated bhang. The consumers of bhang give preference to the cultivated plant, and state that it is palatable, while the wild hemp is not. 62. Evidence* of MAKHDUM BAHAWAL BAKHSH, kureshi Hashmi, Proprietor of Land, Spiritual Leader of certain Sects of Muhammadans (Peesi Mureedi), Multan. 1. I often pay a visit to my disciples ( Mureeds) in the districts of the Punjab and Sindh. I state here what I know from the observations of the habits and customs of the people. 2. Narcotic articles obtained naturally from hemp are called bhang, ganja, and charas in this country also. But ganja, not being used in this country, people have no knowledge of its varieties. 3. It is heard that before the British rule in India bhang was cultivated largely in this coun- try ; but its growth has been greatly restrained by suppressive measures by the Government. As far as I know, I can say that bhang grows spontaneously in the districts of Hoshiarpur, Jullunder, and Shahpur. It is abundant in Hos- hiarpur. 4. Bhang is a name commonly known. Two varieties are known : (1) Bhalola (male). It has a greater quantity of seed in it. (2) Bhambhar (female). Its use causes headaches. Many religious mendicants call it by the name of " buti." Hindus and Hindu religious mendicants call it also by the name of " sukha" " sawi." 5. Cold climate and hilly tracts are favourable for the wild growth of hemp. 6. Growth of wild hemp is sometimes dense, but usually scattered. 7. No cultivation made in the Punjab for the production of ganja, charas or bhang fibre. Bhang only is grown. 8 and 9. Nil. 10. Only persons who consume bhang, and Hindu and Muhammadan religious mendicants who own culturable plots of land, cultivate hemp sufficient for their requirements; but this class is not regarded as hemp cultivators; they are called agricultural cultivators. 11. Ganja not being used in this part of the country, no plant of any kind is raised for its production. 12. No. 13. Ganja not being used in this part of the country, no plant of any kind is raised for its production. 14. I do not know anything about it. 18. Ganja is not used in the districts of the Punjab. Nothing more can be stated regarding it. Charas keeps good for a year if protected from the effects of cold weather. It loses half its effects in the second year; by the third year it is quite deteriorated and has no effect. Bhang is similarly situated as charas. 19. Charas is used for smoking. In special cases luxurious people eat a very small quantity of it. Ganja does not prevail here. 20. A class of persons known as religious mendicants of the Hindu and Muhammadan * Translation. vol. v. 3 s
474 persuasion use charas and bhang. Charas is smoked; and a lotion of bhang is prepared by grinding it with water and drunk. People in towns use bhang generally and charas occasionally. No definite uumbercau be given, nor can localit- ies be fixed. 21. Nil. 22. Charas imported from Yarkand and Bokhara is used, the former being preferred. 23. Bhang is not generally used for smoking. In special cases, for press of time, it is eaten after pounding it. They use it also in smoking. 24. Same as against question No. 20. 26. The number of habitual excessive consumers is the largest, and descends in order in the case of moderate and occasional consumers. 27. The excessive consumers of bhang are frequently among religious mendicants and men of low caste, such as Kanjor, Dom. These men get into a habit of its excessive use through irre- gular mode of living and association with exces- sive consumers. 28. Habitual excessive consumers use as much as 10 tolas, costing one anna, while moderate consumers take as much as 2½ tolas, costing 3 pies. There are persons who consume one pie worth bhang per diem. 29. Cardamom, aniseed and poppy seed are ordinarily mixed with bhang. But in excep- tional cases, almond, sugarcandy, small cardamom, saffron and milk are its ingredients. They mix dhatura with it in rare cases. The ingredients mentioned above, except that of dhatura, are mixed for removing dryness, and dhatura is mixed for intoxication, and as a stimulant of sexual desires. But the practice is not common. 30. Bhang is to a great extent consumed in company, usually by men. It is not confined to any definite time of lite. Among the female sex prostitutes are the frequent consumers, and the other classes of the female sex use it occasionally. No custom prevails for children to indulge in it. 31. The habit of consuming bhang is easily formed by association with its consumers. The habit is broken oft by gradual diminution of the quantity. It develops into the excessive by a moderate use of it. 32. The use of bhang is not admissible in reli- gious customs. 33. There is no public opinion, social or reli- gious, in regard to the taking of these drugs. The practice is held in disrepute among the people the reason being that these drugs produce dryness in the brain, and are harmful in business. Diet charges of the consumers are expensive in propor- tion. The use of these drugs causes weakness of liver and bladder. Digestion is also impaired. Its excessive use creates many other serious diseases. There is no custom of worshipping the hemp plant. 34. The excessive consumers feel the privation for a few days. No approximate number can be stated. 35. Prohibition would be felt as a grievance by the consumers. If the growth and prepara- tion of the drugs be totally restricted, illicit use is impossible. It will be most disagreeable to the excessive consumers, but the prohibition is not likely to cause any serious discontent. Total prohibition is impossible to be followed by a recourse to alcoholic stimulants, but the use of opium will be encouraged. 36. Alcohol is not being substituted for these drugs, nor is the change expected to occur. 37. There is no custom of the consumption of ganja in the country. No account of the differ- ence of their effects can, therefore, be given. 38. Ganja not being used in this country, no account of it can be given. 39. No smoking of the kind is practised here, so the question of its injury cannot be discussed. The hemp plant is said to be bitter to the taste. 40. Native doctors prescribe oil of bhang as an ingredient in other medicines, especially for spermatorrh475 47. No. 49. Bhang is used as an aphrodisiac. It is used by prostitutes. It is injurious. Weakens the bladder. 51. The proportion of bad characters connected with crime is not large among habitual moderate consumers. 56. The narcotic effects of bhang are alleviated by the admixture of milk, cardamom and magh ziat. On the other hand, gul gajni parched gram, karanfal and saffron are mixed to excite feelings of sexual intercourse. Ignorant persons mix dha- tura, and serious effects are caused. 57. All that is known has been stated There is no other matter to be dealt with. From questions 58 to 70 nil. 63. Evidence * of SARDAR BAHADUR BHAGWAN SINGH, Sikh, Zamindar, Sohana, Umballa District. 3. Hemp grows naturally in the districts of Hoshiarpur, Umballa, and in the Kalsia State. 6. Wild plants of hemp grow densely as well as in a scattered fashion. 7. Hemp is not cultivated; it is a plant of natural growth. 11. Ganja is not raised from the wild hemp seed, for it is another class of product. 13. As far as I know, the sowing of the hemp plant is not prohibited. 14. Charas and ganja are not prepared in the districts mentioned in answer No. 3. 15. It has been stated above that bhang is not cultivated here. It is merely produced by nature. There is no special manner of its preparation. Generally the plants are cut, put together and dried. The leaves are used when dry. No pre- paration of bhang is used for smoking. The plant is used in three different methods which are as follows :476 19. It is said that ganja and charas are used for smoking only. 20. No special class ; nor is the number of such persons known, but they are to be found in every part of the country. 21. No person is present here who could give information on this point. 22. Foreign (pahari) charas is used here. 23. It is said that some people smoke bhang in the Shahpur district to produce intoxication. 24. Hindus, fakirs and shopkeepers. Muham- madans and fakirs of the same persuasion drink bhang to the value of about 6 pies worth, when a few meet together. One man alone consumes about one pie's worth. 25. Bhang is largely consumed in the district. 26. Kanjars, mirasis and fakirs are habitual ex- cessive consumers. 27. The beggar class use both bhang and charas and the example is followed by their associates. 28. A man accustomed to smoke charas con- sumes about four annas charas daily and bhang about six pies worth when there are several con- sumers assembled. I have had ocular demonstra- tion of this. 29. Not known. Enquiries have been made on this point. 30. Mention has been made at Nos. 24 to 28. The drug is generally used by adults and not by children. 31. The habit of using bhang and charas is easily acquired. Although difficult to break off yet it is not impossible. Moderate habit develops into the excessive. 32. Not practised here. 33. The use of drugs is generally in disrepute. Its use renders a considerable change in the coun- tenance of consumers. They become worthless. Bhang is not worshipped here. 34. The consumers would feel the privation for a short time, because its constant use makes the drug most agreeable to them, and its disconti- nuance would certainly be felt by them, but only temporarily. 35. Could be prohibited if Government wishes it, but then the drugs would be illicitly consumed. The prohibition could be enforced if the bhang is not cultivated. No discontent is likely to arise among the consumers; on the contrary, it would be to their benefit. Nor would any political danger be expected. No one would have recourse to alcoholic stimulants. Even if they did, the proportion would be about 5 to 100. 36 and 37. Not known. 83. Ganja is neither prepared nor used here. 39. Enquiries show that no one here knows anything about it. 40. Native physicians sometimes prescribe bhang with medicines, and it is also used in the treatment of cattle diseases. 41. It is said that bhang increases the appetite, but the consumers cannot endure severe exertion or exposure to cold or heat, nor does it alleviate fatigue or fever. It is not in any way beneficial, but detrimental. There is no class of persons here who use the drug for above purposes. 42. Injurious in its effect. The consumer loses bodily power and becomes unfitted for business. 43. Yes, inoffensive. 44. Its moderate use intoxicates the consumer; for the time he does not feel the harm being done him, but it certainly makes him uneasy after its effects are over. The man becomes hungry. Generally its effect lasts about three pahars (nine hours). The consumer becomes lazy. The want of subsequent gratification certainly causes great uneasiness. 45. Its habitual moderate use makes a serious attack on the physical, mental and moral powers of the consumers. Constitution is impaired, weakness and indigestion follow, appetite is lost altogether, and the man soon finds himself a prey to cough and asthma, politeness to a certain extent neglected, laziness predominates, and the man loses all inclination for sexual desires. Brain is affected, and in most cases insanity is the result. The sufferer becomes talkative and remains so till he uses the drug. Talkativeness and insanity are results of the constant use of the drugs. 46. The excessive use of bhang or charas causes great injury. 47. The habitual moderate use of it does not in any way affect the children of the consumers. 48. There are many persons who use these drugs, but their children are not accustomed to it. 49. Yes, practised as an aphrodisiac; not used by prostitutes for this purpose. The excessive use of hemp produces impotency. 50. Have seen many persons in this state. 51. Nearly all the bad characters are habitual moderate consumers. Their occupation is generally begging. 52. Many such persons live in cities. 53. The excessive use of these drugs does not incite any serious crime, but slight offences or violence do of course occur. Murder impossible. 54. Not used for this purpose. 55. These drugs do not produce complete stupe- faction. 56. The admixture of dhatura causes death. 57. Not practised here. 58. and 59. The present system is working well. 60. Ganja not produced in this district. 61. Charas not produced in this district. 62. Does not require any control, Is cultivated to a very small extent. 63. Do not know the system of wholesale or retail sale vend. 64. None. 65. The duty should be reduced. 66. Nothing is known about ganja or its rates, which is neither produced nor used here. 67. The tax. should be reduced. 68. There are some shops here and the buildings are suitable. 69. These shops were opened after consulting the local community. 70. No smuggling or illegal import or sale of drugs has been observed here. Oral evidence. The paper was written in Urdu at my dictation, and subsequently translated.
477 Question 45.478 51. Bhang does not lead to crime. Ganja and charas consumers are in the habit of gambling. 52. As 51. 53. Excessive indulgence in any of these drugs does not incite to unpremeditated violent crimes. It sometimes incites to petty crimes, such as gam- bling or theft. 54. These drugs are not used by criminals to fortify themselves to commit a premeditated act of violence or other crime. 55. Generally criminals mix dhatura in bhang to further their designs. Complete stupefaction is not induced without admixture of dhatura. 56. As 55. 57. Ganja and charas are used for smoking. Cannot say by experience. State only on report. 58. The system is working well. Scarcely any case of illegal consumption. 59. As 58. 60. Ganja is not produced in these districts. Nothing is known how it is made. 61 and 62. As 60. 63 and 64. No objection. 65. Cannot propose any alteration in the taxa- tion. 66. Have no knowledge how to distinguish the different kinds of ganja, nor can propose any alteration in the rates of taxation. 67. No objection. 68. Shops are established; licenses granted; sales take place according to rules. 69. Have heard that shops are established after the wishes of the people have been consulted. 70. There is no Native State adjoining this district. 66. Evidence of KAZI STAD AHMAD, Zamindar, Peshawar. 1. The information that I am going to give I have obtained from the fakirs and others who use hemp drugs both morning and evening as "nasha." 2. Charas is made from bhang, but not in our country. It is imported here from Yarkand, Kashmir and Kabul. Ganja is neither made nor used by people here. Consequently there is noth- ing known about it. 3. The hemp plant grows spontaneously in abundance at Hashtnagar and Dcaba, the northern part of the Peshawar district. 4. It is known by one name, bhang only, through- out the district, and this name refers to exactly the same plant. 5. Temperature of climate is said to he neces- sary to the growth of the wild hemp. It grows in abundance in climates like Peshawar, Kabul, Kashmir and their neighbouring countries. 6. The wild hemp, as a rule, does not grow densely here. Its growth is scattered. 7. The hemp plant is not cultivated in this district for any use. The wild plant that grows here is used as bhang, and its extract prepared by boiling is mixed up with sugar and called majum, which is used to stupefy children when they are going to be circumcised, and also to produce sleep when it is wanted. 8. There has been no increase or decrease recently, as far as I know, in the growth of the wild bhang. It grows to the same extent now as it did twenty years or so ago. 9. There are no particulars to be given regard- ing its cultivation except that the new plants which come forth grow from the seeds falling from those which have attained their maturity. 10. As there is no cultivation of hemp in this part of the country, so there is no special class of its cultivators. 14. (c) Bhang, which is produced from the wild plant, is prepared at Hashtnagar and Doaba, and brought down by people for sale to the con- tractor, but to what extent it is not known. 16. Bhang is prepared by people in their houses and by fakirs at takias. It can be prepared from the hemp plant wherever grown. 17. The only preparation, majum, made of the hemp drug in this part of the province, is made by the contractor only. 18. The bhang drug deteriorates, it is said, by keeping in damp and cold places. The only measures taken to prevent deterioration are to keep it in warm and dry places. 19. Charas, as far as I have been able to find out, is used only for smoking in our country. 20. Fakirs, as a rule, and a few respectable and well-off persons smoke charas, the former in takias and the latter in their houses. 22. There is no native charas here. The foreign charas used is imported from Yarkand, Kashmir and Kabul. 23. Bhang in its original state is never used here for smoking. 24. The people who drink bhang, as a rule, belong to poor classes. There are very few re- spectable men who use it. They indulge them- selves in wine and spirituous liquors. 25. The use of bhang and charas is neither on the increase nor on the decrease. It is in the same state now as it was twenty years ago. 26. The proportion of the consumers of each of the four classes asked may be ascertained from the contractor. It is not known to us. 27. The people who are in the habit of using the bhang drug belong to low classes, and it is the association with fakirs and visit to public places479 is said to be easily formed, and it is difficult to break off. 82. There is no social or religious custom in regard to the consumption of these drugs among Musalmans. The use of any intoxicating drug is condemned by the Muharamadan law. 88. The consumption of each of these drugs is regarded by Musalmans as unlawful. 84. It would not be a serious privation to con- sumers to forego the consumption of the drug they use. They would feel it hard for a day or so to be deprived of it. 35. I do not think it would he possible to pro- hibit the use of any of these drugs. It would be lessened and practised secretly by imposing re- strictions on them. The prohibition is not likely to occasion any serious discontent, nor would it amount to a political danger. The prohibition is also not likely to be followed by recourse to alco- holic stimulants or other drugs. 86. I do not think that alcohol is now being substituted for any of these drugs, as most of those who use bhang belong to the lowest and poorest part of the community, who cannot afford to substitute alcohol for any of these drugs. 43. Yes; they are inoffensive to their neigh- bours. 44. It does not produce intoxication, but it makes man stupid and dull. 45. It has not come to my personal knowledge or experience that the moderate use of it has caused any physical, mental, or moral evil effects, though cases occasionally come to notice in which the excessive use of it has produced evil effects, princi- pally insanity. 46 to 70. I am, from my own experience, un- able to reply to the remaining questions, nor is there anyone in the district who can do so. 67. Evidence* of SHEIKH RAIZ HUSSAIN, Kuraishi, Zamindar, Multan. 1. I have no personal experience about the use of these drugs, and I have derived my informa- tion from the circumstances of the consumers. 2. Ganja is neither imported into Multan nor consumed here. Charas is imported from Yarkand and from other places is Khurasan 3. Hemp plant grows spontaneously in abund- ance in the Jullundur, Jammu, Rawalpindi, Simla, Amritsar, Kangra, Hoshiarpur, Gurdaspur, and other hilly countries. It also grows wild in native gardens. 4. It is known by the following names :480 proportion of consumers in large towns is 7 per cent., and in villages 2 per cent of the population. 21. Ganja is neither imported nor consumed. 22. Foreign charas imported from Bokhara, Yarkand, Samarkand, Herat, etc., is used here. 23. Bhang is smoked in this country, particu- larly in large towns, by no particular classes. 24. (a) Wealthy persons occasionally eat bhang in the form of majun. (b) Khatries, Brahmans, shopkeepers, gosains, sadhus, fakirs, kanjars, musicians, Pathans, takiadars, qualandars, beggars, acrobats, actors, dancers and Biloches drink it. The proportion in large towns is 18 per cent., and in villages 4 or 5 per cent. 25. Ganja is not consumed. There is a decrease of 10 per cent. in the use of charas and bhang, because the consumers of these drugs have taken to drinking481 drunk for the purposes of intoxication it creates false appetite, and is not digestive in both cases ; (b) it does not give staying-power under severe exertion or exposure or to alleviate fatigue, but, however, if it is grouad in water it has cooling effect ; (c) in unhealthy tracts the use of bhang is considered beneficial ; (d) in any other way it does not appear to be beneficial. There are no special classes who use the drug for any of the above purposes. 42. It is not beneficial, but is injurious as stated in answer to question No. 33. 43. No. 44. The immediate effect of its use is paleness and laziness. It is not refreshing. It does not make the consumer insensible, nor does it allay hunger. Its intoxication creates appetite. Its effect lasts for three hours, and its after-effects are fatigue and forgetfulness, and the want of subse- quent gratification produces uneasiness and long- ing for a further dose. 45. The use of these drugs produces noxious physical and mental effects. It injures the digestion and causes loss of appetite, and the con- sumer has no tendency for food until he uses the drugs. The excessive or moderate use of charas causes bronchitis and asthma. The excessive or moderate use of bhang causes indigestion and dysentery. It greatly impairs the moral sense and induces habits of immorality and laziness. It also induces habits of debauchery. It also produces insanity by excessive use; this insanity is not of a permanent nature, but of the kind of melancholia, because by giving up the use of these drugs and by skilful treatment the consumer recovers. Consumers who become insane by the use of these drugs are not violent, but only talk nonsense. Those people who by the use of these drugs become subject to mental anxiety or brain diseases still use these drugs, but other people who suffer from the said diseases have no longing for the use of the drugs in order to obtain relief. 46. By the excessive use of these drags the symptoms mentioned above appear much earlier than by moderate use. 47. It is not an hereditary habit, but is only formed by the company (of consumers). The children are, however, weak and degenerated. 48. As the effect of these intoxicants is extreme- ly arid and cooling, the offspring of the con- sumer is always weak, because the sexual power is affected. 49. At first the moderate use of bhang and charas is practised as an aphrodisiac, but gradu- ally it develops into the excessive habit and tends to produce impotence. Prostitutes also use the drugs for this purpose, and they prove very inju- rious, because these drugs dry the blood and tend to produce impotence, and by their use the con- sumers practically become impotent, more so by the use of charas. 50. Please see answer to question No. 49. The only difference is that the excessive use makes the consumer impotent much earlier than the mode- rate use. 51. Some bad characters commit crimes by means of these drugs, generally offences under sections 377 and 379 of the Indian Penal Code, and in some instances the criminals stupefy their victims by administering these drugs in further- ance of their criminal designs. 52. Crimes are committed by inducing the excessive use of these drugs, and by means of these serious and minor offences are committed. 53. Certainly indulgence in charas incites to unpremeditated crimes, violent or otherwise, but I can give no instances. 54. No ; on the contrary, their use depresses the spirits. 55. Yes. 56. Bhang proves less injurious, if ingredients, such as aniseed and musk-melon seeds, be mixed with it ; and moderate cousumers often mix these ingredients ; but in the excessive use such admix- tures are of no use. The admixture of dhatura increases intoxication, and, moreover, effects com- plete stupefaction, the consequences of which are very injurious as stated in answer to question No. 45. 57. Charas is only smoked, and its effects are injurious as stated in answer to question No. 45, etc. Oral evidence. Question 1.482 68. Evidence* of KAURA KHAN, Khan Bahadur, Zaildar, Jatoi, Muzaffargarh District. 1. As I am a great zamindar of Muzaffargarh and Dera Ghazi Khan districts, and hemp plant being cultivated and its produce being used in both the districts, and especially and zemindars and zaildars have connection with cultivators and drug contrac- tors, and with such men who use the drugs, I write this evidence from my experience. As ganja is neither produced nor used in this district, my answer will be with regard to bhang and charas only. 2. I concur with the opinion expressed in this question. with regard to the products of the hemp plant and the different varieties of ganja prepared from the plant. Although charas is not prepared in this district, yet I know the way in which it is prepared. Bhang is known in this district by the following names:483 Bhang.484 of course do this much, that sometimes they steal away hemp plants from the fields of the cultivators. 52. The excessive use of these drugs makes the consumers very cowardly and flattering-. 53. When, from excessive indulgence of these drugs, one becomes insane and cannot control his senses, he may commit unpremeditated crime, violent or otherwise. He may commit petty crimes often. As, for instance, the person mentioned in answer No. 46 has been several times convicted of assaulting men, but he has not done away with his habit ; in fact, his habit is every day increasing, and if he continues, he will be sent to a lunatic asylum. 54. Charas and bhang are not used for this purpose. 55. It is quite possible that the criminals may- be using these drugs to stupefy their victims ; but such an instance has not been heard by me. The drugs can be mixed in flour. 56. (a) The admixture of bhang with dhatura, when moderately taken, is only more intoxicating. (b) The excessive use of the above admixture produces brutal thoughts and dryness of throat, and this kind of use is the worst of all. 57. Ganja and charas arc used in English medi- cines. Native hakims very seldom use them. Ganja is not all used by the native hakims, while charas they use often in several diseases. 58. In my opinion it would not be improper if the use of these drugs are prohibited, and the best way of doing this is that the acreage duty bo levied, on the cultivation of the hemp plant as that levied on poppy cultivation and be carefully supervised. 59. The cultivated area of bhang may be ascer- tained and acreage duty levied thereon. The officers should be required to inspect the fields, in short, the rules regarding poppy cultivation be extended to the bhang cultivation also. 60. Nothing can be said about ganja, as it is not prepared in this district. 61. Charas also is not prepared in this district. 62. Bhang cultivation should be supervised the | same way as the poppy cultivation. This is not a difficult task, and can be accomplished through the tahsil officials. 63. The present system really requires modf- fication, inasmuch as it does not bind the consumers to take their supplies always from licensees. It should be binding on the public, that they should get their supplies from the licensees and should not store them in their houses. 64. The import of these drugs from other dis- tricts should be carefully supervised. 65. Ganja and charas are not prepared in this district, and duty may be levied on the cultivation of bhang as on the poppy crops. 66. I cannot say anything with regard to this. 67. I cannot propose anything for ganja and charas ; but some duty should be levied on the cultivation of bhang. 68. In large towns there are shops for the vend of bhang and charas from which the public get their supplies, while the zamindars secretly get them for their use. 69. The shops are opened according to the popu- lation of the town and number of consumers. The wishes of the people are not consulted. 70. When supervision is not fully made, it is quite possible that smuggling of hemp drug's is carried on. Oral evidence. Question 1.485 drinking bhang. I attribute all the madness in their family to bhang. Question 53.486 51. Yes, most professional bad characters use these drugs. 52. Yes. As No. 51. Rape, unnatural crime, deeds of violence. 53. The ganja smoker lives in the border land of homicidal mania. Numerous cases. See also cri- minal records. See also "Revelations of an Orderly " written by a country-born Magistrate of great experience (Benares, Medical Hall Press, republished 1866). This book was described by an inexperienced European Magistrate, some 30 years ago, as a gross exaggeration, but it is below, not above reality. 54. Yes. Often in cases of dacoity, rape, etc. 55. Yes. I remember a case where complete stupefaction, prior to robbery, was brought about by bhang alone. 56. Not modified, but increased by the admix- ture of dhatura. 57. Did not know that ganja and charas were ever drunk ; may be. 58. My acquaintance is ancient; I can now only note results. There appears to be now practically no difficulty in obtaining these drugs. 59. As already stated, the only cure is destruc- tion. Revenue must be sacrificed. Economy in numerous other ways will supply deficit, 62. Control easy. Forbid cultivation. To be consistent, forbid opium cultivation. 63. Yes; to both (a) and (b). The sufficient objection is they are not necessary to human life. 64. Yes. Prohibit exports and imports. 69. Local public opinion ought to considered most distinctly. I have known cases where brothels were objected to, and mahzarnamas (roundrobins) presented, showing that the people are naturally respectable, and averse to the disorder which such places produce. They should have, as far as I know, they do not have " local option." If the employes of the State showed clearly that the removal of such places was proper, respectable natives would come forward readily enough. At present they are afraid, and suffer in silence, just as they suffer the exactions of fakirs, whose filthy ways of extorting money will not bear description. The State has but to be boldly despotic to earn the lasting gratitude of the well-disposed. It has but to crush out evil practices to strengthen its rule; it will suffer by fostering evils ; it will never suffer by fostering good. The use of hemp drugs belong to the former class. Abuse of Cannabis indica; B. P. Cannabis sativa; Linn. Cannabis indica, Cashmereana (Honigberger487 been used for stupefaction instead of dhatura. I refer the Commission to the criminal records and asylum reports for facts which established the evil effects of the drugs both as regards health and crime. After so many years what remains on one's mind is general impression. Question 49.488 73. Evidence of BABA KIRPA SINGH, Manager, Charitable Institution, Sialkot. Oral evidence. I am Manager of the Charitable Institution kept by the late Baba Vir Singh, about 3 miles from Athari. Sir Donald McLeod gave an order, continuing a privilege accorded in Sikh times, for one boat- load of bhang to be taken annually to the dharam- sa'a without interference. It is brought down an- nually from the Shakargarh tahsil of the Gurdas- pur district by the Manager himself in the month of May or June. At that time of the year the plant can be taken off the fields without trouble, for the crops have been removed. The bhang plant is also ripe at that time of the year. If it is cut too young it has no "nasha" and it rots in the boat. The plant is brought down with the seed on it, but the seed is removed when the leaves are pre- pared for use. The seeds are useless, as they have no intoxicating property. Where we gather bhang, the plant does not bear a flowering head resembling ganja. Nothing is paid to the zamindars, who are glad to let us have the bhang, and consider it an honour to supply us. On the contrary, they feed us when we go to collect the bhang. The bhang is used by the sadhus belonging to the institution, and is distributed to the lepers, and the maimed, and halt and blind who arc supported by the institution. Two or three sadhus are told off to pound the bhang and prepare it. The drug is not measured out. It is consumed very freely. I myself have a masha of bhang pounded up for me twice a day. The others consume much more than I do, for Babu Vir Singh told me to take very little. The poor people are very much benefited by it. I have never known any one injured by it. It is supposed to be good for leprosy in drying up the discharge. About 200 men, i.e., all the people in the Gurdwara, drink every day. The boat-load is sufficient for all the wants of the dharamsala. There are no women in the dharamsala, and we never give it to women. Charas is not used at all, as it is forbidden to the Sikhs to smoke. 74. Evidence of BABU P. C. CHATTERJEE, Head Master, Church Mission School, Majitha, District Amritsar. 1. I have had long and familar conversation with consumers of hemp drugs of all sorts. I have observed with sorrow their miserable circumstance, and the patient suffering of their family. I have had many interesting discussions on the sub- ject with experienced medical men. I have im- parted instruction to the children of many hemp drug consumers. 3. Almost in all the districts of the Punjab hemp drugs grow spontaneously. It is abundant in Hoshiarpur. Cannabis sativa of Ambuta in Hoshiarpur, and that of Jermia in Gurdaspur are remarkable for their intoxicating power. 4. It is known by the names of bhang, buti, sabzi, bijia, and sukha. All these names refer to the same plant. 5. River and canal banks, and other shady and moist places seem to be favourable for the growth of the hemp plants. 6. Dense. 7. Yes. In Multan and Jhang districts hemp plant is cultivated for use as bhang in small quan- tities. 8. There has been a decrease in the area, as the use of bhang among Sikh Sardars and other influ- ential and well-to-do men is at a discount now. 9. The seeds are sown in a small plot of ground which serves as a nursery. The plants, when grown to a certain height, are transplanted. 10. Fakirs, men in charge of dharmsalas, and some bhang-drinking zamindars, cultivate hemp drugs for personal use, as well as for distribution among friends. 11. Bhang is boiled or warmed on fire. Some put hot copper in bhang to make it more intoxicat- ing 16. Yes. 17. Cultivators sell bhang, but some people pro- duce bhang for their own use. 18. Charas deteriorates after a year. In four years it altogether loses its effects. Heat chiefly deteriorates charas. It should be kept in a cool place. Bhang does not deteriorate. The older it is, the better. 19. Charas and ganja are only smoked here. I have not seen or heard of their being put to any other use. 20. Ganja is smoked in Bengal and North- Western Provinces by low class and illiterate people, and fakirs of all kinds. Punjabis rarely smoke ganja, but charas is smoked by Brahmins, mirasis, and both Hindu and Muhammadan fakirs. I do not think there is much difference in the pro- portion of ganja and charas smokers. Charas and ganja are generally smoked by the people of cities and towns, and rarely by villagers. 22. Foreign. Generally imported from Yarkand and Ladakh. 24. Nehangs and other Sikhs, who live in dharmsalas, Muhammadan and Hindu fakirs, mirasis, and some Brahmins, who live on alms, generally drink bhang. Some people, specially of Multan district, eat majum489 support. Want of knowledge, want of healthy occupation, in some cases disappointment, grief and remorse, lead their victims to excessive use of these drug's. Habitual consumers of all these drugs are taken from ignorant, lazy, and beggarly classes of people. It is difficult to specify the moderate con- sumers. Some fakirs drink bhang to immerse in the devotion of God. 28. Habitual moderate consumers of all these drugs use about ¼ rupee worth of charas, which cost about half an anna a day. Bhang is very cheap, consumed in the same proportion as above, costing less than a pice. Habitual excessive con- sumers smoke ½ rupee worth of charas, costing an anna per day, and a pice worth of bhang. 29. Dhatura is not mixed with it by consumers. Seeds of cucumber, pumpkin, pepper, melon, milk, almonds, sugar, aniseeds, poppy seeds, are mixed with bhang, which people drink. Tobacco is gener- ally used with charas and ganja for smoking. 30. Generally used in company. Fakirnis, poor old prostitutes, merasans, who live in company of such men who are addicted to these drugs, use them also. Children generally abstain from these drugs. Very few of them might sometimes drink bhang, or eat a piece of majun. Young men use them, when they, for some reason, leave their house and mix in bad company. Rich men, when reduced to poverty and unable to procure liquor, take to these drugs. 31. The habit is not easily formed. It is not difficult to break off. There is a tendency to indulge to excessive use of these drugs from moderate con- sumption; because the intellect and self-respect of the moderate consumers gradually become weaker and weaker, and then at last they consume drugs in large quantities. Small quantities do not give them pleasure as at first. 32. There is a religious custom in Bengal to drink bhang in large or small quantities, according to the taste of consumers, on the last day of the Durga Puja, after the idol is thrown into the river. This custom is not essential. It is generally tem- perate. It does not generally lead to the formation of habits, neither is it very injurious. Shiva, the third personage of Hindu trinity, but who, I think, was a celebrated physician, is represented to have been the greatest smoker of ganja and drinker of bhang. So the Shaivas or the worshippers of Shiva use these drugs in imita- tion of their object of worship on Shivratri. 33. Smoking of ganja and charas is looked upon as disreputable, but moderate use of bhang is not so looked upon. Because those who smoke charas and ganja, or drink bhang in large quantities, spend their time idly. They become unfit for work. They leave good society and generally become crazy and bad tempered. They become useless members of society, generally selfish, careless of the comfort of their families. In fact they become dead to all useful purposes. Consumers worship it when they drink bhang. Siddhi or bhang is supposed to lead to success in every work, if it is carried in one's dress or a tilak is put on the forehead. 84. There will be some privation for a few days, especially for fakirs, etc., who live solitary life, and have little or no occupation. One per cent. smoke charas. Two per cent. drink bhang. Ganja is not smoked here. 35. Yes; charas and ganja can easily be prohi- bited. There is likelihood of bhang being con- sumed illicitly, as it grows wild in many places. By closing the shops, and punishing smugglers, Yes, but it will not produce any political dangers, as bhangis and charasis are lazy and useless people, have little or no status in society. Prohibition of bhang will produce discontentment among the Akalias and few other people of insignificant posi- tion. The prohibition may be followed by recourse to opium. 36. No; drunkards may take to bhang, etc., 37. The effect of charas is instantaneous, but does not last long; that of ganja is slower, but more lasting. 39. Ganja and charas-smoking is less injurious than eating or drinking them. For in smoking these drugs, less quantity is imbibed than in eating and drinking them, and in a most refined form. Bhang-drinking is the least injurious of all these hemp drugs, specially when it is mixed with milk, pepper, etc. 40. Hindi and some Unani hakims rarely pre- scribe bhang in piles, malaria, fever, convulsion, and dysentery. Bhang is also given to cattle, when they do not eat fodder. It is also used as a sopori- fic. 41. People generally consume hemp preparations for pleasure, and hardly for medicinal purposes. 42. The use of hemp drugs is neither beneficial nor harmless, even in moderate quantities. There is great danger of moderate consumers being excess- ive consumers, and thus of being useless members of society. They deaden and weaken nervous powers, and also intellect. 43. Generally inoffensive. 44. All these drugs produce a kind of pleasure, by satisfying the craving which the habitual consum- ers feel for them. They strengthen for the time being the nervous system which was unstrung. Bhang creates a false appetite, and generally leads the consumers to intemperance in eating, and con- sequently to indigestion and other diseases. Effects of ganja and charas last for three or four hours ; but that of bhang for 12 hours. All narcotics produce after-effects, both bodily and mental. Hemp drugs make people indolent and lazy. There is after-effect. Charas and ganja produce immedi- ate intoxication. People who depend for food upon the alms of others, generally smoke ganja and charas. 45. Yes, it produces laziness of body, inattention and carelessness to all worldly affairs. Disregard to shame and self-respect. Smoking of charas and ganja even in moderate quantities ruins constitu- tion. 47. The consumption of hemp drugs does not seem to be a hereditary habit. Children of many such people altogether abstain from consuming hemp drugs. Of course the example is demoraliz- ing. I think that even a moderate use of hemp drugs affects the bodily and mental faculties of their children to some extent. 48. Habitual excessive use of these drugs affects the children both bodily and mentally. Besides such parents being useless, people do not take care of their children, and allow them to go on accord- ing to their own wishes. Children of such parents do not obey, love or fear their parents, which become the cause of their own ruin also. They are weak in body and intellect. 49. Yes; because under the influence of the drugs, people can cohabit for a longer time than in normal state. Yes, it is used by prostitutes for the same reason. Persons, who use hemp drugs for such a purpose, generally indulge in excessive vol. v. 3 U
490 cohabitation under the influence of them, and conse- quently exhaust themselves. It does tend to pro- duce impotence. It dries the spermagenitale. 50. If the moderate use ultimately produces such a disastrous effect, excessive use cannot but do so much more effectually and in much less time. People who use those drugs excessively cohabit longer than those who use them moderately, and exhaust themselves much sooner; and sometimes there is no discharge of semen at all. The excessive use of these drugs dries the semen, and all vitality in a very short time. 51. Almost all bad characters use hemp drugs to deaden the feelings of shame, humanity and fear Criminals in the eve of committing crimes, generally use these drugs in moderate quantities. Murder, burglary, theft, rape, and other crimes are seldom committed without the use of these drugs in moderate quantities, and also to drown their remorse. 52. Those who use these drugs in excessive quan- tities become helpless creatures, and even unfit for any daring crime. They may commit petty theft, when in want of funds to procure these drugs or food. They also quarrel with their neighbours or trouble their families. 54. Yes, always. 55. Yes; experienced people generally take their own tobacco, so that there may not be any chance of any of these drugs being mixed in the tobacco. Yes, complete stupefaction is possible by pure drugs in the case of those who never used them before. Dhatura is often mixed for such purposes. 56. Bhang drunk, mixed with black pepper, milk, sugar, sweet almonds, is less injurious. Bhang mixed with dhatura produces complete stupefaction; the victim will be dumb, and unable to walk. It is not mixed for personal use, but for others with a view to rob them. 62. Should be controlled. People who produce bhang use it themselves, and give it to others gratis. If this practice is prohibited, it may do great good. Those who give or sell bhang to others without a license should be punished. 65. Taxation on all these drugs ought to be ten- fold increased, because cheapness of these drugs is one of the principal causes of their consumption. 67. Yes, it ought to be increased. 68. Shops or houses, where these drugs, and specially their preparations, are sold and consumed in the premises, are the hot beds of crimes. People who frequent such places lose all self-respect, all comeliness of appearance, and all moral sense. They are dead to all useful purposes of life, and simply lead useless existence. If such houses can be stop- ped, half the crimes will disappear. Number of lunatics will greatly decrease. In fact such an act will confer a great boon to the society. 69. People are not consulted. Yes, ought to be. 70. Yes, there is, and it should be stopped. People generally smuggle these drugs from Native States. Oral evidence. Question 1.491 There is an English maxim, " Touch not, taste not, eat not, drink not, that intoxicates the bruin." This maxim of a negative character does not mean except that anything almost all intoxicants are generally harmful to the consumer. A glance at the condition of the people of India can suffi- ciently prove what effect the excessive use of these drugs have produced on the people of India. The following is a translation of a Sanskrit Sloka on bhang :492 Cannot say anything about the wild plant. Bhang is reduced to pulp in a pestle with one or more of the following ingredients: almonds, aniseed, cucumber or pumpkin seeds, black pepper, salt, and sugar; and drunk mixed with water or milk. Sometimes pills or balls are made of bhang paste and used for the purpose of intoxication, or for medicinal purposes in cases of diarrhoea or indi- gestion. I have heard of its being given to cattle in this form. 16. (a) Yes, I believe so. (b) I should think so. (c) I cannot say. 17. No special class so far as I know. 18. I believe they deteriorate after two or three years. Cannot answer the rest of this ques- tion. Bhang is said to improve in medicinal qualities as it grows old, but to lose its powers as an intoxicant. 19. Only for smoking, as far as I know. I know not their other uses 20. The use of ganja is comparatively rare in this province, being generally confined to fakirs and sadhus and the lower classes of Hindustani immigrants. Charas is more largely used by the people of the Punjab. Ordinarily both drugs are smoked in smoking shops, but often in private houses also. I cannot tell the respective propor- tions of the people who use charas and ganja. 21. I do not know. 22. Foreign, from Kashmir, Ladakh and Yar- kand, the two latter being more highly esteemed. 23. I have never heard of this. 24. All classes use bhang : Sikhs and religious orders more largely than others. I cannot tell the proportion. 25. I think the use is nearly stationary, with a tendency to decrease among the middle classes. I attribute this to the spread of English education and ideas. English-knowing people are apt to look down upon the use of hemp drugs or intoxi- cants, and prefer to use liquor. 26. 1 cannot say, 27. Mostly mendicants, fakirs, and takiadars, and some well to-do people who have nothing to do. Idle and dissipated habits lead to this prac- tice, particularly among people who have squan- dered their money in profligacy and care no longer to use the costlier alcoholic drinks. 28. I cannot say. 29. For ingredients mixed with bhang, see answer to question 15. They are used to improve the taste of the drink ; and sugar and milk are said to increase its intoxicating powers. I have heard that dhatura seed is mixed with bhang by some people, but cannot say if the report is true. The object, of course, would be to increase the intoxication. Bhang massala called sardai is sold in most cities of the Punjab, notably Amritsar. 30. In takias, dharmsalas, and religious houses, and on some religious occasions in company. Many, however, use them in solitude. I cannot tell the proportion between two classes of people. The use of ganja and charas is extremely rare among women, and of bhang very much less than among men. It is not usual to give bhang to children, except as a preventive against bowel complaints. So far as I know, they are not allowed to use ganja or charas. 31. Not very easily, I am informed, as the first use of these drugs is followed by distressing symp- toms. Once formed the habit is doubtless diffi- cult to break off, but I believe less so than the opium habit. I have known persons who have given up the use of ganja and charas without much difficulty. The habit has a tendency to grow, especially that of using bhang. 32. Bhang is drunk during the days of the Holi festival, and occasionally on days of religious fast in this part of India among Hindus. In Bengal it is drank on the last day of the Durga Puja, and invariably offered to every guest or visitor on that occasion. I believe the use is not absolutely essential, and is grounded more on custom than religion. Generally the use is moderate and temperate on such occasions, but dissipated young men and ill-conditional people make use of them to get drunk. The use of the drug on such occasions sometimes leads to the habit of regularly taking it. So far as I know, the use of ganja or charas is not customary fur any social or religious function. 33. Public opinion regards the use of ganja and charas with disfavour, Habitual consumers of these drugs are considered disreputable, and for this reason respectable people who have contracted the habit of smoking them do so in private. Bhang is not generally so regarded, but a habit- ual bhang drunkard is looked down upon. Broad- ly speaking, I think the habitual use of hemp drugs is considered more reprehensible than that of opium. I do not know about the worship of the hemp plant. Bhang or siddhi is considered by some as sacred to Mahadeo or Siva, the third divinity of the Hindu triad. It is also regarded as of good omen, and orthodox Hindus smell or taste it, and carry it with them when starting on a journey. 34. I can scarcely give a confident opinion. I should think, in the case of consumers of bhang which has certain medicinal effects on the system, it might be a privation to forego its use. They might suffer from loss of appetite and bowel com- plaints if the use was suddenly stopped. But I am not equally clear about smokers of ganja or charas, though probably, even in their case, the sudden stoppage of the habit would cause some inconvenience. They are, however, a comparatively small class in this province. I cannot state the probable number of each class. 35. I doubt very much whether it would be feasible. I should think it would be consumed illicitly. It would produce some discontent, but I cannot say whether it would amount to a poli- tical danger. I should deprecate sudden interfer- ence, with the consumers of bhang at any rate. Unquestionably liquor-drinking would increase, which would be a much greater evil in my opinion. 36. Yes, it is considered more fashionable, par- ticularly among the English-educated classes. 37. So far as I am able to judge, the effects are similar, but those of gauja-smoking are of a more intense and aggravated character. 38. I do not know. 39. I have no knowledge, but I believe smoking is on the whole more injurious. 40. I have already described the use of bhang in bowel complaints. It is also, I believe, given to horses and cattle. I am unable to say whether ganja or charas are prescribed for any disease by native physicians. 41. Bhang has an effect in uromoting appetite
493 and improving digestion at times. Ganja and charas are supposed to give staying-power under severe exertion, and to enable the smoker to bear up against exposure to heat and cold. I am not aware of any other beneficial effects from the use of these drugs. My remarks about bhang apply equally to habitual consumers, and to those who use it occasionally for medicinal purposes. I do not know if ganja or charas is ever smoked in order to give staying-power or to ward off the effects of exposure. I should think not. In speaking of their effects, I refer to habitual con- sumers only. 42. I have already described the benefits to the best of my knowledge. The moderate use of bhang may possibly be harmless, but ganja and charas smoking is on the whole always injurious. 43. I think so. 44. I cannot say. 45. (b) Ganja and charas are apt to produce leanness and weakness of body. (c) I am not sure. Probably not. (d) Ganja and charas smoking dors. Not bhang, so far as I know. (e) Yes, to a certain extent. (f) I believe they do. Ganja and charas, if excessively used, is apt to lead to insanity. 47. I cannot say, except as to the effect of ex- ample. A father who habitually indulges in these drugs is likely to have his practice imitated by his sons. 49. I have heard bhang is sometimes drunk for this purpose, but the effect of all these drugs is believed to be injurious in this respect in the end. 51. I think so; but the use of these drugs has no necessary connection with crime. These forms of intoxication are resorted to, as they are com- paratively cheap, by habitual criminals and bad characters, who are generally poor. They are more properly the effects rather than the cause's of habits of crime. But in so far as they deaden the sensibilities of the mind and enable the criminal to bear up against exposure and fatigue, they may be said to help crime. 53. Occasionally ganja and to a lesser extent charas-smoking is said to induce a surly habit of mind. 54. Sometimes, to deaden their sensibilities and to produce a reckless frame of mind. 55. Bhang is sometimes used for this purpose. Not ganja or charas. I have come across cases of this kind in the course of my practice. Bhang may produce complete stupefaction. 56. Milk and sugar are said to increase the in- toxicafmg power of bhang; pepper gives flavour; while salt, cucumber and pumpkin seeds, almonds, etc., are supposed to have a cooling effect. 57. 1 have never come across a person who in- dulges in this habit. 62. Hemp is little cultivated in this province, but in my opinion its cultivation should be regu- lated and controlled in the same manner as that of poppy. 69. I believe they are not consulted, but think they should always be. 77. Evidence* of LALA GANESH DASS, Pleader, and President, Sarin Sabha, Hoshiarpur. Charas, ganja and majun are prepaid from bhang (hemp plant). Charas is imported from Yarkand, and is not manufactured in Hoshiar- pur, nor is ganja manufactured in this province. Majun is prepared in the Punjab by boiling bhang in water and ghi, and the juice extracted from it is then mixed with sugar and made into majun. It is prepared to a small extent, and some people use it in winter or on the occasion of the Holi or other festival, but they are not habitual consumers. Bhang is not cultivated in this province, but grows spontaneously to a small extent in the plains and in abundance in the hills. There is hardly any village in this district, round the fields of which there are no wild hemp plants. Bhang is exported from Hoshiarpur to Ludhiana, Feroze- pore, Maler Kotla, and other districts. Bhang is not cultivated here. A large trade in charas is carried on in the Hoshiarpur city; that is, charas worth about two lakhs of rupees is yearly imported here from Yar- kand, and the excise contractors of the Punjab and North-Western Provinces carry it to those provinces for sale. The local traders of this place also export it to other districts on their own ac- count. The dealers of this district carry merchan- dise of sorts to Ladakh and Yarkand and bring charas in exchange for it. The use of these drugs is physically and mor- ally injurious, particularly the use of charas, the effects of which are extremely bad. The consum- ers of the latter drug become weak, emaciated, melancholy, insane, impotent, lazy, etc., and also suffer from phthisis, bronchitis, asthma and affec- tion of the brain, etc. Most of the consumers of charas become incapacitated for work and lead a miserable life. There is a Punjabi proverb that. " charas says that494 have recourse to other intoxicants, because the in- toxication of charas is not like opium and other intoxicants which are indulged at a fixed time. There is no regular fixed time for smoking charas as it may be smoked once only or oftener during the day. Charas-smoking fakirs are esteemed only by the consumers of the drug, and non-consumers show them no respect, but on the contrary avoid their company. It has been seen that family-men contract the habit of charas-smoking by the company of fakirs. The greatest loss to this country is that traders of Hoshiarpur and Amritsar who take to Ladakh and Yarkand merchandise worth lakhs of rupees bring charas instead, which spreads insanity and other diseases in this country. In the opinion of this Association the sale of charas should be strictly prohibited, as there would be very little financial loss by it. Bhang is less injurious, and is often religiously used at Gurdawaras, and is also used by zamin- dars in the treatment of cattle. As it grows wild, the subordinate Government officials will have many chances of harassing the subjects, if prohibition is enforced ; and therefore bhang should not be prohibited. I, Ganesh Das, Vakil, Chief Court, will appear as a witness before the Commission on behalf of the Sarin Sabha. Oral evidence. Question 1.495 26. Among the consumers of bhang496 49. The use of bhang to some extent, and that of charas to a much greater extent, have just the contrary effect. 51 to 54. There is no essential connection be- tween the use of these drugs and criminal habits. If a bad character is addicted to bhang-drinking or charas-smoking, he would indulge in his habit at the fixed time; but the consumption of none of these drugs gives any particular fortification to one about to commit a crime. If anything, the use of these drugs renders the consumers timid, and would rather prevent one about to commit crime from perpetrating it. 55. Criminals are reported to induce their victims to drink bhang mixed with dhatura, which immediately brings about stupefaction. Bhang alone will not induce complete stupefac- tion ; but charas and ganja may. 56. A very moderate mixture of dhatura only intensifies the intoxicating power of the bhang, and is frequently resorted to by excessive consum- ers of bhang; but the admixture is decidedly harmful when administered to one not addicted to excessive consumption of bhang. 58. The present system works perfectly well so far as bhang is concerned. Improvements may be made so far as charas and particularly ganja are concerned, with a view to check any increase of the habit of smoking them. 62. No; cultivation should not be controlled. It would not be feasible. 65. The taxation of bhang is perfectly reason able in both respects; for it is as much a necessary of life to millions of people as tobacco. If the Sikhs and other non-consumers of tobacco were to agitate for the removal of the present tax on bhang, they would make out a very strong case. 68. Not many such. The existence of such houses or shops is not commendable, as it is a source of temptation to lookers-on. 69. The wishes of the people are not consulted in such cases as a rule. Local public opinion ought to be consulted before such temptations are placed before them. 80. Evidence of ARYA SAMAJ, Dera Ismail Khan. Copy of the Proceedings No. 113 of the Meeting of the Antring Sabha of the Arya Samaj of Dera Ismail Khan, dated 31st October 1893. The extract relating to the Hemp Drugs Com- mission was laid before the Executive Committee of the Arya Samaj, Dera Ismail Khan, held on the 31st October 1893, and the following resolutions were unanimously carried out:497 bhang by rubbing it with the palms of the hand, and then mixed with tobacco and is smoked in the pipe; hence the prohibition or further restric- tion to its preparation and sale is unnecessary, nay even impossible. Charas.498 25. Use of bhang and charas is on the increase. Reasons of the increase are499 83. Evidence of DEVI DAYAL, Editor of " Kaistha Mitra" Lahore. Bhang grows spontaneously. It grows in ex- cessive quantities in damp and inundated ground. In the Punjab it is generally called bhang, sabzi, buti, and bijya, and mostly in places thandai and sardai. Those who drink it daily as a practice and those who have become addicted to it, are called ' bhanger.' This word (bhanger) implies that the man (addicted to it) possesses low manners and practices; that he cannot be trusted. The state of his person shows that no such work can be en- trusted to him, in which an exercise of spirit and strength are necessary. The use of this article in large quantities is generally found among such people as either asso- ciate with bad people, or in the beginning associated with bad men. The different classes of people who are alleged to have renounced the world, such as the jogis, jangams, sanyasis, udasis, kanphatas, suthras, and sadhus, and such like rovers, as also the worthless illiterates, use bhang largely. For instance, the priests attached to the shivalayas and temples, the mahants of the different sects of world- ly-forsaken people, their disciples, and especially those who associate with people, as well as the Chaubes of Muthra, are reputed bhang-drinkers. The Chaubes have this saying among themselves : " O Jumna mother ! Why did you not flow of bhang (instead of water) ?" The illiterate shop- keepers and the menials, such as chaprasis, police constables, chowkidars and cooks are also in the habit of using it. The seats occupied by sadhus and fakirs, banks of tanks, gardens, thakurdwaras, shivalayas, and such like places, form rendezvous for bkang-drinking, and to these places people who have contracted this habit resort at appointed times; and when bhang is ground and prepared it is distributed to all those present according to the quantity each is in the habit of taking. They con- tribute something monthly or on special occasions towards the expenses, each according to his means. Bhang is ground on grinding stones or in stone cups specially made for this purpose. A smaller number of people who drink bhang are shopkeepers, regimental sepoys (specially the Pur- abias), jewellers, goldsmiths, cloth-sellers, and clerks, who know Hindi and Persian. Amongst the Hindus, there are a few persons only who refuse to take it if they get it ready and as a chance or merry-making drink, excepting those who are strictly forbidden, or who loath it having tasted it once previously. But in the hot season it is much in use; and most of those who do not drink it, drink it at that season. There are several stages of its preparation. This depends upon the social positions of the drinkers. Those who are poor content themselves by mixing black pepper and cucumber, musk-melon and water-melon seeds with it, when grinding ; and, if they can afford, they have some sugar, etc., or else they take it in its insipid state. Rich people, or who take it as a chance or merry-making drink, take pains for its preparation. In addition to mixing the ingre- dients required for its composition, they mix some rose water or keora water (Pandanus oderatissimus) with a view to make it sweet-scented, and put milk, sugar, etc., and thereby make it tasteful. This kind of preparation is called dudhia or motia- jhar. In the different districts this preparation is called by different names like the above. As in the Persian language liquor has many high-sound- ing and deceptive names, bhang has similarly such names, such as wark-ul-khayal (imagination-creat- ing leaf) and wark-unnishat (pleasure-giving leaf). It is possible that the Hindustani-speaking people may not know the meanings of these words, for they are not Persian equivalents of bhang; they are rather artificial names. It is taken in various ways. Some take it after grinding and straining it. Long as you grind it, the better result you produce. The thicker the better. Similarly, ' garhi chhanna' is the idiom in Urdu, which literally means to prepare a thick bhang. Some peeple, in order to avoid the trouble of preparing it, clean the dry bhang, and, having washed it, keep it in a shadowy place till it is dry. Then, putting the bhang on the palm of their hands, they rub the same with the other palm and chuck it into the mouth like powder. If they get sugar and spices, they mix them with the dry bhang, and, putting it into the mouth, take a gulp of water. As the winter ap- proaches, people lessen the use of bhang, because, as they say, drinking bhang in winter causes rheuma- tism. At the close of the winter, only such people drink bhang as have become addicted to it. But in the winter season people make use of bhang often in the other form, that is, they make majum (cakes of sugar with bhang in them) of it. When travel- ling by railway it is much in use. In the excise contractors' shop majum is largely sold in these days. There is another reason for it. Those who cannot afford to prepare majum at home, they go and buy from the contractors. The correspondent himself has heard majum-eaters say : " The contractor, for the sake of making a good earning, takes on his own shoulders our murder and gives us poison" (i.e., the contractor takes the risk of their being killed and gives them poison500 amusement and making jests and jokes ; as, for example mixing the majun with sweet, or saying that a new sweet of pleasant taste has been pre- pared, they cause the people to take it, and after- wards, when the person who took it gets intoxicated and begins to talk foolishly, the friends treat him as an object of amusement and make a fool of him. In the North-Western Provinces and in such parts of the Punjab as are between Delhi and Umballa, the custom has been experienced that, on the occasions of marriages, etc., in order to make fools of the people of the bridegroom's party, bhang mixed with pithi (ground dal) is put in kachauris, and, when they eat such kachauris, they get intoxicated, but they feel sorry on account of their carelessness and folly. In the Punjab the bhang of Abnota (name of a place) is generally much liked ; consequently there is a saying : " He who drinks the bhang of Abnota forgets his arse cloth (called ' angota ' in the Punjabi language) ; in a handful an owl, and in a lota quite senseless "501 the city. On return there was moonlight; and when we came near the garden, we all imagined and took the sandy plain for a very deep lake, and were of opinion that we should not pass through it, because we did not know the depth of the lake. Consequently one of us, putting his stick, tried to find out the depth; he found the stick going down. We also came to the conclusion that there was quicksand also in the lake. Consequently, we retraced our steps, and going round about two miles, we reached the lodging by the other side of the garden. In the morning we all laughed at our folly and felt ashamed." Recently it has been ascertained that at Delhi on the day of ' Nirajala ekadshi' (a Hindu fast day) they put up bhang sheds from Chandni Chauk to the river Jumna, and bhang is given to all who wish to drink it. Bhang is an intoxicating drug well known to make the drinker a fool and a mean man. A pandit (one learned in Sanskrit) read to the correspondent a verse in Sanskrit, of which the meaning was that bhang is a drug which corrupts senses. Consequently there is a common saying, " The sense of such and such person has become bhang," or " such and such person bhanga-gaya " (corrupted by bhang). The object of the people who drink bhang in larger or less quantity is to get intoxicated. Some people, with bestial and lustful ideas, use bhang to retard the discharge of semen; but when they are addicted to it, they feel sorry, because, drink- ing a little in the beginning, they go drinking much in the end. The grandfather of the corres- pondent makes use of bhang, probably since the last forty years. His physical condition is not good (i.e., he does not keep good health). If he does not take his food for two days, it matters very little to him; but until he drinks bhang, he would not even bathe, nor would he eat anything. If delay occurs in drinking bhang, he becomes very angry, feels much discomfort in the hands and feet, and becomes peevish, and little things put him out. He has often been found making com- plaints that he has become subject to a very bad habit. " God forbid," he says, " no enemy of his may contract this habit." He takes precaution to see that no one in the family should get into this bad habit; consequently he keeps his appli- ances of bhang-drinking hidden. The correspondent has thought over how to stop the use of bhang, and has finally arrived at this conclusion. At present the total stoppage is im- possible, and even it is not practicable, because bhang grows wild in this country in abundance, and can be had in large quantity through unfair means; but should Government gradually try to stop the practice and adopt means of stoppage, the correspondent thinks that, ten years hence, Gov- ernment can very easily put a total stop to the use of bhang. The means are as follows :502 By smoking charas people very often become insane, and this is the result of bad company. All people agree on this point. If charas smokers, do not get charas at the time they usually smoke it, they experience great discomfort. They feel quite uneasy in the hands and feet, get yawn- ings, and don't feel inclined to do any kind of work; and if they come to know that such and such a person has charas with him, or such and such a shop sells it, no matter though they may have to go from house to house and be subjected to all sorts of indignities, but get the drug somehow they must. If, after enquiries from all quarters, they understand that the drag could not be pro- cured, they try to content themselves, and the time passes anyhow without it. All agree on this point. Under the influence of charas, the commission of crime is possible, and necessarily a charsi is selfish ; consequently there is a common saying503 84. Evidence * of RAI SINGH, Sikh, Retired Resaldar of India Horsey Lahore. After full consideration of the subject, I arrive at the conclusion that the practice of charas-smok- ing is ancient among the people of the Punjab, and that the drug is imported from Yarkand and Lad- akh. At first the practice was prevalent among the fakirs and sadhus (Hindu mendicants) only, but it has since found its way among other classes of people also. Charas-smoking is indeed injurious. Chandu-smoking is not an old practice in this pro- vince. The evil has crept into the Punjab from Lucknow and other cities of India This drug (?) is first used by the people as an aphrodisiac, and possibly with some beneficial result; but afterwards, when the habit is formed, the drug does not produce any such effect. On the contrary it proves very injurious and completely ruins the health of the consumer. The consumption of the drug is not based on any religious custom. The same is the case with ganja Bhang-drink- ing is common in the Punjab. The way in which it is consumed is absolutely harmless. Its consump- tion is not regarded so disreputable as that of ganja or chandu, the reason being that bhang is generally drunk as a cooling beverage on the occasions of religious festivities. The ingredients, such as almonds, poppy seeds, cardamom, black pepper, musk-melon seeds, milk, etc, are mixed with bhang to counteract its arid effect. Generally speaking, the use of bhang is not injurious to health; its moderate use is rather beneficial in the hot weather. If drunk after being mixed with the ingredients, it not only quenches thirst, but also diminishes flatulance and the excessive heat of the body. In my opinion it is not necessary to place any restrictions on bhang. Manufacture and sale of charas and chandu, except for medicinal use, should, however, be strictly prohibited. The Government would do a great favour to the people by I prohibiting the use of charas and chandu. Indeed, J a sudden stoppage will occasion discontent among the consumers. It would therefore, be advisable for Government to proclaim that the sale of these drugs will be stopped after one year from the date of the proclamation, and that in the meantime the consumers should endeavour to forego the practice, so that they might not feel privation at the close of the year. In this way no inconvenience will be felt by the consumers, and the Government will obtain its object to the advantage of the public. 85. Evidence* of Bhagat Hira Nand, Rawal Pindi. 1. My information of the hemp drugs is derived from the following sources: 504 procure pestle and mortar eat dry leaves of bhang with water. Some persons also use bhang after it. 20. The charas consumers among the Hindu fakirs are bairagis, sanyasis, jogis, the priests at thakurdowaras and devidowaras and Brahmans, and among the Muhammadans the takiadars, ziaradars and hujradars, who consume charas in bhangar- khanas (places for the consumption of bhang), inns, and in other places. In my opinion the proportion of these charas consumers does not exceed 5 per cent. (of the popula- tion), for the reason that it is only in large cities and towns that such consumers are to be met with. The bhang consumers are to be found among Government servants, shopkeeprs, dharmsalas and the priests of gurdowaras, besides the classes of charas smokers above mentioned, and the propor- tion of such consumers as may be estimated at not more than 15 per cent. 21. In my opinion this question does not concern the Punjab. 22. The charas generally consumed is especially that of Yarkand, which is imported here by the Laddakh, Kullu, Kashmir, and to some extent by the Yusafzai routes. 23. I know nothing about it. 24. No class of the people is known in the Pun- jab to eat bhang. There are people who drink it, and a detail of them has been given in answer to question No. 20. There is no particular locality where the bhang consumers may be found in large numbers. 25. Apparently there is no special reason for the increase and decrease. 26. (a) The habitual moderate consumers are 10 out of 15 consumers in one hundred (sic). (b) The habitual excessive consumers are 4 out of 15 in one hundred (sic). (c) The occasional moderate consumers are four- fifths out of 15 in every one hundred (sic). (d) The occasional excessive consumers are one- fifth out of 15 in every one hundred (sic). 27. As regards charas, the bairagis, sanyasis, jogis, takiadars, and the priests of thakurdowaras and devidowaras, etc.; and as regards bhang, the nihangs, the bhais of Sikhs, dharmsalas, and the priests of thakurdowaras, etc. The habit is formed by associating with the consumers ; otherwise these drugs serve no useful purposes in life. The craving for the drugs resembles a fit of hydrophobia, i.e., it maddens the consumers, who lose all self-control. 28. The average allowance of charas is one tola, and average cost per diem 3 pies :505 hibition is made, these traders will be put to a great loss. 36 to 39. I know nothing about these. 40. The native physicians prescribe bhang in certain human as well as cattle diseases. Bhang is also Used by European doctors as a medicine. 42. The use of charas is indeed injurious ; that is, it causes asthma, bronchitis and phlegm. I have observed two cases in which the smoking of charas caused sudden death. 43. No charas smoker has ever hurt anybody. 44. The intoxication of charas and bhang lasts for two or three hours to the habitual consumers. There is no special reason by which it may allay hunger. The want of subsequent gratification produces uneasiness and pain in the limbs. The remaining questions could not be answered for want of time and inaccessibility to official papers. 86. Evidence* of LACHMAN DAS, Merchant, Ladakh. 1. I have been going to Ladakh for the purpose of trade, and there I learnt from Yarkand mer- chants, who visit that country for trading, that in Yarkand bhang is cultivated in the month of Baisakh in waste lands, and round the fields of other crops for the manufacture of charas. It remains standing for seven months, and is then reaped in the month of Kattak when the blossom is ripe and then stored on the roofs of houses. It remains there for one month, and gets dried in the meantime. The zamindars then thrash the plants after separating the larger leaves by night within their houses. The smaller petals and flowers then fall on the ground and are reduced to powder. It is then sifted thrice, put in bags, and sold to the traders. The merchants go on storing it up until the month of Jeth comes, when they place it in the sun, and a kind of oleaginous substance oozes out of the powder. It is then kneaded like tobacco, and put in bags made of cloth. The following three or four different kinds of charas are prepared from it :506 25. Charas smoking and bhang drinking are daily increasing. Ignorance idleness lead to the formation of these bad habits. 26. To break off the habit is beneficial to the moderate as well as to the excessive consumers. Ten, twenty or thirty per cent. of the traders give up both bhang and charas after occasionally using them. The proportions cannot, however, be stated. 27. The practice of consuming charas and bhang prevails among the Hindus, Muhammadans, native musicians, kanjars, sweepers, and Hindu and Muhammadan fakirs. These evil habits are gene- rally contracted in childhood by seeing others using- the drugs. 28. In this district the consumption of charas is greater than that of bhang in the city of Hoshiar- pur; the consumption of charas and bhang is in the ratio of 1:4. Regarding charas (a) One tola, price anna 1. (b) Two tolas, price annas 2. Regarding bhang (a) Three mashas. (b) From three mashas to four tolas. 29. The consumers generally smoke charas with admixture of tobacco. The fakirs in special cases mix dhatura like tobacco. Their object is, however, not known, nor do I know of any other admixture. 30. Generally five or ten persons assemble toge- ther for smoking charas. The drug is seldom used in solitude. If the habit is formed in childhood, it is then next to impossible- to break it off. It is, however, not so usual for children to consume the drug. 31. Even for the consumption of bhang, the consumers assemble in twos or fours. The habit of using charas and bhang is easily formed by seeing others use them, and it is difficult to break it off. The moderate consumers of charas and bhang have generally an inclination for excess. The charas smokers become very soon addicted to its excessive use. 32. There is no such religious custom among the family men. Indeed, among the fakirs, bairagis and suthras (Hindu mendicants) regard the use as hereditary. Neither the moderate nor the excess- ive use is regarded essential. Charas smoking is injurious to brain, eye-sight, and the blood of the body. 33. The consumers of bhang are mild-tempered as compared with those of charas. There is no such opinion, social or religious, in regard to the practice. As far as I think, I regard the use of both charas and bhang as bad. When the con- sumers smoke charas, they cough and spit so much that they make the place dirty. The non-consumers cannot tolerate passing by the locality where it is smoked. The custom of worshipping the hemp plant does not exist in this country. 34. It would be a privation for some days to an habitual consumer to forego the practice. The charas smokers can satisfy their want by smoking- tobacco, while the consumers of bhang by drinking sherbet or sardai (cooling beverage). 35. The prohibition is feasible if the British Government so desire. How could charas be con- sumed or sold illicitly if its importation from Yarkand is stopped altogether? The prohibition is possible if the importation of charas from Yarkand is put an end to. No one has the auda- city to create such a discontent which may cause any political danger. Indeed, it would not be sur- prising if the consumers of charas and bhang took to alcoholic stimulants, dhatura or sankhia as a substitute. 36. The use of charas and bhang prevents the consumers from taking to drinking. In other words, the consumers of these two drugs do not use alcohol. Alcohol is not yet substituted to any certain extent (for these drugs). I cannot attri- bute the change to anything, nor do I have any proof to state. 37. As I know nothing about ganja, I cannot state the difference between the effects of charas smoking and those resulting from ganja smoking. 38. I do not know anything regarding ganja. 39. In my opinion there is none (less injurious than the other). 40. Native physicans do not make use of charas. Indeed, doctors prescribe the drug in the treatment of cattle. Native physicians, however, make use of bhang in the treatment of both men and animals. 41. (a) The moderate use of bhang sharpens the appetite. (b) It, however, does not help in alleviating fati- gue or giving staying-power under severe exertion and exposure. (c) It counteracts the effects of unwholesome water. The moderate use of charas satisfies the hunger, and helps in enduring exposure. (d) It is not beneficial in any other way. The fakirs generally smoke charas in order to allay their hunger. The traders drink bhang to avoid the effects of unhealthy climates. 42. Even the moderate use of charas is not harmless, as it gradually affects the blood, produces emaciation, injures the virility, reddens the eyes, causes asthma and bronchitis. The moderate use of bhang interferes with the digestion, the reason being that the consumer, while under its influence, feels hungry and eats too much, but cannot digest it. 43. The neighbours who do not consume the drugs, i.e., who do not smoke charas, cannot tolerate the bad smell of the smoke, but do not experience any other inconvenience. Indeed, some of their children contract the habit by seeing them use the drug. Charas smoking first produces cough and then dries the blood, causes loss of appetite, and does not refresh the mind; on the contrary, saddens it. When the consumer gets intoxicated, his appetite is lost. Intoxication is produced as soon as the drug is smoked. It lasts for one hour. Then there is a desire for another smoke, and a little uneasiness is felt. Bhang drinking is, on the other hand, not so injurious. 45. Charas smoking injures the eye-sight, causes bronchitis, asthma, insanity, emaciation, and loss of appetite. It also impairs the moral sense and pro- duces laziness. If a person is licentious, he be- comes impotent. It deadens the intellect and pro- duces insanity many a time, and sometimes insa- nity of a permanent character is caused. If tem- porary insanity is produced, it is cured by breaking off the habit, and thereafter no symptom is visi- ble, but on the contrary the body grows stronger and stronger. There is a Punjabi proverb about the use of charas, which is " I cause cough and bronchitis. If still the consumer does not die, I can't help it." Moderate use of bhang, however, does not produce any such disease. 46. The excessive use of charas is very injurious. Too much bhang-drinking is also injurious.
507 47. In my opinion there must be five per cent. of such consumers, with whom the moderate use of charas and bhang is hereditary, and this habit must certainly affect their children. The practice generally prevails among native musicians, kanjars and dervishes. 48. The habit certainly becomes hereditary with the children of the excessive consumers, as it is difficult for them to break off the habit. 49. In the beginning the use of bhang moderate- ly acts as an aphrodisiac. The moderate use of charas and the excessive use of bhang affect virility. Perhaps 1 or 2 per cent. among immoral women make use of charas. Indeed, 5 or 7 per cent. out of them use bhang. No wonder if charas-smok- ing produce impotency, as it dries the blood and injures virility. 50. The excessive use of charas causes insanity. Two or three persons in Hoshiarpur are begging from door to door like insane people, and have been reduced to this miserable condition in consequence of charas-smoking. 51. The badmashes generally consume charas and bhang, and get other people also to form the bad habit. They, however, do not commit any crime. There may be some rare cases. 52. The excessive consumers of charas and bhang become unfit for work, and are reduced to beggary in the end. They also commit petty thefts and talk nonsense. 53. The excessive indulgence in charas and bhang does not incite all of a sudden to unpreme- ditated crime, violent or otherwise. Indeed, it leads to speaking nonsense. The charas smokers do not and cannot commit homicide, as they are themselves just like the dead, in other words, they are generally emaciated and lazy. 54. Criminals do not use charas and bhang to fortify themselves to commit an act of violence and other crime. 55. Bhang and charas are of little use to crimi- nals in overpowering their victims, nor can they stupefy them by means of the two drugs. Complete stupefaction cannot be induced by charas and bhang without admixture. 56. If charas and bhang are moderately used, the consumers can attend to his business. Exces- sive use, however, makes him quite unfit for work. The fakirs mix dhatura for personal use. The rob- bers induce their victims to smoke (with tobacco) admixture of dhatura, with a view to rob them. 57. I have not seen any one eating or drinking charas. Bhang is, however, swallowed in the form of a pill after being ground. 58. There is no defect in the present excise sys- tem, except that the leases for the monopoly to sell the drugs are sold separately in respect of small vil- lages in batches, and different contractors obtain the leases. So one lessee generally undersells the rival contractor to put him to loss. This undersell- ing leads to smuggling and an increase in the num- ber of consumers. If leases were given out by auction in respect to districts, and granted to one person, nothing of the sort would occur, nor would the number of consumers increase. 59. In my opinion the best thing would be to sell leases of each district to one contractor. 60. Ganja is not produced in this province, nor is there any necessity of any method for control- ling it. 61. As charas is not produced here, no modifica- tion is required in any respect. 62. The hemp plant is not cultivated here at all. The wild plants are, however, properly controlled, as no one except the contractor can get them collected. Moreover, he, too, cannot do so without obtain- ing permission. The system would work still better if the license were granted to one person in the district, as is being done in the Saharanpur district. It will also save trouble to Government, that is, the Government will then have to keep watch over one person instead of many. 63. There is no objection to the present system of wholesale and retail vend. Indeed, the local wholesale vendors must obtain license. The pre- sent arrangement of giving leases by auction in re- spect to villages in batches should not continue. The leases should be given in respect to districts, as is the case in the south of India. The present system is, however, satisfactory for the Yarkand and Ladakh. merchants. It should not be necessary for them to obtain a license. 64. There is no objection to the present system. Indeed, if the leases be sold for whole districts, in that case the contractor in his district need not obtain a permit for conveying bhang and charas from one shop to another in the district. When the traders cannot sell these articles at one place, they have to convey them to another. So the present arrangement is not favourable to them. 65. In my opinion the taxation of charas and bhang is reasonable with reference (a) to each other, (b) to alcoholic or other intoxicants. No alteration is necessary. 66. As I know nothing about ganja, I cannot give any opinion in respect to it. 67. The present rate of duty on charas and bhang appears to be reasonable. Having regard to the ultimate incidence of the tax on the consumer, it would be an excess to propose a new tax. In that case trade, too, will be paralysed, in other words, the traders of charas and bhang will suffer a loss. 68. There are no other shops or houses, except those of the lessees, where the drugs can be sold by retail vend. Indeed, there are shops for wholesale vend. The wholesale dealers should certainly have a license, in other words, the privilege of retail vend should be granted to the local lessee. 69. The wishes of the villagers and the neigh- bouring people are generally consulted whenever a new shop is opened for the sale of these drugs. 70. Smuggling is practised in those districts which are co-terminus with the Native States. In my opinion, the evil can be remedied in this way. The leases should be given to one contractor in res- pect to petty States, and not in respect to villages separately. In the case of large States, the leases should be granted to two or three persons ; other- wise, in respect to villages, one contractor undersells the rival contractor, in order to defeat him. In this way smuggling is practised. vol. v. 3 Y 2
508 87. Evidence of LALA HARRI RAM SETH, Merchant, Rawalpindi. Ganja is not grown in this part of the province, nor is it imported. Bhang is not grown in this part of the province, but grows of itself. Neither charas nor ganja is manufactured from it. Bhang is only used by fakirs and people of the lower classes. Its habitual use is considered rather disgraceful and is also bad in effects. As to charas it is imported from Ladakh and other Trans-Kashmir States. It is only smoked, but not eaten or drunk. It is very quick in pro- ducing inebriation, and is at the same time very dangerous in after-effects. Habitual consumers of charas are much more pre-disposed to insanity. It also, like bhang, is used by mendicants and lower class people. It is very injurious in its effects to the brain ; dries up the blood of, and undermines the whole system of, men used to it. Habitual consumers are generally ease-loving; and as they are generally of the lower class, they suffer from pecuniary wants. Consumption of charas, as generally of all other intoxicating drugs, is on the increase, and if no taxation be necessary, some prohibitive import duty should be levied upon it, so that its use be percep- tibly decreased. 88. Evidence of SALIG RAM, Kayasth, Drug Contractor, Delhi. 1. I have for a long time been drug contractor ; for this reason I know particulars and have gained experience. 2. In different districts bhang is known as below :509 and Ladakh, the charas arrives at Hoshiarpur by October. Up to March, in the winter months, it keeps good. After the hot season and the rains till the October of the second year or still the October of the third year, it keeps fit for use. After that it goes bad. But the period for the charas is four months. But for this reason that it comes once a year it should be considered good for one year. In the next year, on account of the cheap rates, it is sold to poor people to whom the buying of the new charas at twice the rates of the charas of the former year is distasteful. In the third year it is only slightly intoxicating and is not liked generally. The effect is of the climate. The charas produced in Bokhara can be kept for six years in India without going bad. Bhang is cut in April and May. After the rains and the cold weather in the next May and April, it is excellent. In bhang, freshly cut, till such time as the rain does not come, there is a peculiar smell, but it produces great heat and is very intoxicating. In the third year the intoxicating qualities are less- ened, and it goes bad. But if in the first year it becomes damp, it goes bad. No preventive action on account of climate can be taken. 19. Ganja is smoked in the chillum. Another way of smoking is by placing the chillum on the i huka. This is also the prevalent method for charas in Bengal, in the East, and probably in the Punjab, and all over India. 20. Except the Europeans and the Parsis, the inhabitants of India of every class and (kamnasib) community, who may be considered ill-fated, make use of it. In India generally, somewhere four, somewhere five ; but in Allahabad, Bareilly, Cawn- pur, Fyzabad, Muradabad, and in other places where there are numerous Hindu temples, the proportion should not be considered to be less than ten per cent., rather more. 21. Ganja is smoked in the chillum. Flat ganja is the best. I do not know much about it. In Bengal it is largely used. 22. Foreign charas is brought from Arakan, which is in the province of: China. 23. As an exception some pauper fakir, who is habituated to intoxicants, hushes off the dry leaves, mixes it in the tobacco and smokes it in the chil- lum. Such smokers could not be more than twenty in all India. 24. In Muttra, the districts adjoining Muttra, at Jaganuath, and where there are Hindu temples, the proportion of smokers is 50 per cent.; in other districts, and in the province, the proportion is from 2 to 5 per cent. Those who are greatly addicted to it grind the bhang and make it into cakes. This they keep, and when they want it, they eat it. Some people who would give their life for bhang, and are inveterate habituals, chew the dry leaves. 25. The use of the Yarkand charas is on the in- crease. The reason is that for some years the pro- duce of India has been exported to Europe, and on account of the dearness of the prices of grains, drunk- ards, who are poor, have begun smoking charas. Another reason is that in some parts of provinces of India liquori is stealthily distilled and brought to use. Now very good preventive arrangements have been made, and those people are not able to drink the legal liquor. They too use charas. 26. Taking a hundred consumers, I give the following proportions:510 (Those mentioned above) they use liquor and lie like children in the way.] It is not the custom in India to worship the hemp plant. There is a proverb that a donkey by seeing and smelling the hemp plant ran away. The plant said to the donkey511 an hour; when the intoxication is wearing of, it makes him rakish, and the inclination for a second drink comes on him. But the habitual consumer, being accustomed, will not smoke again. For in- stance, one may smoke cheroots as often as he pleases during the day ; he may smoke once or ten times. I enter here a couplet written by some poet at some time. " Charas, pila gurgyan ghala aur bij ghala waka ander ka; Sukh sukh lakar ho jawa, munh howa jaise bander ka." (A charas-smoker loses religious wisdom imparted by the guru, and vitality. He is reduced to a mere skeleton, and face resembles a monkey's.) 45. The effect of ganja and charas is hurtful both physically and mentally; that is, a charas- consumer under the influence of the drug has no beauty in his face, or has the appearance of having been beaten. And how can he be moral as his company is worthless and very low? A man that keeps straight, an abstainer, at the age of fifty or sixty, is equal to a charas-consumer at forty. At first, beyond the age of thirty, which is the prime of life, the blood dries and the diges- tion is impaired, and on account of bad digestion the appetite will be injured. This does not cause dysentery, bronchitis or asthma, but on mixing with tobacco, provided it is Calcutta tobacco, bronchitis and asthma are brought on. Charas alone docs not bring them on, but it is generally thought that charas-smoking brings on these diseases. Consumers have no moral sense for this reason that charas company is extremely low, and that company loses its senses and polish. There is no laziness in the intoxicated state; but when the effects are wearing off, the habits of im- morality are acquired from bad company as well as not. A smoker who has smoked charas for fifteen or twenty years if he goes to a woman, will surely be injured in some way, because it deadens the power. In youth, on account of intoxicants the pleasure is doubled. It deadens the intellect and produces insanity in this way, that if a moder- ate consumer who has not had any for a day or two, for some special reason, and if in the heat of June he has travelled ten or fifteen kos, and acci- dentally meets charas-smokers, and the chillum is well filled with charas, and the traveller takes a pull, and the charas smoke affects the brain slightly, he will in a short time become insane temporarily ; but if he is treated he will be cured in the cold weather. If the brain is seriously affected, then he will gradually recover. But if he again smokes it, he will after some time from his recovery be again affected in the hot weather ; specially if the brain is too much affected, death will at once ensue. For instance, if any living thing is confined in a place excluded of air, it will at once die ; in this way it is very harmful for the smoke to get to the brain. It is not difficult for a person who is suffering from anxiety or from brain diseases to go mad. This matter is natural, and more cannot be said about it because many weak people smoke it and nothing happens, and strong people become insane. 46. Ganja excess has the worst effect of all. 47. The habit is not hereditary, and seldom affects the children; in large cities there may be three or four habitual moderate consumers; if such children are intoxicated at an early age, it is an easy matter for them to go mad at some period, because all his strength is lost and he becomes weak. 48. Of these drugs, even excessive bhang con- sumption does not produce insanity. 49. The moderate use is an aphrodisiac. Very poor prostitutes use bhang, and lose shame with the object of pleasing their friends. Owning to modesty I cannot explain more. It produces impotency. 50. In my opinion charas and ganja would be better than bhang as an aphrodisiac, and is more injurious. 51. Perhaps there are some bad characters, other- wise they are of average good character. They are called badmashes for this reason only, that our children may fear them and avoid the company. Perhaps they do commit some general or special crimes. 53. Nothing can happen from this drug. It is another question if a man is frenzied and shouts that he will murder seme person ; such a clamour is a frenzy. There is no fear of homicide. 54. It is never taken at all with this object, nor do consumers when intoxicated have sufficient audacity. 55. Complete insensibility can never take place without an admixture. 56. Prior to the Mutiny when Thuggy was ram- pant, the Thugs used to become acquainted with the charas and ganja consumers, and they would find out the road to be travelled at that place; one or two Thugs would fill their chillums and smoke; the traveller arrived at this spot is offered the chil- lum, as it is a custom among charas-consumers that the smoke is offered without payment; the traveller takes a pull when the other Thug says " Come let us fill another." Now dhatura is mixed. The traveller gets the chillum first; he immediately be- comes insensible, and the Thugs are successful and make off. 57. In my opinion no one eats ganja, but charas is eaten for the following-:512 cants would be lessened, but the income would be enhanced. Reasons for enhancement of income under the first system.513 There are many reasons for these arrangements and improvements ; but from these questions it will be found that there is profit, and all harm, which is considered good, will disappear. How- ever, from this system there will be profit and no shade of damage. The arrangement is this, that in the first five years' contract the Ghazipur opium be included in the excise contract, and the rate be fixed at Rs. 20, in the next contract at Rs. 25, and in the third at Rs. 30, then it will be seen what increase there will be in the income, and the sales will gradually decrease. Till such time as opium is not included in the excise contracts there will be the usual fluctuations, and the new system is not exhaustive. 60.Ganja is not produced in this province. 61.Charas is not produced at all in India; the climate is unsuited. 62.The cultivation is carried on in Bengal and in States, etc. No benefit can accrue by super- vision till such time as the systems of the States and the Government system are not one. A good system would be for Government to take the con- tract from the States, or that the State people be given to understand that by this system they will also benefit, and step by step introduce the Govern- ment arrangements. When this arrangement is carried out, the system will itself show that it is good. and both the Governments will be benefited. 63.The wholesale license fee should be fixed at Rs. 15 annually. This would be profitable to Govern- ment, and would not be distasteful to any one. Retail shops, where they exist as separate shops, should be stopped. Government suffers loss from such shops, because such small retail vendors very much injure the large thikadars of neighbouring districts. 64.Thikadars of small capacity transport charas from one district to another. The Collector exer- cises supervision, but not with proper firmness. The reason is that when charas comes into a dis- trict from another district, he does take stops to pre- vent the import; but the officers of the exporting districts do not care ; but there are some who are gad of it and of the increased income of their dis- tricts, and it is to be regretted that they do not consider British interests. The existing arrange- ments governing export and import are excellent. 65.As regards the taxation of ganja either on the cultivation or consumption, the opinion of those officers where ganja is cultivated should be considered right. The taxation of charas is not liked for this reason, that Chinese merchants bring the charas, and if they are burdened with taxation, especially on articles which go bad in the next season, the trade of various Indian articles will be injured. As now the Government is praised, so then for these reasons it will be condemned. The profits will be about Rs. 75,000 annually if there is a tax of Rs. 20 a maund, but one trade will suffer and the Government be condemned. Proportionately to the profits from taxation the income from license fees will be decreased. The taxation of bhang of spontaneous growth, together with other articles, will be a general source of displeasure, and in my opinion Government should never intend to tax bhang. Because, as compared with general displeasure, the income from taxation will be nil. It would be better that, at the auction of contracts, the thikadars in their agreements should add a clause that Government will tax the sale of charas, at their shops, at so much a seer. This should also apply to bhang. Under these circum- stances taxation will not be condemned, and trade will not be injured, and merchants will not be dis- pleased. Thikadars are servants of Government, and they will take contracts. If they suffer from the new system, they should not care, because they are accustomed to profits and losses, and there will be an advantage gained, in that they will not sell bad charas or bhang, for this reason that what has gone bad the thikadars will themselves destroy, because they do not like paying tax on bad articles. The tax on liquor should be Rs. 3 per gallon in all Punjab districts. The vilage taxation should be Rs. 2-8 per gallon, and in the other districts of provinces in British India the taxation should be raised according to the Punjab taxation. It is meant that the taxation and arrangements should be uniform in the Indian Empire. 66.If it is taxed, then the best kind should be taxed highest, the next quality a little lower, and the last quality very little. But till such time as the Government arrangements are not likewise in States, no benefit can accrue. 67.The ultimate incidence should be considered as three pie on the average per man per day. This taxation is on those who have 5 to 7 rupees a month. It should be considered that those who are accustomed to it give 1/10th of their income, and now increasing the taxation does not seem to be right. 68.Regarding the prohibition of charas, etc., which has been mentioned in answer to question 35. If it. was adopted that charas-consumers should not be allowed to go outside the premises, then they would of their own will depart from it, and the people would benefit by it. There will be some cavillers to the closing of shops, and respectable people would on no account go to the shops to smoke charas, and this habit will also die away from the company of fakirs, provided that the number of shops be decreased. By this the Gov- ernment income will suffer. But in India after two or three years the population would increase, and a time will come when the result of this loss will be a gain. 69.It is the custom; to enquire, and a considera- tion of this is correct. 70.Innumerable orders are passed regarding the arrangements of drugs from Native States, but no arrangements are made about unlicensed vendors who abound in districts. Now consider an un- licensed vendor brings charas for Rs. 3 a seer from a district where the rate is Rs. 2 a seer. This vendor gets a profit of Re. 1 a seer. This vendor keeps the amount allowed by Government, and started selling, house by house, because the thikadar sells at high rates, and he begins selling at very low rates. Under this system every drug should be considered taxless. Many people buy from him, and if he is arrested, he has not more than the licensed quantity, and if it be said that he sold with- out a license, which is illegal, then the buyers say that we did not buy, and the seller says I did not sell, we are smoking among ourselves. Therefore an arrest cannot be made. This system is more or less in all districts; when the unlicensed vendors get a taste of this, then they do not fear either a fine or imprisonment, and they consider it a source of livelihood. The thikadars suffer loss from this, and the Government has to suffer a loss of lacs of rupees in license fees. These bad practices, if necessary, should be prevented by law ; district officers make sufficient efforts, but their efforts can- not work as against law, and they are rendered helpless. vol v. 3 Z
514 89.Evidence* of VIRU MAX RAM SARAN, Khatri, Licensed vendor of Opium and Drugs, Amritsar. 1.I am a license-holder, and carry on trade with Ladakh. 3.The hemp plant grows spontaneously in Hoshiarpur, Gurdaspur and Jullundur districts. 4.It is known by the names of sabzi, buti and bijya. 6.Ordinarily dense. 7.(c) For use as bhang. 14.(c) Majum is prepared from bhang. 18.Charas keeps good for one year, after which it deteriorates in the rainy season. In cold climates it keeps good for a little longer. 20.Sadhus and fakirs, no matter where they live, smoke the drugs. 22.Charas imported from Yarkand is the one chiefly used. 24.Sadhus, fakirs and Nihangs drink bhang. 25.The use of charas and bhang is on the in- crease. 67.Increase of tax on charas will result in a de- crease of the Yarkand trade. * Translation. 90.Evidence of KAHN CHAND AND MOHAN LAL, Khatri, Licensed vendors of Opium and Drugs, Amritsar. The evidence of these witnesses is the same as that of No. 89, and is not reprinted. 91.Evidence* of KIDAR NATH AND KUNDAN LAL, Khatri, Licensed vendors of spirituous Liquors and General Merchants, Amritsar. 1.Since a long time we have been licensed ven- dors of the spirituous liquors, and have also been carrying on trade with Ladakh and Yarkand. 3.Hemp plant grows spontaneously and in abundance in the Hoshiarpur, Gurdaspur and Jul- lundur districts. 4.That plant is known here by the names of sabzi, buti and sardai. 6.Dense. 7.In Gurdaspur, Hoshiarpur and Jullundur districts hemp plant is used for the production of bhang only. 9.Hemp plant grows spontaneously along the banks of rivers and lakes. 14.In this district there is very little consump- tion of majum, which is prepared from bhang, 16.Bhang is not prepared in these cities (sic). 17.Charas is prepared at Yarkand by the zamin- dars. 18.Charas deteriorates if kept longer than one year. After three years it becomes quite useless. The only measure which can to some extent prevent charas from deteriorating is to keep it in cold countries. Hot climate spoils it altogether. 19.Charas is smoked in a huka. 20.Sadhus and fakirs, no matter where they live, smoke charas excessively. 22.Charas imported from Yarkand is the one chiefly used. 23.No. 24.Bhang is consumed by Nihangs and Sikhs, who are to be found everywhere. 25.The use of charas and bhang is on the in- crease. 30.These drugs are chiefly used in company. 31.The habit of consuming bhang is easily formed. It is difficult to break off. 32.Moderate consumption of these drugs is less injurious than the excessive use. 34.To forego the consumption of charas will be a serious privation to sadhus and fakirs, who are habitual consumers. 35.The prohibition of all these drugs will be followed by recourse to other intoxicants, such as liquor, etc. 36.Alcohol is not at present being substituted for any of these drugs. 40. Bhang is used in treatment of certain diseases of men and cattle. * Translation. 92. Evidence* of GOBIND RAM, Khatri, Licensed vendor of Charas and Bhang, Amritsar. 1.As I have been carrying on trade with Yar- kand, and am a licensed vendor of charas and bhang, I am well acquainted with the matters connected with the above-named drugs. 2.As no variety of ganja is used in the Punjab, the information regarding it should be obtained from Hindustan. 3.The hemp plant grows spontaneously in the * Translation.
515 Hoshiarpur, Gurdaspur and Jullundur districts, and also in the Kashmir State. 4.Bhang is known by the names of sukka, buti, sabzi and sardai. 5.The cultivators alone can answer this question. 6.Dense. 7.Bhang and no other drug is produced here from the hemp plants, which grows spontaneously. 8 and 9. Can be answered by cultivators only. 10.No special class. 11.Ganja is not produced in the Punjab, but in the North-Western Provinces and Oudh. 14.Only bhang from wild hemp plant. 16.Bhang does not grow in houses, but in jungles (sic). Ganja and charas cannot be pro- duced from the plant. 17.Ganja and charas are not prepared in the Punjab. Bhang grows spontaneously. 18.Charas and bhang deteriorate in the Punjab after one year, and they become quite useless after two years. If kept in a cool place, they keep good a little longer, but they quite lose their effects after two years. 19.In the Punjab charas is smoked in huka or chillum. 20.In this province sadhus smoke charas exces- sively. Other people also, except Sikhs, smoke it; but I am unable to give their proportion. 21.Ganja is neither produced nor smoked in the Punjab. It is excessively used in the North- Western Provinces and Oudh. 22.Charas imported from Yarkand is the one used in this province. A kind of charas is also imported to India from Bokhara, but it is used in the North-Western Provinces and Oudh, but not in the Punjab. 23.Bhang is not smoked. It is drunk after being pounded. 24.Bhang is excessively drunk by Nihangs and Sikhs, and also by other people. No one eats it. 25.The use of bhang and charas is on the increase owing to climatic reasons. 26.(a) Sadhus and fakirs. (b) Brahmans and jogis. (c) Shop-keepers, etc. (d) Their number is not known. 27.Fakirs, sadhus and Brahmins, etc. 29.Charas is smoked after mixing it with to- bacco. Consumers with moderate means mix black pepper and poppy seeds with bhang ; while well-to-do people mix almonds, cardamom, sugar, milk and keora with it to prevent its arid effect. 30.In solitude charas 1½ masha, and bhang 1 tola ; in company more than the above stated quantities. It is not usual for children to consume any of these drugs. 31.The habit is formed by associating with the habitual consumers. It is difficult for those long accustomed to the use of these drugs to break off the habit. 32.There is no religious custom (about the use of these drugs), nor is its use compulsory. 33.No custom for worshipping the hemp plant exists. 34.It would certainly be a privation to the habitual consumers if they did not get the drugs to which they are accustomed. 35.If the prohibition is enforced, it will occasion discontent among the habitual consumers, and they will surely resort to the illicit consumption of the drugs. But such discontent will neither amount to a political danger, nor will it be followed by re- course to spirituous liquors. 36.Alcohol has no connection with the question of any of these drugs ; nor can the consumers of charas and bhang substitute alcohol for them, be- cause one pice worth of these drugs would give such gratification to the consumers as would be given by 4 annas worth of alcohol. 37.Ganja is smoked in the same form as charas. There is no difference in the way they are used. 38.Should be enquired from the North-Western Provinces. 40.Can be answered by native physicians. Bhang is used in treatment of bullocks (cattle?). 41.The use of bhang is beneficial in the hot weather, and the use of charas in the cold weather. Charas gives staying-power under severe exertion and alleviates fatigue. There is no particular class who use the drugs. 42.Bhang is neither beneficial nor injurious. 44. Should be enquired from the consumers. 58.The present system of excise administra- tion works well, and there is nothing objectionable in it. 93.Evidence* of GUJARMAL, Sud-Hindu, Licensed vendor of Opium and Drugs, Hoshiarpur. 1.I know absolutely nothing about ganja on account of the drug being neither produced nor used in this province ; I have, however, experience in respect to charas and bhang, both of which have been sold at my shop for the last twenty years. Charas is generally imported by traders from Ladakh and Yarkand and sold at my shop. My servants also have been visiting Yarkand for the last five or six years. I have often sold bhang after collecting it in the Hoshiarpur district. 2.I have not ever seen how the charas is manu- factured, nor is the drug ever prepared in this province. According to the information obtained from the traders of this place and Yarkand, the drug is manufactured at Yarkhand in the follow- ing manner :516 which are called bhang, buti sukha, and bijia. The stalks are used as fuel by the poor. 3.The wild hemp grows in the Hoshiarpur, Jullundur, Umballa and Saharanpur districts and in the Kapurthalla State. The plant is not culti- vated. Its growth is abundant in the Saharan- pur and Hoshiarpur districts. 4.Answer to this question is contained in my reply to question No. 2. 5.Cold climate and sandy soil, liable to inunda- tions, produce the plant in abundance. Rains too are beneficial to the harvest. The growth is scarce in uplands. 6.The growth is generally dense. It is, how- ever, scattered where the seeds have not fallen in abundance. 7.The hemp plant is never cultivated. It grows spontaneously. (a) and (b) No. (c) Yes. (d) No. 8.In my opinion the growth of the wild hemp is greater than it was eight or ten years ago ; the reason being that more area has been thrown up by the rivers and hill-streams, which has been occu- pied by the wild plant. 9.Nothing is known, as the plant is not culti- vated in this province. 10.The plant is not cultivated in this province. 11.I do not know anything about ganja as it is not produced in this province. 12.Nothing is known. 13.I know nothing, as ganja is not produced in this province. 14.Neither ganja nor charas is prepared in the Punjab. Bhang only is prepared from the hemp plant. When the harvest is ripe, the plants are reaped and dried in the sun. The dry leaves are then collected, and the stalks thrown away are used by the poor as fuel. 15.Bhang is prepared from the wild plant as mentioned above, and is drunk after being pounded. 16.Bhang is not prepared by people in their houses. It is prepared from the wild plant where- ever they may be. Ganja and charas are not manufactured in this province. 17.The license holders get the wild plant collected through the labourers. Ganja and charas are not produced at all in this province. 18.Bhang begins to lose its effect after one year, and becomes absolutely useless after three years. It totally deteriorates by drenching. It can keep good for two years with ordinary care. If kept in a dry place, it can remain good even for three years. Damp place, however, brings about rapid deteriora- tion. After one year, bhang begins to decrease in value. Charas is very strong during the first year; after that it gradually loses its strength, until the fourth year, when it becomes quite useless. Charas keeps good at hill stations, such as Simla, Kulu, Ladakh, Dharmsala, etc. The deterioration is both rapid and complete if the drug is kept in a warm place or exposed to heat. Hundreds of maunds of charas which became useless have been burnt in this district. It should be borne in mind that after two years charas would not fetch one- fourth its original price. I don't know anything about ganja. 19.Nothing is known about ganja. Charas is not used in any other way except for smoking. 20.I don't know anything about ganja. Charas-smoking prevails mostly among Hindu fakirs, sadhus, suthras, bairagis, sanyasis, jogis, Muhammadan fakirs, professional musicians, kan- jars and camp followers, such as grass-cutters and sweepers. The drug is also smoked at the takias and temple by fakirs and those who visit them. 21.I know nothing, because ganja is not pro- duced here. 22.Charas is not manufactured in this province. It is imported from foreign territories, such as Yarkand, etc., where it is prepared from the culti- vated hemp. It is first brought to the Hoshiar- pur and Amritsar districts, whence a greater portion of it is exported to North-Western Prov- inces and Oudh. The remainder is consumed in the Punjab. European cloth and other articles to the value of nearly 3 or 4 lacs of rupees are annually exported from Hoshiarpur and Amritsar to Yarkand and Ladakh by the traders of this country as well as those of Yarkand, who bring charas, gold, silver, etc., to this country in ex- change. 23.Bhang is not smoked in this province. 24.Bhang-drinking prevails among Muham- madan fakirs, sadhus, udasis, nirmalis, akalis (Sikhs) and other Sikhs. No one eats it. Bhang is largely consumed in the Sikh temples. Its drinking is common among the people in general in the Lahore and Multan districts, the Bahawal- pur State, and in Sindh and North-Western Provinces. 25.The consumption of charas and bhang is on the increase nearly three years since, the reason being that large quantities of charas were imported during these years. The drug became cheap, hence the increase in its consumption. The in- crease in the consumption of bhang is due to bum- per crops of the plant, and also to the substitu- tion of lawful for illicit consumption. 26 and 27. Nothing is known. Charas. Bhang. 28. (a) One to two tolas per diem. Three to four tolas per diem. (b) Three or four tolas per diem. Five or six tolas per diem. The consumption of charas and bhang prevails to a larger extent among sadhus and fakirs than the ordinary people. Bhang when prepared for use diminishes by one-fourth after washing and cleansing. 29. Almonds, seeds of musk melon, black pepper, milk, sugar, and other ingredients are mixed with bhang. Some persons mix all the ingredients, while others mix black pepper only. The object of these admixtures is to neutralize the arid effect of bhang. Black pepper is mixed to make the drug less flatulent, and milk and sugar to make it deli- cious. Charas is smoked after being placed between two layers of tobacco. Dhatura is not generally mixed with bhang in this province. 30. Bhang is drunk in solitude as well as in company. Charas is generally smoked in company and rarely in solitude. None of these drugs is used either by children or women. 31. The habit is formed by associating with consumers. It is not so difficult to nip the habit in the bud ; but to forego it after it is fully formed,
517 causes privation. There is a tendency for the moderate habit to develop into the excessive. 32.The drugs are not required for the perform- ance of any religions ceremony, nor have they any connection with religion. The moderate use is not injurious. Excessive Use is, however, likely to prove harmful. 33.Generally speaking, the use of these dings is not regarded as an evil. The reason why charas smoking is looked upon with disfavour is that it produces bronchitis, languor, asthma, etc. The consumption of bhang at first sharpens the appetite, but afterwards causes indigestion, etc. It does not, however, injure the constitution much. Fakirs look upon bhang as sacred to Shiva. Charss- smokers also invoke Shiva, Kali, or any other god before smoking the drug. 34.It would certainly be a privation to the con- sumers to forego the habit. The numbers of such consumers cannot be estimated. Fakirs and nanga sadhus, who dispense with clothes after smoking the charas, will specially feel serious privation if the drug is withheld. Akalis (Sikhs) and other people will also feel annoyed in the event of bhang being prohibited. 35.Fakirs accustomed to the consumption of bhang or charas will feel annoyed and offended at the prohibition. Their worldly connections being hardly such as to enable them to live in peace, it will be difficult to maintain order among them. It is also feared that these fakirs will then use the drugs illicitly. Since they have been confirmed in the habit, it will be very difficult for them to forego it. The consumers of these drugs will not have recourse to alcohol. Sudden stoppage of the consumption of these drugs would cause serious privation to the consumers. 36.People are now more inclined to spirituous liquors than before. This appears to be due to the increase in the number of liquor shops and also to the people moving mostly in the society of the consumers of liquor. As leading (native) gentle- men have recourse to alcohol, the masses too are following their examples. 37 and 33. Don't know. 39.No other drug, except that to which the person is accustomed, can gratify his craving. No- thing is manufactured from bhang or charas which should fully gratify the consumers of bhang and charas. 40.No physician prescribes charas in the treat- ment of any disease. Bhang is, however, pre- scribed by physicians in certain diseases, but not in general. It is also given to cattle along with other ingredients. 41.The consumption of bhang sharpens appetite. The people of Sindh and North-Western Provinces drink it as preventive of malarial diseases and in- jurious effects of unwholesome water. Charas is generally smoked by fakirs as a protective against cold and flatulence. 42.In my opinion the consumption of these drugs is not harmless. The moderate use of bhang does not, however, prove injurious. 43.The consumers are inoffensive to their neigh- bours. Dryness is, however, caused to their brain and they talk nonsense after smoking charas. 44.The habitual consumers feel refreshed when they take the drug, but get uneasy and distressed when the effect is over. In case of not having the drug at the fixed hour the consumer feels a sort of perturbation. 45.Charas-smoking injures the brain and causes loss of appetite in the event of excess. The habitual charas smokers are generally dull and lazy, and subject to phlegmatic diseases, e.g., bronchitis, asthma, etc. It does not induce to debauchery. Excessive smoking, however, affects the intellect and even produces insanity of a temporary type The disease is, however, cured by eating rich diet and foregoing the habit. Excessive use is likely to cause relapse. Diseased persons do. not use any of these drugs. Bhang drinking does not cause such diseases as are produced by charas-smoking. Nothing is known about ganja. 46.Please see my answer to question No. 45. 47.The consumption of any of these drugs does not affect, in any way, the children of the consumers. 48.Please see my answer to question No. 47. 49.The consumption of any of these drugs is not practised as an aphrodisiac. Immoral women drink bhang to some extent as cooling beverage. The consumption of bhang does not produce im- potency, but excessive charas-smoking does. 50.Please see my answer to question No. 49. 51.Bad characters do consume bhang and charas, but the use of these two drugs is not likely to incite to any crime. 52.Please see my answer to question No. 51. 53.The excessive indulgence of any of these drugs is not likely to incite the perpetration of violent crime or homicide. 54.The drugs are not used by criminals to fortify themselves to commit a premeditated crime. These drugs do not possess the fortifying property which liquor and other intoxicants do. 55.These drugs do not possess stupefying pro- perties, which are peculiar to dhatura, mittha-telia, etc. Complete stupefaction cannot be induced without the admixture of other narcotics. 56.Nothing is known. 57.I know nothing about ganja, since the drug is neither manufactured nor consumed in this province. None eats charas. It is, however, smoked by being placed in the midst of tobacco in a huka chilium. 53.Requires improvement to some extent. 59.According to the system in force, no whole- sale merchants except the retail vendors holding licenses can purchase or sell bhang and charas. No wholesale merchants can purchase and transport charas and bhang for sale, but can sell the drugs to the licensed vendors when one comes to him. Arrangements should therefore be made for grant- ing licenses to the wholesale dealers for buying the drugs and transporting them to other places for sale to licensed vendors. 60.I have no experience regarding ganja, as the drug is not produced here. 61.Charas is not manufactured in this province. 62.The hemp plant is not cultivated here at all. It grows spontaneously. No control is necessary, seeing that the drug is cheap, and consequently no loss is likely to result. If licenses for the purchase and sale of bhang were given to wholesale vendors, they would themselves manage to get the hemp plants collected and stored up. Afterwards they could sell to the lessees or other licensed wholesale vendors. Control would thus be completely ex- ercised.
519 63.Ganja is not produced nor smoked in this province. Licenses for the wholesale vend of bhang and charas should, however, be granted. At present charas, which is imported from Yarkand, is sold by us as a merchandise to the retail vendors holding leases. We ourselves cannot buy it. In case of licenses being given, we too will be entitled to buy bhang from every district and transport it for sale. As regards bhang, contractors alone can get it reaped and collected for sale. No other person has a right to do so. In the case of the licenses being given, other persons too will be able to buy and sell bhang. Some majum (a kind of preparation) is pre- pared from bhang. No other person, except retail vendors holding lease, can prepare and sell majum. Nothing is prepared from charas. It may also be said that licenses for the sale of charas have been granted to wholesale vendors in the Amritsar district. 64.I have no objection to the present system, except those mentioned in answer to question No. 63. 65.Ganja smoking does not prevail in this country. Bhang is not worth taxing as it is very cheap. In the first place, great expenditure is incurred in getting the plant reaped and conveyed, and then if it remains unsold for two years, the cost will in- crease by payment of house rent. It also begins to decrease in value after one year. It is then not worth the cost laid on it as the proverb runs :519 black (lit. round) pepper. The rulers of Yarkand recover duty on this drug. I know nothing about ganja. 18.Charas deteriorates if kept long. It, how- ever, keeps well in this country for one year. During the second year it does not deteriorate so much as to entirely lose its effects. It, however, loses half its strength. During the third year it completely deteriorates, and no one buys it. If there is any desire to keep it for three years, it can be kept at cold places, such as Simla, Murree, etc. Bhang keeps well for one year only. After that it continues to lose its effects year after year. It does not deteriorate as much as charas, provided it is dried in the sun. I know nothing regarding ganja. 19.Charas is smoked by means of a huka or a chillum. The drug is placed in tobacco. It is smoked in Hindustan by means of a chillum. In the Punjab it is generally smoked by means of a chillum, and occasionally by a huka. 20.Charas is smoked by gosains, suthras, jogis (Hindu mendicants), and abdhuts (who always keep their bodies naked), and also by professional musicians and grass-cutters in cantonments. 21.As ganja is not used in this country, I know nothing about it. 22.Foreign charas is imported from Yarkand and used. First it was imported from Bokhara into India, but now the importation has been stop- ped for some years. In Kashmir, bhang dust is produced to a small extent and consumed locally and not imported here. The people of this country do not like it. In Rampur Bashari, charas is pre- pared from bhang for local use. 23.No. 24.(It is used by) Akali Sikhs, fakirs in general, mahajans, Brahmins, and other classes mentioned in answer to question No. 20, and by most of the Sikhs at Amritsar and Tarn Taran. Mahajans drink it everywhere and also in Marwar. The numbers cannot be explained. 25.The use of ganja is not prevalent at all in this country. Charas smoking is, however, on the increase on account of the increase in population. The use of bhang is just as it was before. 26.(a) I cannot answer this. (b) Sadhus, fakirs, nirmalas, udasis, and profes- sional musicians. The proportion cannot be stated. (c) Mahajans, Brahmins, etc., use it occasion- ally. The excessive consumers, who are generally Sikhs, Akalis, etc., consume bhang only out of these intoxicants. 27.The Sikhs, who during the reign of Maha" raja Ranjit Singh drank liquor hard and could get it cheap, after the advent of British rule, being thrown out of employment, could not afford to buy liquors previously obtained at a cheap price. They returned to their homes and took to bhang in place of alcohol. Their children contracted the habit by associating with them. 28.Cannot be ascertained. (a)Three pies worth. The amount of charas cannot be estimated. It must have been consumed at least at 6 annas worth per day. (b)One anna, 3 pies worth. 29.The following ingredients are generally mixed with bhang:520 appetite. Uneasiness is felt four hours after use, when the intoxication abates. 45.The moderate use does not injure the consti- tution (of the consumer). It, however, makes him feeble. It does not cause asthma, dysentery and dyspepsia, nor does it impair the moral sense, nor does it induce laziness and debauchery. It neither deadens the intellect nor produces insanity. The excessive use of charas, however, causes bronchitis, asthma and other diseases. If temporary insanity is caused by moderate use, it can be cured for ever by discontinuing the use of the drugs. Some people use bhang in moderation at Lahore, Derajat, Multan and Shikarpur, to avoid the effects of climate. 46.The excessive use is beneficial, as far as has been mentioned under question No. 45 ; otherwise it is injurious. 47.The habit is not hereditary, but it is a pri- vation to break it off for the sake of benefit (sic). The evil consequences do not affect the children. 48.The habitual excessive use of these drugs dees not affect the consumer in any way, except making him uneasy and uncomfortable (sic). The evil consequences of the excessive use of the drug are not inherited by the children of the consu- mers. 49.Some persons use it as an aphrodisiac, and most Hindu mendicants consume it for subduing their animal passions. Immoral women also drink bhang for sexual pleasures. Young men of wealthy families use it as food and accessory. Hindu men- dicants practically use bhang for purposes of devo- tion. 50.The excessive use makes the consumer languid and affects his virility. The excesssive or the moderate use makes no difference to the Hindu mendicants and fakirs. 51.There is not one kind of bad characters. The gamblers use it to exhilarate themselves and to avoid sorrow resulting from the loss of bets in gambling. Other criminals, such as highway robbers, dacoits, or thieves, etc., who commit crime by physical force, do not consume this drug. 52.If a gambler takes to excess instead of moderation, he will lose bets instead of winning them, as it is impossible for the excessive use not to affect the intellect. Other criminals neither use it moderately, not in excess. 53.The excessive use does not incite the consum- er to any violent crime. Such a case is not known to have ever occurred, as the consumer is himself unconscious by excessive use. 54.The use of bhang and charas does not fortify the criminals mentioned under question No. 51, as it makes them cowards and depresses their spirits. 55.A small quantity of unadulterated bhang or charas stupefies the non-consumer. 56.When any one has a criminal intention, he administers bhang to his victims with a large admixture of dhatura, and thereby gains his object. The use of bhang alone does not induce stupefac- tion. The admixture of a little amount of dhatura, however, produces complete stupefaction or makes the consumer unconscious. 57.As far as I know charas is smoked by being placed in tobacco. Nothing is known about ganja. 58.The present system in respect to taxation and control should be continued. It works well from Yarkand to Hoshiarpur, as well as throughout the territories under British rule. If the system were discontinued, the Yarkand trade would cease altogether. If any step is taken against it, the traffic of Yarkand will decrease from one maund to two seers, with the result that the natives of Askardu, the Bhut tribe of Ladakh, the people of Kashmir, and merely 8,000 carriers, who go every year from the Jullundur and Hoshiarpur districts, will suffer a heavy loss. The carriers and traders of Yark- and, who import every year about 18 or 20 thous- and pony loads of charas, and export other products instead, will also suffer a loss. 59.(Almost) all the reasons have been explained in answer to question No. 58. Some are, however, noticed in answer to this question. Every year nearly four thousand, or four thousand and a half, maunds of charas is imported from Yarkand into this country. A portion of it is consumed in the Punjab, and the remaining portions in Hindustan. 60.As ganja is not produced in our country, I know nothing about it. 61.Charas is not produced in our country, nor is any effort necessary in this respect. In this dis- trict, the hemp plant grows spontaneously, and, after getting dry, the ripe seed falls to the ground without reaping. During the spring season the same seeds grow, and the labourers reap the harvest and sell it to the contractors at the rate of four or five maunds per rupee. The proprietor of the land feels grateful, as the hemp plant is reaped and the land is cleared. 62.In the Jullundur and Hoshiarpur districts, the plant grows spontaneously, and not by cultiva- tion, and its control is not considered necessary. 63.The present system of (a) wholesale and (b) retail sale vend of drugs is satisfactory. 64.The existing regulations regarding the export and import of these drugs by means of permits are very satisfactory The bearers obtain a permit (a kind of certificate) from the British authorities. This system is excellent, and to the satisfaction of the Ladakhis, Yarkaudis, and the Punjabis. It does not cause inconvenience to any one. 65.I cannot suggest anything. The present administration is satisfactory. 66.Nothing is known about ganja. 67.Bhang ought not to be taxed. There is no objection taken against charas at the rate of 8 annas per pacca seer. As regards ganja, opinion may be expressed in the country where it is pro- duced. 68.The retail vendors have no license for bhang and charas. They only get a contract for retail vend. When a contractor goes to any foreign territory to purchase bhang or charas, he obtains a permit from the district authorities, and thereby gets a license to import. The retail vendors at Amritsar have alone got licenses for bhang and charas. 69.It would be an excellent thing if the wishes of the people were consulted before a shop is opened in a locality. The matter is also under the consi- deration of the Government. 70.No contractor can import bhang or charas in- to any State without obtaining a permit. In the first place it is conveyed from Yarkand into Ladakh without any permit, and when, however, it is des- patched from Ladakh to Kashmir or Kulu or Ram- pur-Bashahar, it is weighed at Ladakh and a per- mit is granted to the trader. The drug is re weigh- ed on arrival at the frontier towns of Rawalpindi,
521 Kulu, Simla, Abbottabad or Sialkot, and if any dis- crepancy is found it is rectified. The seal of the Government is then affixed on the consignments of charas. Permits are then prepared in triplicate form. One copy of it is kept by the Ahlmad clerk in his permit book; the second is given to the trader (lit. owner), and the third is despatched to the district into which the charas is to be conveyed. 95. Evidence* of MALIK KHAJAN SINGH, Excise Contractor, Rawalpindi. As regards the use of the hemp drugs, charas, ganja and bhang, I beg to state as follows :Indian Temp Drugs Commission. VOL. V. EVIDENCE OF WITNESSES FROM NORTH