REPORT ON BURMESE ELEPHANTS. BY VETERINARY CAPTAIN G. H. EVANS, ARMY VETERINARY DEPARTMENT; SUPERINTENDENT, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA. SEPTEMBER 1894.
Note on Elephants in Burma, with a description of their Equipment, by VETERINARY CAPTAIN G. H. EVANS, Army Veterinary Department; Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Burma (September 1894). Names.2 qui vive, so he keeps out of the way; but while they are moving off to fresh ground the tiger follows ; the little one, being lame, probably lags behind, thus giving stripes another chance. If he does not get one, he waits till the herd settles down again to feed, and then, when the opportunity offers, he makes another dash at his victim, and invariably bites a second limb. The calf is now hors de combat, and the tiger knows that he has only to wait, as the herd, if large, cannot stay long in one place ; for twenty or thirty animals will soon clear all the " tit bits " on the ground where they are feeding ; or they may want water, so the young one has to be left behind. I believe, however, that they will not leave a young one until they are forced. As soon as the herd is clear, the tiger finds a young beast an easy prey, and no doubt a very excellent meal. In January last, a tiger attacked a calf in a cane-brake. The little fellow was crying pitifully ; his legs were so badly bitten that he was really unable to walk a few yards, so had to be shot. Two cows were on guard and charged so furiously that they also had to be shot. All this occurred within fifty yards of a main track through the jungle. The people sometimes catch a "rogue" or other destructive beast by means of pitfalls. These are made in the following manner : The point selected for digging a pit is on one of their well-known tracks to certain water or cultivation, and usually at a spot where the grass or jungle is very thick. The pit having been dug, all traces of fresh earth are removed ; the mouth is then carefully concealed with bamboos, elephant-grass, etc. After this a good amount of fresh droppings is procured, and these are thrown over the grass. This trick rather puts an animal off his guard, and so he falls into the trap. The men then turn out and destroy the animal with spears or a gun. Karens now and again capture one or two with the aid of tame elephants. Considering their great size, elephants are wonderfully active,3 proper preservation of the efficiency of the animals committed to their charge. They must remember that the class of men usually employed with transport, if left to themselves, are, from general indolence, carelessness, or from a desire to avoid the fatigue and hardships of a campaign, quite liable to render their animals unserviceable. Ample supervision enables the carrying out of systematic checks against carelessness, and, still more, of checks to malpractices. A little neglect will often deprive a force of the valuable services of many animals. Purchasing.4 them during the night. The thief who has been lying close by, waits till an animal strays a bit, creeps up to him, cuts through the cane hobbles, and after driving him a short distance, jumps on his back, and takes him the shortest cut into Siam. The hills clad with very dense jungle afford such " gentlemen" ample shelter; the owner, as a rule, has the good sense not to " hunt for a needle in a bundle of straw." Accomplished thieves make plenty of money, for they steal an animal in our territory, sell him in Siam, steal him again a month or so after, bring him across our frontier, and once more dispose of him to some one at a place many miles distant from where they originally stole the beast. I once heard a man remark that if he had anything to do with the framing of laws he would put " elephant- lifting" under crimes punishable with death. Needless to add that he had lost more than one animal in this unsatisfactory way ; by great good luck he recov- ered one, after spending a few hundred rupees. Distinctive marks are, as a rule, not very numerous on these creatures. Bur- mese elephants may be divided into two classes, viz.,5 The Siamese around Chengmai (Zimme), Kyon-Taing, and Mohauk, are said to breed elephants. The truth is, they own a large number of animals which roam about the jungles in a semi-wild state, and, as might be expected, a certain number of calves are born : these people also buy up all the calves they can lay hands on, and let them go about till they can sell or train them. Calves may be bought for little or nothing: this is also the case in Burma. Owners would often prefer to give them away, rather than be subjected to the expense of keep- ing them. A great many animals may be found in most of our frontier districts, like Tavoy, Amherst, Shwegyin, Toungoo, Salween Hill Tracts, and in Karenni. I believe there are from 200 to 300 in the latter place, and about 100 in and around Papun. In certain parts there is hardly a jungle village that cannot boast of possessing an elephant, and the usual rates for hire of a baggage animal is Rs. 2 per diem. Feeding.6 loose to graze. There is nothing I know of more conducive to keeping these creatures in good health, and it is quite the best treatment for sickly and debil- itated animals. To prevent straying, a couple of heavy chains ought to be wound round the legs, just above the pads, or a few turns of a heavy chain should be put round a hind leg, and the long free end allowed to draggle behind. When the feet are closely hobbled, they cannot move about enough to obtain good grazing. Karens Burmans, and Shans simply hobble with the light cane fetters which allows of their straying a bit : they at times use the long chain on the hind leg. A large bell or clapper is suspended from the neck, as in the jungle, where usually ali is still. The sounds of these bells can be heard some distance off, and thus time and trouble are saved in bringing them in. Govern- ment elephants being kept in an artificial state, their diet must be modified and supplemented. At times much energy is demanded of them, and a shorter time is given them to repair the loss than if they were wild, so it is necessary to supply them with increased nourishment without undue stimulation. For this purpose a daily allowance of twenty to thirty pounds of rice or paddy (unhusked rice) should be given, and it is better to give the latter crushed. They should also receive a fair ration of salt ; it does them good. Wild animals con- stantly visit the salt-licks. Wheaten flour made into cakes and sweetened with common sugar is much relished; onions, tamarind pulp, etc., may also with ad- vantage be incorporated in the cakes : they ought to be given after the ordinary rations. One or more of the following plants are procurable in most places :7 Exercise.8 In any case those placed in charge of elephants should be kind but firm, and very even tempered. No animal has a more ready perception of such qualities than the elephant. Indian keepers are a most difficult class of men to deal with, but if carefully selected and justly treated, a marvellous amount of work can be got out of them I think that it is too often the case that an officer in charge of mixed transport devotes all his attention to the mules and ponies, leaving the other animals to the care of a Transport sergeant, often a temporary hand, who, through inexperi- ence and want of knowledge of the language, does not go the right way to obtain work out of such men. Elephant-keepers are born pilferers ; they cannot help it. The appropriation, for sale or their own use, of part of the grain ration, and the submission of false and exorbitant bills for drugs in very urgent cases, are common offences. The former can be avoided by weighing the ration and seeing the animal get it, the latter by keeping in stock the drugs usually ordered or preferred by mahawuts. Their dishonesty is of the most flagrant description, and though prejudicial as it must appear to good discipline, unless such peculation be carried on to such an extent as to directly affect the health of an animal, severe punishment, such as dismissal, should not be enforced: good management is the remedy. One point should never be overlooked9 smaller canes are interlaced to give the frame strength, and also to hold small articles. Another kind has a light framework of wood with interlacing of light canes or bamboo. Very often little attention appears to be paid to the carrying capacity of these baskets, for I have seen some so small as to be utterly use- less. The average carrying capacity, I should say, is from 300 to 350 pounds. All these patterns of howdahs fit snugly on the back. The names of the different parts of the gear employed by the Burmese and Karens are as follows:10 work. The majority of cases of elephants being disabled by sore-backs and feet are, in my opinion, due to want of supervision. If every care be taken to see that animals receive their food, are not overloaded, saved unnecessary labour, and that parts exposed to irritation be regularly inspected before and after work, I am certain that the persons in charge will be well repaid for their trouble. The advantages of these animals for transport are11 the elbow. An animal wounded in this spot does not, as a rule, go far. A good and accurate rifle is necessary for shooting these beasts. In charging, the head is held high ; aim a foot or more lower down than when in the natural position. Since writing this note, I have, through a friend who has just returned from Siam, received a few notes. The object of his visit was to try and purchase some good timber elephants, and he started for that country from Da-Gwin on the Salween. He visited all the large Laos States,