Report of Veterinary Surgeon J. H. STEEL, A. V, D. on hic INVESTIGATION INTO AN OBSCURE AND FATAL DISEASE AMONG TRANSPORT MULES IN BRITISH BURMA, which he found to he a Foyer of Relapsing Type, and probably identical with the disorder first described by Dr. Griffith Evans under the name " Surra", in a Report (herewith reprinted) published by the Punjab Government, Military Department, No. 4394467, of 3rd December 1880Report of Veterinary Surgeon J. H. STEEL, A. Y. D., on his INVESTIGATION INTO AN OBSCURE AID FATAL DISEASE AMONG TRANSPORT MULES IN BRITISH BURMA, which he found to be a Fever of Relapsing Type, and probably identical with the disorder first described by Dr. Griffith Evans under the name " Surra", in a Report (herewith reprinted) published by the Punjab Government, Military Department, No. 439-4467, of 3rd December 1880CONTENTS OF REPORT. PART I.-HISTORY OF THE DISEASE (pp. 1-10). Para. 1.iv CONTENTS. Para. 8.CONTENTS. V PART IV.vi CONTENTS. CONTENTS OF DR. GRIFFITH EVANS' REPORT ON SURRA AT DERA ISMAEL KHAN. .. .. .. .. .. .. Page The name " Surra" explained .. .. .. .. .. .. 59 Geographical distribution of the disease .. .. .. .. .. .. 59 Definition .. .. .. .. .. .. 60 Symptoms .. .. .. .. .. .. 60 Post mortem appearances in the horse .. .. .. .. .. .. 61 Do. do. camel .. .. .. .. .. .. 64 Mortality .. .. .. .. .. .. 62 Contagion and imfection .. .. .. .. .. .. 63 Different animals affected .. .. .. .. .. .. 63 CausesREPORT ON AN INVESTIGATION INTO A DISEASE AMONG TRANSPORT MULES. PART I.2 the amount of information available as a basis for this report and rendered the work of collection of evidence much more difficult and prolonged than it otherwise would have been. The complete absence of skilled assistance in clinical observation and record threw a large amount of manipulative work on me which might just as well have been performed by a Veterinary Assistant had one been available. This was only felt at first, for, later, Corporal Hill, 2nd Somersetshire Regiment, became competent to make intelligent observations and records of the pulse, respirations, temperature, and general symptoms of the cases, so that the clinical records could be continued during my absence at Tonghoo; I may add that the average salootri is quite unfit for any such duty. The disease is not one in which elaborate section-cutting for microscopical investigation is required, but such researches in this line as suggested themselves have been carried out with satisfactory results; the blood is the seat of the disorder and can best be examined while it is alive and as taken from the living animal. The parasites which occur in it are peculiar in their life-history and in their relations to the phenomena of the disease, on both of which matters the present research has increased our knowledge. A serious stumbling block to progress in study of their develop- mental changes was the fact that they become invisible on drying up and practically so on cessation of their movements. I made attempts to stain them in various ways and have obtained excellent results from the use of aniline dyes. Culture was a line of research for which my appliances would not suffice. This matter is of great importance as bearing on the entry into and exit from the system of the parasites, but must be Worked out by future observers. My attempts at curative treatment have not given any important results of a positive character, but I have obtained some information as to prevention. Although much of importance remains to be done before we thoroughly understand how to grapple with this disorder practically and successfully, yet I trust the present inquiry will be found to have added important facts to our knowledge of its clinical features, causes, and true pathology. 2. HISTORY OF THE DISORER.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CHART ILLUSTRATING THE DISTRIBUTION OF CASES OF RELAPSING FEVER IN TIME,PL ACE, & CORPS.
3 and November, less so in December and January, and two cases succumbed to it at the end of February, when the outbreak ceased. Of the Native Infantry half transport, four mules (one hired out to an officer), and of the European Infantry, two mules died of the enzootic this season (1883-84). The probable losses from relapsing fever of Government transport animals at Rangoon during the year 1883-84 may be tabulated as follows:4 shall not be far out in representing the money loss to Government in two years from this disease in British Burma at Rs. 30,000 ; and if, as is possible, the losses in elephants (so numerous lately) are also due to relapsing fever, a considerable addition must be made on that account to the above specified amount. We may here give a table showing the losses probably from relapsing fever of Government transport mules in 1884-85 :5 just as surra in British. Burma is ! The balance of evidence tends to the view that relapsing fever is not a disease new to British Burma. It is almost impossible to exactly establish this position, because so little has been known of animal diseases in Burma until quite recently. The evidence of Veterinary Surgeon (First-class) E. Frost, however, would seem to point to its being a new disease, for, although he has been engaged professionally in Burma for some eight years, the disease is new to him; he has never seen a case before which he can recall to his mind. But his professional work has been among animals proved by experience to be least liable to it, namely, the animals housed in private stables receiving individual attention from people in charge of them. During my stay in Burma I heard of two cases at Rangoon in ponies belonging to private individuals. I did not see them, but there could be little doubt as to their nature. I have seen wretched shadows of ponies grazing in the marshes which strongly reminded me of my patients. The mortality among ghari ponies and others belonging to poor people is high, if we may judge from the not infrequent sight of a carcase by the side of the road in the early morning. These people view the loss of a pony as a " visitation from God" and enter no further into the cause of it, although there is a tradition among them, which I have heard of two or three times, that the ghari-owners could not keep their ponies alive until they hit on the expedient of giving them some gram with the paddy ration. Tonghoo seems from report to be a very unhealthy place for ponies, and, if for them, how much more for imported mules ! This question of whether the disease is new to Burma is of some practical importance, for it has been suggested that the transport mules may have brought the disease with them from India, especially the Punjab, in which neighbour- hood it is well known to horse-owners and cavalry officers. But, apart from the high probability that the disease is not contagious, as will be demonstrated hereafter, we have the significant facts in this relation that the mules at Tonghoo and of the Euro- pean Infantry at Rangoon were not, like those of the Rangoon Supply Depot, subjected to the outbreak the year of their arrival into the country; also that it has not yet appeared among the sappers' mules at Rangoon, the artillery at Tonghoo, or the animals at Thayetmyo and Moulmein. It rather seems that the mules came from India with good constitutions, in exact proportion to which, plus the care taken of their health, plus the healthiness of the station to which they were posted, has been their freedom from disease. According to this view it is possible that it may next season extend to the stations and corps which have not yet suffered from its ravages, and we cannot yet give an opinion as to whether removal of mules from Tonghoo and Rangoon to Moulmein and Thayetmyo would prevent recurrence of the disorder; it seems not unlikely that aggregation of a large number at Moulmein would render it the seat of an outbreak from which it is now exempted by the very small number of trans- port animals there. Thayetmyo has stood this test satisfactorily for two years and will probably be found an excellent centre for mule transport. 7. The serious mortality at Rangoon in 1883 was reported on (under date 9th November 1883, No. 1693,) by Veterinary Surgeon (First-class) Frost, then in veterinary charge of the British Burma Transport. He states that the disease from which so many mules have died within the last month or six weeks was ulceration of the stomach, generally confined to the left sac, but in some instances the ulceration extended to both sacs, no traces of disease being found either in the gullet or in the intestines. Some cases were acute, others chronic. He considered it due to some- thing deleterious in grain, grass, or water (the latter especially). He thought that the exposure to which the depôt mules were subjected during the height of the monsoon, when quarantined at Kokine, rendered them susceptible; as a matter of fact they went out in good condition and came back in bad. In accordance with his sugges- tions, Major Hill, Deputy Assistant Commissary-General for Transport, removed the mules and ponies from the dep6t and had them watered from a different tank. Inspect- ing Veterinary Surgeon Evans was referred to in the matter and was " inclined to think that the disease was parasitic " (vide Commissary-General Macgrath's letter to Quartermaster-General, No. 2412 T.B., dated 18th January 1884). Inspecting Veter- inary Surgeon Shaw was, in the commencement of 1884, deputed to inquire into the disease. He arrived at Rangoon in April 1884, but, as the last fatal case at the depot had terminated on 14th February 1884, the disease was not then present. He concluded from such evidence as was available that the symptoms and post-mortem 2
6 appearances clearly point to some irritant causing the disease; this irritant he thought resided in certain tanks which had been beyond doubt established as sources of infec- tion. He suggested that the animals be kept from drinking the water of stagnant pools and tanks; that eleven "old and worn-out" mules be watered from the suspected sources until the following February, and that, should the disease reappear in the mean while, opportunity will have been afforded to carry out further inquiry. Inspecting Veterinary Surgeon Evans, writing from Ootacamund on 14th May 1884 (No. 549), concludes that there is not sufficient evidence to show what the disease was. Accordingly, the disease having reappeared, I was, in October 1884, deputed to make the suggested necessary investigation. The following is a precis of the knowledge of the disease acquired before my arrival. 8. SYMPTOMS.7 researches with the higher magnifying powers may reveal some pathological organism hitherto overlooked." The event has quite justified this surmise. The Chemical Examiner to Government, E. Romanis, D.SC. (Edinburgh), examined the gastric ulcers and found in them vegetable debris and low forms of life, but, not being a medical man, did not feel in a position to give any statement as to their pathological importance. 10. From Tonghoo the following list of post-mortem appearances is summarised from the evidence (in twenty-five unselected cases) given by officers of the medical department as attending the committees for post-mortem examination of mules under orders of the General Officer Commanding (there being no veterinary officer at the station):8 In the water from tanks Nos. 1 and 3 " were over eighty specimens (species ?) of animal and vegetable parasitic (?) life, twelve of the latter (confervæ) being new to science, but whether any of them are noxious is not known. Microscopical examination of the contents of the stomach and of waters from Nos. 1 and 3 tanks was unsuccessful so far as detecting any injurious animal parasitic life goes, but there were present certain vegetable organisms of the Algæ family, some very rare varieties of decimedes, diatoms, chara, and confervæ. Among the infusoria were the harmless vorticella and rotifera" (vide Inspecting Veterinary Surgeon Shaw's report). The occurrence of the disease in October and the following months, i.e., " after the tanks had received their supply of organic impurities," was considered a noteworthy point in relation to the cause ; but, as a matter of fact, the organic impurities in relation to the bulk of water are then at a minimum, and the maximum is attained generally in May and early in June, when cases of relapsing fever actually commence. It is as well to correct the method of expressing this fact, although its bearings on the disease are the same, i.e., that, after the maximum organic impurity has been attained, cases of relapsing fever begin to occur, and they increase in number with the fall in the ammonia curve as the following chart shows :9 " (c) The remaining transport animals that continued No. 2 tank water till it became low (when it was thought prudent to remove them to well water) did not show a single case of the disease * * * * " (e) Total disappearance of the disease since Nos. 1 and 3 tank water ceased to be used." We shall refer to this argument in another part of the report. 12. Veterinary Surgeon (First-class) Frost distinctly recognizes exposure as a predisposing cause, and the Transport Officers at Tonghoo attributed many cases to " exposure when on public command at Thandoun in June " 1884. 13. The possibility of locality causing the disease was recognized ; accordingly the Rangoon depot mules were in 1883 moved out of their lines on to the glacis of the Pagoda Fort, to the Commissariat Bakery, and to Kokine with a view to getting rid of it, and the Tonghoo mules were moved out several miles towards the frontier to the sanitary or cholera camp. 14. The influence of advanced age in causing fatality was thus far noted that " old age " was the verdict of many post-mortem examination boards at Tonghoo, and is entered as the cause of a number of deaths at Rangoon. It is urged that many of the mules sent from India to Burma were very old, and that thus many veterans of Afghanistan10 17th November 1884) and from time to time fresh cases occurred11 I have proved, generally non-detectable in the fresh blood; secondly, the " pocket" instrument used by Dr. Evans, although excellent for magnification and definition, is much too small in the field for exact and prompt diagnosis ; thus, in Rangoon, it several times gave negative results when my larger instrument readily showed the parasites present. Dr. Evans made some post-mortem examinations at Tonghoo, which, as we shall see directly, have a most important bearing on the relations of gastric ulceration to relapsing fever.* 2. To Veterinary Surgeon (First-class)Frost belongs the credit of drawing attention to the state of the stomach, ulcers in which organ are very marked in a large propor- tion of the cases. This is a lesion generally associated with the action of an irritant poison, and, apart from such influence, is rarely seen in veterinary practice as may be inferred from the record of a case in vol. XIII, Veterinary Journal, page 201, where it is noticed editorially as quite an exceptional condition. Under these circumstances it was natural that the cause of irritation be sought for in the food and surroundings of the animal. Firstly, the question of malicious poisoning has to be dealt with. It seems, from the evidence bearing on this matter, that there has been at times some dissatisfaction among the transport drivers, and it was thought that this could be directly associated with the prevalence of the disease in different lines at Rangoon at different times; the influence of attendants on the development of the disease was thus far perceptible that some drivers have lost fewer of their mules than others, or even none of those under their charge. In one or two cases the driver, after losing all his three mules, deserted. Chemical analysis of the viscera was resorted to, but no poison detected ; the gastric contents administered to a mule from two fatal cases failed to communicate the disease, but the cases might have been chronic in which all poison had passed off from the system in the earlier stages of attack, so it was necessary to get other evidence. The disease practically occurred only among Government animals, and it was difficult to see how poisoning the animals could benefit any one12 from relapsing fever was not ascertained, and we have no evidence to show that the ulceration depended on any cause other than their vagabond mode of existence. One of the experimental mules died of " ulceration of the stomach," i.e., that lesion was found after death; another died on 27th November 1884, and was carefully examined by me. He showed no signs of relapsing fever and his stomach was not ulcerated. I have carefully examined five of these mules for some time and found them anæmic, but not suffering from relapsing fever, as I am in a position to state positively. The remainder of these mules got fat and have been sent to the regiments for duty. Thus three cases of " ulceration of the stomach " have followed in eleven mules experimented on ; of these, two are excluded as having been not treated in accordance with the conditions of the experiment, and the single remaining case may have been due to other causes operative in the station at the time. Six animals certainly, and two more probably, did not suffer from drinking the water of tank No. 1. Such results as we can obtain from this imperfect experiment are, therefore, opposed to the view that some irritant in tank No. 1 water caused the disease. The water of the tank in question was in November 1884 bright and sparkling, but I find that in January 1885 it has become almost green from plant growth and contains much organic suspended matter, both animal and vegetable, and there is a scum on its surface in places, especially at the corner near the road from the Somersetshire lines, where the tank is freely accessible for drinking purposes. The corner near the Depôt Lines where the animals used to be watered is comparatively pure, and there is no possibility of sewage contamination of this tank. It contains fish and tortoises. The arguments against this special tank are defective. My researches have brought to light error in some matters which are advanced as facts; thus one case of the disease occurred in the European Infantry mules in December 1883 ; again these mules seem to have been watered at the cemetery tank, not No. 2, but, even if they were watered at the latter, it is not likely that on all occasions they would have passed the accessible eastern corner of tank No 1 to go a quarter of a mile farther on to tank No. 2. The supply of water to the dep6t mules while in quarantine at Kokine is not mentioned, and it is not considered that a transport mule waters almost anywhere, if used for puckal work at the tank to which he goes, if on orderly duty at every place where opportunity offers, and the same with other duties. It is practically impossible, from the very nature of the service, to prevent mules obtaining water from various sources, and the probable face that private animals13 that care and attention to exact and continued observations which my predecessors had not been able to find time for in consequence of other urgent duties. I had been nearly a month in Rangoon observing the clinical features of the disease before (on 11th December 1884) I recognized in it the parasite of Surra. This observation, soon amply and thoroughly substantiated by frequent repetitions, at once afforded me a solid basis for future work. It was evident to me, from the very diffused nature of the lesions as observed post-mortem, and on other grounds, that the blood was the seat of disorder. But the question arose whether the ulceration of the stomach would not fully account for this ; no doubt such extensive ulceration as was generally found would admit of absorption of unaltered gastric juice and of imperfectly prepared products of digestion. The post-mortem evidences are not contradictory to this possi- bility, and the most evident symptoms of the disease might be accounted for on this theory. The persistently acid state of the urine, too, indicated excessive acidity of the blood, which might be due to prematurely absorbed gastric contents, and the occasional occurrence of albumen in the urine might be accounted for in this manner. And yet there were difficulties in the way of this view, especially it would not account for the periodicity of the disease which was not in association with the phases of digestion nor with any other detectible gastric influence. Further. it soon became evident that in a sufficiently large proportion of cases post-mortem examination showed ulceration of the stomach only to an insignificant extent or else entirely absent. This led me to conclude that gastric ulceration is not the disease, although evidently in very close association with it either as a cause or an effect. A mule having been destroyed for broken leg was found to have ulcers of its stomach ; this fact still further confirmed my view that the gastric ulceration was but secondary, although (considering the fever cases are not diagnosed at their commencement) it is possible that the animal suffered from the disorder without it having been recognized and should at the time (November 1884) have been on the sick list for it. Gastric ulceration having been proved but secondary to the principal disorder, the important question next suggested itself whether the relations between the two conditions are accidental contemporaneous existence, causal, or the ulcers but a local manifestation of specific disorder. (a) The two states might be due to a common cause acting as a poison on the system and exerting a local influence on the stomach ; (b) or the ulcers in the stomach might be the portal of entry of the specific element into the blood ; (c) or they might be the vents through which the blood expelled it from the system ; or (d) the two states on account of the great frequency of both among a limited number of mules might occur simultaneously in many cases. In endeavouring to solve this difficult question, I found it necessary to examine the pathology of the stomach ulcers with very great care. I obtained the following results from post- mortem examinations :14 and myself :15 until, if the animal remains alive long enough, perforation occurs. Probably the peritoneum becomes involved in the general atrophy, but I have not seen a single case in which it has shown signs of inflammation opposite the ulcers. (In Tonghoo one case was noted.) Here and there a stellate congestion of the corium may be detected by means of a magnifying glass. Condensation of the areolar tissue connect- ing the muscular with the mucous coat and sometimes thickening of the former takes place, and later the three coats of the stomach may become united by consolidation of their connective tissue. Perforation may result from extension of the ulceration and is generally a minute opening through the peritoneum, its length corresponding to the direction of the outer layer of muscular fibres. It is sometimes seen in the cuticular portion, sometimes in the villous. Where the muscular layer is exposed, its blood- vessels are often distinguishable as black lines between the fibres; they are filled with coagula. This leads us to the important question of whether the blood organisms are the producers of the ulceration, and gives a clue to the manner in which they might produce that effect. The villous portion is less adapted to show the lesions above described, but it presents them, one and all, in different cases. We frequently find that part of its substance is dense and thicker than the rest, but not uniformly so, for here and there are thin spots resembling ulcers, or we may find lines of ulceration looking very much like rents converging towards the pylorus, or the membrane may be merely congested and present blood-spots. In some cases there are changes going on at the line of junction of the two portions which look like (and probably are) a normal change of nature of the membrane, an increase in size of the villous at the expense of the cuticular, especially wherever the latter normally projects into the former. I have also seen cases in which the ulcers were apparently undergoing gradual, but not very advanced, repair. Various forms of parasites are to be found, but this is nothing unusual. The abodes of sclerostomes and the gelatinous mucus in which those on the mucous membrane are embedded are constantly alluded to in the post-mortem records, but apparently have no direct relation to the disease. Bots leave behind them marks resembling some of the smaller ulcers on the cuticular part, but these will not be confounded with the extensive removals of tissue found in true cases of gastric ulcer. Dr. Romanis has found, on microscopical examinations of the ulcers, low organisms and tissue debris16 Rangoon bruise the paddy before use with a view to breaking off the irritant sharp points, which they think injurious to the stomach. The Tonghoo Committees noted the occurrence in the stomach of unbroken paddy in several cases, and one Board suggested " that paddy be no longer given and some light easily digestible substitute be made.'' In one of my experimental cases which died on the fortieth day of the disease, I find well marked ulceration of both cuticular and villous coats bearing a fairly direct relation to the known duration of the case. He has been fed with soft readily digestible food since admission. In my experimental cases which succumbed subsequently to this I always found gastric lesions, more or less intense. Altogether the evidence very decidedly tends to the conclusion that gastric ulceration must be directly associated with this outbreak of relapsing fever as a special feature of it and one materially aggra- vating the symptoms. The latter point must not, however, be exaggerated; thus the persistent acidity and occurrence of albumen in the urine must not be attributed entirely to this lesion, for I have found them in a case where the lining membrane of the stomach was proved to be normal after death, and the acidity of the stomach contents is constantly diminished in fever, so would be less likely to affect the blood in relapsing fever than in. health. Again marked pain in the region of the stomach, indicated by the animal turning his head to the left side and biting the hypochondrium, occurs sometimes, and in one instance of it I found no ulceration of the stomach. Having thus decided that we must, at any rate provisionally, accept ulceration of the stomach as a lesion of the disease, and not simply in the light of a cause or accidental accompaniment, the next matter to be dealt with was whether the disease is an erup- tive disorder having the local manifestations of the constitutional derangement in the stomach. 5. I was at first inclined to accept this view. I find from my records that before I detected the parasite in the blood, I thought the disease was malarious and decided to, pro tern., term it gastric typhoid; there certainly was well-marked cachexia, fever was a prominent symptom, one part of the alimentary canal (the stomach) was the seat of ulceration presenting special features, and sometimes there were circumscribed congestion of the mucous membrane of the small bowel, often somewhat most marked on Peyer's patches. In some cases just before death the fæces became soft, reddish, and most offensive to the smell. I think the following extract from my note-book of an. entry made at this stage of the inquiry will be found sufficiently interesting to warrant its insertion here :17 settled, it was next necessary to decide in what respects that fluid is modified. The earlier lesions noted were those of simple anaemia, a paucity of red corpuscles, a shrivelled or imperfect condition of the blood elements, an apparent preponderance of white corpuscles, which were soon found to be not white but decolorised red ones, a tendency to dropsy, petechiæ of membranes, cardiac murmurs immediately preceding death, extreme pallor of membranes, the dry harsh state of the skin and acidity of urine (as though the animal, for want of sufficient vegetable diet, had to become practically carnivorous in living on its own tissues); these were conditions enough to warrant me in seriously considering whether I had not been sent simply to investigate a disease which I should have to report as under-feeding pure and simple! In starva- tion there may be exaggeration of normal daily variations in temperature, and a certain periodicity dependent on the phases of digestion might be present in association with gastric ulceration, but, as the temperature tracings gradually developed themselves, I became assured that simple anaemia would not suffice for the explanation of a Relapsing Fever, nor explain why the disease occurred at certain seasons especially. For some short time after I subjected the blood to elaborate scrutiny, only small, spherical, mobile, highly refractive bodies attracted my attention as unusual. I thought they might be the micrococci of malaria as described by Tommasi Crudeli and others. Soon, however, the characteristic organisms became evident and at once dispelled, in a most satisfactory manner, all ideas of typhoid, ulceration of stomach from irritant ingesta, malicious poisoning, and simple anaemia, but not absolutely the theory of malarial influence. It may at- first seem strange that with active living beings in the blood Veterinary Surgeon (First-class) Frost and myself (for a month) had not observed them, but in this relation it must be remembered that it is only at certain phases of the fever (which happen to be at the time when the animal is least likely to be brought to the notice of the veterinary officer) that they are detectable in the blood; secondly, the parasites are, under ordinary powers, detectible only by most intent observation when we know what to look for. Dr. Evans' Surra observations " gave us a good lead," but we were " thrown off the scent " by the gastric ulceration, which induced us to believe that we had to deal with a disease other than Surra. What led me back to the right track was especially the markedly relapsing character of the fever as shown by the beautiful thermographic tracings which the cases afforded in the first month; and, as Relapsing Fever in man is associated with spirilla in the blood, I was led to seek and find spiral organisms in mules affected with the British Burma disease. Then, with increased familiarity with the disease, I found many of the differences between it and Surra (as observed by Dr. Evans) melt away, and now but few remain. The symptoms in a pony which obtained the disease artificially almost exactly answered to Dr. Evans' description of his cases in Punjabi horses. 6. To illustrate the results of clinical observations made by me and to give an idea of the symptoms and post-mortem appearances found in the mules, I will insert in the Appendix my note-book records of clinical work for two days consisting of pulse, temperature, &c., records and the results of urine analysis. Also I give the charts of one ordinary case of the disease, the record case book entries of two more, the charts of experimental mule cases and of one pony and one dog case, and the charts of complicated cases as occurring in the mule. These will suffice as a means of illustration of the cases to be dealt with in the inquiry, and also as a means whereby we may compare this Burma disease with Relapsing Fever as observed in man and Surra as studied by Dr. Evans in and about Dera Ismail Khan. In comparing Surra with the British Burma disease, I have had the benefit of Dr. Evans' opinion after personal examination of Burma cases. He was inclined to consider the two diseases as distinct, but closely allied, rather than essentially the same disease modified by difference in species of the animal affected, geographical range, and other local conditions. He now agrees with the latter opinion. There are some of the symptoms which I have observed as differing markedly from those mentioned in the report on Surra. I have seen serous effusion beneath the vulval mucous membrane, but very seldom the petechiæ in that situation as described by Dr. Evans; swelling of the sheath in males and below the sternum in females was noted in Surra, but I find Appendix, Disease Charts, &c. Natural cases A. 39 A. 11 a. 31 Artificial case .. XV Record case book entries. B. 57 B. 70 Illustrative of diag- nosis .. B. 54 Total records of cases. 7 5
18 the latter occurs no more in one sex than in the other, indeed, my most persistent case of it was in a stallion ; 19 extending from the end of the visible " tail."* I had no reason to suspect the presence of ciliæ on the head; indeed it was quite possible to understand the varied movements of the parasite without any such agency being required. I found not the slightest sign of " two fin-like papillæ on each side20 are very marked. Relapsing Fever of man is a rather rare disorder and is described as occurring in direct and immediate association with such debilitating influences as famines and imperfect nutrition. The blood contains spirilla, which, as Murchison (Path. Trans., 1875, p. 317,) points out, disappear from the blood before the crisis, are absent during the intermissions and re-appear with the relapse, phenomena exactly corresponding to those noted in the mules' disease. Vandyke Carter of Bombay has conveyed relapsing fever from man to monkeys by inoculation with but six failures in twenty-one trials (Med. Chir. Trans., 1880, p. 125). It has been observed that men suffer more than women (3 : 2), whereas I find that females are most liable, but not markedly so. It is most common in adolescence and early manhood, but the mule disease seems to affect animals of all ages indiscriminately. The disease of man is attributed to the following as the principal causes : scarcity of food, overcrowding, want of cleanliness, and contagion. I could obtain no evidence of the latter, and with regard to the former, some of my mules which died were fat; none of them are specially crowded, and their lives and persons are kept decidedly cleaner than those of the average mule. The blood, in addition to the parasites, has been noted as containing " large, colorless transparent cells," often two to four times as large as the white corpsuscles ; these I have generally noted at a certain stage of the fever in the mules as " gelatinoid, decolorised, red corpuscles," which sufficiently expresses my views as to their nature. It seems strange to me to read in accounts of the human disease of " even a fourth relapse," whereas in the mule we get even a seventeenth in some cases; also the low mortality in man is in striking contrast with the invariably fatal result in equine patients. Season has little effect although the disease' of man prevails most in winter. Relapsing fever also occurs to an extent in mules at all seasons, and specially attracts attention as an enzootic in winter and late autumn. The spirillum of man (Spirochæte Obermeieri) seems larger, more uniform in diameter, more markedly spiral, and less ferocious than that of the mule, which I had termed Spirochæte Evansi after its discoverer, but I find that he is not willing to accept the view that it is a spiral bacterium, a matter which I shall have to enter into detail about later on. I may here remark that I have never studied Relapsing Fever of man or its organism practically, and that I am in the main indebted to Quain's Dictionary of Medicine for the above facts about them, the articles being by Grimshaw and Bastian. Fever has not been specially prevalent among the transport drivers who live in lofts above the mules, nor have any cases of apparent communication of the disease from the mules to men constantly handling them occurred. I have tried inoculation of a monkey with marked success. Thus we are in a position to compare the human and mule disease on a common ground by contrasting Carter's cases of monkey disease with mine. 9. Manifestly it is not possible to verify by experiment its communicability to man, for the disease conveyed by inoculation might prove fatal after causing much disturb- ance to the system occurring in paroxysms extending over a long time. The follow- ing circumstances, trivial in themselves, may be alluded to as possibly links in the chain of evidence on this point. Veterinary Surgeon (First-class) Frost; when attending mules affected with this disorder, became ill; he suffered from pain in the left side and used to say he had caught ulceration of the stomach from the mules ; he recovered only when he went away to district work. I also, on arrival and having attended the mules for a short time, had pain in my left side, which especially rendered laughing acutely painful; this, with an accompanying constant hunger, persisted until my trip to Tonghoo. I was examined by a doctor because I suspected pleurisy, but none was present. Subsequently, when collecting specimens of blood from one of the affected animals, I made a minute puncture accidentally on my hand ; in a few days it became a star- shaped congested spot and later some fluid collected beneath the epidermis, but these phenomena ceased after remarkably resembling unsuccessful inoculation of an insus- ceptible subject. My monkey bit me on one occasion. The wound suppurated freely for several days, but has now healed, and I feel no ill effects from the accident. We may conclude that the British Burma disease is of the same class of disorders as "Famine Fever " of man, and that they are probably not exact pathological equivalents, although we require more evidence on this point. 10. In the class " Relapsing Fevers " we must also include those which have been observed and induced by Drs. Vandyke Carter and Evans and myself. Monkeys have
21 suffered from the affection induced by inoculation with the blood of human patients. Dr. Evans describes Surra in the camel, called also Phipri. It is considered the third stage of a progressive anaemia, in which dropsy of the abdomen and legs and rapid wasting occur. Recovery is almost hopeless, but, when it does take place, the animal remains useless for two years, its urine becoming high-colored during the hot season and natural during the cold. The usual duration of the attack is from one week to two or three months ; it seldom lasts four months. The parasite lives longer by several hours in the blood of the camel than in that of the horse after it has been drawn. I find that the Burma disease as induced in the dog proved fatal after inducing symptoms remarkably lesembling those exhibited by the mules, but with peculiar swelling of the lymph glands on either side of the face. I found no ulceration of the stomach after death (but cannot be quite sure on this point because the animal died dur- ing my absence and was much decomposed before I examined its carcass). Carter's attempts to communicate the disease of man to dogs proved unsuccessful. The parasite in the dog's blood seems more feeble than that in the mule's; it leaves the large cor- puscles of the dog to tackle those of the mule, but its efforts to detach the latter from their rouleaux seem futile and ineffectual, although its movements become vigorous and markedly spiral in the effort. It seems more uniform in diameter throughout its length than that of the mule's blood. "When transferred into a drop of ruminant's blood, it works its way, without the slightest difficulty, among the small red corpuscles, but never has been seen by me to touch one of them. I have seen one parasite return again and again to a small group of corpuscles, shaking each of them in the intervals between its short movements to and fro and disturbing others by violent lashings of its tail. My inoculations of a bullock with blood containing numerous and active parasites from a mule have been followed by hard swelling at and around the seat of inoculation, persisting for many days but without appreciable systemic disorder. A goat too resisted inoculation, but after intraperitoneal injection fell away rapidly in spite of excessive appetite. After death its spleen was found to be enlarged and somewhat indurated. Thus the result of this experiment was dubious. Altogether it is probable that the Indian ox and the goat enjoy immunity from Relapsing Fever.* 11. With the determination of the true nature of the British Burma disease arises a question of nomenclature. There cannot be the slightest objection to the desig- nation " Equine Relapsing Fever" as applied to this disorder in future scientific notice of it, for it affects naturally both mules and ponies, and the thermographic tracings leave no doubt as to its being a true relapsing fever. Surra also is an equine relapsing fever in all probability, but Dr. Evans' records of cases are not sufficiently long to make this absolutely clear. He has since informed me that he had been inclined to consider the Punjab disease somewhat periodic, but the length of time available to him for the Trans-Indus inquiry did not suffice to enable him to determine the true relapsing character of the fever22 Anthrax, Relapsing Fever, and other blood diseases. It is fortunate that with such marked features of similarity we have also marked points of difference. In Anthrax the blood contains bacilli, in Relapsing Fever spirilla. In Anthrax the temperature is persistently high; in Relapsing Fever it is alternately high and low. In nine cases out of ten Anthrax is acute; in a similar proportion Relapsing Fever is of long duration. Although the differences between the two disorders are amply sufficient for diagnosis, yet there is a sufficient family likeness between these two parasitic affections to determine that they shall be studied by the same methods and to indicate that the lines of research followed and facts established in this investigation of Relapsing Fever may in the future suggest new lines of inquiry in cases of Anthrax outbreaks. The disease of the horse known as KAMRI has long been regarded as of frequent occurrence in Burma ; it is possible that many cases recorded as such have been Relapsing Fever. True Kamri is a nervous disorder, having its seat in the spinal cord (unless we may accept the latest researches on the subject23 perhaps as free motile nuclei, such as are noticeable in the majority of specimens and distinguishable from the free nuclei of healthy blood only by a sort of purpose in their movements, but more probably as in a quiescent form so that they are detectable only on aniline staining.* Whether naturally the organism enters the system in the spirilloid forms, or as a micrococcus, or as an unrecognizable germ, we cannot say, and we are equally without guiding evidence as to whether its entry is effected by exercise of its eel-like activity or by its use of a special boring organ too minute for detection with ordinary microscopical powers. The size of spirilloids is not sufficiently great to exclude the possibility of their passing through the walls of normal capillaries, as do the leucocytes, but the passage may be to an extent forced, for we have evidence that the blunt extremity or " head " must be armed with some mechanism, if only a sucker, to enable it to obtain a grip on the red corpuscle; the disintegration of the latter would lead us to infer that the arrangement is something more formidable than a sucker. "We know that the parasites, small though they be, can exercise a great deal of strength at the expense of the corpuscles. The amount of force expended is often greater than that which is exerted in adhesion between two corpuscles in a rouleau; it is sufficient to enable the parasites to drag the corpuscles about, shake them, distort them into various shapes, and it suffices to enable one parasite to drag two corpuscles about with ease and rapidity, also to shake a long rouleau, but not to detach it from the mesh- work to which it belongs. This strength is ordinarily exercised in locomotion, in traction, in changes of form, and in pushing a way among the corpuscles. The energy, strength, and perseverance shown by the parasites in making their way through an aggregated mass of red corpuscles should more than suffice to procure them an entry into living capillaries. The parasites in their spirilloid form, much more so in their possible germ phase of development, would find no difficulty, under the ordinary life conditions of mules, in obtaining access to the mucous membranes of the alimentary and respiratory systems; entry via the skin is not impossible especially in the presence of open wounds, blistered surfaces, &c, but we have evidence against its ordinary occurrence. The air, water, and food must therefore be looked on with suspicion as vehicles for conveyance of the organism which generates relapsing fever into the system of the victim. 15. But not only is it necessary that the organism shall gain access to the system, it is also essential that the individual invaded be susceptible to attack in order that the parasite may obtain a fail footing from which to extend its ravages. My inoculations of the bullock have thus far been valuable, in that they have shown that local irritant action by the parasite need not necessarily be followed by systemic infection. That the opposite is not the case is shown by my inoculation of the pony in which both local and general symptoms were the result. In many diseases individual peculiarities have a marked effect on the " taking" or rejection of the specific virus, but in equine patients my administrations of relapsing fever parasites have been invariably followed by success in communication of the disease. Animals in fat condition have succumbed as rapidly (perhaps more so) as the weak and emaciated ; old and young, male and female, horse and mule, have become affected. Thus in this disease, as in anthrax, but to a less degree, predisposing causes sink into insignificance from a practical point of view in comparison with the determining influences, viz., those which have a direct influence in conveyance of the pathogenic organisms into the system, for we can alter the latter, but the former are beyond our control to a great degree, or, however much we may modify them, we cannot render the system absolutely insusceptible to invasion by any means we are yet acquainted with. Yet we cannot altogether afford to ignore predispositions on the part of the animal, and so shall have something to say about age, color, breed, and conformation after we have drawn attention to a few other matters to be taken into consideration in studying the causes of disorder. It is evident that the same cause operating on different individuals does not necessarily produce the same effect. Thus many animals exposed to a specific influence may resist it, whereas others succumb. Therefore we must not argue that, because a supposed cause is not in every case followed by an attack, it is not a true cause, nor must we, on the other hand, consider that, because a supposed cause fails to generate disease, the animal is * In his report on " Surra" Dr. Evans says :24 resistent, for the cause may not be a true one. It is evident that there may be different determining influences at work in different cases; we prove this by our coarse experi- mental methods even, for in one instance the disease is conveyed by puncture of the skin and injection of blood into the subcutaneous tissue (a very unnatural determining influence unless the disease is ordinarily conveyed by mosquito punctures or leech bites), and in another instance a large number of parasites taken in with food generate the disorder, reproducing it in probably an exaggerated copy of the natural ingestion of spirilloids with food and water. From this we learn that, although we are right in considering the parasite the sole actual and immediate cause, we would err if we stated that any one specified determining influence is at work in all cases. Some cases may be due to food, others to water, and others to air introduced into the respiratory organs. We have no evidence opposed to the view that mosquito and leech bites and visits of flies to wounds are in some cases the determining influences by which spirilloids are brought into the system. Several of these influences may be simultaneously operative on an animal and so the actual way in which the attack was brought on in any particular case obscured; this was observable in the case of the dog " Motee." She received blood subcutaneously and ate flesh of animals which died from the fever; it is, accord- ingly, uncertain from which source she obtained her relapsing fever. 16. To trace out a cause of attack we must decide when it operated, that is, how long it exerted its influence before it induced the attack, and when the attack actually commenced. Unfortunately these points are both doubtful in the disease which I have been studying; the period of incubation varies with the channel through which the contagium enters the system and with the condition of the contagium at time of admini- stration. My experiments amply prove this: incubation was longer after gastric inges- tion than after subcutaneous injection of the virus, and longer still when blood with no parasites detectable was used instead of that in which they were numerous and active. Incubation in the dog was much longer than in the mule, and in the pony (and especially the monkey) it was very short. Again, in examining the outbreak as a whole, we labour under the very serious difficulty that we do not generally know when the cases commenced; this is due to imperfect diagnosis, owing to causes which I have elsewhere indicated. It is singularly unfortunate because it compels me to consider cases in relation to possible causes only by their date of fatality. This is manifestly a much less satisfactory datum than the date of attack, for the duration of cases varies very much. I have been obliged, for want of a more satisfactory method, to strike an average duration for cases and deduct it from the date of death, and in this way get a possible date of attack. 17. The fact that we have no positive evidence that the spirilloids leave the blood of affected mules is of much importance, as it may be associated with the contagious- ness and curability of relapsing fever in man as contrasted with the strong evidence of non-contagiousness and non-curability of the mule disease. In man the influence of contagion can be traced in the manner of spread of the disease into unaffected districts, but the evidence which we have to hand about the mule disease is strongly opposed to the theory of its communicability by contagion; no contagious influence can be traced in its manner of spread among mules in one stable or working together. In the Somersetshire lines, D troop mules were often intermingled with those of A, B, and C troops, and had to pass through their lines daily, but, until their movement into the other stables, not one D troop mule was affected. Further, lame and non-febrile sick animals have stood in lines containing many fever patients and did not become affected although many of them had open surgical wounds at the time. They have been returned to uninvaded lines from the sick lines on recovery and have not carried the disease. There are two incidents of the outbreaks which deserve mention here. While the disease was in the Rangoon depôt lines three ponies were started (on 28th September 1884) from there to Tonghoo. One died on the way at Shwaygyin (cause unknown), another at Tonghoo shortly after arrival, the third remains alive. One mule succumbed at Tonghoo previously to their arrival and one in the third month after their arrival, so, and, especially, considering the obscurity of cause of death in two ponies, we have not here material for tracing the Tonghoo outbreak (which took place seven months later) to contagion from Rangoon. Twenty-four mules were sent from the depot to Thayetmyo on 21st December 1883 ; of these, one died at Letpadan
25 on the way up with perforation of the stomach, the result of ulceration, and one at Nyung Hla Kyoun of " anthrax." On arrival six were sick, but seem to have recovered. These animals came from an infested locality and seem to have had the disease, and yet they did not convey it to those at Thayetmyo. On 24th March 1884 four mules were sent from the depôt to Thayetmyo and two to Tonghoo; in the former place the disease has not broken out, in the latter it has proved severe, but was commencing before the arrival of these mules. The depôt ponies which died in the 1883-84 outbreak arrived from Thayetmyo, a disease-free place, on 19th May 1883. Thus we see that the prevalence of the disease is not in direct ratio with interchange of animals from disease centres. This non-contagiousness of the mule disease may be the result of the organisms not being expelled from the system, but remaining in it until they induce a fatal result. Whereas in man profuse perspiration occurs as a critical evacuation in the attacks, no such phenomenon has been observed in the lower animals. I have not experimented with saliva of mules, which contains organisms a little like certain forms of spirilla, but have given stomach contents and fluid from the bowels through the mouth without effect. I thought it possible that the gastric ulcerations and the circumscribed congestions of the bowels were associated with elimination of parasites from the system through these organs, but the result has proved negative. Thus we have strong evidence that the disease is not communicable by contagion or infec- tion ; we are certain that it may be given by inoculation with, or ingestion of, the blood. 18. Although predisposing causes are subordinate in importance in this disease, we must give them some attention. Breed and conformation seem to exercise some influence. Captain Johnstone expresses the non-professional idea on this subject when he says " the small thick-set mules in general appear to enjoy almost complete immu- nity." This was noted at Rangoon, where the mules most like donkeys were least often affected, but, although patent to non-professional observers, this fact has limited practical value, for not only all sorts of mules, but even ponies of the country, have succumbed to the Burma disease. 19. With regard to size, it is a matter of constant remark that the larger mules suffer more from the fever than the smaller ones. This may be due to one or more of three causes: (a) The big mules are most used and have the hardest work. (b) Although allowed by Government more food than smaller ones, they, in feeding off the ground or out of unpartitioned mangers, generally get actually a smaller amount than their less phlegmatic small companions. Also in the distribution of gram sufficient care is not always exercised or practicable for securing to each large mule a large feed. I notice also that, as concerns fodder, the mules are all treated alike, the allowance for three fellow-workers being placed in front of the three animals and the sharpest of them obtaining an unduly large share, often, by the free use of hoofs and teeth, keeping the others away until all the tit-bits are consumed. It is evident also that, when picketed in the open, large animals will suffer most, especially they will miss their large ration when it becomes necessary to evenly distribute insufficient food or to allow animals entirely to shift for themselves. (c) The influence of breed and conformation may tell here, the largest mules being those which retain most of the caballine characters of their progenitors, the small ones the asinine. Although this more frequent attack of large mules has been commented on especially in connection with their use for puckal work, it certainly cannot be considered a specially marked feature of the Rangoon outbreak, in which I find 24 mules out of 47 cases were 13 hands and upwards, only 9 of them being 13.2 and upwards (i.e., first-class mules). In the 3rd Native Infantry at Tonghoo of 57 cases 22 are returned as first-class mules, 32 as second class, and 3 as "not specified." Thus calculating the percentage of losses on the mules of each class mustered on the strength, we cannot consider this a marked feature of the disease, although any special tendency of large mules can be fully explained in the above manner. 20. Age does not seem to influence liability, but vereran mules have succumbed in considerable numbers. The Tonghoo returns of the 3rd Native Infantry show most deaths at the ages of 12, 18, and 20, but a fair distribution from 8 years old up to 21 years; however we have already noted the suspicious exactitude of this return as regards ages. In the Somersetshire Regiment most of the fatal cases were mules of early adult age, but both old and young also fell victims. Old animals, from the 7
26 defective state of their teeth, have been least able to utilize to the full such nutritive support as is contained in unhusked rice, and so would be weakened and rendered (perhaps) more liable to invasion by spirilloids. Sex influence has been marked in the 3rd Native Infantry at Tonghoo, there having been 39 cases in females against 15 in males. In Rangoon, however, mares and geldings have been affected in about equal proportions, and several stallions have died. Evidently sex has, as a rule, but little to do with development of relapsing fever in mules. Color, too, will not require much special notice. It. is certain that in outbreaks of this disorder but few grays are left unaffected. This is difficult to explain except by the known laxity of fibre in animals of this color as compared with darker ones, also their admitted special liability to lymphatic and asthenic disorders. It is evident that no special color secures exemption from relapsing fever. In the Somersetshire Regiment I find a loss of 16 grays and 1 white against 23 browns and 5 bays27 of puckal work as a cause of the disease was not noted. We may, therefore, fairly conclude that puckal work, as such, is only an indirect cause, and may safely continue to be performed by the mules, provided the animals be not overworked at it and be as much as possible prevented drinking water from the tanks. 22. Exposure to weather might predispose to attacks by lessening the constitu- tional power or determine invasion by the parasites as implying plentiful access to malaria, mud, stagnant water, bad food, and so on. I am led to consider exposure a very powerful factor in production of relapsing fever. In Tonghoo especially the mules working to and from Thandoun fell victims to the disease, for this work implied an exhausting march first through terai, then up a very steep hill for about nine miles, and finally insufficient shelter, food, and general care on arrival at Than- doun. In the Rangoon Supply Depôt outbreak the disease was preceded by a period of exposure during the height of the monsoon on the glacis of the pagoda and at Kokine. Early in 1884 the Somersetshire mules were sent out into the districts to collect straw, and they had hard work and a rough time of it in so far as I can make out. I have evidence of some mules dying with ulceration of the stomach when on the line of march to the frontier out-stations, but they possibly were suffering from the earlier stages of the disease when they started. Death of two mules exposed on Anthrax graves and of the hard-worked and exposed mules used for puckal work in the Somer- setshire lines are evidences as to the effects of exposure, especially when combined with overwork. We may say that in every case of outbreak exposure, with its usual concomitants,28 stable of the Somersetshire lines in 1884-85, although the most exposed of four, lost none of its occupants, while the mules were dying rapidly in all the other three (it oertainly contained a large proportion of the small mules and none of the first class); that ponies in Rangoon town and cantonment, which could hardly have all escaped the " wave," have not appreciably succumbed; and that simultaneously at places so far apart as Rangoon and Tongnoo the disease has been raging. The balance of evidence is against the wave theory and the influence of air. In 1883 at Rangoon, certainly, during the main prevalence of disease at the depôt, a north-east wind prevailed, to the effects of which the animals would have been exposed had they been in their lines, and to which many of them were actually for a time exposed on the east glacis of the pagoda, but in 1884 it was only after the main fatality had occurred that the wind veered round to the east; hitherto the Somersetshire lines had been rather out of the wind, which was mainly from the south-west, so that they lay to leeward of the pagoda hill. If we judge by the number of admissions instead of fatalities, the evidence of wind as a determining cause is even less marked. At Tonghoo the fatalities occurred mainly when the wind was from the west. Here also the disease seems to have prevailed when the wind was low; evidence from Rangoon tends also to associate high winds with less fatality. Thus sultry weather, with a stagnant state of the air, seems rather to favor development of the disease. At Tonghoo the lines are low-lying, and mist hangs over them after it has cleared away from the greater part of the remainder of the station. When I was there in December it persisted until after 8 o'clock in the morning. The outbreak in the Somersetshire lines affords us a good illustration of a local centre. Thus, out of 55 of the cases, 23 were from A troop (3/7); 17 were from B troop (2/7); 14 from C troop (1/4); and only 1 from D troop (1/55). The predominance in A troop and the practical absence of the disease in D troop seems a significant fact worthy of further investigation. "We must first examine the physical geography and geology of the locality to see what special information can be derived from them. The Somersetshire mule lines are situated to E.N.E. of the elevated plateau on which the Shwe-dagon pagoda and the European Infantry lines are built. The plateau attains a very considerable height above the sea level and above that of the alluvial deposit on which Rangoon town and suburbs are situated, and which is continued to east and west of the plateau as rice land, but little above the sea level. The plateau terminates abruptly to north and east, but here and there outcrops of its component laterite form sub-plateaux and small hills projecting from the neighbouring alluvium. On these outcropping prominences are situated the mule lines, which consist in all of four stables, named after the troops which occupy them. A path to them has been formed along a natural drain- age channel. To the right of this path are A and B stables, the latter on a projecting spur below the level of the former and between it the native drivers latrine. C stable is to the left on the highest part of the sub-plateau. The path after a saddle back course terminates at a pro- minence on which D stable stands almost at right angles as regards its direction with the other three stables. It is practically surround- ed by low-lying and marsh land and is always kept fresh and pure (if at times somewhat cold)by its exposure to all currents of air. Although freely exposed to all the vapours arising from the neigh- bouring marsh land and to driving mist and fog, this stable could never become the seat of stagnation of air ; perhaps this was the cause of immunity of animals kept in it. Something may be attributed to good natural drainage and to the mules being of the small thick-set stamp and to the non-commissioned officer of the troop being a specially [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
29 careful man. A and B troop stables are almost parallel to a large iron pipe through which the drainage from the plateau is supposed to pass; but, as a matter of fact, during the rains a large amount of water flows from above by the path to the site of A stable ; this is to an extent prevented by a receptacle cistern situated between the hospital latrine and the path on the high ground, but the brick drains leading to this are not sufficient and so the water flows over the edge of the plateau. It floods the drains of A stable and has to be constantly baled out by means of buckets from the cisterns in which they end, and this can only be done very imperfectly, so it is to be feared that admixture of animal matter, dung, urine, &c., with the remnant may render these cisterns actual nidus for development of miasma. They are quite unnecessary ; increase of the natural slope to a very slight degree and removal of the cisterns would give a very efficient system of surface drainage in this and the other stables, as the natural facilities are great. Why the drivers' latrine should have been placed within a couple of yards of the end of B stable it is difficult to see; it would be much more advantageously situated if on the low land a few yards further on, and it is not always in first-rate order if I may judge from the times when I have inspected it. Its emanations cannot but be prejudicial to the mules, and its receptacles must be carried through the mule lines for disposal. Stables A and B in which the disease has prevailed most are in a direct line between two latrines; this is probably a coincidence merely, but just possibly may be a predisposing cause by its prejudicial influence on the health of the mules. Stable 0 is almost parallel with A and is out of the direct line of drainage. Almost parallel with stables A, B, and C is on each side a nala with some brushwood and somewhat tempting to the natives as a latrine, for which purpose it is occasionally used. The two are mainly formed and deepened by the rush of water from the plateau, but that to the south is constantly moist from a stream formed by water trickling from the surface of one of the deeper layers of the laterite of the hill. Altogether we may sum up by saying that there are no glaring sanitary defects to which we can attribute the greater pre- valence of the disease in A, B, and C stables, especially in A. There are certain minor defects which will readily admit of remedy, and part of the special prevalence must be attributed to the larger proportion of first-class mules. I am inclined to consider the deleterious influence here also to mainly reside in a stagnation of air. Microscopical examination of the air of stables in search of the cause of disease did not seem a very promising line of research as I arrived in Rangoon when the disease was already on the decline, and probably after any cause operating through the air had ceased. However, considering the possibility of infection, I deemed it right to make some examinations of the air from the sick line stable. This I did by drawing it through a plug of cotton wool in a tube and steeping the latter in pure water for some time without exposure to air. I found no development of spirilloids in the fluid, but of course this method has but little value as being rough in the extreme. In the Bedfordshire lines at Tonghoo I found that the Transport Officer noted that most cases came from one of the two stables. But all the lines at Tonghoo are defective in some important respects. They are of the usual pattern and four in number, arranged in parallel pairs. The disease has proved equally prevalent in both European and Native Infantry lines, and practically the stable conditions are the same. The ground occupied is on the line of drainage from the men's lines ; it is intersected by drains, in many parts of which water is liable to stand or to overflow. There must be a great deal of marsh around the stables in wet weather. In near proximity is a jheel, which is a receptacle for filth and bazaar refuse, and into which hungry mules, turned out in numbers to the scanty grass croppings about the lines, would be sure to find their way. Followers' lines are beginning to encroach into close proximity with the mule stables, especially in the case of the Native Infantry at Tonghoo. 24. The stables supplied by Government for the mules are very superior to the average of private stables in Rangoon, but they differ in this important particular that there are no lateral walls. As a rule, private stables are closed on one side, which may or may not have a window opposite each horse's head, and the other side is generally furnished with a split bamboo chick or screen. Thus the animals are protected, not only from dew, but also from driving mist and the moist cold air of early morning, as also from certain winds which are popularly supposed to be " feverish." This closure of stables seems to be an important means of prevention of malarious disease. The private 8
30 stables have boarded floors raised a little from the surface of the ground under which the earth becomes much contaminated with filth and moisture, whereas the Government stables have generally excellent asphalte floors with fair slope, surface drains, and are generally kept in excellent order. But, although the stables being open at the sides renders them less valuable as a protective means than they might be, we have ample evidence that this defect is not in itself sufficient to generate the disease, in that D stable fo the Somersetshire lines is by far the most exposed and at the same time is the most healthy. The geological formation of the plateau on which the lines at Rangoon stand is laterite; this bluish laminated formation is somewhat clayey and tends to check percolation of water; thus on the plateau surface there are marshy patches, and much water hangs there in monsoon time. The A troop mules used to be picketed out here in the early mornings while their stable was being washed. As far as stable man- agement goes, the Government mules both at Tonghoo and Rangoon have been better treated than the majority of private animals in Burma. Related closely to the question of locality in its effects on the disease is the fact that it has not yet been observed at Thayetmyo or at Moulmein, and it is important to consider if those places are intrinsically healthier, especially in relation to fever, than Rangoon and Tonghoo. We must not jump prematurely to conclusions in this matter. Had we been considering it only from last year's experience, we would have included Tonghoo among the stations in British Burma healthy for mules, but we should have been sadly in error. It is necessary to wait for two or three years longer before we decide on the relative healthiness of stations for the mules; we have not as yet sufficient evidence on which to base an opinion. Moulmein has hitherto been tested with only a very small body of mules, and we have seen that the disease has hitherto occurred only among mules collected in numbers. Thayetmyo has thus far withstood this test; a large number of mules serving in it have remained healthy; it is a place differing much in its climate from both Rangoon and Tonghoo. And we must remember that we have a suspicion that some animals sent there sick recovered. The balance of evidence is in favor of the view that Thayetmyo will prove a conve- nient station and suitable for a large number of mules. We must not forget that the Artillery mules at Tonghoo and the Sapper mules at Rangoon have entirely hitherto escaped the disease. 25. The influence of season is worthy of especial attention, because of the fact that, in so far as our experience at present goes, the deaths have specially occurred in autumn and winter[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
31 (b)Rainfall in relation to prevalence of the disease is thus far noteworthy that both at Tonghoo in 1884-85 and at Rangoon in 1883-84 and 1884-85 the rain curve has been parallel to the curve of disease fatality but three or four months antecedent to it. This is very striking {vide Graphic Record No. 3) and suggests that the advent of the rains and the increase and decrease of rainfall are in direct relation to the disease and probably simultaneous with the occurrence of attacks, allowing some three months for the average duration of cases (including incubation). The actual amount of rain bears no relation to prevalence of the disease, for the fall was greater in Tonghoo in 1883-84 when the disease did not prevail than in 1884-85 when it proved extremely fatal, and the total losses in the two years have been about equal in Rangoon, whereas the current season has been much wetter than that of last year. The rainfall of Thayetmyo, hitherto a disease-free place, is very low as compared with that of Rangoon and Tonghoo. It is plain that increase of average monthly rainfall means increase in the number of swamps and marshes, whereas increase in the total amount falling in the season or abnormally large rainfall at one time means increased dilution of tanks and flushing of natural water channels. We can to an extent understand why the Relapsing Fever should be in association rather with the gradual annual rise and fall of the rain curve than with unusually severe downpours. (c)Humidity of the atmosphere holds the same relations to the disease as rain- fall. (d)Temperature.32 animals are being worked and given a drink from some scanty water-accumulation. I do not think that a good full tank or a well with a fair amount of water in it will be likely ever to convey the disease; marshy pools, stagnant tanks, streams with very sluggish current, and stagnant accumulations of water whenever and wherever they occur are to be looked on with most suspicion. A priori we may argue that water, especially in tropical countries, is a fruitfal conveyer of disease ; that the spirilloids are just such organisms as we might expect to invade the system from stagnant water and marsh soil; that Lower Burma is specially the abode of marsh and malaria; and that the substitution of well water for that in tanks at the Rangoon lines has been considered beneficial. The argument that the disease died out at the dep6t after substitution of well33 contractor cuts it below the water surface and thus supplies a semi-fermenting mass of which a large part is yellow semi-decayed leaves and a tough submerged stem covered with slime. This slime is just the sort of habitat a spirillum prefers. Dry tank grass is sweet to the taste, fairly nutritive, but liable to contain germs of spirilla such as have (possibly) resided in the slime which has dried on the stems. Thus, as far as relapsing fever is concerned, it is open to the same objections as the contractors' wet tank grass. Some change in the system of feeding transport mules in Burma is sadly needed and would, probably, if on correct lines, tend to lessen the prevalence of relapsing fever. 29.Influence of attendants and general management can have merely a predisposing effect on the development and prevalence of the fever. A driver in charge of three mules has much power over them as concerns ensuring them healthy constitutions not predisposed to disease, A careless, lazy man will allow his animals to scramble for their food, much of their fodder to be trampled under foot and contaminated with urine, the work to fall unevenly on his three mules, insufficient time for drinking, heads too tightly fastened to admit of the animals reaching their feed, and so on. Unless looked sharply after, a native may appropriate the mules' food for use of himself and family ; sometimes a driver takes a dislike to one of his mules on account of its being high-spirited and troublesome, and he tries the effect of lessening its feed for the benefit of favourite mules. The eyes of the European non-commis- sioned officer cannot be everywhere to check such practices, and he is often compelled to be away at parades and other duties. I am inclined to consider that where a driver has lost his three mules from this disease, he is probably careless and inefficient, and that where he has lost two out of the three, he may be unfortunate merely, but is more probably inefficient. Attendants may be responsible for the actual introduction of the disease by, when on orderly or other special work, allowing their mules to drink from dirty tanks or to eat swamp grass and whatever pickings they can get from marshy places. In justice to these men I must add that, as a rule, they seem fond of their animals and the mules of them, and that in the various outbreaks it is not always the least-cared-for animals that have suffered. 30.The freedom of the Artillery mules at Tonghoo and of the Sapper mules at Rangoon may be associated with a better acquaintance by Artillery and Engineers than Infantry with the details of mule management. The officers and non-commis- sioned officers in the Infantry Regiments have not been given a chance in this respect. They have had no opportunity of acquiring experience in animal management, practically or theoretically, so when they have made common-sense suggestions have not been able to urge them with sufficient authority, and there has been absolutely no systematic veterinary protection for the animals nor even have adequate health records been kept. 31.The following table shows the monthly distribution of admissions to treat- ment of Somersetshire mules, the percentage being taken in each case on the number of mules left in the stables respectively. This method of search for the cause might be worth following further if it were based on reliable facts; but, as we have already seen that the date of admission to treatment is not, in most cases, the date of attack, we may simply notice its results without considering them as established :34 From this it would seem35 regain a little strength and to exhibit less regular visitations by the parasite than usual. I think that I have noted the same result after the regular administration of white arsenic in six-grain doses daily. All I can say of these agents is that, in so far as my experiments go, they are the ones from which most hopes of good result have been obtained. I thought on one occasion that the action of ammonia in dilute solution sufficed to kill the parasites; it seemed to do so when an ammoniacal solution of carmine was added to a drop of blood in which the parasites were numerous and active, but subsequent results did not confirm this. When I administered ammonia to a patient, the case proved acute and promptly fatal. Dilution of a drop of blood with water lessens the distinctive movement of the parasites, but does not, at any rate immediately, destroy them. 34.If we look through the list of causes, we shall see that they almost all admit of counteraction. Thus I am able to draw up a list of suggestions as to measures which should be adopted with a view to avoidance of future outbreaks.The mules selected for service in Burma should be of moderate size and age, those most like donkeys being the best, and animals of gray or white color specially avoided. But the mule transport should be as limited as possible ; animals indigenous to the country such as elephants, ponies, and especially Burma bullocks, being mainly relied on for military transport. Although I do not recommend any change at present, I think that a gradual alteration in distribution of the various animals of transport would be an advantage from a veterinary point of view, the mules being sent up-country as much as possible, especially to Thayetmyo, and the bullock-cart transport and use of ponies being expanded at Rangoon. Tonghoo does not seem to be a healthy place for mules or ponies, but it ought to be for elephants and is for bullocks; and we must remember that at this place the mules have not had an opportunity of showing how they would be if their food were good and sufficient and their stables in a healthy situation. Experience seems to indicate that the collection of a couple of hundred mules in one place in Lower Burma is not advisable; that their stables should be in blocks well apart from one another and in places where they will get lots of fresh air and be well above the level of neighbouring marsh land. It also indicates that the plan of hiring out Government mules and ponies is a very excellent one in British Burma; it secures individual care and attention for the animals while rendering available, in emergency, a number of useful transport beasts which are kept in condition at little cost to Government. Although exposure to weather cannot be avoided on a campaign, it can be generally avoided in peace, and its ill effects can in either case be much lessened by careful selection of camping grounds and of water for drinking purposes as well as systematic feeding of the animals. Every march into the jungle, every despatch of batches of transport animals from one station to another, and every season when communications are kept up between a central station and outposts (as between Tonghoo and Thandoun) ought to be made an opportunity for enforcement and practice of animal management in such manner as should be resorted to on active service and as might, to an extent, be if it were more generally practised. This is a matter which I feel assured might be managed much better than at present with benefit to the mules and with less serious results from their marches up-country than are now sometimes experienced. There are some stables which, as we have seen, seem to be local centres of the disease ; they are probably too much shut in and liable to stagnation of air in them, and possibly also to stagnation of water in their drainage cisterns and in the soil around. It would be very beneficial if stable A in the Somersetshire lines at Rangoon were removed from its present position and thereby aggregation of. animals on the sub-plateau, where it is situated, be lessened and a freer supply of air allowed to stable C. It should be removed to a more airy and open position. Failing this, something may yet be done in the way of removal of the drainage cisterns and the substitution of paved surface drains down the side of the hill and the adoption of the dry-earth system of managing the stable-flooring. The drivers' latrine should be at once removed to below the hill, and the brick drains against the gram-shed and hospital latrine should be deepened so as not to allow of overflow by the side of the pathway into A stable. The supply of movable jhamps for one side of each block of stables to be used for the exclusion of driving mist and heavy rain under the discretion of the officers in charge would be an improvement. In excep-
36 tionally sultry weather the mules should be picketed in the open, and the stables would benefit by the temporary evacuation. With regard to the Tonghoo lines, their bad situation might be improved and possibly be made to answer if some improvements were made in the surroundings; the drainage altered by deepening the existing channels and by cleansing of the neighbouring impure jheel, also by the removal of refuse accumulations and encroaching native huts. Each of the mules should be provided with a good jhool in order that it may be available in the event of unavoidable exposure, especially during monsoon-time, and there should be provision made for a reserve supply of nosebags being available, so that the animals may never have to feed off the ground. If all stables were, like those of the dep6t at Rangoon, fitted with mangers, the saving in food for the animals would be great and the cost more than covered by the saving in nosebags, which are quickly worn out by mules and might then be kept simply as service kit. I attribute so much ill effect to exposure during the rains that I am of opinion it would be an advantage if an order were issued that whenever in British Burma mules or ponies are removed from their stables into quarantine, during the monsoon especially, cheap temporary sheds be run up for their accommodation, and that at places such as Thandoun and Kokine, where Government mules are constantly wanting accommodation, provision be made for their proper housing. With regard to watering: it seems to be generally understood that well water should be used whenever procurable, and, when it is not, large tanks with ample water in them are to be preferred, and especially those free from rank vegeta- tion and scum on the surface. Care in selection of water and in avoidance of that of marshes and low tanks should everywhere be strictly enforced and constantly impressed on every one in charge of the mules; especially is this precaution necessary with puckal mules, and great care should be exercised that these be not overworked and that they get regularly tended and fed on their return from this duty. 35.Reserve supplies of food, both fodder and grain, should be available for im- mediate use, so that condemnation of a day's supply will not mean deprivation of the mules of one day's feed. The gram or paddy should be crushed ; there is a large pro- portion of animals among the mules in Burma with defective teeth and weak digestive organs; such animals cannot make the most of uncrushed gram, and they do not digest unprepared paddy, which therefore acts as an irritant. If the gram be purchased in crushed condition, it is liable to be of inferior quality and adulterated; it would be better if there were grinding stones for crushing purposes in each large mule lines. It would be an advantage if part of the present supply of grain were supplemented by some aromatic, such as Indian oil-cake, which can be purchased in the bazaar at a cheap rate. It would supply the aromatic element, which is usually deficient in Burmese fodder, and which native horse-owners atone for by the constant administration of mus- sauls. It is already used in feeding the Government bullocks at Rangoon and Tonghoo, and is much liked by animals and excellent for fattening. There are so many points which might be settled with advantage on the question of feeding Government animals in Burma37 great, and correction of them will tend materially to prevention of its prevalence in the future. It would be well worth the while of Government, in the event of future outbreaks, to try the effects of change of climate by shipping affected mules in the earliest stages of the disease to Bellary, Secunderabad, or some other dry place where they could be kept isolated and treated under veterinary supervision. 36.I in one case removed blood from the heart of a mule just dead and which I had an hour before ascertained to contain some parasites, and with it conveyed the disease to another mule. The fact of the blood not having died before use lessens the value of this experiment however. I have therefore inoculated with dried blood with negative results; local abscesses, which healed readily, occurred at the seats of inoculation. A safe practical conclusion to arrive at is that the carcasses of all animals which die from this disease should be destroyed by cremation in their skins and without post-mortem examination; except when necessary for scientific purposes; it should never be needed to verify diagnosis. We are not assured that the flesh used as food by dogs conveys the disease; vultures do not seem to suffer from it, but they may distribute the spirilloids in their fasces. PART III.38 first actual febrile attack may occupy only about three days and be separated by about five days from its immediate successor39 or both eyelids may be affected simultaneously.I have observed serous effusion beneath the vulval mucous membrane, but petechiae were very seldom present and, when seen, are simple, very small blood points. The irritation of these parts is, however, shown by frequent symptoms of " horsing ;" indeed in mares there is almost always in this disease a little reddish brown fluid dried about the external generative orifice, which discharge persists throughout the attack. The parallel to this sexual phenomenon of mares is seen in male animals as frequent and quite uncalled-for erections of the penis, which may be due to irritation of the erection centre in the cord, but possibly also is associated with the formation of blood-clots in the erectile structure of the penis, which organ latterly in the attack remains permanently slightly protruded and turgid, or there may be embolic plugging of its vessels; sometimes slight dropsy occurs beneath the sternum, and all injuries are very liable to dropsical complications. Slight oedema of the limbs occasionally occurred in my cases, and in one acute case there was considerable anasarca, the swelling involving all the four legs and the whole under-surface of the body, and it disappeared with remarkable suddenness after the animal fell for the last time. However, throughout the disease there is not such an amount of dropsy as might have been anticipated from the depraved condition of the blood. In my cases dropsy has been the exception, not the rule. The irritation occurring in the membrane of the eye is denoted early by profuse lachry- mation. The tears overflow the eyelid and trickle over the face and there dry, leaving a peculiar white saline and albuminous mark. Generally some of the surplus tears trickle through the nose, but sometimes, probably as a complication, there is an ordinary mucous discharge which may be slight or profuse. The occurrence of successive crops of petechiæ, especially in the conjunctivae, is very characteristic of the disease. I have carefully studied the relations of these blood-spots in character, number, and time of appearance to the presence of parasites and the degree of fever. They vary much in appearance in different cases and at various times. They range from simple small spots of fresh blood or from faint very diffused extravasations of blood to extensive blood accumulations outside the vessels of a dark purple color, changing gradually to a fresher red as they clear away. This removal of the escaped blood takes place in every case and thoroughly, so much so that at times the conjunc- tiva looks perfectly normal and healthily moist. The spots are most readily detectable on the portion of membrane which covers the haw, but are by no means confined to there, for they invade all parts of the membrane. They are generally either very few or perfectly absent when the parasites are active in the blood, and hence it occurs that their period of invasion is generally at the crisis of the fever, and that they are numer- ous and well marked during the decline and least fever stages. Whether they depend on migration of the parasites or on vessels plugged by them giving way I cannot say, but, from the time of their occurrence and the purple color so often assumed by them, and in which respect they differ considerably from the petechias of simple anaemia, I am inclined to consider that they result from these causes. I have carefully examined, by use of the microscope, the lachrymal secretion and the gelatinous mucus which collects at the inner canthus, but have detected nothing abnormal in them, and certainly spirilloids, as such, are not present. I have not tried inoculation with them. These spots may perhaps be associated with disorder of the spleen, such as is generally found, after death, to have been present. Possibly the enlargement of that organ is indicated during life by the animal, as he sometimes does, turning his head to the left and biting over the hypochondrium. This symptom I for a long time thought was an indication of gastric ulceration until I found it present a few days before death in an animal of which the stomach proved to be not diseased. In some cases the submaxillary lymphatic glands become somewhat swollen without any lesion of mouth or nostril to account for it. I have never seen it lead to abscess of the gland nor even to a very painfully tense condition of it. I am inclined to consider this symptom due to the same causes as are in operation to produce the general engorgement of the lymph glands which I have found on post-mortem examination and markedly before death in my dog. On studying this symptom in relation to others, I find that it is of so unfrequent occurrence as to prevent its being considered of much importance in the progress of the case, and there are no evidences to lead to the conclusion that it is indicative of a tendency of the parasites to desert the blood channels for the lymph system in accordance with phases of their life-history. The appetite is excessive throughout the attack ;
40 it is remarkable how an animal in a state of semi-coma will continue to eat grass almost without ceasing. In one case the patient seemed very keen for his gram, but after the first mouthful, either from pain or distaste, refused to take any more and turned away eagerly to his grass. in the human subject, pain, especially after ingestion of food and persisting until completion of digestion (or until vomition occurs), is found when the stomach is ulcerated. Sometimes, as in the case of senile ulcers of the limbs, so in gastric ulcer there is little or no pain; when present, the pain is noted as occurring in one spot u It is not uncommon for the pain to increase for a few days and then gradually to subside. These exacerbations the writer has chiefly observed in very chronic cases. They probably point to an extension of the ulceration, for they not unfrequently precede haemorrhage or perforation." There is appetite, but the patient dreads the pain resulting from feeding; there is copious flow of saliva prior to vomition ; loss of strength and energy in chronic cases; pain between the last lumbar and first dorsal (?)vertebrae generally more on the left side than on the right; the bowels are constipated, there being mucus sometimes in the stools. The urine is clear and passed frequently and in considerable quantities (Fenwick). The above precis of the symptoms of gastric ulcer in man, as taken from Quain's Dictionary of Medicine, is well worthy of perusal as justifying the diagnosis of the mules' disease as ulceration of the stomach which used to be made prior to the establishment of its nature as relapsing fever. Before I proved its periodicity, demonstrated its distin- guishing parasites, and proved that ulceration of the stomach is absent in some undoubted cases, I examined carefully this diagnosis of my predecessors. I found in our patients depraved appetite, the copious flow of saliva from the mouth, loss of strength and condition, and the pain on pressure over the loins and over the sciatic nerves on either side of the sacrum. The breath also was in some cases very offensive. I came to the conclusion that, although these symptoms would justify diagnosis of gastric ulcer, something else had to be dealt with, that something being blood derangement, as proved actually the case. We have already seen the bearings of ulceration of the stomach on the main disease. The urine varies in quality and quantity in different cases and, to an extent, in accordance with the phases of the disease. Sometimes it is very viscid, its specific gravity being as high as 10,40. I am not sure what is the cause of the viscidity; it is not directly associated with the presence of albumen, nor have I been able to determine its special occurrence at any one phase of the disease or in association with congestion or other disease of the kidneys. In other cases the reverse condition is found and a certain degree of polyuria is present, the urine being limpid, of a very pale yellow, and low specific gravity (10,0541 being simple, circumscribed, epithelial degeneration, probably as a result of plugging of the small vessels of the dermis ; it disappears very rapidly and is only found in a small proportion of cases. The dry, hard condition of the skin is a characteristic feature of the chronic or subacute cases; it is associated with extreme marasmus.The wasting sets in rather suddenly after the fever has been on the animal several times. Suddenly one day it is noticed that the mule or pony is " tucked up;" his ribs show plainly, his eyepits are deep, he looks old, and there seems " nothing of him." It is at this stage the patient generally comes under professional notice; inquiry elicits the facts that lately he has been sluggish and not working with good heart; that he has been out of sorts several times recently, but not to any important degree; that he has been noticed to hang back on the collar chain in the stable; to eat earth freely and to have a most ravenous appetite for fodder. These signs are almost sufficient in themselves to stamp the case as one of relapsing fever, but the diagnosis must be assured by use of the thermometer and microscope. The movements are very languid and weak almost from the first, and the deficiency in power of the hind limbs must not be called paralysis, for no true loss of conveying power has occurred in the nerves or nerve centres, but the deficiency in motor power is, if we may judge from post- mortem results, due to blocking of the vessels of the hind limbs with blood-clot. There is often a marked deficiency in color of the supra-lumbar muscles found after death ; they seem as though they had been inflamed, probably, as Dr. Evans pointed out, in consequence of excessive pack-loads to the animals and quite independently of the disease. Almost from the first the deficiency in power of free movement shows itself. When the animal is made to " stand over," it tries to obey, but catches one hind foot in the bedding and totters with the hind quarters, almost invariably recovering itself in time to prevent a fall to the ground. When the patient falls and remains recumbent broadside, as it does towards the end of the attack, it is manifesting extreme debility rather than actual paralysis, for, when the animal suffers from delirium or struggles on being touched, it will be found that some of the limbs, generally the uppermost pair, move with abnormal energy, so that the bedding soon becomes removed from beneath the animal and he is covered with bed-sores, and sometimes the skin is actually worn through on projecting points from the way in which the animal dashes himself about. The head is especially liable to such injuries; sometimes it is spasmodically drawn to one particular side, in other cases it is rigidly elevated. Generally an animal which " goes down " does not rise again, but I have records of cases in which the patient has risen after being some time recumbent persistently and has remained for a month or longer time after this constantly standing until death set in. Some patients stand and feed to the very last and then drop dead. A noteworthy indication of cachexia and the general malnutrition is occasionally to be seen in the changes undergone by the cornea in advanced cases of this disorder; it first becomes opaque and then small sub-conjunctival ulcers, like those seen in dogs suffering from distemper, may be noted. The general atony of the skin in animals which remain stretched flat on the side for some time is denoted by the undermost surface of the body being bathed in perspiration, but there is never any critical increase in the evacuations from the cutaneous glands resembling the sweating stages of the febrile exacerbation in man. 3.The very general nature of the malnutritions, the fact that practically every part of the body shares in them, at once attracts our attention to the blood as the main seat of disorder. A small drop may be obtained for examination by incision, with an abscess lancet, about a quarter of an inch long, into the thin skin of the muzzle; occasionally the animal will, by an inopportune jerk of the head, give him- self rather a long slash, which, however, generally heals freely by first intention ; generally blood does not flow readily from the wound, and the animal does not seem to mind it, or a small quantity of lymphy fluid only will, for some time, collect from the wound. The deficient sensibility and anaemia of the patient are noteworthy. The drop obtained is generally grumous and purple in color ("like bad claret," as it was described by a looker-on on one occasion); probably a few short delicate hairs of the muzzle become mixed with the specimen; they do not interfere with the exami- nation, but sometimes look remarkably like embryonic filariæ, especially when curled up by contraction of the clot in which they are entangled; they taper towards each 11
42 end, most so towards the apex, and their medulla does not extend to either extremity, so that they look very like worms, for which they are apt to be mistaken. I dwell on this point because when first I saw them I thought I had made a " find," but soon decided that I was in error.A thin film of blood may now be examined under the microscope, under one-fifth inch objective, which is best for diagnostic purposes. It is at once evident that the blood is not normal. The white corpuscles are, as a rule, quite natural, but the red are much altered. Sometimes débris of red corpuscles may be observed, and the corpuscles are crenated, irregularly shrivelled, or they look half- moon shaped, this latter condition resulting from their being markedly concavo-convex. Large, irregular, filmy-looking masses, which at first look like altered white corpuscles arranged in a tessellated manner or in lines like strings of coral, turn out to be altered or decolorised red corpuscles. I have noted this state especially just after the parasites have left the blood when the fever is declining, but do not consider it peculiar and special to this disease, for I also find it in the blood of anæmic mules. It has been noted in the blood of human patients in relapsing fever, but I cannot recall to mind having seen or recorded it in the blood of the dog or monkey. The first change noticed in the blood elements of surra cases at Dera Ismail Khan by Dr. Evans * was leukocytosis, with a remarkable increase in the number of the largest granular lymphoid corpuscles, which he often saw breaking up under the microscope. Leukocytosis was not remarkable in my cases at Rangoon. The next change Dr. Evans noticed was in the red corpuscles ; he speaks of a large number of shapeless particles of pale red jelly from half the size of a normal corpuscle downwards, whereas I have invariably found them larger than the normal red corpuscles. He refers to a large number of small granular particles in the serum which I also have observed; some of these look like colorless masses of débris, others are small highly refractive nuclei with an evident independent movement quite distinct from the Brownian notion, by which all such minute bodies are found to be affected. These are the " point-like bacteria " seen by Ignatovsky in man, which he found in the perspiration as well as the blood ; but he observed them also in the blood of typhoid and typhus patients and in perspiration induced by pilocarpine and even in the sudor of healthy individuals. It is evident that the point-like bacteria, which I had described in my daily records, are not distin- guishable from numerous other micrococci, both normal and pathological. I can, by independent observation, confirm their special prevalence in those phases of the fever when the spirilloids are absent; further, I may note that I have frequently seen nuclei like them in the blood of unaffected animals. Particularly when the corpuscles have aggregated to form rouleaux and so produced an irregular network of solid blood elements, the diagnostic characters become apparent. These are the presence of organisms of a special shape, and the fact of a special movement of the corpuscles being caused by them. The latter condition will be apparent before the former, and to the practised eye it is detectable under even very low powers, half inch for example Quite apart from the blood currents which cause numerous red and white corpuscle to rush onwards in one direction, generally rapidly, but sometimes in an uncertain slow manner when they are entangled in side currents, also apart from the occasional rush of a red corpuscle towards the exposed end of a rouleau, there will be noted a quivering or shaking of some of the red bodies of an irregularly intermittent character. When parasites are numerous, this may at once be detected in any part of the field of vision, but sometimes we note it only after very careful attention and concentration of our vision on certain groups of corpuscles; then the parasites are not frequent. While examining the specimen it is necessary to alter the focus carefully with the fine adjustment, so as to ensure all the thickness of the layer of blood being seen; sometimes the quivering of red corpuscles is detectable only where they are massed together. I lay great stress on this quivering because it is a special feature of relapsing fever and surra, and its presence is diagnostic to such a degree that, when a large number of blood specimens are being examined in a limited time, it is sufficiently indicative to the practised eye that there are parasites present. After long exami- nation of a specimen of slightly-quivering blood, we may at length see a minute thread- like organism with eel-like movements emerge from the mass of corpuscles and move slowly forward, or we may observe the little being apparently tugging with all its * Vide paragraph 24 of his report,
TO FACE P. 43. FIGURES OF PATHOGENIC SPIRILLOIDS OR RELAPSING FEVER ORGANISMS [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] LENGTH OF PARASITES ESTIMATED AT 3 TO 6. TIMES THAT OF RED CORPUSELES. ROUGH DRAWINGS OF THE PARASITES MADE BEFORE THE METHOD OF STAINING WAS ADOPTED. INSERTED WITH A VIEW TO ILLUSTRATING THE GENERAL IMPRESSION CONVEYED TO ME BY THEM AS SEEN IN ACTIVITY: BELOW THESE DIAGRAMS WAS A NOTE THAT THE FRAGMENTS OF CORPUSCLES WERE QUIVERING OR BEING DRAGGED HASTILY OVER THE FIELD OR HAVING A PARASITE HOVERING ROUND THEM. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] DRAWINGS FROM STAINED SFECIMENS. THE DETAILS OF INDIVIDUAL PARASITES HAVE BEEN SHOWN BUT THE FIGURES ARE NOT TO SCALF AND IN THE SELECTION OF INDIVIDUALS FOR DELINEATION THERE WAS A BIAS TOWARDS THOSE BEST GROWING THE SPIRAL FORM THIS FEATURE OF THE DRIED & STAINED PARASITE HAVING BEEN DENIED. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG: 9. AFTFR ZIEGLEP FROM THE ENGLISH EDITION OF HIS "PATHOLOGICAL ANATOMY." [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG: 10. HUMAN BLOOD OF RELAPSING FEVER FROM THE "PRACTITIONER." × 700. (AFTER KOCH) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 11 . BLOOD OF APE INOCULATED WITH BLOOD OF PATIENT FROM WHOM FIG: 10 OBT × 700 FROM THE "PRACTITIONER" (AFTER KOCH) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG: 12 & 13. WILL PROVE OF INTEREST AS THEY WERE PRODUCED BY CONDUCTOR SMILES FROM SPECIMENS HANDED OVER TO HIM ON LOAN (WITH MY MICROSCOPE) HE PREPARED THESE DIAGRAMS,WHICH MUST THEREFORE SETAKEN AS ENTIRELY UNBIASSED TESTIMONT AS TO THE FORM OF THE PARASITES. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG: 12 . ANIMAL STAINED SPECIMENS REF THE WEIGHTHKOCK METHOD, FROM THE BRITISH SURYA OUTBREAK (BLUE) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG: 13. SAME AS FIG: 12. (MAUENTA)
43 might at a red corpuscle endeavouring to detach it from its rouleau. "When the parasites are " numerous and active," we see them all over the field directly we get the focus; most active in their movements, they pass from place to place by lashing their long thin bodies, by an eel-like movement, and in a vermiform manner by the propagation of a body-thickening along them like a wave. They may be seen free in the pools of serum between the rouleaux or firmly attached to a corpuscle or two which they have succeeded in appropriating and drag after them as they move back- wards, spin round and round, shake and worry or occasionally push forwards with rapidity. These artificially motile red corpuscles move into and out of focus rapidly and especially attract notice. At first I thought them the heads of the parasite as they were sometimes distinctly heart-shaped, but enlarged experience very soon proved that it was not so, the heart-shaped ones being merely two corpuscles simultaneously detached from the end of a rouleau. Dr. Evans' graphic description of the actions and appearance of the surra organism applies to these to a very great extent, but not entirely. As he mentions, they always take hold of the corpuscle by their blunt ends, sometimes several at a time to one corpuscle, then they move backwards, tugging hard. I have frequently seen two or three of the parasites tugging together at one piece of corpuscle, and they often become entangled, several together, in one wriggling mass. I have never been able to observe what Ignatovsky of Odessa points out that these agglomerations may be observed exclusively at the end of the attacks and that the number of balls or bundles of the spirilloids invariably increases as the moment of critical perspiration approaches, but then we have no sudorific crisis in mules. However the bundles of spirilloids are well marked in some of my stained specimens. At different times the organisms differ in size, and I have even noted large and small side by side in the field of vision. In a number of observations we shall find them sluggish or active, large or small, ferocious or placid, altogether in every condition suitable for examination of their structure and actions. Under a powerful light they are refrangent, irregularly-curled lines ; under moderate light each looks like a very thin black line actively motile in such a way as to give it a subspiral appearance, but not uniform in thickness throughout. Although, as described, they generally move in the direction of the blunt end, except when dragging at the corpuscles, a bold stroke with the lash-like tail or a doubling of the parasite on itself until the tip of the tail almost meets the blunt end followed by a sudden straightening may cause lateral movement. I have never seen them attack the white corpuscles, nor, indeed, any constituent except the red ones, which sometimes seem to be torn in pieces by two or more parasites; fragments may be seen in most specimens taken towards the end of the relapse, but we must not consider as such some corpuscles shaped like a quarter moon, which, on careful examination, prove to be unbroken red corpuscles altered in shape. At first I found that the parasites were no longer detectable in specimens after drying, and this serious difficulty presented itself until, on Dr. Vandyke Carter's advice, I adopted the Weigert-Koch method of drying in very thin layer on a cover glass. Even then they could be seen only with great difficulty, and the conclusions obtained were not reliable. I tried various staining agents and at last had complete success with aniline dyes. The effect of obtaining the parasite stained and quiet is remarkable in its modifying influence on our preconceived ideas as to its general characters. The parasite in motion is as different in appearance from when at rest as a rapidly revolving wheel is from a still one. It is only when this fact is realized that we are able to understand how it is that competent observers figure the same object so differently as they have 8pirochæta obermeieri. This will be seen by comparison of the figures of Koch and Ziegler here inserted (as kindly copied for me by Veteri- nary Surgeon F. Smith)44 thing to decide on the shape of the spirilloids in movement. The way they wriggle about and constantly pass out of focus renders their delineation very trying to the patience, and any representation of them on paper purely diagramatic. The dried and stained specimens (especially the magenta ones) are most beautiful objects. I think the figures in some text-books of the spirillum, like a huge corkscrew, must be purely imaginary and deduced from ideas formed of what the parasite in motion would be like if it were sufficiently enlarged. If such be the case, they are very apt to mislead and require immediate correction in accordance with the latest proved facts. We shall hereafter consider the parasite further. 4.The thermometer is the guide which ranks next to the microscope in value for purposes of diagnosis. The tracings which I have obtained by careful personal investi- gation for a complete month and by reliable records under my immediate supervision for a much longer time are beautifully illustrative of the effects of the disease-producing organism on the thermogenic centre. When an inoculation has taken, the mercury rises to 106° or 105° Fahrenheit, generally in a gradual manner and with one fall in its course usually on second day ; the evening temperature is exaggerated in relation to the morning, whereby the diurnal oscillations are rendered much greater than in health. On third, fourth, and fifth days the reading is high and gradually increasing, so that usually on the evening of the fifth day of exacerbation the crisis is reached; a rapid fall then ensues, so that on seventh morning the temperature is low and so remains for two or three days until the next rise. In typical cases there is a slight check to the abrupt fall on the evening of the sixth day. Thus a stage of the disease is completed, and these stages, varying in length from seven to ten days, may occur again and again, varying in number from three or even fewer to, it may be, as many as seventeen before death. The phase of low temperature reading cannot be designated " fever-free," because the line seldom falls to the normal; it may, however, descend even lower, and such great oscillations indicate usually the approach of the fatal result. The maximum reading is sometimes 107° Fahrenheit or even more, but usually not quite so high. A rise above 108° Fahrenheit indicates speedy death. There are thus two conditions under which death occurs45 5.The duration of attack varies considerably in different instances. The average of twelve cases observed by me has been over 66 days. The longest has been already 170 days on the sick list and looks pretty well still; the shortest' of these cases was 17 days. Thus the disease may vary in duration from six months to one month, the period of incubation and of presence of the disease before diagnosis being allowed for. We have seen that it is difficult to fix the exact commencement of any but experimental cases, and we have shown why this is so. Generally life flickers for some time before it is extinguished, the reserve stores of fat become exhausted and the animal falls in consequence of being unable longer to support his own weight. He remains for days apparently more dead than alive, and, at length, after becoming very cold and breathing with difficulty, dies quietly; or else, towards the end of a protracted illness, the patient becomes excessively weak, dull, and heavy, with dropsy of the eyelids, pendulous lower lip, extreme labor in breathing, looking the very picture of misery. He falls, and for some time is delirious and struggles severely, especially when touched, and finally " dies hard " with a high temperature and parasites in the blood up to the last. In my most acute case I found the patient carried off while in good condition, with a plentiful reserve of nutritive matter in the way of internal and external fat, after a very short illness characterised by acute dropsy. The tempera- ture ran up to the almost unprecedented reading 110° Fahrenheit just before the fatal result and the animal died directly from fever, his life being " burnt out" as it were. 6.The immediate cause of death varies from a yielding to the excessive height of the fever to the complete wearing out of the animal and exhaustion as a culmination of anæmia; not unfrequently the animal succumbs to complications rather than the disease; in others sequelæ are responsible for the fatality. Of these latter, two demand special notice in consequence of their frequency46 canal.The stomach generally presents extensive ulceration, but its pathological condition has been already noted in detail (Parts I and II). The alimentary and respiratory mucous membranes are elsewhere and in other respects free from disease with the exception of the ulcers alluded to in our notice of symptoms.These ulcers seem only to occur on those parts of the mucous membranes which are visible in the living animal, and they resemble those of the stomach in being atrophic degenerations ; they are, however, evanescent, less frequent, and less numerous. The spleen is, I find, almost always enlarged and generally weighs about 4 lb. Its structure is not frequently disorganized, although in some instances there are circumscribed blood accumulations in it and on its surface. Generally there is an excess of spleen pulp, so that it pits on pressure and long retains the impression of the fingers. Microscopical examination of the fresh pulp failed to demonstrate any abnormality although on one or two occasions I have noticed an unusual preponderance of spherical highly refractive bodies generally aggregated in pairs. The liver is usually quite healthy and not nearly so frequently the seat of congestion at Rangoon as it seems to have been at Tonghoo. The kidneys are seldom free-from disease; either they are in an anæmic, dropsical state, or else are markedly congested. In one instance I noted a considerable amount of extravasation on and in the under part of the right kidney as though some blood-vessel had given way. Large clot's of the most varied colors may be drawn from the large vessels at the upper part of the abdomen and the hind limb; even when the investigation is made immediately after death, these are often found. The sublumbar muscles are normal; the supralumbar will generally be found atrophied. The lungs are congested in most cases, but once, where a clot prevented passage of blood to them, they were peculiarly- dry and anæmic. The trachea is generally full of froth. The heart in chronic cases has gelatinous accumulations in its furrows in place of fat and a few extravasa- tions along the course of its blood-vessels; but in only one case have I seen any beneath the endocardium, and then it was into the substance of an auriculo -ventricular valve. In all advanced cases the heart is large and flabby as having undergone extensive fatty degeneration; both sides are filled with blood with clots of various colors; thus I have seen from the four orifices of the same heart severally and respectively yellow, purple, bright red, and a greenish blue clot projecting. In all the more prolonged cases the brain and spinal cord with their meninges are decidedly sodden and anæmic; the brain is soft and looks as though it had been for some time in water ; the plexus choroides of the lateral ventricles are bloodless and of a pale yellow color. In acute cases there is sometimes very slight congestion, but I have never seen this so pronounced or associated with the presence of blood-clots pressing on the brain as seems to have been the case not infrequently at Tonghoo (vide Parts I and II). 8.With the discovery of minute organisms in the blood arose numerous and important questions resembling those which have been so long and hotly debated concerning the bacillus of anthrax. Firstly, is the spirilloid organism a feature of the disease, or is it merely an accidental accompaniment ? My researches show that it is found in all cases of the disease, is in direct and immediate association with a certain phase of the disease; thus, when the temperature is about to rise, the spirilloids become detectable, they become very numerous and active during the rise and the climax of the fever, but disappear just before the crisis; thus its presence in spirilloid form seems directly related to the degree of the fever, and its phenomena and activity seem to bear definite relations to the severity of the relapse. The features of the life-history of the organism, in so far as we are acquainted with it, place us in a position to attribute all the disease conditions of the patient to it. The inoculation of an animal with blood containing the parasites invariably produces the disease (except when the. inoculated animal is a ruminant), but I have also proved that blood taken from an animal when no organisms are detectable will likewise convey the disease, but less rapidly. We have a strong chain of evidence that the parasite is the actual and immediate cause of the disease, and further that it is itself the materies morbi. We infer that it acts in two ways to produce the symptoms and fatal result; in its active phase it tears and drags at the red corpuscles and causes their disintegration ; it passively acts by blocking up the capillaries. Careful examination of the records of cases shows that the occurrence of petechiæ on the mucous membrane especially takes place when the parasites are not detectable in the blood by ordinary methods, i.e., from just before the maximum of the curve to just before the commencement of the next rise. When the
47 active parasites are present, the membranes are generally yellow and free from spots. Although the membranes will not be found to answer this description in all cases, the typical occurrence of spots is sufficiently frequent to warrant our considering it a fact in the pathology of the affection. In their active phases the parasites cause irritation of the membranes as is sufficiently evident from the lachrymation, profuse salivation, and slight discharge from the female generative passage, but later in their life they tend to aggregate either by two individuals uniting longitudinally to form a long one either temporarily or permanently (which is rare), or by several becoming entangled together to form wriggling masses, which Ignatovsky considers most frequent just before the crisis. Although each parasite is in diameter smaller than the smallest capillary, it is not hard to understand how several individual's wriggling together may block up an extremely narrow passage through which they are trying to pass ; hence results a more or less persistent plugging of the vessels, which becomes the more wide- spread because the blood in this disease has a marked tendency to form clots in the living vessels. Petechiæ, extensive extravasations, dropsies, and even ulceration are possible, indeed probable, results of such plugging of minute vessels. Ulceration of the stomach thus or otherwise induced might act as a cause of further or primary invasion by spirilloids. There can be no doubt that of two animals grazing in a marsh48 as those which he found in the surra disease at Dera Ismail Khan ; he does not think they belong to any class of spirilla, but that they occasionally take a spiral form like an, eel or a serpent in contortion. He further informs me that, after examining them with a 1/12 immersion lense, he found their bodies not really round, but flattened, the sides often curl in, which gives them a roundish appearance.* Varieties.49 At present we have positively no exact evidence of the mode of exit of parasites from the body; indeed we have no proof that they ever leave the system of an affected mule. The sodden-looking congested kidneys might at first sight seem to have been rendered so by the constant passage through them of these active organisms, but the disease of those organs is nothing more than is ordinarily found as a secondary diseased state in cases of very high fever or even of prolonged debility. Micro- scopical examination of the urine has failed to detect anything like the blood organism. There are manifest objections to testing this fluid by inoculation. So no method suggests itself to me for settling the important point whether the animal gets rid of the parasites in the urine. If it does, then that fluid would be a fruitful means of con- veyance of the disorder which would seem highly contagious, but it is not so. The liver and bowels are congested in the height of the fever, and the lining membrane of the stomach is the seat of extensive lesions, probably due to the parasites ; but, in reply to the question whether the parasites are thrown off through the alimentary canal, we can only say that search for such minute beings in the contents of stomach and bowels seems hardly likely to be followed by good results, and on two occasions the gastric contents and on a third gastric and large bowel contents given per primas vias failed to communicate the disease. Carter's experimental inoculations of monkeys with saliva failed, but Ignatovsky's observation of motile nuclei in perspiration would seem to indicate possible ways of exit of spirilla from man, but we have as yet no data for discussing this question conclusively in the case of the mule. 4. Affinities.50 Some doubt as to the close alliance of the mule and man organisms legitimately existed until both had been stained and examined in the quiescent state; but, now we know that the former readily take aniline dyes, are curled up subspirally after death, and are found very like the stained spirochaetes of man as figured by Ziegler, I think we can have no further doubt on this point, and we cannot consider that the only relapsing fever of man differs intrinsically and radically in its probable producer from the only relapsing fever hitherto described as such in equine patients, and that both these fevers induced by similar means produce a relapsing fever of the monkey in spite of the radical and intrinsical differences in their causes ! Adherence to this latter view would argue an incapability of appreciating and accepting such proofs as are generally acknowledged to be sufficient in natural history and modern pathology. Indubitably the nearest allies of these mule organisms as well as of those which Dr. Evans found in the disease called " Surra " are the " flagellated organisms " found in the blood of rats and some other rodents, not known to be diseased, of which Dr. Lewis says they " present many features in common with motile organisms undoubtedly of vegetable origin; on the other hand, taken as a whole, they appear to approach more closely to the forms of life usually classified as protozoa * * * *. Many believe that these organisms are zoospores, and not animalcules" (vide his " Microscopic Organisms found in the Blood of Man and Animals "51 (12)As also have the post-mortem appearances. (13)The manner in which death is brought about has been determined. (14)The influence of climate, locality, season, &c, on the production of this disease has been discussed, and some conclusions as to etiology, based on statistics, have been obtained. (15)A number of proximate causes have been determined. (16)Determination of the nature and causes of the disease has enabled me to suggest prophylactics. (17)The inefficiency of certain methods of curative treatment has been demon- strated. (18)Evidence bearing on its communication from animal to animal has been obtained. (19)The exact relations of gastric ulceration to relapsing fever have been ascertained. (20)The methods of a systematic inquiry into an outbreak of specific disease have been placed on record for guidance of, and improvement by, future workers. (21)The value of modern instruments of precision for diagnosis has been vindicated. The principal matters to be solved in the pathology of relapsing fever of mules on which light may be thrown during future outbreaks are52 P.S.53 Urines Nos. 7, 8, 9, and 10 showed on test copious albumen; no sugar nor bile constituents detected. The following is a Specimen of my further investigations of urine :54 General observations, work done, &c.55 The following are examples of my digests of these reports :56 The actual details of daily work have been dealt with in my periodical progress reports to the office of the Inspecting Veterinary Surgeon, Madras Army. P.S.57 CASE I58 conjunctiva looks better; left cornea quite opaque, and the side which is undermost is always bathed in sweat. A fair dropping of hardish dung, coated with dark viscid material, mucus and bile, very foul smelling; respirations 72, labored. Temperature at rectum 105.1° F., at nostril 100.6° F.; visible mucous membranes moist, of good color. November 19th (2 p.m.)NLS to insert Black and white image
NLS to insert Black and white image
59 MILITARY DEPARTMENT. DECEMBER 1880. No. 7. REPORT ON "SURRA" DISEASE. From G. EVANS, Esq.,M.D., Inspecting Veterinary Surgeon, British Army, on Special Duty, to the Assistant Adjutant-General, Punjab Frontier Force, dated Simla, 13th November 1880, No. 27 B. In continuation of this office No. 17 B., of the 19th October 1880, I have the honor to submit the following report upon my investigations relative to the disease called " surra," in the Dera Ismail Khan district, for the information of the Brigadier- General Commanding the Frontier Force and of His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjab. 2. I arrived at Dera Ismail Khan on Saturday evening, the 18th September, and left there on my return to Simla on the morning of Tuesday, the 19th October after spending a week in visiting the out-posts. 3. The name " surra " is used by the natives to denote anything rotten, and is applied by them to a dry rot, such as a withered leaf, and to a moist rot, such as a putrid carcase. The name is thus a very comprehensive one, and is applied loosely to all chronic ailments of a lowering character which have not a specific designation. A native will speak of himself as " sur gia " (gone rotten) when he has felt for some time in ill-health and does not know what he suffers from. The name surra is given to this disease among horses as a distinctive designation because a withering or falling- off in condition is a marked feature in its progress without any visible lesion post mortem to account for it. In England we speak of the " rot " in sheep, and " decay," " consumption," &c., in man, to denote affections characterised by wasting during life. 4. This disease is different in some important respects from any other that has ever been reported upon in man or beast. It is quite new to science, and until the parasite, which is found in the blood of animals suffering from it, is better known and studied, I think it would be wise to retain the name " surra " to designate the disease. But though new to science, it is not new in reality, for it has been only too well known to the natives of Dera Ismail Khan district for several generations as an occasional scourge. 5. Geographical distribution.60 6. Definition.61 invariable symptom in the progress of the disease is the wasting away of the flesh; and this is the more remarkable, seeing how much the patient eats, and apparently with good appetite. This wasting or withering away goes on more rapidly in some cases than in others. The records of the 4th Punjab Cavalry show an average duration of forty-three days after the admission on the sick list. Whether they die early or late, they live until they are reduced in condition to mere living skeletons clothed with little but skin, most pitiable objects to look at. There is often much anaemic palpitation of the heart in the last stage, the sound can be heard a little distance off, and the membranes become blanched. Some cases at last drop down, and die suddenly, perhaps when they are eating and enjoying food; others become delirious and struggle on the ground as if in pain; while other cases linger for days after they are down, too weak to rise or to stand after they are helped up, but go on eating all the grass they get and much of the corn until at last they die, without pain, passing away gradually like an English summer's day, no one can tell when the light ends or when the darkness sets in. 8. Such are the symptoms which any intelligent observer would notice. For my own more especial observations with regard to the pulse, respirations, temperature, urine, and blood, I beg to refer you to the appendices lettered A to I. The first three are records of fairly typical cases of the disease contracted in the normal way ; the other cases I produced by injecting beneath the skin of healthy animals fresh blood from the jugular vein of a horse suffering from surra, or else by pouring such blood into the stomach of healthy animals. These observations I made all myself, and noted in my memorandum at the moment of observation; so I can vouch for their correctness so far as they go, but I regret exceedingly the incompleteness of these records upon some points of special interest to medical men. The vastness of the field 1 had to work in and the richness of valuable facts to be gathered were more than I could possibly do justice to alone without trained scientific assistants. I wish 1 could have carried on my examinations of the urine of the cases inoculated as I did with the normal cases, to see whether it contained albumen, and whether there was in more than one case any apparent relation between the advent of albumen in the urine and the decrease of the parasites in the blood. I spent so much time every day in studying the parasites in the blood, fearing I could not bring any away to show, that I could not devote myself as much as I wished to the microscopical examination of the sediment from the urine: my eyes would not stand it. I many times looked for " casts " in the sediment of the urine, and failed to find any; but I am not prepared to say none were ever passed, though I believe if they are passed it is rarely, for the kidneys all appeared quite healthy post mortem, excepting in one case, which I could not examine by the microscope.* I had to work with the microscope for many hours a day out-of-doors at the sick lines, or else in a stable, when the thermometer was 82° within a cool bungalow, and the sun pouring down its rays through a cloudless sky upon the surrounding bare sandy ground. Very few investigators know what that means. Moreover, the flies were an additional torment; for when they crowded upon the stage of my microscope, disturbing the vision, soiling the lenses, and swarming on my face, &c., it was not possible to fan them off without beating and shaking the microscope. The blood which 1 was examining or else the tissues of the body at post- mortem examination attracted them so, and thus much of my energy was expended in self-control under that provocation. 9. Post-mortem appearances.62 intestinal glands, &c. I mention this because in no other way could a satisfactory- investigation post mortem be made under such conditions of climate, and to add weight to the results of my examinations, for I took every precaution in my power to prevent making mistakes. This was the more necessary because of the disease being a new one to me. 10. There was more or less abnormal amount of clear serum effused in the peritoneal cavity in all cases, with a slight fluff of lymph upon the parietal layer, but no sign of any inflammatory action; it was a simple exudation. I found no abnormal effusion in the pleuritic cavity, but in one case the pericardial sack was greatly distended with fluid. In several cases I found filaria papilosa free upon the mesentry, besides other nematodes as well as a very small tape-worm, whose character 1 have not yet been able to determine. I examined the kidneys, liver, spleen, heart, lungs and the mucous lining of the stomach and intestines throughout with great care in every case that I had the opportunity, and I am prepared to state positively that this disease is not characterised by any structural organic change; it is purely a disease of the blood. In one case, as I mentioned elsewhere (appendix C, case 3), the kidneys were pale and soddenlike, and in another the margin of one lobe of the lung was hepatised; but these cases being so exceptional can have had no characteristic relation to the disease. In some cases there were petechiae of the mucous lining of the intestines, similar to what was visible during life in the vagina and on the eyelids. The mucous membrane everywhere was more or less tinged yellow, and often the subperitoneal connective tissue was yellow also; but in no case was the structure of the liver diseased, though in one case the liver was studded throughout with calcareous degenerations of cestode larvae, and in two cases 1 found flukes in the liver, with inspissated bile distending some of the bile ducts enormously. 11. Mortality.63 troopers on the sick list, besides sixteen grass-cutters' ponies. Fresh cases were daily discovered. 12. Contagion and infection.64 15. The jemadar of camels told me he thought that No. 8/79 suffered from a disease different from the others because he had been so long ill, and had never refused food, whereas the others fed irregularly and lost condition much more rapidly. The five were wretchedly thin. No. 8/79 was rather thinner than the others. On examining the mucous membranes I found the first four on the list presented the characteristic appearance of surra in horses65 fatal disease known by several names, such as klanhog doaia and surra, depending upon the several stages. Phipri is another name by which it is known among camels. I know of no reason for saying that the fly causes the disease except the common tradition of my people. The symptoms of the three stages of the disease in the camel are these :66 probably will be in the red corpuscles: a large number will be like shapeless particles of pale red jelly, from half the size of a normal corpuscle downwards. The last change observed will be a large number of small granular specks in the serum. I wish to note particularly that the first apparent change in the blood is the presence of those foreign bodies67 often find organisms A, B, and C in healthy animals, and therefore conclude they are harmless. But we also invariably find organisms, undistinguishable in shape from A, B, and C, present in the very first stage and throughout the course of diseases 1, 2, and 3. A always abundant in 1, never in 2 or 3 ; B always abundant in 2, never in 1 or 3 ; and 0 always abundant in 3, but never in 1 or 2. The blood of 1, 2, and 3, containing the organisms A, B, and C, if put under the skin or into the stomach of healthy animals, will invariably reproduce 1 + A, 2 + B, and 3 + C, but not other associations. Again, if we destroy A, B, C, or remove them from the blood of 1, 2, 3, by filtration, and then inoculate healthy animals with the blood so treated, we shall either reproduce the disease in a very mild and modified form, or else not at all. A pure chemical virus would be in a state of solution and would not be in the least affected by the filter. From which results we conclude that the organisms A, B, and C are the causes of the diseases 1, 2, and 3, though from other observations we find that organisms, undistinguishable from A, B, and C in appearances, are harmless.* 25. Those who believe that these organisms cause the diseases with which they are associated do not agree as to how the cause is effected. There are three theories of explanation. 1st68 under very different conditions many months before. If the surra parasite in some form or other develops in ponds which dry up during the hot season, the germs or ova would be widely scattered by the wind, which raises the dust of the beds of those ponds afterwards, the spores or ova would be sown broad-cast, many would rest on the food, others on the drink of horses, thus being conveyed into the stomach, while others would be inhaled into the lungs and develop by the moisture and heat there, then pass into the circulation. Possibly that may in some measure account for the disease prevailing much more this year and the last, which were very dry and hot, than the previous year (1878), which I was told was a very wet one in the district of Dera Ismail Khan. If, again, the horses daily drank water from a source in which these organisms naturally developed, then that would be the most common way in which they were conveyed into the system, and that water would be the chief remote cause of the disease. My opinion is that such is the case in the district of Dera Ismail Khan. I cannot prove it, for I have not been able to find the parasite in the water; but I declare that the water which the horses drink is very impure and obtained from shallow, narrow, winding irrigation channels choked with sedgy vegetation and slime, most favorable places for the breeding of all kinds of low organisms. For a further description of them I beg to refer His Honor to appendix K. That the water is of a marshy character is further shown by the presence of flukes in the liver of two surra cases I made a post-mortem examination of. 28. With regard to the food being the remote cause, it has been suggested that the disease is due to the horses eating grass from low inundated land on the banks of the Indus, &c. Major Money, 4th Punjab Cavalry, informed me that the disease was common among the horses of the 3rd Punjab Cavalry when they got grass from inundated ground near the Indus, but it ceased when they got grass from higher ground. It is not improbable that such grass would convey the ova of the parasite ; but it is not the common cause at the outposts, for the disease comes on when the horses feed on chopped straw and drink irrigation water at the base of the hills 40 miles beyond the reach of the Indus, just as much as when they feed on grass, and the disease prevails, moreover, at these posts far more than at Dera Ismail Khan, close to the Indus, where they get better water from wells. 29. I cannot praise the horse standings at all the posts: some of them were very much soiled, but upon the whole they were not worse than the average of native cavalry, and I do not think the disease comes from this source. However, I would strongly recommend that the standings be raised and kept even and the soil renewed periodically. There was an abundance of clean dry earth and sand near all the posts, but I saw none used to put on the ground when horses stale, to keep the stalls dry and clean, as is the practice in all well-regulated stables and horse lines in India. 30. Ultimate causes.69 years ? It would be impracticable to recommend all the irrigation channels to be made " pakka," and kept clean; yet if my opinion, as expressed above, is correct, nothing short of that would do. But the water could be corrected by boiling it every day before the horses drink it, which would be a very expensive process in a district where fuel is so scarce. I do not know what else to recommend, unless good water can be got at reasonable cost by Artesian wells from below the salt strata, or pipes be laid down to draw water direct to the posts from the rivers above where they are broken up to supply the irrigation channels. The pipes need not be large. It is simply a matter of expenditure with regard to the average annual loss of horses from this disease, and the correctness of my opinion as to the causes of it, which I here submit for His Honor's consideration. I wish much that I were able to advise upon this subject with less hesitation. There can be no doubt that the water is very bad, but whether it has any direct relation to surra as a remote cause has not been proved, and perhaps cannot be proved without an expensive experiment as above recommended. 32. Cure.70 Shape.71 motions, to assure myself in what manner they unite. I am inclined to think that their respective heads and tails are in the same direction, overlapping each other; but Dr. Haig was inclined to think, on the contrary, that they fasten with their tails in opposite directions. What they do it for I do not know, perhaps for copulation; but a combatant officer on one occasion, looking at a fresh drop of blood and seeing the parasites unite in that manner, exclaimed: " By gad, now two of the little devils are fighting for a piece of corpuscle which one of them had broken off." I mention this because that officer had not been told before that they did sometimes fasten together, so that he was not in a state of mind called " expectant attention." He said after- wards that he "had observed a small particle of corpuscle at the head of one of the two before the other rushed up to tackle him." 36. With reference to the surra parasites which I transferred from the horse to the dog (vide appendix I), and which I submitted to Dr. Lewis for his opinion as to what they are, I received the following communication from him on the 8th instant: 72 the membrana nictitans; all visible mucous membranes of a pale yellow color; very thirsty. Feeding fairly well, taking 6 pounds of grain daily and the full allowance of grass. Skin dry and bound to the ribs. The gait stiff and weak. 73 Table showing the variations in the pulse, temperature, urine and blood of case 1. Date 1880. Morning or Evening. Pulse. Temperature of rectum. Urine. Blood, &c. Sp. Gr. Albumen. Sept. 19th ... Morning. 54 100 ... ... Evening. 56 1013/5 .30 Absent. 74 Evening.75 Table showing the variations in the pulse, temperature, urine and blood of case 2. Date 1880. Morning or Evening. Pulse. Tempera- ture of Rectum. Urine. Blood, &c. Sp. G. Albumen. Sept. 19th Morning 50 103 ... ... Evening 56 105 2/5 .28 Present. 76 September 27 th77 Table showing the variations in the puke, temperature, urine, and blood of case 3. Date 1880. Morning or Evening. Pulse. Tempera- ture of Rectum. Urine. Blood, &c. Sp. Gr. Albumen. Sept. 25th. Evening. 58 105 Blood not examined. 78 moist, and a very small purple speck on the membrana nictitans. Two salutries, most experienced in this disease, say they suspect the case is surra, though they are not yet sure of it. The horse feeds well. Urine, specific gravity 44, alkaline, free from albumen, good colors. Blood not examined. September 28th79 Table showing variations in the puke, temperature, and blood, &c., case 4, inoculated by subcutaneous injection, 23rd September. Date 1880. Morning or Evening. Pulse. Temperature of Rectum. Blood, &c. Sept. 23rd Morning Normal. 100 Normal. Evening Do. 101 Blood not examined. " 24th Morning Do. 103 Do. do. Evening Do. 99 Do. do. " 25th Morning Do. 99 3/5 Normal Evening Do. 101 2/5 Blood not examined. 80 horse out of work, and he had not been out of the station within the past twelve months or more. It was therefore considered in every way a good subject for this experiment. Blood was drawn from the jugular vein of case 4 (apendix D), and three separate drams of it injected as soon as possible with a hypodermic syringe into three separate parts of the neck The pulse of the pony this morning was 40, and the temperature 99 3/5. This evening, just before the inoculation, the temperature was 100 2/5, pulse 44. I may remark that I find about one degree difference in temperature, morning and evening, common in healthy horses. September 3Oth81 Table showing variations in the pulse, temperature, and blood, &c, case 5, inoculated by subcutaneous injection, dated 29th September 1880. Date 1880. Morning or Evening. Pulse. Temperature of Rectum. Blood, &c. Sept. 29th Morning. 40 99 3/5 Normal. Evening. 44 100 2/5 .......... " 30th Morning. 35 to 40 97 1/5 Blood normal. Pulse very intermittent and indistinct at the jaw. Oct. 1st Morning. 35 to 40 99 2/5 Blood not examined. Pulse as yesterday. " 2nd Morning. 40 100 3/5 Do. do. Pulse more regular. " 3rd Morning. 40 101 4/5 Do. do. Eyes suffused. " 4th Morning. 44 104 Pulse not intermittent, full and distinct at the jaw. The mucous membranes becoming yellow, with petechiae. Blood examined, parasites swarming. " 5th Morning. 46 103 Blood not examined. " 6th Morning. 56 103 Do. do. Pulse not intermittent, but almost indistinct at the jaw. Membranes very yellow. " 7th Morning. 44 100 4/5 Blood not examined. " 8th Morning. 45 99 82 Remarks.83 October 8th84 case 6 (appendix F), and defibrinated, it contained the parasites of surra innumerable in every drop, and very active. It was then thoroughly mixed with three times its bulk of water from the well from which the horses drink, and allowed to stand covered in the pharmacy until this morning. Twenty-four hours after it was thus treated, I stirred it well up and examined some of it by the microscope ; no parasite could be found in it. It had no bad smell, or any sign of decomposition. Five ounces of the blood and water mixture were now added to 35 ounces of fresh water, and given as a draught to No. 72. Twenty ounces of the blood and water mixture were mixed with twenty ounces of fresh water, and given as a draught to No. 302. October 18th 85 Assam as soon as I can to investigate a disease there, I have handed the animal over to Dr. Lewis, who takes a deep interest in this investigation, and he will watch whether the parasites reappear; and if they do, he will study them. November 3rd86 the dry shore of an ancient sea. From there the land slopes to the Indus, the soil at first becoming less stony, more gravelly and sandy ; then the gravel disappears, and there is more and more of alluvial mud mixed with the sand as we approach the Indus, but the sand remains in a large proportion. 5. The streams and rivers which come within our borders from the Suliman valleys are not allowed to reach the Indus except by percolation through the soil. My opinion is that, owing to its being spread over such an extensive area of dry sandy soil, the water is nearly all evaporated by the heat of the sun before it reaches the Indus. 6. As soon as a river comes well within our boundary, the natives dam it, and make what they call a "bund." From this dam channels are made to carry the water in different directions on the plain. As these main channels proceed, they divide and sub-divide into a perfect net-work of small channels, about a foot wide and a few inches deep, circulating round the small enclosures and inosculating with each other. From them water is drawn to irrigate the fields about the villages, and from them men and animals drink, until at last the water becomes expended, so that the channels cannot be conducted further. 7. There are very few wells in the district outside Dera Ismail Khan. It may be said that there is no cultivation anywhere except where the land is irrigated, as I have described, from the rivers coming in from the Suliman hills. Beyond these net-works of irrigation-channels the land is a barren desert. 8. These shallow courses are made to circulate in a manner to check the too rapid flow of the water, and this arrest is further encouraged by allowing sedgy vegetation to grow freely in them. I found the water often stagnant and exposed to a tropical sun for hours when the channel was dammed at distant points for the purpose of irrigation. Nothing could be contrived more favorable for the development of the lowest forms of organic life, animal and vegetable, and these I found swarming and often visible to the naked eye in a clear glass bottle exposed to the rays of the sun. The farther the channels are from the main arteries the more does the water approach the condition of marsh water, and we should expect animals which drink such water to be infested by parasites found in animals pastured on marsh lands. Accordingly, I found flukes in the livers of two of the horses which suffered from surra. The fluke is an exceedingly rare parasite in the liver of the horse. I never saw one before, and very few Veterinary Surgeons ever have found one in that animal, though they are not uncommon in the ass in England, because he is ill-cared for and pastured on waste places, commons, &c., where the land is more or less of a marshy character and the water stagnant. The presence of the flukes in the livers of these horses is alone a proof that the water which they drank was not good. The parasites could not be traced to any marsh grass, for there are no marshes proper in the district: the soil is too porous, and the climate too dry. The horses were fed on grass grown on dry sandy soil or else on chopped straw. The bottom of all the irrigation channels which I saw was slimy. 9. My opinion is that the cause of surra is taken in by the horses with the water which they drink, that the dirty condition of the wells at Dera Ismail Khan favors the development of that cause to some extent, but that it is developed mostly in water conveyed by shallow winding, sedgy, slimy, water-courses such as I have above described exposed to the influence of a scorching sun and a cloudless sky. 10. There are three ways of avoding it. First, get pure well water. I am told that no good well water can be got at the outposts by the native mode of digging: the water obtained is far too salty. Could not an Artesian well be made deep enough at reasonable cost to obtain good water from a lower stratum ? Secondly, if no good water can be obtained from wells, the water from the irrigation channels should be boiled every day before the horses drink it. Thirdly, draw water for the horses direct from the rivers above the irrigation channels by means of pipes. 11. Filtering the water through a bed of clean sand 3 feet deep has been suggested to me; but I do not think it would be effective, for the filter would require very frequent renewal, and I do not think the native officers in charge of the outposts could be trusted to do that properly. 12. I made the following notes at the outposts which I visited. 13. Tank, 11th October 1880 87 from this tank, because the 1st Punjab Cavalry only arrived from Kabul on the 30th ultimo, with the war complement of water-carriers, and they say they cannot bring enough water from the other tank, which is a little farther off on the west side of the tahsil, and from which I am told the 4th Punjab Cavalry always got water for the horses. I visited the tahsil tank and found it covered, 21 feet square with about 3 feet of water in ; it is supplied by an exactly similar irrigation-channel as the other, but is kept cleaner, and the water is more often renewed ; it is dirty enough, but I am told it is considered the cleanest in the neighbourhood. I found the water in it contained a great many infusoria visible to the naked eye by means of sunlight passing through a clear glass bottle. There is no well in the whole country about. The grass at present is good, gram good, barley inferior. 14. The tahsildar of Tank informs me that a great number of horses (he does not know how many) belonging to the zamindars died of surra last year ; but the disease was not com- mon for twenty years previously, when the whole of the Nawab's horses (about 300) died of surra. Cattle do not get any disease like surra. Horses are most subject to it in the beginning of the cold weather, and most of them live until the time when green wheat is given to them (about the new year), then they all die; no case has ever been known to recover, he says, and therefore no medicine is given. 15. Last year fourty-four horses of the 4th Punjab Cavalry were admitted on the sick list for surra at this post, and they all died. This year up to the close of last month thirty horses were reported sick of the disease here. I do not know how many of them died; I saw fifteen besides five ponies and two mules at Dera Ismail Khan, not likely to survive. At the present time there are no cases. The post was not occupied by the Punjab Cavalry before last year. 16. Kot Nusaran, 12th October 1880.88 a tank within the fort, 5 paces by 6 and 5 or 6 feet deep, covered. The ground close to the edge where the men stand to draw water, is uneven, and retains a puddle of dirty black slime. A stick introduced showed about 5 or 6 inches of soft mud at the bottom of the tank. Color of the water dirty, swarming with frogs and infusoria. It is supplied by a shallow, winding irrigation-channel, one foot wide, coming from the Gomul river, traversing about three miles of irrigated land before it reaches the post. It is choked with sedgy vegetation, and I found several inches of black slime at the bottom of the channel close to the fort. with a green scum on the surface in some places. 21. This post was not occupied in 1878. Last year, twenty-two horses were taken ill with surra here, and all died. This year forty-seven were taken ill belonging to the 4th Punjab Cavalry. I do not know how many of them have died. I saw eleven troopers and two ponies suffering from surra at Dera Ismail Khan which had marched in with the disease from this post. 22. Major Underwood informed me that in May 1879 the 3rd Punjab Cavalry sent fifty-two sabres and about twenty-five ponies from Edwardesabad to Jutta post, where they remained about two months. Nearly every one of those animals died of surra during the following cold season at Edwardesabad, and no horse there got this disease which had not been at Jutta. This fact is interesting, not only as showing how prone this station is to the disease, but also that it is not communicable by any ordinary means ; for if it were infectious in the ordinary acceptation of the term, seventy-seven cases of it imported to a station would have caused it to spread. Major Underwood further informed me that the 5th Punjab Cavalry had 150 sabres on the Dera Ismail Khan frontier from 24th January to end of April 1879, and Done of their horses died of surra when they returned to Kohat. No horse of that regiment was stationed at Jutta. This confirms the common observation of natives and Europeans in this district that the disease is much more common in the later than in the early months of the year. 23. Manghi Post, 14th October 1880.89 26. Zarkani Post, 14th October 1880.