REPORT ON THE CALCUTTA EPIZOOTIC OR CATTLE DISEASE of 1864 IN CALCUTTA AND ITS NEIGHBOURHOOD. BY DR. C. PALMER, PRESIDENCY SURGEON. (3328.)
( 2 ) From DR. C. PALMER, Presidency Surgeon, to S. C. BAYLEY, ESQ, Junior Secretary to the Government of Bengal,( 2 ) appears to have reached its height. From this time it gradually died out, and when the subject was made one of special investigation, the disease had not only materially lessened, but the cases that were brought in, were found to be less severe and more amenable to treatment. By the end of April the Epizootic had disappeared as such altogether, although sporadic cases have since been brought under notice and treatment, as we are informed by Mr. Greenhill; but as an Epizootic from this time, the end of April, the disease had died out. We may, therefore, define the time during which the disease existed, as an Epizootic, from January to April inclusive. The havoc this Epizootic committed during the period under review was great and serious ; it spared but few; condition, nor age, nor sex, was a protection : indeed the best fed and cared for, and in the highest condition, were at least as liable to be attacked, as cattle in poorer condition and indifferently housed and fed ; and all equally succumbed. The disease, as a rule, made a clean sweep of all the cattle in a yard where it had found ingress. We may in elucidation mention the fatal result to the large and valuable head of cattle belonging to Mr. Floyd of Alipore, he lost all. Mr. Stalkartt of Howrah lost all his, and many others who had for years given the subject of the improve- ment of the breed of cattle in Bengal much consideration, and had expended much time and money on this object, saw their work of years demolished in a few weeks. It is not, we regret, in our power to give any correct or reliable statistics shewing the number of cattle attacked by this Epizootic, but the result of treatment of those which were brought in was most alarming and discouraging, probably not less than 90 per cent. died! (Rutherford.) We now proceed to give the symptoms of this Epizootic, for which we are indebted to Mr. R. Rutherford, who made careful notes of the cases that were brought under his observa- tion and treatment, and who has most liberally placed his notes at our disposal. Mr. Greenhill also lent us valuable assistance whilst conducting our enquiries, and his observations corrobo- rate those made by Mr. Rutherford. It is to be remembered that these notes were written some fifteen months since, and when we compare them with the symptoms given of the Epizootic now raging in England, their closeness and similarity to these is remarkable. Mr. Rutherford describes the symptoms thus: "The disease is ushered in, in all cases with fever of a remittent character, but it is only in a few cases that the shivering and sweating is observed ; the skin is hot and dry, or otherwise of a clammy feel; ears hot, and pulsation of their arteries very distinct; extremities hot and cold alternately; breathing accelerated and oppressed; catching of the flauks, and frequent twitchings of the muscles of the flank. Dulness and loss of spirits is an early symptom, and a strong disinclination to move or be moved about; the horns are hotter than usual, more so near their base ; eye dull and expressive of pain of a dull character : conjunctival lining red ; and towards the inner canthus the membrane shews several ecchymosed spots ; gradually the eye become duller and more dusky in hue, a discharge of tears is constant, and the animal experiences great annoyan( 3 ) the ears of irregular heat; remission of the fever takes place, sometimes once a day, in other cases in two days. This also is observable of the purging in a few cases; the breathing becomes short and quick, and pulse quick and tremulous; expression of face is that of dull pain and congestion about the head : the flies swarm about the eyes, mouth, and nostrils, and as appeared in my post-mortem examinations, readily deposit their ova on the inner edge of eyelid and nostril. In milk cows the secretion is early diminished, gradually becoming less, but rarely entirely suspended; it is, however, of inferior quality and slightly altered in colour, as if mixed with the serum of the blood. In some cases symptom of abdominal pain occur, getting up and lying down at times, boring the head into flanks and cold sweats; in others there is strong evidence of the lungs being involved: the breathing is catching and abdominal, and auscultation gives an increased harsh sound over the region of the larger Bronchiæ. Towards the lower part of the Trachea and bifurcation of the tube the mucus rale is very distinct. Tym- panitis of the first stomach is a common symptom, but never to a great extent, and is owing to the suspension of rumination, which latter took place at the commencement of the disease ; the food in the stomach ferments and decomposes, giving off gas in the process. If tapped the gas still continues to form, unless some strong stimulants is passed in through the Cannula. Tenesmus is now present, and the motions are frequently mixed with blood; in other cases the discharges are like dirty water, and come away with sudden violence, discharged almost involuntarily. By this time the animal has become extremely offensive, her motions and breath taint the surrounding atmosphere to a nauseating degree, and in the majority of cases death now rapidly ensues from exhaustion and depraved blood." Such are the symptoms noticed and detailed by Mr. Rutherford; he has condensed them into the following as " diagnostic symptoms." 1st.( 4 ) I would here remark that I placed three healthy cows in my stable in the hope of saving them; they did very well for some time, but even there the disease attacked them; they were removed without loss of time. A fortnight after however my horse got sick, suffered with the same symptoms and died in less than eight days. I got the stall thoroughly repaired, the floor renewed, and all the wood work painted, and all the time it remained unoccupied (nearly two months). I kept it well aired and smoked, not apprehending infection, I brought a healthy young mare and kept her in the stall for about twenty days, when she too sickened in the same way and died. The sufferings of the horses were greater than those of the, cows ; the throat became affected much sooner. In one thatched shed, with a kutcha (mud) floor; four calves became diseased and died. I then placed an old sow in it, and kept her there for about three months; she never got ill, and when I removed her I had the shed well cleaned and covered with clay and cow dung, and kept two horses in it up to the day of the late Cyclone, (October 5, 1864) when the shed was blown down ; the horses were not sick, nor sorry for a single day." Mr. Floyd proceeds to recommend, on the authority of a letter to the Illustrated London News of some time since, Turpentine, and states that the remedy was successfully tried by his neigh- bour, Mr. Pritchard; to this we shall revert when we notice the mode of treatment of the disease. He then observes: " The disease from its first stage attracts myriads of flies which prove very distressing to cows. When Mr. Pritchard's cow got the turpentine and linseed oil, the total absence of flies was remarkable." Some years ago the disease prevailed in Russia, and lasted for 5 years. Some parts of Australia has been known to suffer from it. Natives of the N. W. Provinces say, that whenever it has appeared, it has remained for 4 or 5 years, breaking out between November and January, and carrying off horses and other animals, as well as cows." This highly interesting account tallies very closely with the symptoms given by Mr. Rutherford, and it is of importance to note that Mr. Floyd's description is that of a non-professional person, who described exactly what he saw without consulting a veterenary surgeon. Further, both these reports were made during last year and long before the English " Cattle Plague" had made its appearance. It is worthy of remark here that the cattle treated by Messrs. Greenhill and Rutherford were invariably brought to the extensive stables over which they preside, were kept in stalls and boxes adjoining horses, yet the disease was in no instance communicated to horses, and even with Mr. Floyd's cases before us we cannot but record our opinion that the disease is not communicable to horses. Our own observations, and those made by others, who watched the progress of the Epizootic, are completely confirmatory of the foregoing. In 1862 Mr. Ladd, who has long been an enthusiast in cattle breeding, had a fine young cow attacked at his farm at Entally, in the Suburbs ; his description of the disease his cow suffered from, corresponds closely with the above specified symptoms. She was treated by a highly intelligent veterinary Surgeon, Mr. Bretherton, who pronounced the disease to be an uncommon one, and to be essentially a " blood disease." Out of a total of 9 head of cattle 7 were attacked and died; but it does not appear that the disease spread at this time. Mr. Rutherford, however, states that he believes he has met with cases occasionally both in Calcutta and on the other side of the river at Seebpore,* but that these cases were of a sporadic character and did not spread. Mr. Ladd recognized the disease at the Exhibition on its first appearance as the same, his cattle had been affected with two years previously, and warned Mr. Floyd of its infectious nature, and advised him to remove his cattle at once; but the warning came too late; these circumstances are of practical importance, as they go far to prove that the Calcutta Epizootic of 1864 was really not as was generally believed, a new disease, although we are not in a position to assert that it had been previously known as an Epizootic. Having thus fully given the symptoms characterizing the Calcutta Epizootic of 1864 we proceed to remark upon other Epizootics which have been rife of late years in different portions of this country; and we shall be led to the conclusion from the information which has been submitted by the Chief Officers of extensive districts, that a disease similar to probably identical to that we have described, has been long known under other denomina- tions in India, and we shall endeavour to show that at least two distinct Epizootics are, and have been of frequent occurrence. To quote extensively from the reports which have been sub- mitted, would be to lengthen this paper to an inconvenient and unnecessary extent. The cor- respondence has already been published in the Supplement to the Calcutta Gazette of March 12th, 1864. We propose, therefore, to extract only briefly from these letters, premising that there is a remarkable resemblance in all the descriptions given, so much so that we are com- pelled to believe that similar Epizootics have been recognized in various Districts and appear to be equally fatal in all. There are, doubtless, many other and different Epizootics which may have been confounded with those described ; but we have, we believe, ample evidence to lead to the conclusion that at least two distinct, highly fatal and infectious, Epizootics have been described in these reports with considerable accuracy. One of these is the same as the Calcutta Epizootic of 1864. The other is of a different character, but also well known in Calcutta. The Districts from which reports have been submitted, comprise a large portion * Of 13 head of caettl 13 were attacked and all died.
( 5 ) of the Madras Presidency and nearly all of Bengal, viz., Burdwan, Nuddea, Rajshahye Patna, Chittagong, Bhaugulpore, Dacca, Cuttack, Assam, Chota Nagpore, Cachar, Darjeeling, and were the enquiry extended to the N. W. Provinces and the Punjab, it is believed that reports similar to those submitted by the Bengal Officers would be furnished, and Mr. Floyd's statement, founded upon information given him by Natives belonging to the North-West, that a similar disease has been for years known there, would receive confirmation. When it is borne in mind that the various reports above alluded to are each an analysis of many reports furnished by the Magistrates attached to the several Districts in the extensive Divisions mentioned, we should a priori expect to find a great variety of description and not a little actual inaccuracy, such however is not the case, and we believe that the general similarity of these reports is owing to the fact that the Natives, as a rule, describe all Epizootics, or Cattle Plagues, as Small-pox,( 6 ) to this disease within the last few years. The symptoms are, for the most part, the some as in the first mentioned disease, with the exception that no pustules are visible on the body. The Natives, however, appear to think that the two diseases are distinct, and that what Cholera is to man, Puschima is to the cattle; they look upon it as fatal, and do not appear to try any remedy or care." Mr. Oliphant states that owing, as he is informed, to the ravages of this latter Epizootic chiefly, the diminution of cattle in his District, Jessore, is such that the price has risen "ten times higher than it was formerly." In the District of Burdwan again two dis- tinct diseases are described. The one as Ghootee or Small-pox, the other is there also, called " Puschima," which is more fatal than the former. The immediate symptoms are loss of appetite, swelling of the glands of the throat, difficulty in breathing, enlargement of the head, and occasionally of the stomach also." It is scarcely possible to have a more independent convincing evidence than the above, that the two distinct Epizootic, we have named, have been for years raging in one and the same District or locality, and it we consider establishes our view that the two Epizootics, viz., the Eczema and the Calcutta Epizootic, have extensively existed and not improbably contemporaneously in the same localities, and that they have been in some instances confounded. The reports before us are replete with similar evidence; but we must be content with one further extract to add still greater force to this opinion. Mr. Jervoise Grey, writing from Sarun, describes a disease which is there called " Seetla" or " Matha" or " Chenchuck," and of which the symptoms are similar to those of the Cattle Murrain prevailing in the Madras Presidency, namely, refusal of food, running from the mouth, eyes and nostrils, and purging, but pustules, are said to appear only slightly and occasionally. This, we are of opinion, is the Calcutta disease, and not the Eczema " Epizootica." Mr. Holm, a gentleman of great experience in Rungpore, alludes to a disease amongst cattle known there as "Gola-Har," the chief symptom of which is " ulcerated sore throat," for which no successful treatment is known. He also describes the Bussunt or Small-pox and " Cholera." Sufficient has, we think, been advanced to prove the existence, very extensively throughout India, of two distinct and very fatal Epizootics; the one, we believe, to be identical with the " Eczema Epizootica," or " Apthous Epizootic," or " foot and mouth disease" of England. The other is identical with the Calcutta Epizootic of 1864, and which we have advanced evidence to shew was no new disease but had hitherto been either confounded with other diseases, or not taken any very special notice of. We have hitherto spoken of this Epizootic as that of Calcutta of 1864, without attempting to classify it amongst recognized cattle diseases. We have little doubt, however, that this disease is the one known in Europe as the " Rinderpest," the Epizootic which for so many years past has devastated Central Europe, and from " its home" the steppes of Russia has again forced a footing in England and is at this moment working out its deadly course amongst the cattle of the metropolis, and by the last received accounts is spreading through the counties of England; a disease which in the opinion of those best qualified to judge, both in England and France, was restricted to a circle, large indeed, but still restricted, and could not possibly extend itself beyond those precincts. If our opinion be correct, it will be seen that this deadly cattle scourge has been making rapid strides in this an eastward direction, and that all the regulations which have been on the Continent of Europe so rigidly enforced, the Military 'cordons' which were to have prevented any diseased cattle from leaving a farm or a locality in which the disease had shewn itself, and the strict supervision exercised at ports, both of export and import, have apparently proved futile in checking the spread of this fatal Epizootic in a westwardly direction. Accepting the opinion expressed by Professor Symonds and other leading veterinary authorities, both in England and on the Continent, that the steppes of Russia is the home of this disease, and that it has spread from thence by infection, and that by severe sanitary prohibitions its progress might be limited; it is a highly interesting and important fact to advance that this same disease has travelled eastward, and as it has been unchecked by any sanitary restrictions, its progress has been, perhaps, proportionally more rapid in an eastwardly and unguarded and unprotected direction than it has been westwardly, where science, backed by arbitrary and even despotic Government aid, has been called in to check its march, but with, as it now appears, only partial success; it was checked only, not turned back; it is raging in England with a violence equal to any it has exhibited in India or elsewhere, and threatens to bring distress and disease to thousands. It, however, must be borne in mind that, although a universally admitted contagious or infectious disease, it is not at present believed to owe its existence to infection alone, it is held to be a true Epizootic engendered by some malarious, or, as yet unknown, Epizootic influence, and in all probability its cause will be found to be similar to all other Epizootics, and it will exhaust itself or die out. It would occupy too much space to transcribe the symptoms, &c. given by Professor Simonds and others of the Epizootic of Central Europe and Russia, and which is known on the Continent as the Rinderpest, which name Professor Simonds proposes to designate it by in England. We content ourselves by asserting that those symptoms so closely resemble the symptoms observed here of the disease in 1864, that little doubt can be entertained as to the identity of the two diseases: but should any person wish to pursue this subject more minutely
( 7 ) we would refer him to Professor Simonds' evidence given before a Parliamentary " Committee on contagious diseases bill" and his " report on the cattle plague:" and a paper by Mr. Renault, Director of Alford, read before the Central Society of Agriculture of France, all of which are contained in the " Veterinarian" for 1857-58 and 1859, and in an article headed "cattle plague" in the Veterinarian, July 1st, 1857, will be found a very full description of the Rinderpest, which we had transcribed, but now exclude from this paper, as we fear extending it to too great length. These articles are well worthy the perusal of those interested in this enquiry, and we believe that the symptoms described in the " Veterinarian" proves the identity of the two diseases, the " Rinderpest" and the Calcutta Epizootic pf 1864. It has been remarked in England by Professors Simonds, Gamgee and others, that the present English Epizootic is not only the "Rinderpest," but that it was known in England in 1745, and was ruinously destructive throughout the country. Existing for several years, (12) in spite of the most stringent sanitary laws enacted and rigidly enforced with the view of checking its spread, it was stated to have been then imported from Holland by two diseased calves: it is now reported to have been brought by foreign cattle into Islington market. The general opinion is, that it is an imported and infectious disease, but on the other hand there are many who insist upon its originating within the country, and is not an imported disease, and this question is now being very warmly discussed. The descriptions given of the symptoms are, however, very similar, and admit of little or no misunderstanding or doubt as to the nature of the disease when it shows itself. We select amongst numerous reported symptoms, furnished by men of eminence, the following which are published by order of the Privy Council. The identity of the symptoms, with those recorded by Mr. Rutherford in this paper, are remarkable, and again confirm our opinion of the nature of the disease which we observed here in 1864. The following is copied from the Evening Mail of August 7th, 1865. " Description of the symptoms of the disease before referred to." " Variations in the earliest indications of the disease will be manifested; these depending somewhat on the severity of the attack, but more especially on the circumstance as to whether the digestive or respiratory system is the chief focus of the malady. As soon as the affection declares itself, the animal ceases to take any kind of food, and in most cases even refuses water ; rumination is suspended, and the animal stands with its head drooping and its ears drawn back. If made to move, it shows great prostration of strength, and frequently staggers as if about to fall. The skin is hot in places, and often remarkably so between the limbs, the hind ones in particular. An exudation early takes place from these parts, and is succeeded by cracks and sores. The hair is staring, especially along the upper part of the neck, shoulders, and back. The extremities are cold, even at the commencement of the disease, and in a latter stage the increased heat of the surface of the body gives place to a remarkable coldness, especially along the course of the spine. Tears trickle from the eyes, which are red and expressive of suffering, and a watery discharge flows early from the nostrils. There is a continuous increase of these secretions, which become more or less purulent in. the advanced state of the malady. The mouth is hot, red, and ' inflamed,' often presenting here and there raw-looking spots, especially on the inner side of the lips and along the roof. The breath is foetid. The respiration is increased, and generally accompanied with a moan in the advanced stages. A slight cough is also present in some instances. The pulse is quick and weak and scarcely to be felt, excepting at the heart, even at the commencement of the disease. The bowels are sometimes torpid at the outset, but Diarrh( 8 ) months ago, and Mr. Greenhill, who has paid much attention to the disease and has treated a vast number of cases, gives a similar description. It would be highly interesting to trace the roads by which this Epizootic has spread itself over the old world, and doubtless ere long we shall ransack its origin and spread with the same accuracy as the origin and spread of Epidemic Cholera has been investigated and made known. It is worthy of remark that the cattle disease which devastated Egypt, broke out in that country a few weeks after its disappearance here, and we are informed by the Times that that Epizootic carried off no less than 1,700,000 head of cattle.( 9 ) It would be of no practical utility our relating the modes of treatment, which have from time to time and in different places been adopted by the Natives of this country. The result of such treatments has been generally utterly inefficacious, based, as they frequently are, upon superstition. " Poojahs," with some, rice grown at Juggernauth, raw fish, and the dried tongues of tigers and leopards with others, have had, and continue to remain, on trial. More rational and consistent measures have, however, been in many instances adopted; such as the removal of infected cattle, cleanliness, fumigating infected cow sheds, and the giving of nutritious non- stimulating food and fresh wholesome grass, also stimulating drugs; but the same story is told by all; treatment is inefficacious, and to quote any mode of treatment, which is allowed to be of little value, would be simply filling this paper with certainly many curiosities of Native and even European treatment of diseased cattle, but can be of no practical utility. To give, however, the treatment adopted, in some cases with success, will, we consider, be of much practical assistance, not to that portion of the public only who are deeply interested in this important subject, but also to members of the veterinary profession, both in India and in England, who have hitherto considered the disease almost, if not wholly, incurable. We might quote many cases of successful treatment, but the following will exemplify sufficiently the treatment which we would advocate. The two cases subjoined, were treated by Mr. Greenhill. We watched these and we can safely affirm that they were well marked and almost hopeless cases of the disease. Case I., by Mr. Greenhill.( 10 ) the animal: 6 P. M. the same; gave gruel. On 16th blisters taken, dressed; breathing easier but grunting; bowels well opened but not much purged; a quantity of gas passing off from intestine; gave assaf( 11 ) V.( 12 ) We have confined our remarks thus far to the purely therapeutic and remedial measures be enforced in cases of actual disease. There yet remains an even more important branch of the subject to be noticed, viz., the prevention of the disease and the checking it when once it has shown itself in a District, village or homestead. To fully enunciate our views on this most important subject, would carry us far into the recognized and admitted rules of general Hygiene, a science which of late has become generally studied, and which is working out much practical good. Without asserting that fresh air, fresh pure water, absolute cleanliness, wholesome and properly proportioned food, and a regulation of temperature will, com- bined, form a complete barrier against the attacks of all diseases of a malarious or epizootic nature; we are yet justified in advancing the opinion that these, which may be not incorrectly termed the foundation of Hygiene will so modify and dilute, if we may be permitted the expression, the epizootic " influence" or poison, that the disease will be of comparatively insignificant importance and danger. In proof of this we adduce the numerous instances which have already been brought to notice of dairies in London having wholly escaped the Epizootic there, owing to their advanced hygienic state, whilst others in their immediate vicinity have been actually swept away. Too great stress cannot therefore be laid on these points as protective against Epizootic disease; but should the disease effect an inroad, the question of how to check its further spread is one of the utmost importance. Prompt and complete separation of the healthy from the affected and suspected cattle is to be enforced. To effect this it may be a question as to whether the still healthy cattle should be removed to another and an untainted spot or the diseased animal taken to some place especially set aside for its reception and treatment. The latter will be the more generally feasible plan, but when it is practicable to remove the unaffected cattle, we believe this proceeding the more likely to be successful in checking the disease ; this may, however, involve constant change, and thus render its being fully carried out in the great majority of cases impracticable. In the Mofussil where occasionally almost unlimited space is at command, this course should, we think, be insisted upon ; early separation, however, is absolutely to be carried out, and not only of the animals themselves, but of every article they have come in contact with that can be removed ; and fixtures must be at once and thoroughly disenfected. Straw, dung, hay, troughs, and such like should be removed, burnt or disenfected ; the stall in which the animal stood should not be again used, but thoroughly cleansed out and disenfected; and it would be well were some cheap disinfectant sprinkled over the stalls containing the healthy cattle ; night and morning a small quantity of McDougall's disinfecting powder might be dusted lightly over the stalls and sheds. Mr. Murray, in a letter to the Times, says he has long adopted this course in his stalls at Manchester with excellent result, and " the cost does not exceed one penny per week per horse." All animals dying should be buried without a moment's delay, not skinned ; and no animals should be allowed to approach the burial ground until some time has elapsed since the last interment. Although in the Epizootic of Calcutta condition appeared to be no protection, yet, as a general rule, we should expect to find the poor, ill-fed and dirty cattle more susceptible, and their physical state should be improved as far as possible. The question of inoculation has been mooted, and by some the experiment has been strongly urged ; we learn that it was tried in 100 cases on the Continent and that all died. ( 13 ) 4th.