ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CAMEL SPECIALIST For the year 1919-20 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore : PRINTED BY THE SUPRINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB. 1920. Price : Re. 0-3-0 or 4d.
Annual Report of the Camel Specialist for the year 1919-20.
Revised List of Agents for the Sale of Punjab Govern- ment Publications. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, London, W.C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., Limited, 68-74, Carter Lane, E.C., and 25, Museum Street, London, W.C. BERNARD QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, London, W. T. FISHER UNWIN, Limited, No. 1, Adelphi Terrace, London, W.C. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, Lon- don, S.W. H. S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, and 9, Pall Mall, London. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, London, S.W. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E.C. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W.C. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 51, Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & Co., Limited Cambridge. OLIVER & BOYD, Tweeddale Court, Edinburgh. E. PONSONBY, Limited, 116, Grafton Street, Dublin. WILLIAM WESLEY & SON, 28, Essex Street, Strand, London. ON THE CONTINENT. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris, France. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. IN INDIA. The Manager, Imperial Book Depôt, Delhi. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-'Am Press, Lahore. MANAGER, Punjab Law Book Depôt, Anarkali Bazar, Lahore. RAMA KRISHNA & SONS, Book-sellers and News Agents, Anarkali Street, Lahore. HONORARY SECRETARY, Punjab Religious Book Society, Anarkali, Lahore. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent and Proprietor, Nazir Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & Co., Bombay. THACKER SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAMS, Limited, Madras. T. FISHER UNWIN, Calcutta. V. KALYANARAM IYER & Co., 189, Esplanade Row, Madras. G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. SUPERINTENDENT, American Bap- tist Mission Press, Rangoon.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CAMEL SPECIALIST For the year 1919-20. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB. 1920.
No. 4007-S. (Rev. & Agri.-Agri.). FROM THE HON'BLE MR. E. JOSEPH, I.C.S., Revenue Secretary to Government, Punjab, To THE SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA- (1) DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE AND AGRICUL- TURE. (2) ARMY DEPARTMENT. Dated Simla, the 12th August 1920. Revenue & Agriculture. Agriculture. SIR, I AM directed to forward, for the information of the Government of India, the Annual Report of the Camel Specialist for the year 1919-1920. I have the honour to be, SIR, Your most obedient servant, E. JOSEPH, Revenue Secretary to Government, Punjab 17 D ANo. 5/45-72. FROM S. M. JACOB, ESQUIRE, I.C.S., Offg. Director of Agriculture, Punjab, To THE REVENUE SECRETARY TO GOVERN- MENT, PUNJAB. Dated Lahore, the 26th July 1920. SIR, I HAVE the honour to forward the report of the Camel Specialist, Sohawa, for the year 1919-20, the Laboratory- having been restored to this Department on 1st September 1919. Captain Meadows was in charge of the Laboratory at the time, but unfortunately met his death by drowning a few weeks later. Captain Cross took over charge on his return from leave. 2. Captain Cross' report is of great interest. His remarks on the treatment of surra seem to suggest that the efficacy of tartar emetic in curing camel surra, in a majority of cases, has yet to be established. The experi- ments reported in Pusa Bulletin 95 are being followed up by Captain Cross. The virulence of the surra trypanosome is shown by the experiments on ponies, dogs, sheep, rabbits and guinea pigs all of which succumb to the disease on artificial inoculation. Buffaloes and goats are shown to be immune carriers. 3. The equilibrium of host and parasite is most danger- ous, as it necessarily involves the survival of the parasite, whereas the annihilation of the host does not. When data have been collected showing what the rates of sickness, infectedness, and exchange between the various hosts are, an
2 analysis by Major McKendricks' methods, would be invalu- able to show the utility of any particular preventive measures, such, for example, as the killing of tabanidæ. 4. The Military authorities will doubtless be aware of the possible shortage of camels referred to by Captain Cross under the head " Breeding." 5. Captain Cross is an enthusiastic and able officer, and under his control the Laboratory is of great value both to the Civil and Military authorities. I have the honour to be, SIR, Your most obedient servant, S. M. JACOB, Offg. Director of Agriculture, Punjab.
Annual Report of the Camel Specialist for the year 1919-20. THE Laboratory was retransferred from Military Depart- ment to the Civil authorities on the 1st September 1919. 2. Captain W. A. Pool held charge of the office from the 1st April 1919 till the 22nd July 1919, on which date he was relieved by Captain D. Meadows, who held charge till the 11th October 1919, on which date his death, which was much regretted by all who knew him, occurred. Captain H. E. Cross held charge from 27th October 1919 to the end of the financial year. 3 Bahadur Khan was appointed Laboratory Attendent on the 1st May 1919 ; with the exception of this addition to the staff there were no changes in the subordinate staff during the year under report. 4. Captain Pool travelled 1,314 miles by rail and 285 miles by road. The late Captain Meadows travelled 218 miles by rail and 100 miles by road. Captain Cross travelled 1,217 miles by rail and 692 miles by road. Courses of Training. 5. Forty-nine sarwans from various Camel Corps underwent a course of training as veterinary dressers; of these 30 passed the examination at the end of the course and 19 failed to do so. Two Veterinary Assistants from Alwar State underwent a course of training in microscopical work and in the treat- ment of surra by large doses of tartar emetic. 6. Eighty animals belonging to private owners were treated during the year for various diseases. Treatment of surra by Tartar Emetic. 7. In the early part of 1917 experiments with tartar emetic in connection with the treatment of surra in camels
2 were carried out by me on different lines of dosage. A detailed report of the experiments has been published in Pusa Bulletin No. 95. Further experiments carried out on a large number of camels during the cold weather of the year under report show that3 camelmen are of the opinion that if a camel, infected with surra, lasts over 3 years the camel finally recovers, improves in condition and becomes immune to the disease. To ascertain the course that surra runs in camels when naturally contracted, 11 camels suffering from surra and in fair condition were obtained from Silladar Camel Corps, some in the latter part of 1914 and some in the early part of 1915. From their condition and history it is probable that these 11 camels contracted surra during the 1914 fly season. These camels were kept under the most favourable conditions, they were given no work and in addition to browsing were given a ration of grain and bhoosa. The blood of each camel was daily examined and a record kept of the presence or absence of trypanosomes. Up to the end of the year under report (31st March 1920) 10 out of the 11 camels have died ; the time that each camel lived since he was first detected to be suffering from surra is given below. The one camel that is still alive is in poor condition and will probably die during the next cold weather :4 September 1913 to be suffering from surra. During the cold weather these 7 camels were worked by the owner in Ambala and Amritsar Districts, but during the hot weather they were not worked but were kept at his home ; periodical visits were paid by me to ascertain how these camels were "doing." It was ascertained that5 As a result of the observations on these camels the- following conclusions may be drawn :6 often been noticed that although a large number of camels were found to be suffering from surra, amongst ponies and mules which were kept in close proximity to the camels during the fly season, practically no cases of surra had been observed. It appeared possible that ponies did become infected but that they did not develop the same symptoms from camel surra as from horse surra and consequently the disease had escaped detection. It was decided therefore to ascertain the course that camel surra runs in ponies and other animals and with this object in view ponies, buffaloes, goats, sheep, dogs, rabbits and guinea pigs were inoculated with blood from camels suffering from surra. The results obtained from these experiments are as follows :- PONIES. No. of pony. Age. Time under obser- vation. Result. REMARKS Y. M. D. 1 8 months ... 2 8 28 Died ... Paraly is of hind legs. 2 1 year ... 3 4 19 Alive Showed no brain symptoms. 3 6 months ... 3 10 10 Alive ... Showed no brain symptoms. 4 3½ years ... 1 4 26 Died ... 1. Partial paralysis of hind legs. 2. Cerebral symptoms. 3. Constipation. 5 4½ years ... 1 4 16 Died 1. Partial paralysis of hind legs. 2. Constipation. 3. Brain symptoms. 6 5 years ... 0 6 28 Died ... 1. Colic. 2. Cerebral symptoms. 3. Partial paralysis of hind legs. 7 5½ years ... 0 0 43 Died ... 1. Lost condition rapidly. 2. Got gradually weaker. 3. Showed no other symp- toms. 8 10 years ... 0 4 28 Died ... 1. Lost condition. 2. Got gradually weaker. 3. Showed no other symp- toms. 9 13 years ... 1 3 20 Died ... 1. Cerebral symptoms. 2. Constipation. 10 18 years ... 1 2 13 Died ... 1. Colic. 2. Paralysis of hind legs.
7 From these experiments it would appear that8 after inoculation was infective for rabbits and guinea pigs. This distinctly proves that buffaloes can act as dangerous reservoirs of surra; and as tabnidæ are frequently seen sucking the blood of these animals, buffaloes must not be forgotten as a probable reservoir of the disease. 4 Buffaloes do not lose condition when inoculated with camel surra. DOGS. Dog No. Age. Time under observa- tion. Result. 1 About 2 years ... 61 days ... Died. 2 About 2 years ... 55 days ... Died. 3 About 2 years ... 37 days ... Died. 4 About 2 years ... 56 days ... Died. 5 About 3 years ... 54 days ... Died. From these experiments it would appear that9 2. They do not lose condition. 3. Trypanosomes are seldom found in the blood of goats inoculated with surra. Trypanosomes were only found in one, once, 107 days- after inoculation. 4. Though the trypanosomes may not be found in the blood of the goats, the blood is nevertheless infective, in the case of one goat it was proved to be infective, 309 days after the goat had been inoculated and in the case of one other goat 321 days after inoculation. SHEEP. Sheep No. Age. Time under observation. Result. 1 About 2 years ... ... 192 days ... Died. 2 About 2 years ... ... 384 days ... Died. 3 About 2 years ... ... 569 days ... Died. 4 About 2 years ... ... 88 days ... Died. 5 About 2 years ... ... 632 days ... Died. 1. Sheep are susceptible to inoculated camel surra. 2. The trypanosomes are very infrequently found in the peripheral circulation, but the blood is infective. 3. Sheep become gradually emaciated as the result of the disease and finally die. 4. Sheep and goats are not so dangerous as buffaloes from the point of view of acting as reservoirs as they are seldom attacked by tabanidæ.
10 RABBITS AND GUINEA PIGS. No. Time under observation. Result. 1. Rabbit ... ... 180 days ... ... Died. 2. Do. ... ... 84 days ... ... Died. 1. Guinea pig ... ... 17 days ... ... Died. 2. Ditto ... ... 75 days ... ... Died. 3. Ditto ... ... 68 days ... ... Died. Guinea pigs and rabbits are susceptible to inoculated camel surra. A detailed report on the course that camel surra runs in ponies and other animals is being published as Pusa Bulletin. Surra amongst private owned camels. 11. To determine the number of surra infected camels belonging to private owners an examination of all private owned camels throughout the Punjab has been commenced, the result of this examination should give some idea of the percentage of camels infected with surra in the province, and also the areas where surra is most prevalent. The result of the examination will be forwarded in due course. Breeding. 12. Forest legislation by closing large areas of rakhs to camel owners, and reclamation by the Canal Department of extensive tracts which were previously available for the breeding of camels, have caused the number of camels bred to have become greatly reduced ; unless steps are taken for the encouragement of camel breeding it will be very diffi- cult in the future for the military authorities to obtain sufficient remounts for the camel corps. The Punjab " pahari " camel, the most suitable for frontier work is becoming very scarce ; steps should be taken to prevent this type of camel from becoming extinct. 13. The subordinate staff have worked extremely well throughout the year : for his services in obtaining camelmen
11 and camels during the year 1915-16 for the Military Depart- ment, Veterinary Inspector Kahan Singh has been presented with a Sanad by Government. 14. Statement of expenditure incurred by the office of the Camel Specialist from the 1st September 1919 to 31st March 1920 :ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CAMEL SPECIALIST For the year 1920-21. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore : PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB. 1921. Price: 0-2-0 or 2d.
Annual Report of the Camel Specialist for the year 1920-21.
Revised List of Agents for the sale of Punjab Government Publications. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, London, W.C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., Limited, 68-74, Carter Lane, E.C., and 39, New Oxford Street, London, W.C. BERNARD QUARTCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, London, W. T. FISHER UNWIN, Limited, No. 1, Adelphi Terrace, London, W.C. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, Lon- don, S.W. H. S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, and 9, Pall Mall, London. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, London, S.W. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E.C. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W.C. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 51, Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & Co., Limited, Cambridge. OLIVER & BOYD, Tweeddale Court, Edinburgh. E. PONSONBY, Limited, 116, Grafton Street, Dublin. Messrs. WHELDON & WESLEY, Limited, 28, Essex Street, Strand, London. ON THE CONTINENT. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris, France. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. IN INDIA. The Manager, Imperial Book Depôt, Delhi. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-'Am Press, Lahore. MANAGER, Punjab Law Book Depot, Anarkali Bazar, Lahore. RAMA KRISHNA & SONS, Book-sellers and News Agents, Anarkali Street, Lahore. HONORARY SECRETARY, Punjab Religious Book Society, Anarkali, Lahore. M. ABDUL AZIZ, Manager, The Vakil and Roze Bazar Electric Press, Amritsar. L. LABHU RAM, Book-seller, Ludhiana. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent and Proprietor, Nazir Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & Co., Bombay. THACKER SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAMS, Limited, Madras. T. FISHER, Union, Calcutta. V. KALYANARAM IYER & Co., 189, Esplanade Row, Madras. G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. SUPERINTENDENT, American Bap- tist Mission Press, Rangoon. A. H. WHEELER & Co., Allahabad.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CAMEL SPECIALIST For the year 1920-21. Lahore : PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB. 1921.
No. 718-17-½. MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE : Dated Lahore, 29th October 1921. FROM E. R. ABBOTT, ESQ., C.I.E., I.C.S., Financial Commissioner (Development), Secretary to Government, Punjab, To THE SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, (1) REVENUE AND AGRICULTURE DEPART- MENT. (2) ARMY DEPARTMENT. SIR, I AM directed by the Punjab Government (Ministry of Agriculture) to forward for the information of the Govern- ment of India the annual report of the Camel Specialist for the year 1920-21 with its enclosures. I have the honour to be, SIR, Your most obedient servant, E. R. ABBOTT, Financial Commissioner (Development), Secretary to Government, Punjab. 258 FCNo. 2543. FROM C. A. H. TOWNSEND, ESQUIRE, I.C.S., Director of Agriculture, Punjab, To THE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, PUNJAB, TRANSFERRED DEPARTMENTS, LAHORE. Dated Lahore, the 2nd July 1921. SIR, I HAVE the honour to forward the report of the Camel Specialist, Sohawa, for 1920-21. It shows the valuable work done by Mr. Cross during the year. 2. The treatment of Surra camels with Tartar Emetic promises to be successful. A copy of Veterinary Bulletin No. 2, referred to in the portion of the report dealing with it, is enclosed. 3. It is hoped that the camel dip, Mr. Cross refers to, will be completed this year. It will greatly facilitate the treatment of camels affected with mange. 4. The fly survey referred to will continue for three years : it is hoped by collecting flies both in Surra free area and in well known Surra areas to ascertain which blood- sucking fly is the transmitting agent of that disease. 5. The bulletins Mr. Cross has written on " Hypo- derma larvæ in goats " and " Spirochaetosis of fowls " should prove very useful: arrangements are being made for the issue of very short leaflets on these diseases in simple Urdu and Punjabi. I have the honour to be, SIR, Your most obedient servant, C. A. H. TOWNSEND, Director of Agriculture, Punjab.
Annual Report of the Camel Specialist for the year 1920-21. I HELD charge of the office of the Camel Specialist throughout the year. 2. Veterinary Assistant Kishen Singh was appointed as a 2nd grade Veterinary Assistant on the 3rd July 1920; with the exception of this addition to the staff there were no changes in the subordinate staff during the year under report. 3. Sanction has been accorded by Government to the employment of five additional Veterinary Assistants, an Artist, a clerk, and ten extra menial staff to carry out a fly survey of the Punjab in connection with surra. The services of Mr. Patel, Assistant Pathological Entomologist, have been lent by the Imperial Pathological Entomologist, Pusa to assist in this fly survey, which commenced on 1st April 1921. 4. Mr. P. G. Patel was deputed from the Imperial Pathological Entomologist's Office, Pusa, from 6th June- 1920 to 20th September 1920, to assist in surra trans- mission experiments and other entomological work. 5. One hundred and eighty-five animals belonging to private owners were treated for different diseases. 6. I attended the examination of the Punjab Veteri- nary College as a Member of the Board of Examiners. 7. I travelled 3,662 miles by rail and 1,841 miles by road. The treatment of surra in camels by intravenous injections of Tartar Emetic. A large number of experiments were carried out with Tartar Emetic. The method of dosage that gave the best results were as follows :2 9th day 200 c. c. of Tartar Emetic 1 per cent. solution intravenously. 11th 3 Method No. 2. 1st day 150 c. c. of Tartar Emetic 1 per cent. solution intravenously. 3rd 4 Method No. 3. 1st day 200 c.c. of Tartar Emetic 1 per cent. solution intravenously. 3rd 5 Method No. 4. 1st day 200 c. c. of Tartar Emetic 1 per cent. solution intravenously. 3rd 6 A detailed report of these experiments is being printed in Veterinary Bulletin, No. 2 of 1920, Department of Agriculture, Punjab. The method of treatment is very simple and inexpen- sive. Treatment should not be commenced when trypano- somes are present in the peripheral circulation and the temperature is high; if the drug is injected under these conditions fainting is likely to occur, and in some cases even death may result from comparatively small doses e.g., 50 c. c. of 1 per cent. solution. On the other hand if trypanosomes are absent from the peripheral circulation, and the temperature is normal, doses of 150 to 200 c. c. of 1 per cent. solution are usually well tolerated. Full details regarding the method of injecting the drug are given in Veterinary Bulletin No. 2 of 1920 referred to above. Fifty-two Military camels suffering from surra were treated with Tartar Emetic and returned to duty. Before despatch they were inspected in compliance with the order of the Director of Veterinary Services by Major Beatty, R.A.V.C , who reported upon them as being in excellent condition and fit for duty. Some months after these camels had been returned to duty, General Sir John Moore, Director of Veterinary Services, informed me that he had inspected these camels and found them in excellent condition. When these camels were returned to duty they would have fetched at least Rs. 300 apiece in the open market, so that the treatment resulted in a saving to Government of Rs. (52×300)=Rs. 15,600. The treatment of surra infected camels by Tartar Emetic gives considerable promise of success, and in the coming year it is hoped to submit a very large number to treatment, so that absolutely definite conclusions regarding the efficacy of Tartar Emetic as a cure for surra can be arrived at. Mange. Experiments regarding the best treatment of mange were carried out; these experiments are not yet complete.
7 The efficacy of calcium sulphide could not be compared with that of other dressings, owing to the Public Works Depart- ment not having yet erected the camel dip. In experiments so far carried out, the best results have been obtained by the application of Taramira oil. Surra Transmission Experiments. About 90 experiments were carried out with different species of Tabanidæ during the year under report to as- certain: 1. The transmitting agent of surra. 2. Whether surra is spread by direct transmission or whether there is a cyclical development in the transmitting agent. The following resutls were obtained. Tabanus albimedius and bicallosus were used for the- direct transmission experiments. They were allowed to bite a surra infected rabbit, in the middle of their feed they were removed, and after 30 minutes interval transferred to a healthy rabbit on which to finish their feed. Only one positive result was obtained by direct trans- mission with Tabanus albimedius; all attempts with Tabanus bicallosus were negative. Four species of Tabandiæ (T. Altimedius ; T. virgo ; T. persis ; and a new species of Tabanidæ) were caught, when biting a surra infected animal (in which Trypanosomes were swarming in the peripheral circulation) and transferred to a healthy dog. Twenty flies were used during a period of 6 days. The minimum and maximum intervals between the infected and healthy feeds was ten minutes and twenty-four hours respectively. Fourteen days after the last feed trypanosomes were observed in the dog's blood. All experiments made to determine a cyclical develop- ment in Tabanidæ proved negative. Twenty-nine days was the longest interval between the infected and healthy feeds. Surra organisms were found in the gut of Tabanus albimedius 8 hours after feeding on a surra infected animal.
8 Emulsions of flies, which had fed on surra infected animals 24 hours to 18 days previously, were injected into healthy animals with negative results. An emulsion of Tabanus albimedius, which had fed 8 hours previously on a surra-infected animal, when injected into a healthy animal gave positive results. Eggs from a fly that had fed on a surra-infected animal when injected into a healthy animal gave negative results. Nine experiments with ctenocephalus to ascertain whether fleas can transmit surra by direct transmission gave negative results. These fleas were removed from surra infected dogs to healthy white rats, but in no case was a positive result obtained. Further investigations are necessary before any definite conclusion can be drawn. Inspections and other Work. 1. At the request of General Sir John Moore, I ac- companied him on his inspection of the camels of the Waziristan Force. 2. Results of examination of specimens sent for exami- nation were communicated to those concerned. 3. An examination was made in October and Novem- ber of a large number of goats in this district, to determine the number infected with Hypoderma larvæ The result of the examination showed that the percentage varied from 48.3 per cent. in some flocks to 91.8 in others. The damage to hides from these larvæ is very great and results in great financial loss to the country. The skins are depreciated in value from 50 to 70 per cent. as the result of the damage caused by these larvæ. A report on hypoderma larvæ, in goats and the means by which the loss caused by these larvæ can be reduced, is being printed as Veterinary Bulletin No. 3 of 1921. 4. An investigation into Spirochætosis of fowls (Zeharbad) was carried out and a report is in the Press. The losses amongst poultry in this country from this disease must be enormous : the results of the investigations show that this loss could be avoided if the poultry were treated in the early stages of the disease by injections of soamin.
9 A fly survey of various main roads and other areas of the Province was made. Results will be published when survey is completed. The work of the staff has been satis- factory throughout the year. I desire to specially bring to notice the excellent work done by Veterinary Inspector Kahan Singh and Veterinary Assistant Abdulla Khan. I also wish to mention the great assistance given me by Mr. Patel who worked very hard, often under very trying conditions, while he was attached to this office. The clerical work was satisfactorily carried out by Babu Sham Shanker. Statement of expenditure incurred by the office of the Camel Specialist, during the year 1920-21. Sub-Head of the Budget. Amount. Rs. A. P. Salaries and local allowances of officers ... ... ... 15,680 5 4 Pay of Establishment ... ... ... 4,300 6 4 Travelling allowances of Officers ... ... ... 1,320 0 0 Do. do. of Establishment ... ... ... 2,604 14 9 Supplies, etc. (chemical and apparatus) ... ... ... 2,047 13 9 Contingencies ... ... 6,673 11 10 Purchase, and stable feed and keep of animals ... ... 20,687 0 10 Total ... 53,314 4 10 H. E. CROSS, CAPTAIN, M.R.C.V.S., D.V.H., A. Sc., I.C.V.D., Camel Specialist.
PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB. 34 DAANNUAL REPORT OF THE CAMEL SPECIALIST For the year 1921-22. Lahore : PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB. 1922. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Price : Re. 0-3-0 or 3d.
Annual Report of the Camel Specialist for the year 1921-22.
Revised List of Agents for the Sale of Punjab Government Publications. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, London, W. C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & CO., Limited, 68-74, Carter Lane, E. C., and 39, New Oxford Street, London, W. C. BERNARD QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, London, W. T. FISHER UNWIN, Limited, No. 1, Adelphi Terrace, London, W. C. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S. W. H. S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, and 9, Pall Mall, London. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, London, S. W. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E. C. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W. C. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 51, Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & Co., Limited, Cam- bridge. OLIVER & BOYD, Tweeddale Court, Edin- burgh. E. PONSONBY, Limited, 116, Grafton Street, Dublin. Messrs. WHELDON & WESLEY, Limited, 28, Essex Street, Strand, London. ON THE CONTINENT. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris, France. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Hol- land. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. FRIEDLANDER & SOHAN, Berlin IN INDIA. THE MANAGER, Imperial Book Depôt, Delhi. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-'Am Press, Lahore. MANAGER, Punjab Law Book Depot, Anarkali Bazar, Lahore. RAMA KRISHNA & SONS, Book-sellers and News Agents, Anarkali Street, Lahore. HONORARY SECRETARY, Punjab Religious Book Society, Anarkali, Lahore. M. ABDUL AZIZ, Manager, The Vakil and Roze Bazar Electric Press, Am- ritsar. L. LABHU RAM. Book-seller, Ludhiana N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent and Pro- prietor, Nazir Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & Co., Bombay. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAMS, Limited, Madras. T. FISHER UNWIN, Calcutta. V. KALYANARAM IYER & Co., 189, Espla- nade Row, Madras. G. A. NATHSAN & Co., Madras. SUPERINTENDENT, American Baptist Mis- sion Press, Rangoon. A. H. WHEELER & Co., Allahabad. THE MANAGER, "Hitavada," Nagpur Central Provinces.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CAMEL SPECIALIST For the year 1921-22. Lahore: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB. 1922.
No. 718No. 7/45-77. FROM S. M. JACOB, ESQ., I.C.S., Offg. Director of Agriculture, Punjab, To THE FINANCIAL COMMISSIONER (DEVELOP- MENT) SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, PUNJAB. Dated Lahore, the 31st July 1922. SUBJECT :2 charge of the operations, was suggested. The orders of the Government of India now received on the scheme are that a whole-time staff will not be employed on 'surra' investiga- tions : but I must confess to some scepticism that all the necessary investigations into the life history of the surra try- panosome can be conducted in a single mountain laboratory. 4. The fly survey which is being conducted since April 1st, 1921, to ascertain what blood sucking fly is the transmitting agent of surra is sanctioned up to March 1924. 5. Mr. Cross is one of the very few Veterinary officers I have met who has a true scientific attitude of mind and an ability to discover the secrets of Nature. This is such a rare and valuable quality that Government should cherish men of this type, and sacrifice to it half a dozen men of modal ability. If I may hazard an analogy, the obscurity of the future will be dispelled more effectively by a single good telescope than by a hundred pairs of ordinary eyes. Mr. Cross' ardour is well shown in his list of published papers, and the results obtained by him are of great econo- mic importance, as for example, his surra investigations, and those on the larvæ which work their way out from beneath through the skins of goats and cattle. He is to be congratulated on the discovery of a new species of fly respon- sible for the maggot in goats, which has been appropriately designated Hypoderma crossii. I have the honour to be, SIR, Your most obedient servant, S. M. JACOB, Director of Agriculture, Punjab.
Annual Report of the Camel Specialist for the year 1921-22. I HELD charge of the office of the Camel Specialist throughout the year. 2. In connection with the Fly Survey, which com- menced on 1st April 1921, the following appointments were made :2 (c) The following Veterinary Assistants of the Royal Army Veterinary Corps underwent a course of training in the treatment of surra :3 Another batch of forty-eight camels were submitted to treat ment and will be returned to the Military Department on the 1st June 1922, by which date they will have been several months under observation. I understand that four hundred camels were submitted to treatment at Dera Ismail Khan by the Royal Army Veteri- nary Corps. With reference to the treatment Colonel Aitken, R.A.V.C., wrote "I have been agreeably surprised to find the low rate of mortality under treatment4 25th day 175 c.c. of a 1 per cent. solution of tartar emetic. 27th day 175 c.c. ditto 29th day 175 c.c. ditto 31st day 175 c.c. ditto 33rd day 200 c.c. ditto 35th day 200 c.c. ditto 37th day 200 c.c. ditto If the camels are very large, the last few doses may be increased to 250 c.c. It has been found that at least a total of 28 grammes must be injected to effect a cure ; but it is advisable to inject a few grammes more, if the animal is tolerating the drug well. The tartar emetic must be pure and freshly made solu- tions only should be used. The cost of the drug per camel for treatment is four to five annas and as Ehrlich's injection flask can be replaced by an ordinary glass funnel, the apparatus required is easily obtainable and very inexpensive. Experiments are being carried out in connection with5 tabanidæ are only capable of spreading the disease by di- rect transmission ; whereas in the new species of tick, trans- mission is not direct but there is probably a cycle of the trypanosome within the tick. 1.6 periodically in the same stables and in the same districts, though fresh cases of surra have not been imported into these stables or districts ; the tick may act as the reservoir of the disease which is thus carried over from year to year. When an animal becomes infected through the tick, the disease may rapidly spread from animal to animal in the hot and rainy season, through the agency of tabanidæ by direct transmission. Further experiments will be carried out with regard to7 (2) A new species of Ornithodorus 8 small ; moreover the Gujrati goat even when kept with flocks that were heavily infected were either not infected at all or only very slightly infected. Whether the colour of the Gujrati goat has anything to do with their not being at- tacked to the same extent as other goats remains to be ascertained. During the coming year a large number of goats in every district in the Punjab will be examined, so that definite data regarding the prevalence of hypoderma in goats may be obtained. In Jhelum District the maggots of larvæ are found under the skin of the back from October to January. How the maggots reach this position is not known ; in the case of the warble fly attacking cattle it is stated by the "Warble Fly" Committee of the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, England, that the fly lays its eggs on the hind legs of cattle, from these eggs hatch out larvæ which make their way under the skin to the gullet wall where they are said to remain for several months; after several months in the gullet wall they make their way to under the skin of the back. Though very careful search has been made for eggs on the goat, no eggs of hypoderma could be found, and I am of opinion that with regard to hypoderma larvæ in goats that the fly is probably not ovipa- rous but viparous and that the fly deposits the living larvæ either on or under the skin of the back It is hoped that definite information regarding the life cycle of this fly will be forthcoming as the result of further investigations next year. Hypoderma larvae in cattle. The cattle of the Jhelum District are heavily infected with hypoderma larvæ. Next year it is proposed to ex- amine a large number of cattle throughout the province to determine the percentage of cattle infected. The damage done to the hides by these maggots is very great and the financial loss to the Province must be very large. The Warble Fly Committee of the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, England, found a dressing consisting of a wash prepared from tobacco powder mixed with lime, most effective. To reduce the loss caused by this fly in the Punjab it would be well worth while for district Veterinary Assistants to give short lectures on the life history of the fly to zamindars and to demonstrate to them the efficacy of the dressing by applying the dressing to cattle infected with larvæ. If the zamindars objected to the application
9 of the dressing it is quite possible that they would be willing to squeeze out the maggots (this is quite easy when they are ripe) and destroy them, this method could also be demonstrated to them by the district Veterinary Assistants. If the larvæ were systematically destroyed for a few years the fly would become extinct. Publications. The following bulletins were published during the year:10 3. The work of the staff was satisfactory throughout the year. I wish to specially bring to notice the excellent work done by Veterinary Inspector Kahan Singh, Veteri- nary Assistant Abdulla Khan and Laboratory Assistant Mu- hammad Zaman. Mr. Patel rendered very great assistance in connection with the fly survey. Veterinary Assistant Kishen Singh gave me valuable assistance on tour, often under very trying conditions. The clerical work was satisfactorily carried out under the supervision of Babu Sham Shanker. Statement of expenditure incurred by the office of the Camel Specialist, together with fly survey of the Punjab, during the year 1921-22. Sub-Head of the Budget. Amount. Rs. A. P. Salaries and local allowances of officers ... ... 15,925 12 11 Pay of establishment ... ... 12,370 12 4 Travelling allowances of officers ... ... 2,039 2 0 Travelling allowances of establishment ... ... 4,259 13 6 Supplies, etc. (Chemical and Apparatus) ... ... 1,881 8 4 Contingencies ... ... ... ... 10,170 6 8 Purchase and stable feed and keep of animals 29,979 10 0 Total 76,627 1 9 H. E. CROSS, M.R., C.V.S., D.V.H., A.Sc., I.C.V.D., Camel Specialist. 20 DA[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CAMEL SPECIALIST For the year 1922-23. Lahore : PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB. 1923. Price : Re. 0-4-0 or 4d.
Annual Report of the Camel Specialist for the year 1922-23.
Revised List of Agents for the sale of Punjab Government Publications. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, London, W.C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., Limited, 68-74, Carter Lane, E.C., and 39, New Oxford Street, London, W.C. BERNARD QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, London, W. T. FISHER UNWIN, Limited, No. 1, Adelphi Terrace, London, W.C. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, Lon- don, S.W. H. S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, and 9, Pall Mall, London. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, London, S.W. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E.C. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W.C. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 51, Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & Co., Limited, Cambridge. OLIVER & BOYD, Tweeddale Court, Edinburgh. E. PONSONBY, Limited, 116, Grafton Street, Dublin. Messrs. WHELDON & WESLEY Limited, 2, 3 & 4, Arthur Street, new Oxford Street, London., W. C. 2. ON THE CONTINENT. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris, France. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. FRIEDLANDER & SOHAN, Berlin. IN INDIA. The Manager, Imperial Book Depot, Delhi. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-'Am Press, Lahore. MANAGER, Punjab Law Book Depôt, Anarkali Bazar, Lahore. RAMA KRISHNA & SONS, Book-sellers and News Agents, Anarkali Street, Lahore. HONORARY SECRETARY, Punjab Religious Book Society, Anarkali, Lahore. M. ABDUL AZIZ, Manager, The Vakil and Roze Bazar Electric Press, Amritsar. L. LABHU RAM, Book-seller, Ludhiana. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent and Proprietor, Nazir Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & Co., Bombay. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAMS, Limited, Madras T. FISHER UNWIN, Calcutta. V. KALYANARAM IYER & Co., 189, Esplanade Row, Madras. G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. SUPERINTENDENT, American Bap- tist Mission Press, Rangoon. THE MANAGER "Hitavada," Nag- pur, Central Provinces.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CAMEL SPECIALIST For the year 1922-23. Lahore : PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB. 1923.
No. 718-17No. 2193. FROM C. A. H. TOWNSEND, ESQ., I.C.S., Director of Agriculture, Punjab, To THE FINANCIAL COMMISSIONER AND SECRE- TARY TO GOVERNMENT, PUNJAB, DEVE- LOPMENT DEPARTMENT. Dated Lahore, the 2nd May 1923. SIR, I HAVE the honour to forward the report of the Camel Spe- cialist, Sohawa, for the year 1922-23. It bears ample evidence of the value of Mr. Cross's work to the province, especially as regards the treatment of surra in camels. It will be his last report, I regret to say, as he has left for England on leave, on the expiry of which he retires on a proportionate pension. It is in the highest degree regrettable that an officer of such value to India should be leaving the country. 2. I sincerely trust that it may be found possible to con- tinue the existence of the Camel Specialist and his work at Sohawa, if a properly qualified and enthusiastic officer is forth- coming for the work. Not only as regards the diseases attacking camels, but also in respect of the many insect-bred diseases that affect our Punjab cattle, an infinity of work still remains to be done. I have the honour to be, SIR, Your most obedient servant, C. A. H. TOWNSEND, Director of Argiculture, Punjab.
Annual Report of the Camel Specialist for the year 1922-23. I HELD charge of the office of the Camel Specialist through- out the year. 2. Temporary Veterinary Assistant Ali Haider Khan re- signed his appointment on the 31st July 1922, and Veterinary Assistant Sultan Mahmud Khan was appointed in his place. 3. Veterinary Assistant Parja Ram was appointed to a vacant post in the fly survey staff on 1st June 1922. 4. I regret to report that Mr. P. G. Patel (whose services had been lent to this office by the Agricultural Adviser to the Government of India) was taken ill in March 1922 and died on the 13th September 1922. 5. I regret to report the death of Veterinary Assistant Himat Singh on the 3rd February 1923. 6. Ninety animals belonging to private owners were treated for various diseases. 7. I attended the examination of the students of the Punjab Veterinary College as a member of the board of examiners. 8. I travelled 3,449 miles by rail and 1,312 miles by road. 9. I accompanied the Director of Veterinary Services, at the latter's request, during his tour of inspection of the camels of the Waziristan Field Force. Courses of Training. The following officers were deputed for training in the diag- nosis and treatment of surra during the year :2 Veterinary Assistant Innayat Ullah. Veterinary Assistant Afzal Beg. Veterinary Assistant Abdul Qadir. Demonstrations in connection with the treatment of surra were given to the following officers :3 The Royal Army Veterinary Corps have adopted the treat- ment as a routine method of treatment. I have been informed by Colonel Sawyer, Director of Veterinary Services, that a very large number of camels have been treated at Dera Ismail Khan and other places, by officers of the Royal Army Veterinary Corps, with satisfactory results, and he very kindly sent me Captain Howe's report on the treatment by tartar emetic of Somali surra- infected camels at Aden. Captain Howe, Royal Army Veteri- nary Corps, submitted 95 camels to treatment and obtained 92 cures. These cured camels have been several months under ob- servation. Captain Howe's report to the Director of Veterinary Services is herewith attached. No. 772-42-H-V. D., dated the 30th November 1922. From4 Experiments with Stibenyl and Bayer 205. Stibenyl is a compound of antimony and is prepared by Messrs. Allan and Hanbury, Chemists, London. From the ex- periments carried out it was found that large doses are necessary for camels; on account of the cost of the drug, it is of no practi- cal value in the treatment of surra in camels. No experiments could be carried out with Bayer 205, as this drug could not be obtained during the year under report. Publications. The following bulletins were published during the year:5 The incidence of surra amongst private owned camels. One thousand seven hundred and forty-four blood smears, taken from private owned camels, were examined ; of these twen- ty-three were found to be positive. Trypanosomes only appear in the peripheral circulation at intervals ; if private owned camels could be kept under daily blood examination for a few days, a very much larger number would be found to be suffering from the disease. Two hundred and fourteen cases of surra amongst Military camels in the Punjab were detected by officers of the Royal Army Veterinary Corps and seventeen cases of surra were detected by the Civil Veterinary Department. From the number of cases that I have diagnosed from clinical symptoms, I am of opinion that 25 to 30 per cent. of the camels in the Punjab are surra-infected. Warbles in cattle and goats. Further investigations were carried out in connection with " warbles." The identity of the flies causing warbles in cattle and goat in the Punjab has now been determined. The fly causing warbles in cattle in the Punjab is the Hypoderma lineatum, Villers ; no specimens of Hypoderma bovis have so far been obtained. The fly causing warbles in goats has been described and named by Major W. S. Patton (vide Indian Journal of Medical Research, October 1922). Very large numbers of goats and cattle have been examined for warbles to ascertain the range of infection. Goats kept in the plains are practically free from warbles, but those kept in hilly tracts are heavily infected (40 to 90 per cent). Cattle kept in the plains as well as those kept in the hills are heavily infected ; of 41,861 cattle examined, 11,593 were found infected with warbles. New Species of Flies discovered. The oorial (wild sheep) bot-fly has been bred out; specimens were forwarded to Major Patton, who informs me that he con- siders it a new species ; it will shortly be named and described by him. In addition to the new species of Tabanidæ obtained last year several more new species have been obtained ; they will be described and named in due course. The fly causing warbles in cattle (Hypoderma lineatum Villers, well known in Europe) was obtained for the first time in India, and the Hypoderma crossii of goats is a new species.
6 Surra Transmission Experiments. Experiments were carried out with Tabanus albimedius and Ornithodorus ticks, full details of which have been published in Veterinary Bulletin No. 12 of 1923. The results obtained were as follows :7 Ornithodorus Ticks. The ticks used were Ornithorus crossii (Brumpt). (1) Interrupted feeds. (a) When trypanosomes present in the peripheral cir- culation of surra-infected animal on which the ticks were fed :8 Collection of Biting Flies. A very large area has now been surveyed, with special reference to surra and a large collection of flies has been made. A preliminary report on the fly survey of the Punjab has already been submitted to you. General Remarks. The whole staff have worked extremely hard, and I am greatly indebted to them for the assistance they have given me. I would specially bring to your notice the work done by Veterinary Inspector Kahan Singh, Senior Veterinary Assistant Abdulla Khan, Veterinary Assistant Udham Singh, Manawar Din, Artist, Babu Gopal Dass and Laboratory Assistant Muhammad Zaman. Babu Sham Shanker deserves mention for the manner in which he has carried out the clerical work of the office and Veterinary Assistant Kishen Singh for his great assistance while out on tour. Statement of expenditure incurred by the office of the Camel Specialist, together with fly survey of the Punjab, during the year 1922-23. Sub-Head of the Budget. Amount. Rs. A. P. Salaries and local allowances of officers ... ... ... 22,254 13 0 Pay of establishment ... ... ... ... ... 13,272 14 0 Travelling allowances of officers ... ... ... ... 2,265 8 0 Travelling allowances of establishment ... ... ... ... 2,342 7 0 Supplies etc. (Chemical and Apparatus ... ... ... ... 1,144 0 0 Contingencies ... ... ... ... ... ... 7,689 3 9 Purchase and stable feed and keep of animals ... ... ... 11,493 12 1 Travelling allowances and contingencies in connection with fly survey of the Punjab ... 3,977 5 7 Total ... 64,439 15 5 H.E. CROSS, CAPTAIN, I.V.S., M.R., C.V.S., D.V.H., A.Sc., Camel Specialist. 7 D of APrinted by the Superintendent Govt. Printing, Punjab.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CAMEL SPECIALIST For the year 1923-24. Lahore: Printed by the Superintendent, Government Printing, Punjab. 1924. Price : Re. 0-4-0 or 4d.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CAMEL SPECIALIST For the year 1923-24. Lahore: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB. 1924.
Revised List of Agents for the sale of Punjab Government Publications. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, London, W. C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., Limited, 68-74, Carter Lane, E. C., and 39, New Oxford Street, London, W. C. BERNARD QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, London, W. P. FISHER UNWIN, Limited, No. 1, Adelphi Terrace, London, W. C. P. S. KlNG & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S. W. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, London, S. W. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E. C. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W. C. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 51, Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & Co., Limited, Cam- bridge. OLIVER & BOYD, Tweeddale Court, Edin- burgh. E. FONSONBY, Limited, 116, Grafton Street, Dublin. Messrs. WHELDON & WESLEY, Limited, 2, 3 & 4, Arthur Street, New Oxford Street, London, W. C. 2. Messrs. EAST & WEST, Limited, 3, Vic- toria Street, London, S. W. I. ON THE CONTINENT. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris, France. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague Holland. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. FRIEDLANDER & SOHAN, Berlin. IN INDIA. MANAGER, Civil and Military Gazette Press, Lahore. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-'Am Press, Lahore. RAMA KRISHNA & SONS, Book-sellers and News Agents, Anarkali Street, Lahore. MANAGER, Punjab Law Book Depôt, Anarkali Street, Lahore. SECRETARY, Punjab Religious Book Society, Anarkali Street, Lahore. MANAGER, Roze Bazar Steam Press, Amritsar. MANAGER, Imperial Book Depôt, Delhi. THACKER SPINK & Co., Simla. THACKER SPINK & Co., Calcutta. W. NEWMAN & Co., Ltd., Calcutta. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & Co., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAMS, Limited, Madras.
No. 718No. 7-45-81. FROM D. MILNE, ESQUIRE, B.Sc. (AGRI.), I.A.S., Offg. Director of Agriculture, Punjab, To THE FINANCIAL COMMISSIONER AND SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, PUNJAB, (DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT). Dated Lahore, the 7th August 1924. SUBJECT.2 determine the incidence of Surra. Transmission experi- ments were also carried on with the flies that were caught, or were bred in the Laboratory. Many new species of Tabanidæ flies which transmit the disease were found. It was discovered that Tabanidæ lay their eggs on leaves, of aquatic plants; on leaves of trees and on rocks overhanging water; also that Tabanidæ are more prevalent in a year of good mon- soon than in a year when the monsoon is poor. As a result Mr. Cross was able to point out that all low-lying swampy tracts and tracts bordering rivers and canals must be regarded as dangerous from a Surra point of view, and that dry sandy areas are not nearly so dangerous. But only a few areas of the province have been surveyed, and much yet remains to be done. The work already accomp- lished also indicates that much has yet to be discovered regarding the role which flies such as Lyperosia, Stomoxys Philæmtomia, etc., and mosquitos play in the spread of Surra. During this survey, also much information regarding Bot flies, Ticks, etc., was collected which will be of great value in dealing with diseases of other animals. It will be seen, therefore, that the fly survey has thrown a great deal of light on the incidence of Surra, and other diseases of domestic animals, and I sincerely hope that money will be found to continue it. The preliminary report of the Fly Survey of the Punjab during 1921-23 has just been published. Mr. Cross has conferred a benefit of great magnitude on the province by his discovery of the Tartar Emetic cure for Surra; by his discoveries that the parasite is transmitted by ticks ; that buffaloes and goats are im- mune reservoirs of the disease, etc., etc. A whole field of work has been opened up with all sorts of possibilities of economic importance, and new information of value is coming out with each report. In the Legislative Council session of March 1922, it was stated that the Punjab Government derives no benefit out of this Institute, and that it is the Government of India that is mostly benefited ; further, that if the Government of India decline to bear a considerable proportion of the ex- penditure on the institution it should be abolished. I
3 mention the point as I feel that it is not realised in many quarters what the closing down of this institution would mean to the Punjab. There are about 2½ lakhs of camels in the province used both for civil transport and for agricultural purposes, and it is evident that a considerable percentage of these are infected with Surra. Then there are about 3 3/4 lakhs equines in the province and these and other domestic animals are also liable to the disease. From what has been discovered already it is evident that if the com- mon diseases of these animals are to be understood, and intelligent attempts are to be made to combat them on the most economical lines, this institution must be kept open. In my opinion it would be nothing short of a calamity to both rural and urban keepers of live stock if the investigations, referred to above, were stopped at this stage. It is essential also that a fully qualified officer be put in charge of this line of work and it is hoped that Mr. Cross may yet return and continue the work which he has so very well begun. I have the honour to be, SIR, Your most obedient servant, D. MILNE, Offg. Director of Agriculture, Punjab.
Annual Report of the Camel Specialist for the year 1923-24. I took over charge of the office of the Camel Specialist, on 5th April 1923, from Mr. H. E. Cross, I. V. S., who proceeded on long leave preparatory to retirement, and held charge throughout the year. 2. As a result of my having been promoted to Deputy Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, in the Provincial Service, the following temporary promotions were made :2 The services of 1st three veterinary assistants were kindly absorbed by the Chief Superintendent, Civil Veterin- ary Department, Punjab, in his cadre, and M. Mohamed Zaman reverted to his permanent lien of laboratory assistant, relieving temporary laboratory assistant Faqir Chand, discharged. M. Manawar-ud-din was appointed as an artist in the Punjab Veterinary College, Lahore, and retention of clerk Lala Gopal Dass in this office vice permanant clerk Lala Sham Shanker on leave, was sanctioned by the Director of Agriculture, Punjab. The services of M. Ghulam Mohamed, a veterinary assistant in connection with fly survey of the Punjab, were dispensed with, with effect from 25th September 1923, owing to absence from duty for a long time. 6. Practically no touring could be done during the year for want of funds. I travelled 1,372 miles by rail and 18 miles by road, while my predecessor Mr. H. E. Cross, travelled 11 miles by road during the short period of 4 days, for which he remained in charge. 7. Three hundred and one animals, belonging to pri- vate owners, were treated for various diseases during the year under report. Treatment of surra by Cross' method. This year a sufficient number of surra infected camels were submitted to this treatment and fair results were obtained. Twenty-five surra cured camels were returned to Mili- tary Department, none out of them, have been reported as relapsed up to date. Six experimental camels were treated for surra and out of them 5 were cured and sold by public auction. The result of treatment of surra in camels being found unsatisfactory at Lahore Cantonment, the Deputy Director of Veterinary Services, Northern Command, arranged for two batches of surra infected camels (each consisting of 20 camels), one to be treated at Sohawa, and the other at the Station Veterinary Hospital, Lahore Cantonment.
3 The excellent result obtained in the batch at the Sta tion Veterinary Hospital, Lahore Cantonment, shows that the animals while under treatment should be well protected against cold and heat, and looked after properly under these good conditions. Nineteen camels out of the 20 were cured, making a percentage of 95 per cent. Though the result of treatment of the batch at Sohawa was not so good, yet the treatment under question can in no way be regarded as non-effective, because the season, while the batch was under treatment, was absolutely un- favourable. It was extremely cold and rained constantly for many days, resulting to 10 deaths out of the 20 camels by pneumonia only. Every effort was made to protect the camels against cold and rain, but in vain, as the Serai, where the camels were stabled (no accommodation being available in the office compound), leaked badly during the rain, and the camels got wet. Season for treatment of surra.4 (2) prepare an emulsion of tartar emetic, which can be injected intramuscularly and subcutane- ously, without producing suppuration, but no such emulsion has so far been obtained. Experiments on treatment of surra in Ponies and Donkeys. Forty-two ponies and five donkeys were altogether submitted to the treatment as follows :5 Experiments with bayer 205. No experiments could be carried out this year as the drug was not procured during the year under report. Treatment of mange in camels. As the Public Works Department could not make the dip water-tight during the year, no experiments on mange could be made, hence the treatment of mange in camels had to be carried out by applying taramira oil, which has so far been proved the best curative treatment of the disease. Incidence of surra in private-owned camels. Owing to financial stringencies and abolition of fly survey of the Punjab, only very limited touring could be made during the year to determine the incidence of surra in private-owned camels. Out of 1,017 camels belonging to private owners, examined for surra, 10 were found positive in Gujrat and Shahpur Districts. Surra transmission experiments. Surra transmission experiments were carried out during the fly season with the following species of Tabanidæ, flee, and ticks:6 Conclusion.7 6. Transmission experiments with tick O. crossii.8 1. During the tour made in the parts of Gurdaspore, Kangra and Hoshiarpore Districts, the following species of Tabanidæ were met with :9 General Remarks. 1. The abolition of the fly survey staff, leaving nearly the whole province unsurveyed, is waste of money, as no definite conclusion can be derived on this most important subject, unless the whole province has been thoroughly sur- veyed. 2. My thanks are due to M. Inayat Ullah, Veterinary Assistant, Incharge Veterinary Hospital, Qilla Sheikhu- pura, for using his personal influence in collection of surra- infected ponies for treatment, and assistance given through- out. 3. I must acknowledge, as well, gratefully the help given by the Deputy Commissioner and District Board of Qilla Sheikhupura, in collection of surra-infected ponies, and sanctioning of two grass cutters to fetch grass for the ponies. 4. My thanks are also due to Mr. T. F. Quirke, I.V.S., Chief Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Punjab, for making all these arrangements for carrying out treat- ment of surra-infected ponies at Sheikhupura. 5. The whole staff has worked well during the year under report. The work of Veterinary Inspector Abdulla Khan and Laboratory Assistant Muhammad Zaman, de- serves special mention. 6. Clerk Lala Gopal Dass has carried out his duties very creditably and with alacrity. Statement of expenditure incurred by the office of the Camel Specialist, during the year 1926-24. Sub-Head of the Budget. Amount. Rs. A. P. Salaries and local allowances of officers ... ... 4,143 5 0 Pay of establishment ... ... 9,634 13 0 Travelling allowances of Officers ... ... 153 9 0 Ditto .. Establishment ... ... 1,289 0 0 Supplies, etc. (chemical and apparatus) ... ... 1,187 13 6 Contingencies ... ... ... 6,255 9 1 Purchase and stable feed and keep of animals ... ... 4,100 14 6 Total ... 26,765 0 1 KAHAN SINGH, DEPUTY SUPDT., C.V.D., Officer Incharge of the Camel Specialist's Office.
PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDET, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB 26 DAPrinted by the Superintendent Govt. Printing, Punjab.
ANNUAL REPORT OF CAMEL SPECIALIST, SOHAWA. For the year 1924-25. Lahore: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB. 1926. Price : Re. 0-8-0 or 8d.
ANNUAL REPORT OF CAMEL SPECIALIST, SOHAWA. For the year 1924-25. Lahore : PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB. 1926.
Revised List of Agents for the Sale of Punjab Government Publications. ON THE CONTINENT AND UNITED KINGDOM. Publications obtainable either direct from the High Commissioner for India, 42, Grosvenor Gardens, London, S. W. 1, or through any book- seller. IN INDIA. MANAGER, Civil and Military Gazette Press, Lahore. RAI SAHIB M. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-'Am Press, Lahore. RAMA KRISHNA & SONS, Booksellers and News Agents, Anarkali Street, Lahore. MANAGER, Punjab Law Book Depôt, Anarkali Street, Lahore. SECRETARY, Punjab Religious Book Society, Anarkali Street, Lahore. MANAGER, Roze Bazar Steam Press, Amritsar. The MANAGER, Imperial Book Depôt, Delhi. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Simla. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta. W. NEWMAN & Co., Limited, Calcutta. MESSRS. S. K. LAHIRI & Co., Book-sellers, Publishers and Printers, Calcutta. D. B. TARAPOREWALA, SONS & Co., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAMS, Limited, Madras.
No. 900-D. FROM R. H. CRUMP, ESQ., I.C.S., Junior Secretary to the Financial Commis- sioners and Deputy Secretary to Government, Punjab, Development Department, To THE DIRECTOR OF AGRICULTURE, PUNJAB. Dated Lahore, the 2nd March 1926. (Ministry of Agriculture.) SIR, I AM directed to acknowledge the receipt of 5 advance copies of the Annual Report of the Camel Specialist for the year 1924-25 forwarded with your letter No. 37/45-82, without date. I have the honour to be, SIR, Your most obedient servant, R. H. CRUMP, Junior Secretary to the Financial Commis- sioners and Deputy Secretary to Government Punjab, Development Department. 113 FCNo. 112 3. The experiments carried out with the intravenous Tartar Emetic treatment on surra in camels at Sohawa con- firm the results obtained heretofore. Seventy-five camels belonging to the Military Department were submitted to the treatment, and of these 6 died during the experiment, 2 had to be destroyed for other causes, and 6 were reported to have re- lapsed after their return to the Military Department. This leaves 61 recoveries and is a very striking achievement in com- bating a disease quite incurable before the Tartar Emetic treatment was discovered by Mr. Cross. 4. Ninety-six natural cases of surra among equines were also treated by Tartar Emetic given intravenously. The results obtained give hopes of success, but losses were heavy where owners did not provide sufficient rations for the patients while under treatment, and the housing was unsuitable. There was difficulty also in securing early cases. 5. Two ponies and four camels were experimented on with Bayer 205, as a cure for surra. Both ponies and two camels are reported to be cured ; the other two camels are reported to have relapsed, i.e., of the 6 animals treated 67 per cent. were cured. This is encouraging. Experiments with other drugs are also being made. 6. Some investigations into the incidence of surra on cows, buffaloes and camels were made. A total of 1,347 animals were examined in Gujranwala, Sialkot, Gurdaspur and Amritsar districts, and 16 camels only showed in their peripheral blood system the Trypanosome which causes the disease. The Trypanosome only come into the peripheral blood system of infected animals periodically however, and S. Kahan Singh considers that if the blood of these animals had been examined regularly for several days, a large number would have been found infected and acting as reservoirs of the disease. 7. At Qilla Sheikhupura 139 ponies and 8 camels, sus- pected of the disease, were examined and found to be infected. An examination was made of a large number of animals in Chaks near Bhalwal in Shahpur District, where surra is bad each year in the fly season, but Trypanosomes were not found in the blood of a single animal. On inoculation however of
3 the blood of five buffaloes which were in an emaciated con- dition, into white rats, 2 of the rats showed Trypanosomes in their blood six days after inoculation. 8. Experiments on the transmission of the disease by ticks and tabanidæ flies were also carried out. Detailed reports of the results are promised by the Officer in charge for publication. 9. Funds have been placed at the disposal of the Public Works Department to remove defects in the camel dispensary at Sohawa. When this is done the treatment of Mange in camels, and other diseases will be greatly facilitated. 10. Proposals have been sent up to Government for the revival of the fly survey which was started in April 1921, and had to be closed down in November 1923, for want of funds. The fly survey as explained in my last year's report has thrown a great deal of light on the incidence of surra and other diseases of domestic animals and it is earnestly hoped that funds for this important work will be granted. 11. Special thanks are due to Khan Bahadur Malik Zaman Mehdi Khan, Deputy Commissioner, Sheikhupura, for the assistance he has so kindly given to the Department in carrying on the surra work. Thanks are also due to S. Kahan Singh, Deputy Superintendent, and to the other staff there for the carrying on the work of the Laboratory. I have the honour to be, SIR, Your most obedient servant, D. MILNE, Director of Agriculture, Punjab.
Annual Report of Camel Specialist, Sohawa, for the year 1924-25. I HELD charge as officer-in-charge of the office of the Camel Specialist, Sohawa, throughout the year. I regret to report the death of Laboratory Assistant M. Muhammad Zaman on the 6th February 1925. Lala Sita Ram was appointed as temporary Laboratory Assistant in the vacancy caused by the death of M. Muham- mad Zaman. Four hundred and eighty-six animals, belonging to private owners, were treated for various diseases, during the year under report. I travelled 5,686 miles by rail. I.2 Out of the 75 camels, treated for surra at Sohawa, 6 died during the treatment, 2 destroyed for other causes, and 6 were reported to have relapsed after their return to the Military Department. III.3 Like last year the staff had to face considerable diffi- culties in the carrying out of the treatment. The conditions for the carrying out of the treatment were on the whole satisfactory at the Sheikhupura and Bhera centres. At Muridke, however, the lack of suitable housing accommodation and the insufficient rations, provided by the owners to their animals, whilst under treatment, militated against the success of the treatment. In all three centres very great difficulty was experienced in securing early cases for treatment, and owners were generally careless in providing suitable feeding for their animals. In order to secure decisive results as to the efficacy of this treatment in future, the following conditions must be secured:4 Summary of the experiments made by intravenous injection of Bayer 205, on Surra-affected animals. No. of experiments. ANIMAL USED IN THE EXPERIMENTS CONDITION OF ANI- MAL USED IN THE EXPERIMENT. Total amount of Bayer 205 given. No. of injections made. No. of days the ani- mal remained un- der treatment. Small animal, in- oculated from the blood of a Surra- treated animal after the treat- ment was finished. No. of days the small animal re- mained under daily blood exa- mination. RESULT. Kind. Age. Before treatment. After treatment. 1 Camel .. Years. 5 Poor .. Good .. Grammes. 14 4 31 ... ... + Positive. Relapsed on 44th day. 2 Camel .. 11 Poor .. Good .. 20 4 31 Dog .. White rat .. Dog .. White rat .. 30 30 30 30 5 It will be noted that the results obtained from the six experiments made with this drug in the treatment of surra, are decidedly encouraging. For more decisive results, it is intended to make further experiments with this drug on natural surra cases, next year, if the drug is procurable. Conclusions : 6 27th day 100 c. c. of 10 per cent. solution of Tryparsamide, intravenously. 28th day 22 c. c. of M-10 solution of Tartar Emetic, intraven- ously. 29th day 387 c. c. of 2.5 per cent. Bismuth Phosphoricum in 7.5 per cent. gum emulsion, intravenously. Result of system No. 1.7 System No. 3.8 Results of systems Nos. 1 and 2.9 VIII.10 clusions therefore can be made, whether this species of Tabanidæ plays any part in the spread of the disease. It is intended to carry out, next year, as large number of ex- periments as possible, within the district, where these flies are commonly met with. Experiments with T. ditæniatus.11 Experiments with O. lahorensis.12 Sheikhupura, and M. Sultan Mahmud, Veterinary Assistant, on special duty at Bhera, for their work in the carrying out of the surra treatment under very trying conditions, also to the staff of this Laboratory, who have worked well during the year under report. The names of Veterinary Inspector, B. Abdulla Khan and Clerk Lala Gopal Dass, deserve special mention. XV.Printed by the Superintendent Govt. Printing, Punjab.
