A NOTE ON SURRA IN CAMELS FOR COMMANDANTS OF CAMEL CORPS By H. E. CROSS, M.R.C.V.S., D.V.H., A.Sc. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore : PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING. PUNJAB, 1914.
A note on Surra in Camels FOR Commandants of Camel Corns. Definition. Surra is an acute protozoan remittent fever accompanied by emaciation, anæmia and debility and characterised by the pre- sence of trypanosomes in the blood during the par- oxysm of fever. Synonyms. Surra, meaning rotten, is the most widely used term for the disease, other common names for the disease in India are:2 SUTRRA IN CAMELS. the camel showing a morning temperature of 99° F. or over. Before we can make certain that a camel is suffering from surra the trypanosome must be demonstrated in the blood, and to demonstrate its presence a wet film pre- paration must be made and examined under 1/6 inch objective, or a smear of the blood must be taken and stained. Toprepare a wet film a very small portion of the edge of the ear is cut with scissors and the ear squeezed till a small drop of blood exudes. To this drop of blood is applied a clean cover glass (¼ inch square is a suitable size) so as to get a small drop of blood in the middle of the cover glass, then apply the cover glass to a clean slide (3" × 1" is a suitable size). The blood will then be between the cover glass and the slide, and will run out to the edge of the cover glass. Too large drops of blood must be avoided, or there will be difficulty in seeing the trypanosome. The film is then examined. A north light is best. If trypanosomes are present, they will be seen wriggl- ing about amongst the corpuscles. The movement of the trypanosomes becomes gradually slower till it finally ceases altogether after about ½ hour, under ordinary conditions of temperature. To prepare a smear for staining. Touch the drop of blood on the ear with a clean glass slide ½ inch from the end of the slide. Apply the edge of another slide across the drop of blood and draw the second glide along the length of the first slide. The first slide should then be waved to and fro until the blood has dried. The smear can be examined at leisure after staining by Leishman's method. Leishman's method.SURRA IN CAMELS. 8 After using the scissors on one camel they must be disinfected in a weak solution of carbolic acid and thoroughly dried before being used on a fresh camel. The detection of surra in a largo number of camels. It has already been stated that the trypanosome only appears in the peripheral circulation during the paroxysm of fever, and that these paroxysm occur at intervals varying from about a fortnight to several weeks. Because no trypanosomes are present in the peripheral circulation on one day the camel cannot be declared free from surra ; all that can be said is that on that particular day the blood is free from trypanosomes. To detect surra the examination must be continued for several weeks daily, but if a Commandant of Camel Corps has a large number of camels under his charge, he will at once state that it would be impossible to examine the blood of every camel daily. This is perfectly true and could not be done, but if it be remembered that the trypanosome only appears during the paroxysm of fever, all that is necessary is for the temperatures of all camels to be taken every morning, and only the blood of those camels showing a temperature of 99° F. or over need be examined. If 10 half-minute ther- mometres are used, the temperatures of 10 camels can be taken in ½ minute. Allowing another ½ minute to allow the temperature being read, etc., the temperature of say 300 camels could therefore be taken in ½ hour. It is imperative that the temperatures should be taken once daily if all cases of surra in the Corps are to be diagnosed. It is obvious from what has been said that by spasmodic blood examination cases of surra are sure to be missed. Symptoms. I. In the acute form.4 SURRA IN CAMELS. are frequently seen in chronic surra cases and oedema on the pads and on the abdomen is also sometimes met with. In dachis infected with surra abortion is common. Very few cases of chronic surra recover. The generally accepted view is that if the camel lasts over 3 years he will recover. Post-mortem appearances. On post-mortem there are no characteristic appearances in camels dead from surra, except those of extreme emacia- tion. Disposal of the carcase. All camels that have died of surra should be at once burnt or buried ; the trypanosome may remain alive from 20SURRA IN CAMELS. 5 ho is feeding well. Colic should be treated by chlorodyne in doses of 8 oz. in 1 to 2 pints of water (of chlorodyne containing 1 grain of morphia per fluid ounce). Constipation should be treated by 16 SURRA IN CAMELS. The principal blood sucking flies are :SURRA IN CAMELS. 7 We can accomplish our first object by submitting the camels to daily examination. Although the blood of every camel cannot be examined daily as explained under the heading diagnosis, it is quite easy and takes only a short time to take the morning temperature daily of a large number of camels and examine the blood of any showing a morning temperature of 99° F. or over. Any diagnosed with surra should be at once destroyed or isolated and submitted to treatment. If this methodis systematically carried out, in a short time every case of surra in a corps will be detected. We can ac- complish our second object (i.e., isolation of Government camels from the privately owned during the fly season) by setting apart rakhs free from Tabanidae for Government camels. To sum up, the spread of surra can be prevented by (1) getting rid of the reservoir of infection; (2) grazing the camels in rakhs free from biting flies during the fly season and in which private camels are not allowed to graze. To determine whether a rakh is free from Tabanidae we must search The examination of a for8 SURRA IN CAMELS. suffering from surra. The camel becomes infected with surra during the fly season; in the majority of cases the camels are not worked during this time and get good grazing; they therefore do not lose condition rapidly, so that at the beginning of the cold weather, though surra-infected, they may still be in good condition. On the other hand, towards the end of the cold weather the surra-infected camel, especially if has been worked during the early part of the winter, will have lost a good deal of condition. It is therefore obvious that the time to purchase remounts is at the end and not at the beginning of the cold weather, and no camel should be purchased that is not in good condition, special attention being paid to the thigh muscles which should be well developed. All remounts should be kept for 6 weeks isolated from the remainder of the corps camels. H. E. CROSS, I.C.V.D.; Camel Specialist.
