REPORT OF THE VETERINARY OFFICER INVESTIGATING CAMEL DISEASES FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31st MARCH 1909. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] SIMLA; GOVERNMENT CENTRAL BRANCH PRESS. 1909.
REPORT OF THE VETERINARY OFFICER INVESTIGATING CAMEL DISEASES FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31st MARCH 1909. SIMLA; GOVERNMENT CENTRAL BRANCH PRESS. 1909.
SECOND ANNUAL REPORT OF THE VETERINARY OFFICER INVESTIGATING CAMEL DISEASES, FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31st MARCH 1909. The work of the office during the year. From 27th April to 24th September 1908, I was engaged at Mohand on experiments and observations in connection with the role of biting flies in the transmission of surra. A report on this work has been submitted to you with my letter No. 5792 On tour also, 43 new cases of surra in camels were found ; and 70 camels were found to harbour filarial embryos in the blood, of which however only a minority were seriously diseased. Of suspected surra in equines, two cases out of five specimens examined by the office were confirmed. 8. The following papers have been sent for publication in the Journal of Tropical Veterinary Medicine :3 13. General and local conditions in 1908-09.4 19. On tour I examined a number of the camels and found that the disease had not spread to any very serious extent in the local troops, probably because of their freedom from surra before going into the surra-zones on the frontier. 20. The total number of proved surra cases found in the twelve months ending 31st March 1909 was 10 (of which one was discovered after casting). Of these, eight were camels employed in the expedition and two were 1908 purchases. 1 he mortality of the four local troops is about 16.5 per cent.; that of the whole corps about 19.4 per cent. 21. Finding that surra was not to be blamed altogether for the increased Mortality I made an examination of a number of camels in poor condition for filariasis. Filarial embryos were found in 13 cases out of 40 examined. This is a high percentage, and although only a minority of these 13 owed their poor condition entirely to the Filariae, there is little doubt that the parasite directly and indirectly accounts for much of the increased mortality ; and that the animals became infected from the other side of the Indus. The Commandant has since found other cases. Much work has been done this year in investiga- tion of filariasis and I hope to send a full report on the subject before the end of the hot weather. There is reason to think that this disease, in the case of the four local troops, will not spread to any greater extent than it has done already. In the absence of exact knowledge of the agent of infection, only segregation (in the case of Trans-Indus troops) and watering of affected camels further down stream than the healthy could be advised ; this in a Silladar Corps is of course more easily said than done. 22. The breeding farm was visited and the camel bachas closely examined for signs of Girki. Last year I advised that the dachis with bachas " at foot " be sent down from the stony rakhs altogether for a considerable portion of the year when grazing in Pindigheb becomes ready. The Commandant however tells me that under existing arrangements this would have been difficult and the bachas have therefore not been sent down altogether but kept as far as possible on the lower slopes of the hills where it is less stony. That this is an improve- ment on the old system, is shown by the fact that only one new case was found fortunately in a dachibacha ; but it is not sufficient to save losses from Girki ; camel-breeding herds in this part of the country must be able to make seasonal movements for complete success. The bachas otherwise leave nothing to be desired and are calculated to make good hill camels. The freedom of the Kala Chitta Rakh from Surra is shown by the low mortality in the breeding farm. 23. In the breeding season of 1908 a Bactrian camel was imported as a sand ; it did not become musth however and was useless. This experiment was hardly necessary when such an excellent stamp of camel is to be found locally ; and as the Bactrian was not old enough, was in poor condition when it arrived and was not even a good specimen of its type, the experiment does not prove that the Bactrian is useless as a sand in India. 24. 51st (Rawalpindi) Camel Corps.5 of Tabanus may also be present, but this will be investigated next month and if they are then found to be numerous, the Commandant will at once be advised as to the most dangerous zones and the best steps to take to save the camels work- on the " Murree move." 27. 52nd (Jhelum) Camel Corps.6 native officer and the fact that they have remained healthy although in close proximity to surra areas shows what can be done by direct supervision of the movements of camels in the surra season. 34. 55th (Montgomery) Camel Corps.7 to 10th October. The grazing difficulty in dry years remains; but if the Shahpur troops could get Phulai grazing on the Salt Range in April and May, this would fortify them for the surra season in the Thal subsequently. 46. In purchasing camels from west of the Indus as is now being done, those found containing large numbers of filarial embryos in the blood should be avoided especially if they are not in first-class condition. 47. With regard to the filariasis in the 55th Corps, recent investigations show that it is unlikely to. spread from infected camels in Montgomery district. Segregation would under the circumstances cause greater trouble than the disease itself. 48. The Anthrax cases probably depend on infection from a bovine source and under Camel Corps conditions the vultures and jackals destroy the carcase during the delay caused by confirming diagnosis; the indications of course are to burn the entire carcase. 49. 57th (Multan) Cornel Corps.8 ew worse surra-zones than between Darya Khan and Dera Ismail Khan. Twenty of them (Supply and Transport) arrived actually in Bannu before 30th September and four of the cases that I found were out of these twenty. The new purchases of the 31st Punjabis camels arrived much later and I did not find any case of surra in those that I examined. 56. Camels should not be purchased between 1st July and 31st October, because at this time so many surra camels are in good condition. The micros- cope was not available for purchasing I am told. The Veterinary Dafadars however took the temperatures of the camels as a safeguard but were probably not then aware of the enormous differences between the morning and evening temperatures of healthy camels ; 100 and 101° F. are normal for a camel in the evening but in the early part of the day these temperatures indicate fever. The purchases had to be made at a low price which is doubtless the reason why so many Mianwali camels were purchased ; they are very inferior. That ordinary care was taken in purchasing is shown by the fact that there are few cases of ordinary unsoundnesses other than surra amongst the new purchases. 57. Three cheap microscopes are wanted here instead of the one expensive one which is now in use. 58. Many of the Supply and Transport camels were in very poor condition as compared with the regimental camels ; this is not entirely due to surra but to the fact that the Commissariat camels get the 2/3rds white bhusa ration whereas the regimental ones get a full ration of missa bhusa. 59. Filariasis was only found in " old " camels, and not in the new purchases which I tested. 60. The total number of surra cases proved during the year in Bannu camels was 18. 61. Marian (Guides Infantry).9 which Kote can be held responsible. Moreover the death-rate since the surra season of 1908 had decreased considerably, only 3 camels being lost between 30th June and 31st December. 66. That Kote is a healthy place for camels in the dangerous season appears certain from the above facts. If the camels are always grazed there at that time surra should cease to trouble the authorities at Kohat, The explanation of the amount of surra in the 58th Rifles is that in 1907 their camels grazed in a known surra-zone ; the dates of diagnosis of the surra cases show that the disease has not spread amongst them in 1908, these being either old (1907) cases or Hangu cases. Transfers are often made from Hangu to Kohat and vice versa, and this may cause some confusion in the future as regards the incidence of surra unless the mortality returns are carefully analysed, 67. The Hangu camels I am told cannot be removed from the surra-zone. Their mortality is high and they are under somewhat unusual conditions as they work all the year round; as there are only about 50 of them, it is practicable to resort to protective drugs. The best and cheapest anti-trypanosome drug known in the camel is Antimony Tartrate and I have ascertained that a camel can take the drug for at least 5 months without harm to himself, in doses which are sufficient to keep the blood free from trypanosomes for nearly the whole time, Apart from any possible truly protective power for the healthy the drug if given to all the animals during the fly-season will temporarily convert the latent cases or " reservoirs of infection" into animals nearly as harmless as healthy ones, for as a rule the blood does not seem to be infective whilst under this treatment. The method is by no means free from disadvantages but worth trying under the circumstances if a reliable Veterinary Dafadar is present to carry it out. 68. It is pretty certain that the surra season in this district is between some date in June or July to some date in October; but it is not yet ascertained whether there is or is not a number of Tabanus present in the valley also in May, as was reported to be the case in Shabkadar, Peshawar district. 69. Much correspondence has been carried on from time to time with the military authorities at Kohat regarding surra and the camel mortality and a detailed report on the whole situation was recently sent to you at your request. 70. Dera Ismail Khan.10 (iii) That where military requirements will allow it, the rest period of the corps camels should be adjusted so as to cover more fully the worst part of the surra season, which in the Punjab is the rains and the following 6 weeks. In some corps the rest-period begins on 1st June and ends on 31st August, and in these cases, from the surra standpoint it would be much better if the rest period were made to begin about 30 days later. (iv) The surra season will even then slightly overlap the rest-period. As far as possible no concentrations or parades of camels should therefore be made which would cause them to march through irrigated or riverine areas or the foothills of the Himalayas before the 15th October. If movements are necessary before that date, double marches are desirable through extensive irrigated districts, or night marching across narrow belts of irrigation (such as occur in Shahpur or Lahore districts) or (where possible) across belts of land subject to inundation from rivers and nullahs (such as the Deg Nullah) ; the camps should be made on highlying land well away (½ mile) from standing water but protected from cold wind and in the foothills it would be safer, before about 15th October, to give rations than to send out to graze, provided the camping ground is well chosen. (These rations however should include a full missa bhusa ration). (v) In May and June, before the true " surra season ", a fair number of Tabanus are to be found in some surra-zones where there is a constant supply of standing water ; the worst instances of this are to be found here and there in the foothills below the Himalayas, and certain localities on the North-West Frontier. In a corps containing much surra, these flies may spread infection and cause new cases and precautions similar to those given in paragraph (iv) are advisable when working camels there, for as a rule it is impracticable to avoid these zones in May and June. (vi) The examination of the blood of camels for surra should be part of the routine of a camel corps. The best time theoretically for this routine would be the rainy season; but owing to the conditions this is as a rule hardly practicable, The next best time is at the inspections at the end of the rest period; at this time every camel (in those corps which have a high mortality) should have its blood examined irrespective of its " condition " or temperature; most of the cases are of a few months' or weeks' duration and are showing trypanosomes pretty often. There is not the same ease in picking out cases after the end of the year because as the surra cases get older they do not show trypanosomes so often. This routine should be as far as possible repeated at inspections through- out the year. In these routine examinations, two things are of vital importance :11 from trypanosomes for days together; until a better means of diagnosis is discovered however the microscope should in every case be used, and will prevent a great deal of trouble, especially in the last 2 months of the year. That very many camels with surra are purchased by camel corps annually is a fact. 72. To insist on first class condition is a considerable (though not an absolute) safeguard when purchasing especially at the end of the cold weather; and in this connection the condition of the hump can only properly be estimated by actually feeling it with the hand. 73. This year has been exceptionally dangerous for the risk of purchasing surra, because of the exceptional rains. Purchasing is becoming very difficult in many districts; and no great improvement is likely to occur until grazing is opened on a large scale for camel-breeding in healthy districts. 74. In the South-East Punjab camel-owners have a test for surra (which I am hoping to investigate this year): they segregate the cases they diagnose until the end of the surra season ; and many of their camels are afterwards sold in the big fairs. From these fairs a large number of plains camels are being pur- chased by owners in the North Punjab and doubtless many pass into the camel corps there as local animals. SOME OTHER POINTS INFLUENCING MORTALITY. 75. There are other circumstances which must have a considerable influence on the mortality, although it is only the provision of surra-free grazing grounds for the corps' use which will reduce the mortality to a reasonable figure. One is the frequency with which Commandants are changed ; soon after he has acquir- ed a knowledge of the animal and the local conditions, his appointment comes to an end. 76. The bhusa ration allowed to corps camels by Government is another point which requires attention. Two-thirds of it is white bhusa, the other third is missa bhusa ; the total weight of bhusa allowed being 16 lbs. The majority of baggage camels will eat very little of the white bhusa leaving it in heaps in front of them after picking out all the missa. Thus, when working on rations, the camel does not get the necessary bulk of food and the effect of this is soon apparent. I have had many opportunities of seeing how quickly camels fall away in condition when they have been worked for a time on this ration (and gram) with little or no grazing. On the other hand they thrive for a time on missa bhusa and mote bhusa. Even when the price of missa bhusa is higher than that of white 3bhusa the camels would actually get a greater bulk of bhusa if the ration were altered and missa bhusa only were purchased up to the same actual cost per camel for they would eat it all instead of leaving it. 77. The camels of two of the regiments at Bannu get a 15 lbs. missa bhusa ration which, with corn keeps the camels in condition when they cannot get grazing; a similar bhusa ration is required for all baggage camels when they are working and cannot get grazing. 78. In my last report I recommended that the sick lines should be in the graz- ing grounds. In a Silladar Camel Corps the post of Veterinary Dafadar or Salutri could become an extremely useful one if sarwans on unemployed pay could be made to report cases of sickness earlier. There is a good reason why the sarwans do not do this ; each man has his three camels, and if one is in the sick lines, the sarwan often has to look after it, and his other two camels' work is either lost or entrusted to some one else; this has as much to do with the non-reporting of sickness as distrust of the Salutri's treatment; non-reportingof sickness leads to the loss of a considerable number of camels annually which could have been saved by simple commonsense treatment applied by a Salutri who knows the animal. The difficulty could be got over by the appointment of a few extra camelmen to look after the sick camels under the Salutri. Neglected cases found at inspections however should be looked after by the sarwan himself; this has been found to be an excellent preventative for mange in unemployed camels in the 56th Camel Corps.
12 79. The unsatisfactory point in the management of the Silladar Camel Corps, from the veterinary point of view, is of course the difficulty of sufficiently super- vising the camels on unemployed pay; which can only be carried out properly by frequent inspections. NOTES ON SOME DISEASES OTHER THAN SURRA. 80. Tuberculosis.-In the year reported, 25 post-mortems on camels dead or destroyed on account of various diseases have been made ; no tuberculous lesion was coincidently present in any of them. When tuberculosis is found in the camel as it was last year, it may be that the source of infection was bovine or possibly human; the camel in the Punjab lives his whole life in the open; but when one camel becomes infected it is easy to understand how others may be infected from him, for it is the practice when feeding grain or bhusa to make the camels sit in a circle; heads inwards, the feed for all being thrown down in a heap in the middle; camels sneeze and cough onto this heap and thus infection by ingestion is an easy matter. 81. A camel with tuberculosis is probably a great danger to his sarwan, for in his resistance to handling he is constantly ejecting part of the contents of his mouth on to the clothes or body of his attendant. 82. A few preliminary experiments with tuberculin (the effect of which has to be checked by an examination for trypanosomes) have been made, the normal temperature of the camel having been first ascertained by prolonged observations ; and when opportunity occurs for further experiments it is hoped that as cases of tuberculosis are found the proper treatment of the in-contact camels may be decided on from their results, 83- Jhoolak.13 ulcer on the first occasion and later only to the unhealthy edges of the ulcer which the necrotic process is otherwise apt to involve and delay healing. When granulating properly, mild antiseptics only are necessary. If flies are present, a fly dressing should be painted on the wound to prevent flyblow. 90. Remarks.14 Theiler and Gray (quoted in Veterinary Journal, March 1907, page 162) state that foot and mouth disease was recorded in Rhodesia in 1903 amongst a ship- ment of camels for which the food (nature of which is not stated) was imported specially from India; no foot and mouth disease in cattle had however been observed for at least 10 years previously in Rhodesia; the sick camels were killed and " the outbreak spread no further." Steel (Diseases of camel, page 52) says that " foot and mouth disease undoubtedly affects the camel and proves a source of considerable losses especial- ly on service;" but for observations on the disease in the camel, he relies on quotations from others, and there is nothing in his article to suggest that he means that he has himself met with a case. 99. I have searched for this disease in the camel which is a great scourge to other ruminants in the Punjab, during the whole of my touring but have never found nor heard of a case, either from officers, salutris or native owners ; I have camped for months and kept 20 to 25 camels grazing in localities in which foot and mouth disease in cattle was at its height affecting a very large proportion of animals (Kharian, October and November 1908 ; Sohawa, February and March 1909). No case occurred in my animals which grazed and travelled over infected land and roads daily; neither were the zamindars' camels affected. 100. The following experiments were therefore carried out:15 106. In one dachi, there was advanced cirrhosis of the liver; in the other, this was not apparent, but there was dilatation of the 1st stomach which had abnormally thin walls. The normal camel's liver, like that of the pig, has a con- siderable amount of interlobular connective tissue and a cirrhosis of a fine character may have been overlooked in some of the last year's cases ; but cirrhosis is-not the first lesion of Wail. The extremely oedematous state of the muscles is therefore the most constant feature of the cases I have seen. Examination of the blood having revealed no parasite, careful observations with laboratory facilities at hand are required before it can be decided whether Wail is a specific disease or an infinitely slow process of debility due to the animal being reared entirely on Lana, somewhat similar to that Which Gilruth (Veterinary journal, July 1905) has seen in sheep from " Ragwort poisoning" in which there is also an extremely slow cirrhosis of the liver. This work will be done at Sohawa as soon as it is made possible. 107. I am not satisfied that the disease is incurable by common sense treat- ment, i. e., long rest and change of grazing-ground, in cases where cirrhosis is not advanced ; this is also to be tried. 108. In the first three paragraphs of my last report on Wail is an account of its Occurrence to which I have little to add. Exactly similar accounts were given to me by camel owners of the Thal far from the place of last year's enquiry ; and the disease is certainly distinct from surra. 109. The Thal is partly in Mianwali district and partly in Khushab tehsil and the grazing in the Wail-affected area is almost unmixed lana. This is the only part of the Punjab in which camels are reared almost entirely on lana ; in most other places, lana is considered excellent as an alterative, the camels being sent on to the lana grounds about once or twice a week; many Salt Range owners however will not allow their camels to touch it. 110. The water-supply of the Thal is from wells and tanks; the camels of the country are the least likely to be affected with insect-borne disease, owing to it's dryness and barrenness. 111. Poor condition and weediness is the normal state in Thal camels.. They are unfit for Camel Corps, and are often found to have little work left in them if bought " nesh " (i. e., 8 years old). 112. The strongyle which I thought at first was causal of the disease has been identified by Raillet as Haemonchus longistipes; the specimens found in the Wail cases were however less than half the normal size of Haemonchus longistipes as it commonly occurs in camels. 113. Camel-pox and Gai-sujh.16 117. Hippobosca camelima.17 APPENDIX I. SURRA-ZONES AND SURRA-FREE ZONES, SECOND LIST. All the areas mentioned below as being surra-zones, seem to be most dan- gerous in the rains and the 6 weeks following the cessation of the rains. In April and May however a much smaller number of Tabanus are often present but would not as a rule justify avoidance of the zones in those two months provided care is taken in selecting camping-grounds. In those parts of the Punjab that I have so far investigated there appear to be three large areas at least in which camels could be grazed during the surra season with very slight danger of coming into contact with Tabanus, although it is not denied that a few are to be met with in the neighbourhood of standing water within these zones. They are18 9. A march from Saharanpur to Lahore (made with camels by Kahansingh, Veterinary graduate, in September, one of the objects being to Iook forTabanus) resulted in the fly being found at the following places :19 REVIEW BY THE INSPECTOR-GENERAL, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT. This report gives a very good idea of the points to which attention has been directed during the year. Investigations and experiments connected with various matters, such as the rô1e of biting flies in the transmission of Surra, the experi- mental treatment of surra and filariasis in the camel, as well as the breeding of that animal, can be more suitably dealt with in separate reports as the work becomes complete. 2. A report on the experiments conducted at Mohand in connection with the role of biting flies in the transmission of surra has already been submitted to Government. The experiments are of considerable interest on account of the proof which has been obtained that the Tabanus, Haematopota and also Stomoxys are all capable of transmitting the disease mechanically,. It appears certain that the importance of the various flies as vectors is not equal: the Tabanus is the commonest and most potent factor in the spread of surra in the camel, the Haematopota is next and the Stomoxys only an occasional agent. These conclusions agree with those of observers in other countries. 3. Unfortunately, conditions were not suitable for the prosecution of experiments to ascertain whether the trypanosoma of surra undergoes any development in a particular fly which acts as a definitive host. Recent observa- tions in Africa seem to show that there is a great probability that a Tsetse fly does act as a definitive host for T. gambiense, T. brucei and a trypanosome of T. dimorphon type. There do not appear to be the same grounds for suspect- ing that the theory applies to surra, in fact the evidence so far available points in the other direction and the only conclusion so far justifiable appears to be that biting flies simply transmit the disease mechanically. Further researches will however be made into this question during the next Surra season, but they are surrounded with great difficulties and the lack of the assistance of a trained Dipterologist is greatly felt in this direction. In present circumstances, it is very difficult to get flies even named and great delay occurs. 4. The work of collecting information regarding surra-zones would be much simplified by a more extensive knowledge of the comparative r6le played by the different species of flies, but this work cannot make very rapid progress at the present time owing to lack of experts who can devote their whole time to the study of the subject. 5. Every effort has been made to disseminate practical knowledge of surra and other diseases amongst officers and others working amongst camels and a short pamphlet, in simple language, is now being printed for circulation amongst those who are interested in the matter. 6. The subject of fostering camel-breeding has received considerable atten- tion. The conclusion which has been come to is that the extension of irrigation which breaks up the best of the camel-breeding areas in Northern India, pushes out camel-breeding which is a rapidly declining industry. If suitable camels are to be bred for military purposes, then we must throw open grazing grounds in surra-free areas in country suitable for the production of military camels. 7. The knowledge which we have so far obtained concerning surra in this animal must be strictly applied, known surra-zones avoided so far as possible and the reservoirs of virus be ruthlessly weeded out. 8. Surra has been severe this year, partly owing to the heavy rainfall and partly to some of the corps having taken part in the frontier expedition and worked in fly-zones. Mr. Leese's review of the disease in the various corps is valuable. 9. Considerable time has been devoted to the study of the treatment of surra in the camel by practical means but the experiments are not sufficiently advanced to publish ; they are being continued. Filariasis has proved to be a serious condition in camels and is being investigated by Mr. Leese.
20 10. Proposals have been submitted for the erection of a small hospital and laboratory for the study of camel disease at Sohawa in the Punjab. When this is ready, the work will be greatly facilitated and many points which cannot now be taken up will be worked out. It is of great importance, for instance, to definitely decide on the susceptibility of the camel to the various contagious diseases which affect other stock in this country. The experiments so far made are too few to warrant any definite conclusions being drawn, but it seems very probable that the camel enjoys comparative immunity from some of them at least, and if this be proved to be the case it will show his superiority as a transport animal over bovines. Lingard states that the camel can be infected with Rinderpest but that the disease is not very fatal in him. Leese's experi- ments go to show that he is probably not very susceptible to foot and 'mouth. disease, if at all. ii. It is hoped that sanction will soon be obtained for the erection of the necessary buildings at Sohawa so that work may make more rapid progress. 12. Mr. Leese has devoted himself whole-heartedly to his work during the year and carried out the investigations at Mohand in trying and unhealthy con- ditions and I consider that he deserves great credit for the progress which has been made during the short time which he has held the appointment. SIMLA ; 11th August 1909. H. T. PEASE, Colonel, Inspector- General, Civil Veterinary Department. G. C. B. P., Simla.-No. II. G. C. V. DANNUAL REPORT OF Veterinary Officer Investigating Camel Diseases. For the year ending 31st March 1910 CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1910
ANNUAL REPORT OF Veterinary Officer Investigating Camel Diseases. For the year ending 31st March 1910. CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1910
ANNUAL REPORT OF VETERINARY OFFICER INVESTIGATING CAMEL DISEASES. FOR YEAR ENDING 3lST MARCH 1910. THE WORK OF THE OFFICE DURING THE YEAR. No decision having been arrived at throughout the year with regard to the proposed head-quarters at Sohawa, all work has been confined to things which could he done practically without indoor accommodation in Camp. 2. Experimental treatment of Surra in camels has been carried on through- out most of the year, and the results separately reported up to 28th February 1910. After a large number of dosage experiments regarding the trypanosome- dispersing powers of drugs including amongst others Atoxyl, Soamin, Anti- mony Tartrate, Orpiment, Antimony Sulphide, White Arsenic (in ball, solution, and as Arsenite), Sodium Arsenate and Donovans' solution, a number of Surra camels has been treated with drags (singly or combined) on definite lines. No successful treatment has been yet obtained ; but the results of some combin- ations such as Atoxyl, Antimony Tartrate and Sodium Arsenate are promising enough to encourage continued efforts. 3. A special tour was made to enquire into the prevalence of Surra in Bikanir State and reported ; but the investigation will not be complete without a visit in the Monsoon season. 4. July, August and September 1909 were spent in the touring of camel grazing-grounds in the Punjab with the chief object of ascertaining definitely which are Surra zones and which are not. 5. The cold weather has been spent partly in experimental work at Sohawa and partly on tour on various investigations. 6. The usual assistance to Camel Corps has been rendered particularly in dealing with Surra ; and much valuable help has been given by their officers especially in giving me access to their camels. 7. Sanction for extension of the appointment of Veterinary Officer investi- gating Camel Diseases for a further five years, from 13th February 1910 was granted in Despatch No. 9 Revenue, dated 28th January 1910, by the Secretary of State for India. 8. The two Veterinary Assistants, Ata Mohamed and Kahan Singh con- tinue to carry out their duties with praiseworthy industry. Babu Sham Sunder was transferred on 13th June 1909, and Babu Daya Shunkertook his place as Head Clerk; Babu Faiz Ahmed was admitted as Second Clerk on 15th July 1909. 9. On 27th March 1910, I proceeded on 3 months' privilege leave, having prepared this report for the year ended 31st March 1910 before leaving. For the period, 27th to 31st March, the Inspector-General, Civil Veterinary Department, took over charge. DISEASE IN SILLADAR CAMEL CORPS IN 1909-10. 10. The 50th and 51st Silladar Camel Corps are returning to their normal state after the abnormal year of 1908-09. In both Corps, diagnosis of Surra has been well carried out as a routine this year and the disease is well in hand. Owing to the small number of camels locally bred, many are brought up from the big fairs (Amritsar, Batesar) which are held soon after the Surra season when Surra camels are often in good condition ; the purchase of these camels into these two Corps is a constant source of danger ; 1 see many strings
2 of them coming through Sohawa in December ; but as most of the Surra ani- mals amongst them are new cases, a consecutive daily examination of blood for 8 or 10 days (practicable I think in the case of these two Corps) should nearly always prevent the purchase of Surra into the Corps from this source, provided that the camels purchased are found on manual examination of the hump to be in good condition. 11. The 52nd (Jhelum) Corps in which Surra was so thoroughly searched for last year is now reaping the benefit. Instead of a mortality of 20 and 30 per cent., the figure has dropped to 11 per cent., and the Corps has in one year gone from the last place to the first. Unfortunately even now, enough Salt-Range grazing in the rains has only been granted for one-third of the camels. Routine examination of blood has been carried out throughout the year. 12. The 53rd (Sargodha) Corps.3 For the Camel Corps the following are suitable situations which are recommended for the monsoon season as non-Surra-zones:4 Surra camels are sent from Rajputana to Batesar fair (in November) and thus Surra acquired in Native States is brought on a large scale into the Punjab. Some method of marking camels suffering from Surra so that they can be recognised is required to prevent purchase into the Punjab either by private camelmen or (through them) into Camel Corps ; it would also be a means of bringing to the notice of the camelmen of the North and Central Punjab (who do not by any means show the knowledge of the disease that the owners in the South-east do) that branded camels and healthy ones should not be grazed together in the fly-season. I think it would also aid the Military authorities when preparing camel-transport for emergencies. I believe that Punjab camelmen would be in favour of some such system for they have been suffering heavy losses. The system of branding which would be most suitable would be to mark every camel found with Surra with the last two figures of the year in which it is found (or if found before 1st June, with the last two figures of the previous year). This would condemn the camel for 3 years only from the year of the brand and so would not prevent the sale of recovered cases. The same system could be applied to Surra camels cast from the Grantee Corps ; although the ordinary casting brand probably acts as a deterrent to purchasers ; and the system might be extended to all privately-owned Surra camels that could be found. The difficulty to be overcome is how to diagnose a large number of cases with a small staff. Much could be done, however, by a small staff working at the fairs themselvs but due notice would have to be given in Native States and districts drained by the fairs. Any Veterinary Surgeon or Commandant of a Camel Corps might be empowered to thus brand all Surra camels (not belonging to Silladar Corps) that he may come across at any time. SURRA-ZONES AND NON-SURRA-ZONES. 23. The rainy season was spent in touring grazing grounds, in search of Tabanus. In estimating its numbers in a given locality, the irregularity in its daily occurrence was allowed for. In the monsoon season, Tabanus seeks its victims for preference between 5 and 9 A.M.. and between 4 and 6 P.M. Unfortunately camels do not graze well in the extreme heat of the day. Camels seem to attract them rather better than horses. Tabanus sometimes appears after showers in April, but is seldom found in numbers for more than a few days then ; and at that season it bites chiefly in the hotter part of the day. The best time of all to search for Tabanus is when the sun comes out after some hours' rain. In some places which are not Surra-zones in the ordinary meaning of the term, one does not find a total absence of Tabanus ; for they can sometimes be found in very scanty numbers by remaining for an hour or so with a horse or a camel near standing water. On these occasions they are generally of the small species. It is possible for an occasional case to become infected, for example when watering, in a non-surra-zone, but it must be exceptional. 24. PESHAWAR DISTRICT.5 forests, which are largely situated along the Deg, are breeding grounds of Tabanus. The Baluch camelmen in the Surra season have nowhere to go to graze their cames save by trespass ; irrigation has cat up the old jungles and the zamindars will not at this season allow camels on their land. Tabanus is now found along the banks of the branch canals in the rainy season. There is a deterioration from a camel grazing point of view, even in the variety of the trees left standing about the fields ; much of the Jhand which yields a useful wood is cut down by the zamindars, who have left a great excess of Kareel and Jal. In the rains camels cannot graze on Kareel and Jal alone and remain in health without a change of diet every few days at least ; and in this part of the country the necessary change was afforded by Lana and Lani (saltworts.) To get this the camels approach the Deg Nullah, and come into the Surra-zones. In the Surra season, the camelmen trespass a good deal on zamindars' land and are subject to being driven about, picking up what they can on the way. There is also a tendency to remain near the good grazing on the Deg too long at the beginning of the Surra season and to return too soon before the end of it. Needless to say camel-breeding here is on the decline owing to irrigation. The Baluches are anxious to keep more dachis, but there would be nowhere for them to graze in the hot weather. I toured in July in this country; it was known that the grazing-grounds in the neighbourhood of Kala Shah Kaku and Muridki have to be avoided owing to biting flies and Surra in the rainy season. My tour was made to investigate the conditio as further west. Details:6 Rakh Marh was said to be free from flies by the camelmen but I crossed the rakh from one side to the other and found many Tabanus all the way. I have given these details so that it may be understood how local camel- men are placed ; but I have been unable to offer many suggestions for I have not yet come across sufficient grazing in a Surra-free-zone in the neighbourhood to exchange for Rakh Mandevi if the latter is closed. The Zamindars of the dry areas I have mentioned might be induced to allow camel-grazing at a proper fee. Camels trample down the grass and occasionally graze on it when it is very succulent ; but the camel-owners here seem to be unprovided for. Surra in horses is well-known in the neighbourhood of Rakh Marh and outbreaks were reported to have occurred in former years in Faizpur, Mandian- wala and Ghazipur, amongst other places. It is proposed to survey certain localities between "Wan-Radharam and Lahore next Surra season for Tabanus with a view to relieving the situation. Meanwhile, it seems as though the necessity for Lana is not so great as it was supposed to be ; for the local troop of the Camel Corps was grazed on the area recommended west of Shakupura, and found that they got on well enough when a ration of salt was given, and when the grazing was not too monotonous in quality. 26. THE SALT RANGE.7 This large grazing area, free from Tabanus, is to be cut up by irrigation after a few years ; there seems to be no objection therefore to over-stocking it with camels meanwhile every Surra season by sending more camels of the Montgomery and Grantee Corps to graze here in the rest period. The approximate extent of the area is the centre and eastern part of the district south of the railway wherever it is neither irrigated nor subject to annual flooding from Ravi or Sutlej. 30. MONTGOMERY DISTRICT.8 On the road below Tret from mile 24 to 21, Tabanus is fairly numerous from the beginning of the monsoon rains to the middle of September. This also applies to the jungle on each side of this part of the road. From mile 21 to Rawalpindi the Tabanus is so scanty that this part of the road cannot be considered a Surra-zone. Pelow Sunnybank therefore Tabanus is only numerous below Tret from mile 24 to mile 21 ; the only tonga Chauki in this zone is at mile 22 and the place where the stables happen to be situated is one of the safest situations in the Tabanns-area, and where it is not very easy to find the fly. The common Tabanus in the rains in the area is the same species as the common one on the Deg in Lahore district. They are not apparently so numerous as in similar (hill-road) Surra-zones, e.g., Mohand pass, but quite numerous enough to account for a considerable number of new cases in camels grazing in this jungle or marching through in the company of a fair proportion of camels with undiag- nosed Surra. 34. FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE AND CAMEL-POX.9 The disease is a peritonitis in the course of which there is productive inflammation in the part of the mesentery which envelopes the spirals of the colon ; strangulation of the colon follows, inflammation and gangrene of the intestine anterior to the strangulation, and the camel usually dies from rupture of the colon. 37. Occurrence of the disease.10 cases a soft suppressed cough was present and on one day a discharge of blood from one or both nostrils was seen ; but unfortunately none of these cases were post mortemed by me. 39. Essential note on anatomy of large intestine in the camel.11 of camels dead of the disease, and disinfection of clinical thermometers used on the sick. Early in the disease, Liq. Acid Carbolic : (B. P.) 2 drachms twice a day may be of use ; the recovered camel received this as well as the others. 43. Remarks.12 is kept, and may run into many years. Loss of condition predisposes to other diseases. I have found camels in which no embryos could be discovered in the blood, but which on post mortem showed dead degenerating adults in the spermatic arteries and no living ones could be found anywhere ; these were apparently cases of natural recovery. On the other hand, several severe cases have been under observation for long periods (one for 2½ years) but still show embryos in their blood, and remain in miserable condition. 46. It has been found that in the Punjab, Filaria evansi is practically (and I believe wholly) confined to camels which have spent part of their lives in those parts of India lying west of the Indus. Large numbers were infected in the Mohmand Expedition. I have examined hundreds of camels in investi- gating this point, and have found (i) a large proportion of camels from the Trans-Indus territory harbouring the worm, (ii) no case of filariasis in a camel which has been bred and reared East of the Indus at a distance sufficient to ensure its never having been across the river, and (iii) in spite of the high proportion of filariasis in camels returning from the Mohmand Expedition in June 1908, there has been no case found to date (two years) of the infection having spread to remount camels from the east of the Indus. I conclude that the unknown agent which spreads the infection is confined to places in Trans- Indus territory. For the same reasons, it is unlikely that the transfer of the embryos from one camel to another is mechanical or it would have been spread from the expedition camels by the Punjab Tabanidæ. The most likely explanation of the spread of filariasis is that the embryo is removed from the circulation by some blood-sucking intermediary host in which it undergoes some developmental process and then regains a camel either by the proboscis of its intermediary host as in human filariasis or by its excretion into the water-supply. Some preliminary observations seem to exclude the Hippobosca camelina from suspicion although that fly appears to be confined to parts of the Trans- Indus. 47. A number of drugs have been tried in the treatment of seriously affected cases ; these include salts of Antimony, Mercury and Strychnine, and also Atoxyl, Soamin and Chloroform, but none have given a good result ; castration, to remove some of the adult filariæ has been tried but the operation is very unsatisfactory when practised on camels in poor condition, and in most cases, adults are also found in other situations besides the artery of the testicle and so remain unaffected by the operation. 48. Having been asked to advise preventive measures against filariasis in the absence of exact knowledge of the agent of infection, I suggested :13 Therefore we have since kept a look out for the parasite under the eyelids of camels (which is probably their normal habitat) and have found three more cases as follows :14 (2). Dislocation of eyeball from inflammation in Orbital Cavity. 53. (a) Septic infection from the lathi-wound.15 REVIEW BY INSPECTOR-GENERAL, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT. The proposals for the erection of a small hospital and laboratory for the study of camel diseases at Sohawa in the Punjab is still under consideration and in consequence work has been much hampered. A great deal of valuable information of a practical nature has, however, been gathered by Mr. Leese, whose energy and application to his duties have been remarkable. 2. The important subject of Surra has been further studied (1) with a view to devising methods of prophylaxis, and (2) to find an effective treatment. In regard to (1), the advice given by Mr. Leese is of a practical nature, founded on the accepted fact that the disease is carried from sick to healthy by the bites of flies. The broad principles involved are the weeding out of Surra infected camels and the avoidance of Surra-zones. The importance of providing Surra-free grazing for Silladar Camel Corps is a most important one and the remarks made by Mr. Leese on this subject deserve very serious consideration, if Surra is to be diminished in the Corps. The summary of the condition of the various cadres in regard to their infection with Surra is valuable as an indication of the efficiency of the measures recommended to prevent mortality. It shows that weeding out of Surra cases does very greatly reduce the prevalence of the disease in future years. It is a pity therefore that more attention is not in some cases given to the routine examin- ation of camels for this purpose. 3. It has been suggested that working isolation of camels might be practicable in the Punjab, but this is shown to be unworkable owing to lack of space and danger to healthy animals. The mapping out of the Surra and Surra-free zones involves great exposure in very unhealthy country owing to the fact that it must be carried out during and after the rainy season and in country covered with jungle and reeking with malaria. The good progress which has been made in the work, therefore, is very creditable indeed. 4. In regard to the treatment of Surra, considering that no accommoda- tion has been provided for the experimental animals, the progress made is extraordinarily good. Mr. Leese has submitted two separate reports on the subject, giving details of the experiments made with (1) Tartar emetic alone, (2) Tartar emetic and Atoxyl alternately, (3) Tartar emetic alone followed by a short course of mercuric bichloride alone, (4) Orpiment, (5) Antimony sulphide by the mouth, (6) Soamin, (7) White arsenic, (8) Arsenic in powder, (9) Arsenic in solution in various forms as (a) Solution of sodium arsenate, (b) Liquor arsenicalis, (c) Donovan's solution, (d) Solution of arsenious iodide, (e) Solution of sodium arsenite. (10) Methylene blue and mercuric bichloride, (11) Soamin and sodium arsenate, (12) Soamin and antimony tartarate, (13) Atoxyl, Soamin and sodium arsenate, (14) Atoxyl, antimony and sodium arsenate. Contrary to what has been found to be the case in the horse, no successful treatment has been yet obtained but the results of some combin- ations are somewhat encouraging. It is interesting as well as discouraging to note that camel surra offers a separate problem for solution. The experi- ments are being continued. 5. Various contagious and other diseases of the camel have also been studied as opportunity occurred, but lack of accommodation proved a serious drawback. It is interesting to find that little evidence now remains to show that foot and mouth disease occurs in the camel. Jhooling has been found to be contagious. A form of specific peritonitis was met with in the Montgomery district. A separate report is being prepared regarding filariasis. Various other diseases have been studied and noted on. 6. Three parasites have been added to the check list, i.e., Thelazia leesei, a new parasite causing ophthalmia, Tænia centripunctata, common also in the sheep and Onchocerca fasciata, found coiled up in nodules in the subcutaneous tissue. D. Hepaticum was found in 2 per cent. of the camels examined and the Jarvæ of Linguatula tænioides once in the mesenteric glands. 7. It is hoped that sanction may soon be accorded for the erection of the necessary buildings at Sohawa so that disease may be more thoroughly studied.
16 8. Mr. Leese has continued to devote himself whole-heartedly to his work in very trying and unhealthy conditions, and I consider that he deserves great credit for the progress which he has made during the year. H. T. PEASE, COLONEL, Inspector- General, Civil Veterinary Department. SIMLA : The 19th May 1910. SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA
ANNUAL REPORT OF Veterinary Officer Investigating Camel Diseases For the year ending 31st March 1911 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1911
ANNUAL REPORT OF Veterinary Officer Investigating Camel Diseases For the year ending 31st March 1911 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CALCUTTA SUPERINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 1911
ANNUAL REPORT OF VETERINARY OFFICER INVESTIGATING CAMEL DISEASES. FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31ST MARCH 1911. THE WORK OF THE OFFICE DURING THE YEAR. From 1st April to 29th June 1910 the Inspector-Genera], Civil Veterinary Department, was in charge of the office ; I returned from privilege leave on the latter date and resumed charge for the remaining nine months. 2. The whole of this time has been spent in camp ; the building at Sohawa did not begin until the cold weather of 1910-1911 ; and owing to the effect of heavy rain in January and March much of the building collapsed and is being rebuilt ; but we cannot now expect to find it habitable until June 1911. 3. On my return from leave I spent the monsoon season from 8th July to 4th October on tour chiefly in the districts of Lahore, Lyallpur, Shahpur, Mozuffargarh and Dera Ghazi Khan and in Bikanir State, with a break of 6 days in Simla to attend the first meeting of the Camel Grazing Committee. In the cold weather I was engaged in Sohawa most of the time, but also toured in January in the Sind Sagar Doab to obtain further information for the Camel Grazing Committee whose third meeting (in Lahore) I attended on 20th February. 4. The want of accommodation has again greatly hampered the work. 5. Veterinary Assistants Ata Mohamed and Kahan Singh have worked very well indeed under great difficulties. 6. THE CAMEL CORPS.2 out process involves more young camels than old ones ; of the Surra animals received in Sohawa last year, 77 per cent. were under 9 years old. MONSOON TOURS. 8. LAHORE AND LYALLPUR.3 area between the Salt Range and the Kundian-Khushab Railway where the water from the Salt Range collects in the rains ; and here they are abundant in the monsoon. This new fact therefore does not materially alter our present ideas on the Punjab Surra zones. 13. Another outbreak occurred in 1910, but this was in camels living in Bikanir city and Gajner where one finds Stomoxys and Mosquitoes, as well as Lyperosia. Veterinary Assistant Ata Mohamed was sent to deal with this outbreak in November, assistance having been requested, A definite plan for dealing with the disease has been suggested to the Bikanir authorities, parti- cularly directed to diagnosis and segregation, for which latter there is plenty of room in Bikanir. 14. It will be noted that this outbreak offers further support to the con- clusion that Surra is chiefly spread by the biting flies, acting as mechanical transmitters and that this severe outbreak occurred in the absence of Tabanus, and therefore without the possibility of the trypanosome having gone through any part of its life-cycle in that fly. At Mohand it was noticed that the flies which carry infection most easily, i.e., Tabanus, were less numerous than Haematapota and much less numerous than Stomoxys, which can carry the trypanosome but with less ease ; in other words, in comparing the practical importance of Tabanus and Stomoxys as Surra transmitters the much larger numbers of Stomoxys probably largely compensated for the comparative difficulty with which it transmits the disease. Perhaps the same factor enables the Lyperosia to spread Surra in the desert portions of Bikanir where it simply swarms. 15. SHAHPUR DISTRICT.4 even the camelman will recognise that his animal is sick in this stage, as it does not graze well. But if the camel survives the first year the fever paroxysms becomes less severe and he often grazes fairly well in the height of one, although he has lost much in condition. These are the cases which camelmen not unnaturally consider as merely suffering from the debility caused by last year's sickness which they think has passed. I endeavoured to impress the fact that these survivors with a history of sickness in the previous year are still suffering from a low fever and are still a source of danger to other camels with which they may be grazed in the Surra season. 18. During this tour, Hippobosca Camelina was met with from Lalgarh to Rojhan. This fly is not found in the Punjab east of the Indus, nor in Bikanir State. Like all Hippoboscae it sticks to its host with great per- sistence and has therefore no probable importance in the transmission of Surra among camels. EXPERIMENTS ON TREATMENT OF SURRA IN CAMELS. 19. At the time of my last report the following facts had been arrived at regarding drug-treatment by Arsenical and Antimony compounds :5 Inoculation of susceptible animals with the blood of apparent cures does not in the case of camels yield much satisfactory evidence as regards recovery of the camel from his disease but will be desirable later on so as to ascer- tain if " cured " camels have quite ceased to carry the parasite in any form. 23. Since therefore the results of the year's experiments cannot yet be considered as conclusive it is unnecessary to go into much detail in this report, but the situation may be summarised as follows :6 and whose blood had been inoculated into susceptible animals on 3 occasions during this time with negative results, was inoculated intravenously with 20 c. c. of fresh blood of a pony suffering from Surra, which blood contained a few trypanosomes (1 in 20 fields). Trypanosomes appeared in the camel in 11½ days. 31. Serum experiments with a recovering camel 7 September 1910, and this proved on examination to be Schistosomum Indicum, a parasite also of the horse, donkey and probably sheep. (Iden- tification confirmed by Dr. Leiper of London School of Tropical Medicine.) Subsequently the parasite was found in 5 camels out of 18 examined. The common situation is the mesenteric veins of the large intestine and often also of the small intestine ; in one case in which a pair of the parasites was found in almost every collateral branch these veins showed the marked appearance of passive congestion associated with the Bilharziosis of other animals. Other situations are the portal vein, and veins of omasum. None of the hosts had enteritis. Judging from the bodily condition of the hosts, the parasite is only of practical importance when the infection is severe ; the passive congestion of the portal system is then perhaps one of the factors which retard the return to condition of some cases of natural recovery from Surra. It was noted that the parasites had survived long courses of treatment of their hosts with Arsenic and Antimony compounds and with 01 Tereb. LINGUATULA LARVAE AND THEIR ASSOCIATION WITH PERITONITIS IN THE CAMEL. 36. This year it has been found that these larvae are extremely common in camels, and show a predilection for the group of glands draining the coecum and colon. The affected glands are generally inflamed in patches and show little cavities where the parasites have been encysted. More rarely they may also be found in the mesenteric glands of the small intestine. Last year I described a productive peritonitis occurring in camels in Montgomery affecting chiefly the colic portion of the mesentery ; suspecting Linguatula larvæ I again visited the district in September 1910, but being unable to get a case of the disease was only able to show that the parasite is found in the district, being present in one camel out of three examined. In October, however, a case of Acute peritonitis occurred at Sohawa which seemed to throw some light on the matter. The camel was an old one in good condition but affected with Surra, and destined for experimental treatment ; he arrived on 4th October and was kept for observations of blood and temperature until 17th when the first symptoms of peritonitis were noticed. Up to this date, he had been grazed and fed along with 20 others under ideal conditions, the weather was good and no reason for the onset of the disease could be discovered. He died in 3½ days and on postmortem peritonitis was the only lesion ; it was acute and most pronounced in the mesenteries of colon rectum and small intestine and in the peritoneal covering of the bowel. The glands of the coecum and colon were intensely inflamed, contained large numbers of Linguatula taenioides larvae and were full of cavities which had been occupied by the parasites, many of these cavities opening on the outer surface of the glands. There was no enteritis nor was any other channel for infection found. No free larvae were found in the peritoneal cavity. The functional destruction of the glands due to the large number of larvae appears to have allowed the access of bacteria from the intestine to the peritoneum. The form of peritonitis met with in Montgomery will probably be found to be due to the same cause ; and it is rather suggestive that haemorrhage from the nose was noted as an occasional symptom last year. PARASITIC BRONCHITIS. 37. This disease, which from all accounts is not uncommon in camels in Egypt, seems to be rare in Northern India. Search for the causal parasite (Strongylus filaria) has been made part of the routine in all postmortem examinations now numbering about 136 and in only one case has the parasite been found present. Yet outbreaks of the disease in sheep are frequently met with. In this camel there was a fairly frequent cough beginning on 3rd September and lasting about 2 weeks when it became less frequent and ceased altogether in another week. The animal had Surra as well and was destroyed 16 days after the cough had gone. On postmortem, small patches of at
8 alectasis were still present in the lungs and a solitary S. filaria was found in a bronchial tube, probably the survivor out of many. During the period of cough there was no nasal discharge and no fever (the camel's evening temperature did not exceed 101.2°F). Probably the very difference in size of the lungs of a sheep and a camel lessens the severity of the disease in the latter animal, in which also the infection is uncomplicated by the presence of S. rufescens. Prom the nature of the disease one would except it to be chiefly asso- ciated with Surra in the camel and it is very likely the cause of the disease known as Mand found in Karnal district. The Punjab camel is chiefly a bush-feeder but this camel had been feed- ing from the ground (grass and thandla), being too weak to be sent to graze in the jungle. No doubt some difference in the system of camel-grazing accounts for the greater frequency of the disease in Egypt and for its greater severity. 38. JHOOLING.9 The affected camel becomes very weak from low fever and constant pain and deaths from this form of Kapali are often reported. The native treatment is firing and is useless. In two cases blindness of the eye on the affected side was seen, from retro-bulbar paralysis due to the original injury. 44. Treatment.10 The febrile paroxysms of camel Surra, as in equine cases are often not accompanied by marked loss of appetite when kept on rations ; but on the grazing ground, the loss of appetite is much more manifest. 49. In India, examination of the blood for trypanosomes is a necessary- part of the examination of camels in fever. Pneumonia, pleurisy, peritonitis and pericarditis are all diagnosable by the symptoms associated with these diseases in other animals. The various characteristic changes in the respirations are very faithfully shown in the camel. Percussion is as useful as in the horse provided the camel may be got on to a verandah or into some building for the purpose. Auscultation is also of use when it can be carried out away from the noise associated with camel-lines. In pneumonia and pleuro-pneumonia the cough is soft and suppressed and almost like a sigh and it frequently passes unnoticed by the camelmen ; if it is desired to find out whether the animal coughs, the best way is to see him rise from a sitting position, as the cough frequently occurs on rising. A common sequel to lobar pneumonia in the camel is abscess in the lung ; this is the most common cause of chronic cough in Punjab camels. The cough is stronger than that of pneumonia and often accompanied by a rattling sound ; the abscess is often very large and then percussion, etc., is useful in confirming one's suspicions. The camel may live several months with gradual loss of condition, though often there is little or no fever or loss of appetite until the disease is advanced. 50. Wounds and ulcers inside the lips are common in Punjab camels, and are liable to be mistaken for lesions of specific diseases ; a desert bred camel imported into country like the Salt Range often suffers at first from sore mouth from the phulai grazing and sore feet from the stony ground, and the result seems to have been confounded with foot-and-mouth disease. Bots may be coughed out in the course of febrile diseases such as pneumo- nia, but they are harmless, and not necessarily the cause of the cough. When bots are got rid of in healthy camels it is by a sudden strong sneeze. In constipation, the shape of the dung-pellets becomes cylindrical with twisted- looking ends. 51. Very serious symptoms in febrile cases, are inability to rise, total refusal of gram (in camels used to gram), sunken eyes, excessive dribbling of saliva, cold external temperature, and retaining food in the mouth without chewing it ; a camel about to die is often found covered by swarms of flies, and the bones of the neck may bulge out at one side owing to the head being supported entirely by the ligamentum nuchae. 52. Pain.11 the breast-pad is however sometimes seen in acute Surra and in pneumonia ; whilst in chronic Surra the oedema is more often around the base of the breastpad and is very slight, the part " pitting " on pressure although there may be no marked swelling. Oedema of the hind feet is sometimes seen in hospital cases which have had no exercise. Oedema under the belly is also sometimes seen in dachis in advanced pregnancy. Oedema of the temporal fossa occurs in a few cases of Surra, but if only affecting one side it draws attention to disease in frontal sinus or to other forms of " Kapaulee." 54. General notes on treatment of camels in sickness.12 Fowl Spirochaetosis.13 I have every reason to believe that in the near future Mr. Leese will be able, to report that his efforts have been crowned with success. One thing is certain and that is, he has obtained very gratifying results. 5. Mr. Leese has been most energetic and unremitting in his labours to advance our knowledge of the diseases of the camel. Considering his work has been carried out very often in trying circumstances the success achieved is highly commendable. I consider we are greatly indebted to him not only for the zealous manner in which he has carried on his work but also for the pro- gress made. G. H. EVANS, LT.-COLONEL, Offg. Inspector-General, Civil Veterinary Department. SIMLA : The 20th June 1911. S. G. P. I.ANNUAL REPORT OF VETERINARY OFFICER INVESTIGATING CAMEL DISEASES For the year ending 31st March 1912. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] L a h o r e : PRINTED AT THE PUNJAB GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1912.
ANNUAL REPORT OF VETERINARY OFFICER INVESTIGATING CAMEL DISEASES For the year ending 31st March 1912. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] L a h o r e : PRINTED AT THE PUNJAB GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1912.
No. 2922. FROM W. S. HAMILTON, ESQUIRE, I.C.S., Director of Agriculture and Industries, Punjab, To THE REVENUE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, PUNJAB. Dated Lahore, the 21th July 1912, SIR, I have the honour to forward the Annual Report of the Officer Investi- gating Camel Diseases. During the year under report Mr. Leese was directly under the Inspector-General of Civil Veterinary Department and neither the Chief Superintendent of the Civil Veterinary Department of this province nor I had any connection with it. Printed instructions on " the curative treatment of surra in camels " are available on application to the Chief Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Lahore, I have, &c, W. S. HAMILTON, Director of Agriculture and Industries, Punjab.
ANNUAL REPORT OF VETERINARY OFFICER INVESTIGATING CAMEL DISEASES FOR THE YEAR ENDING 31st MARCH 1912. The work of the office during the year.2 The figures for all the corps together for the last four years are given below :3 It has been found that Atoxyl and Soamin act in an exactly similar manner in identical doses as regards curative properties ; and as Soamin is less than half the price of Atoxyl, the former drug is the one which it is recom- mended to use. Sodium Arsenate given by the mouth sometimes causes severe diarrhoea, but it has been found that in such cases Arsenious Acid given intravenously can take its place in the longer treatments, acting as well as regards curative properties, and without causing diarrhoea. The best treatments cost Us. 4 or Rs. 4-8-0 in drugs per camel treated. I do not think any of the treatments will often prove applicable to the camel of the private owner, but they are applicable wherever camelmen are more or less controlled by authority and when a Veterinary Assistant's services are to be had ; e.g., Camel Corps and all Government camels. I am convinced from actual experience that the average camel-owner could rarely be made to understand the necessity of bringing his camel at definite times for the doses, and any irregularity in dosing means failure. Some day, perhaps, some method may be arrived at which will cure Camel-Surra by a single injection ; until then the general treatment of surra in camels outside Government employ in the districts is not likely to be on a very large scale. 11. Recommendations for the treatment of surra in Camels4 (6) Alcohol to keep the needles in. (7) Magnesium Sulphate, for cases of Soamin poisoning. (8) Chlorodyne, for checking diarrhoea. (9) Distilled water (plentiful supply). 12. Choice of treatment.5 (e) A surra camel which was a had " shiverer " before treatment was cured of surra and the shivering was vastly improved ; I think therefore that it is quite worth while to treat any surra camels which show this symptom. Utiles for actual closing applicable to all the methods of treatment.6 The sodium arsenate is given by the mouth dissolved in ½ gallon of ordinary water and followed immediately by another ½ gallon of water. This ensures plenty of dilution in the stomachs, and care to prevent spilling is only necessary when giving the first ½ gallon. In drenching the camel, there is no danger of choking, provided the man who holds it does so by the lips so as to leave the nostrils free ; unless warned the camelman will seize the nostrils and upper lip in his grip, effectually closing the former. The Veterinary attendant should inspect the camels at least twice daily, that is, morning and evening, and signs of intolerance or constipation should be carefully looked for at each inspection. 14. " 264 Treatment."7 This was done as follows :8 They are: 9 17. After the treatment for surra.10 20. Mange.11 camped, and on sand if possible. If once the disease has started, however slight- ly in a number of camels which are working together, the best means of arrest- ing its spread is to camp the mangey ones at least fifteen or twenty yards away from the healthy and to change the sitting place of all the camels every two days. In December and January this has been found to be the only means by which, once introduced, the spread of the disease can be stopped. To detect the first signs of mange, camelmen keep a sharp look out on the flanks, groin, axilla and rump of their camels throughout the cold weather, and particularly after any rain has fallen. 22. Treatment.12 A second dressing of oil may be made not sooner than 10 days after the first one, and a third one a similar interval after the second, the application of mud being made subsequent to each oiling. If any patch gives trouble between the dressings, pure phenyle or a little oil may be applied to it. The treatment of mange in the spring may be successful with two appli- cations only, but greater care is necessary to prevent blistering by the more ardent sun. Camelmen often give the oil internally as well, but I cannot recommend the practice. The following emulsion cleans the skin quickly after the cure has been obtained :13 23. Babies.14 Camel-surra is known by the following expressions in Sind in various localities :15 My route was as follows:16 In Sind cases of equine surra are sometimes found still alive at the end of January; this shows how long the fly-season must be; probably a few " dhang " remain in November. Camelmen readily agree, when it is pointed out to them, that 2 and 2½ months are not enough to wait before bringing the camels back to the river- grazing. Various reasons for this early return are given, such as, the failure of water-supply for the camels in the desert, or the withering of the grazing there, or business awaiting transactions at home or the inconvenience of re- maining out in the desert. I am inclined to think the last three reasons are the real ones. In Sep- tember the camelman finds the desert-grazing is going off and he is tempted to return to the river before he need, knowing that the grazing there is good; in ordinary years he should remain away until as late in October as possible, but he generally comes back to the river before that time. It is better to leave the camels on comparatively poor grazing for a few weeks in September and October than to bring them into good grazing and expose them to the hazardous risk of surra. No doubt, as regards his male camels, he is also tempted to begin work as early as possible, and the work largely lies in the riverain country. In short he fails to avoid the disease in the late part of the Surra season, because his other interests demand a return to the dangerous country. The mangrove-grazing camels remain away longer than the desert- grazing ones ; probably because their grazing does not dry up ; the drinking- water difficulty seems to be much greater than in the case of desert-going camels, for it has often to be brought to the camels by boats. As a consequence of their longer sojourn away from the tamarisk and babur jungles of the Delta, there is much less surra among Khara camels than among the Sindhis, and the Khara camelmen take comparatively little interest in the subject of surra. There is a large number of zamindars in Sind who own one or two riding-camels only and have but little knowledge concerning their animals. Their camels often remain in the riverain tracts throughout the Surra-season, and are, in fact, often used there in the plough or for drawing water. There is a great deal of surra among them, but the risk seems to be less than in the case of herds, probably because these zamindars' camels are less liable to be brought into contact with " reservoirs of infection ", that is, other camels suffering from surra. 37. Prophylaxis in Sind.17 common, from July to October even if the year is a poor one as regards rainfall; if there has been no rain, keep them away as long as possible during that season. If in September and October the desert-grazing is poor, it is better that the camels should stay on it than to bring them back to the river; they will soon recover any loss of condition. (2) Keep male camels away in the desert for a corresponding period, whenever possible. If they must return to work sooner, avoid the worst haunts of " dhang " until the flies have died out, working at night, and grazing in the Kir and Khabar jungles in the day, not in the lei and babur. Owners of one or two camels only should not let any other camels come near them from July to October. (3) Khara breeding-herds should be able to live in the Khara at least four months, July to October inclusive ; more if possible. (4) All camelmen should watch for sickness much more carefully than they do. Before June, all last year's surra camels still surviving should be known and segregated in a separate herd ; from July to October, every grazier should note the slightest tendency of any camel to go "off his grazing" and separate him from the rest of the camels until it can be decided whether he has got surra or not. The most characteristic sign of surra in its early stages is irregular appetite on the grazing-ground. (5) Surra is by far the most common cause of abortion in dachis ; the act of abortion often acts beneficially to the dachi and she may begin to recover her condition; nevertheless she should be kept in the surra herd away from the healthy for two more seasons because she suffers from low fever whilst retaining good condi- tion, since she is not subjected to work, lactation or pregnancy. (6) Any camel with surra must be kept in the surra segregation herd for three seasons, including that of the first onset of sickness. The segregation season should be July to November, or better still, March to November. Co-operation between camel-owners would make the segregation of surra camels a very easy matter. Many dachis and bachas recover after three years of sickness, and a fair proportion of male camels also, provided they are not worked during the time. (7) Treatment of Camel-Surra by the methods given in this report might occasionally be possible in Sind, particularly in riding camels, but as a rule the camel-man would not, I am sure, bring his camel on the right days. Otherwise, medioine should not be dispensed for Camel-Surra, as it gives the owner a false idea of security if his camel begins to get his strength back by the rest and good food which accompany it, and during the long process of spontaneous recovery the camel may appear " cured" and will no longer be regarded as a danger to others. (8) In Sind the police-camels and horses sustain rather heavy losses from surra. I think it would be a good plan always to keep the horses and camels as far apart as possible from July to November inclusive, as the disease is so common in camels. The camel-sowars should be alert to see and report any sign of sickness, because it is often difficult to note the early signs of surra if the camel is ration-fed. 38. Other camel diseases in Sind.18 used in Aden might perhaps be suitable for riding-camels in Sind, where wounds are subject to " fly-blow " all the year round. Camel-pox was seen at Naushahro. In Naushahro, Kandiaro and Hala Talukas an amaurosis is met with in camels; investigation has shown that this is probably due to the local practice of feeding the pods of babul (Acacia Arabica) as a ration to camels, and these pods are here subject to a fungoid disease called Rati, which causes a red growth in the pod and is known to the Imperial Mycologist. The amau- rosis thus seems to be due to cryptogamic poisoning, and the camels recover after a time. 39. Baluchistan.19 41. Dispensary work at Sohawa.ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CAMEL SPECIALIST For the year 1912-13 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] LAHORE : LAHORE PRINTED AT THE PUNJAB GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1913.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CAMEL SPECIALIST For the year 1912-13 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] LAHORE : LAHORE PRINTED AT THE PUNJAB GOVERNMENT PRESS. 1913.
No. 574 (Rev. & Agri. Genl.) FROM G. WORSLEY, ESQUIRE, I.C.S., Under-Secretary to Government, Punjab, Revenue Deparfonent To THE DIRECTOR OF AGRICULTURE AND INDUSTRIES, PUNJAB. Dated Lahore, 27th August 1913. Revenue and Agriculture. General. SIR, I AM directed to acknowledge the receipt of the Report of the Camel Specialist for the year 1912-13, received with your letter No. 2530, dated 21st July 1913. I have the honour to be, SIR, Your most obedient Servant, E, ROSS, SUPERINTENDENT-IN CHARGE. for Under-Secretary, Revenue Department, Punjab Government Press. LahoreNo. 2530. FROM W. S. HAMILTON, I.C.S., Director of Agriculture and Industries, Punjab, To THE REVENUE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, PUNJAB. Dated Lahore, the 21st July 1913. SIR, I HAVE the honour to forward the annual report of the Camel Specialist for the year 1912-13. Owing to personal changes little progress has been made. It is a serious loss to Government that Mr. Leese should have resigned Government service and taken his largo experience of camels and their diseases with him; but Mr. Cross with his special bacteriological training is well fitted for continuing the investigation, and will, I am sure, soon make up the time which has been lost. But it is important that he should be provided with adequate accommodation for himself and the camels under treatment and with the necessary instruments and appliances for investigation. Mr. Leese was apparently content to do without either. This matter is receiving attention, and proposals will be submitted for either extending the accommodation at Sohawa or for establishing a new head-quarters. But nothing can be done if the Camel Specialist is to cease to exist early in 1915, which is the limit of the existing sanction to the post. This question will also be referred separately. 2. The cure of surra is still in the experimental stages and Mr. Cross has found it necsssary to modify somewhat the treatment used by Mr. Leese There is however considerable hope of a safe and efficient cure being worked out. But, as Mr. Cross shews, it is more important to prevent surra than to cure it. The most important means of prevention are (1) the provision of adequate grazing grounds free from tabanidæ and (2) the early detection and segregation of surra-sick camels. 3. As to (1) orders have been passed on the report of the Camel Browsing Committee. F.or (2) Mr. Cross suggests 2 4, There will doubtless be opposition by the sarwans to the detection of surra in its early stages and to the subjection of their camels, while appa- rently bright, healthy and fit for work, to the somewhat drastic and risky treatment. Possibly some modification of the rules for the payment of compensation may be necessary. 5. As to paragraph 36 of the report, I understand that the question of a breeding farm has been definitely shelved by paragraph 8 of the report of the Committee on Camel Browsing. This report and the orders passed on it were not sent to me officially and have probably not been seen by Mr. Cross. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient servant, W. S. HAMILTON, Director of Agriculture and Industries, Punjab.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE OFFICE OF CAMEL SPECIALIST FOR THE YEAR 1912-13. MR. LEESE held charge of the office from April 1st, 1912, to May 3rd, 1912, when he proceeded on six months' leave. From May 3rd, 1912, to 11th June, 1912, Major G. K. Walker held charge of the office. On his transfer to the Veterinary College, Lahore, the charge of the office was handed over to Lieutenant-Colonel J. Parmer. Prom the 7th September 1912 Mr. Meadows officiated as Camel Specialist under the control of Lieutenant-Colonel J. Parmer till Mr. Leese's return from leave on the 30th October 1912. On. Mr. Leese's retiring from the Civil Veterinary Department on the 4th Febru- ary 1913, Mr. Cross took over charge. 2. Mr. Meadows travelled 1,007 miles by rail and 28 miles by road, and Mr. Cross travelled 391 miles by rail and 184 miles by road, 3. Work of the office during the year.2 5. Total mortalities of the Silladar Camel Corps3 9. Remarks on mortality.4 15. The other causes of deaths do not call fox any special mention. 16. The mortality of the Grantee Camel Corps cannot be compared with that of the Silladar Camel Corps, as the camels of the Grantee Camel Corps do practically no work during the whole year. 17. I have been informed that it is suggested that the grazing grounds for the 54th Silladar Camel Corps should he changed. I have not had any opportunity of inspecting these rakhs during the surra season. The mortality returns show only 14 deaths from surra. Before changing the grazing grounds for this corps the advantages and disadvantages of such a course should be carefully considered. 18. Surra treatment.5 22. " 668 " method consists of6 29. These results are very good, but none of these oases appear to have been acute. 30. Two hundred and sixty-eight animals belonging to zaniindars were treated during the year. 31. General remarks.7 In the case of camels cast for lameness and old age (if in good condi- tion) there is no objection to their being sold, but cases of debility should cer- tainly not be sold and scattered all over the country, as probably a large number of these camels are suffering from surra. All debilitated cases that have to be cast should be destroyed and not sold. 36. Mr. Montgomery in the Journal of Tropical Veterinary Science (Volume III. No. 3,1908), concludes from investigations carried out by Colonel Pease and himself, that 30 to 50 per cent of all camels in the Punjab were affected with surra. Government have no camel breeding farms to supply re- mounts ; the strength of the corps are kept up by purchases in the open market. Although Commandants when purchasing make blood examination, the fact that the blood may be free from the surra organism on the day of pur- chase by no means proves that the camels are not suffering from surra. In order to supply remounts to various corps I consider the question of establish- ing camel breeding farms should receive the serious consideration of Govern- ment. Owing to the difficulty that private owners have of obtaining grazing for their camels and the increase of irrigation in the Punjab, the difficulty of obtaining healthy remounts for the corps will be very great in future years. The amount of surra prevailing at the present time among the camels of private owners will be investigated next year. 37. Experiments are being carried out by the Commandant of 56th Silladar Camels Corps in connection with the castration of camels. It will be interesting to see whether the gelded camel will be capable of doing the same amount of work as the ungelded, but no definite conclusions can be drawn regarding this point till the animals have been worked for some years. 38. Buildings.ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CAMEL SPECIALIST For the year 1913-14. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore : PRINTED BY THE SUPRITENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB, 1914.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CAMEL SPECIALIST For the year 1913-14. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore : PRINTED BY THE SUPRITENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB, 1914.
No. 3281 S. (Rov. & Agri.-Genl.). From THE HON'BLE MR. J. P. THOMPSON, I.C.S., Revenue Secretary to Government, Punjab, and its Dependencics To THE DIRECTOR OF AGBICULTURE AND INDUSTRIES, PUNJAB. Dated Simla, the 9th September 1914 Revenue and Agriculture. General SIR, I AM directed to acknowledge the receipt of the Annual Report of the Camel Specialist for the year 1913-11, forwarded with your letter No. 1978. dated 28rd June 1911. I have, &c., J. P. THOMPSON, Revenue Secretory to Government, Punjab, 1499 CSNo. 1978. FROM W. S. HAMILTON, I.C.S., Director of Agriculture and Industries, Punjab, To THE REVENUE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, PUNJAB. Dated Lahore, the 23rd June 1914; SIR, I HAVE the honour to forward the annual report of the camel specia- list. It is a record of valuable work. Mr. Cross has made a large number of useful observations during the year and has taken some steps forward in the discovery of a safe cure of surra. 2. A committee consisting of Colonel Pease, principal of the Punjab Veterinary College, Lieutenant-Colonel Newsom, A.V.C., Mr. Stainton, super- intending engineer and myself considered all the circumstances of the camel specialist's work and recommended to governmentANNUAL REPORT OP THE CAMEL SPECIALIST FOR, THE YEAR 1913-14. I held charge of the office of camel specialist throughout the year. There was no change in the subordinate staff. I travelled 7,217 miles by rail and 2,284 miles by road. Owing to the inadequacy of the staff and the want of facilities in the matter of buildings and rooms the work was carried on under great difficulties. A large number of experiments were carried out on surra treatment with :2 Name of the diseases. 50th S. C. C. 51st S.C.C. 52nd S. C. C. 53rd S. C. C. 54th S.C.C 55th S.S.C 56th S.C.C. 57th S.C.C. Total. Debility 4 14 17 7 1 ... 4 9 56 Falls or accidents 24 7 18 11 ... 4 7 ... 71 Pulmonary diseases 18 28 17 9 15 5 7 9 108 Abscess and kapauli 10 4 11 14 3 4 2 6 54 Colic and intestinal diseases ... 12 33 16 19 6 7 13 7 118 Influenza 2 7 1 6 ... ... ... ... 16 Rupture of stomach 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 3 Old age 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Sore throat ... 12 8 3 3 1 ... 3 30 Poisonouss plants 8 ... 6 7 6 2 1 25 Surra 9 20 2 15 18 3 23 5 95 Lymphangitis 2 ... 4 ... ... ... ... ... 6 Snake bite 7 2 8 7 3 1 5 2 35 Kidney disease ... 4 .... 2 2 1 1 ... ... 10 Wind 2 ... 1 ... ... ... .... 1 ... 3 Wounds 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Undiagnosed 6 ... ... 1 2 8 9 26 52 Paialyasis ... ... 3 8 2 9 ... ... 1 ... 23 Destroyed ... ... 2 ... 4 2 ... 3 ... 11 Brain disease .. ... 4 4 2 ... 2 1 3 4 20 Ritten by other camel ... 1 ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 2 Rupture of diaphragm ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Exposure ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 Heart disease ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 2 Liver disease ... ... ... 2 4 1 5 ... ... ... 12 Diarrb3 12. Mortality in the camel corps and local transport calculated from the mortality returns :4 Average strength. Cost. Died. Total. Percentage. Local transport. Dera Ismail Khan 259 18 55 73 28.1 Banna 295 16 83 99 38.5 Kurram Valley 16 ... 11 11 68.7 Grantee camel corps. 59th 1,042 20 143 163 15.6 60th 1,042 23 67 90 8.6 61st 1,028 33 51 84 8.1 62nd 1,059 34 68 102 9.6 14 Percentage of losses by deaths for the year 1913-1345 18. Statement stowing the number of cases of surra diagnosed from 1st April 1913 to the 31st March 1914 in silladar camel corps, grantee camel corps, local transport, and private camels. Corps. Average strength. No. of cases of surra. Percentage. Silladar corps. 50th Campbellpur 1,035 23 2.2 51st Rawalpindi 1,034 33 3.1 52nd Jhelum 1,054 13 1.2 53rd Sargodha ... ... 1,036 28 2.7 54th Lahore 1,047 47 4.4 55th Montgomery 1,068 3 0.2 56th Montgomery 1,055 24 2.2 57th Multan. 1,048 3 0.7 Grantee corps. 59th 1,042 54 5.1 60th 1,042 9 0.8 61st 1,028 4 0.3 62nd 1,059 7 0.6 Local transport. Dera Ismail Khan 259 25 9.6 Bannu ... 295 42 14.2 Kurram Valley Militia 16 11 68.7 Private camels. 2,793 examined ... ... 103 3.6 Total number of surra cases diagnosed amongst government camels dur- ing the year 6 Of all the diseases that the camel is susceptihle to I have no hesitation in saying that the most serious is surra If camels were employed on active service at the present time amongst them would be several suffering from surra, and from these camels the military horses and mules are capable of contract- ing the disease. That horses can contract the disease under natural conditions from the camel is proved by the fact that at Sohawa a few years ago a horse that was kept near surra camels developed the disease. Twenty-five deaths occurred from poisonous plants and 35 from snake bite. At Sohawa snakes are very common, but I have not had a single death from snake bite ; neither have I had a single death from poisonous plants though kaneir is plentiful The results of experiments show that camels will not readily eat kaneir. Sore throat.7 During the time the camels are on unemployed pay it is impossible to take temperatures except when they are periodically inspected by the com- mandants, but when on employed pay there should be no difficulty if half minute thermometers are used and a third veterinary duffadar is employed. 21. Prevention of surra.8 23. Treatment of surra.9 The results obtained are as follows:10 Day, 7th ... 0.5 gm. tartar emetic (1 per cent. solution intravenously;. 8th ... 0.8 gm. arsenous acid intravenously11 2ndly, at Dera Ismail Khan the local transport camels are always kept together, and at Dera Ismail Khan tabanidae abound; surra amongst the camels at Dera Ismail Khan is very common, but if the spread of surra is by direct transmission it is difficult to believe that a single camel could escape. Srdly, we have the the same conditions prevailing at Bannu as at Dera Ismail Khan, and here again we find only a certain percentage of camels infected. 4thly, in certain parts of Bikaner surra is common, though tabanidse are absent. If the spread of the surra is by direct transmission by tabanidae it is difficult to explain why more camels are not infected ; but if a life cycle of the trypanosome takes place in blood-sucking insects and only a small percentage of these become infective, then we have an explanation of why the disease is not spread more rapidly. Investigators on sleeping sickness agree that very seldom, if ever, does transmission take place by direct transmission, that there is a life cycle in the fly and that only 2 5 per 1,000 flies become infective. In connection with the spread of surra it is an extraordinary fact that although so many cases of surra occur amongst camels at Dera Ismail Khan and Bannu no case of surra amongst mules and ponies (though kept only a very short distance away from the camels) have been reported. Although surra is prevalent amongst the grantee camel corps camels, from inquiries that I have made, surra amongst the horses is unknown in the colony. At Sargodha and Mona remount depots there have been no outbreaks of surra, in spite of the fact that there are many cases of surra amongst camels in these districts. The same remark applies to Rawalpindi; surra is common amongst the 51st silladar camel corps and tabanidae are very common about Rawalpindi, especially numerous in Topi park, yet no outbreak of surra has been reported amongst mules or horses. I found cases of surra amongst camels working on Murree road last year, though as far as could be ascertained there was no case of surra amongst the ponies on this road. Although it is known that tabanidae prefer the camel to the pony, it is quite common to find tabanidae biting the mules at Dera Ismail Khan and Bannu and the ponies on the Murree road, and it seems incredible to think that at Dera Ismail Khan and Bannu where camels (amongst which I found surra cases) are so close to the mules that tabanidae do not go from one animal to the other. That trypanosomisis can be conveyed from the camel to the pony I have proved by inoculation ; moreover a few years ago at Sohawa a horse kept near surra camels developed the disease from them. "Why the disease is not spread from the camels to the mules at Dora Ismail Khan and Bannu and why no outbreaks have occurred amongst the horses of the Chenab colony, Shahpur district or the army remount depots, I am unable to ex- plain, but because up to the present no outbreaks of surra have occurred it does not necessarily follow that such will always be the case. To my mind it is most important to determine12 It may be found that ticks and mosquitoes are transmitters of the disease. 25. Result of a one day's ex animation of the camels of the 50th, 51st 52nd nnd 53rd silladar camel corps, with a view to obtaining information as to the actual condition of the corps in relation to surra. 50th Silladar Camel Corps. The camels of this corps were collected for examination at Campbellpur; 1,011 of a total strength of 1,06813 Result of a one day's examination of the grantee camel corps14 The operation of trephining has been explained in detail to commandants and transport veterinary duffadars. As far as is known at present, the cause of the disease is :15 eat it or not. These cases usually occur when the camels are on unemployed pay, so it is difficult to make post-mortems. 31. Tumours of chest pad.16 Tuberculosis.17 Camel VAPPENDIX. REPORT ON THE BITING FLIES IN THE PUNJAB BY MR. PATEL. IN obedience to the order of the imperial pathological entomologist I left for Amritsar reaching it on the 13th ultimo. Colonel Newsom had left instructions with the station master for the work which I received on the 14th. I had to make observations for tabanus, hæmatopota, and other biting flies which are supposed to transit surra. The different insects found at Amritsar are mentioned below :ii (4) Kathwai.iii (8) Campbellpur.ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CAMEL SPECIALIST For the year 1914-15. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB, 1915. Price : Re. 0-2-0 or 2d.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CAMEL SPECIALIST FOR THE YEAR 1914-15.
Revised list of Agents for the sale of Punjab Government Publications, IN THE UNITED KINGDOM. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, London W. C, KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., Limited, 68-74, Carter Lane, E. C, and 25, Museum Street, London, W.C. BERNARD QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, London, W. T. FISHER UNWIN, Limited, No. 1, Adelphi Terrace, London, W. C. P. S. KING & SON, 2 and 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. H. S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, and 9, Pall Mall, London. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, London, S. W. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E. C. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W. C. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 51, Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON, BELL, & Co., Limited, Cam- bridge. OLIVER & BOYD, Tweeddale Court, Edinburgh. E. PONSONBY, Limited, 116, Grafton Street, Dublin. ON THE CONTINENT. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris, France. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Hol- land. IN INDIA. A. CHAND & Co., Imperial Book Depôt Office, Delhi. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-'Am Press, Lahore. MANAGER, Punjab Law Book Depôt, Anarkali Bazar, Lahore. S. MUMTAZ ALI & SON, Rafah-i-'Am Press, Lahore (for Vernacular publi- cations only). RAMA KRISHNA & SONS, Book-sellers and News Agents, Anarkali Street, Lahore. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent and Proprietor, Nazir Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. D. B. TARAPOREVALA SONS & Co., Bom- bay. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAMS, Limited, Madras. T. FISHER UNWIN, Calcutta. V. KALYANARAM IYER & Co., 189, Esplanade Row, Madras. G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. SUPERINTENDENT, AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, RANGOON.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CAMEL SPECIALIST For the year 1914-15. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB, 1915.
No. 2930-S. (Rev. & Agri.-Genl.). FROM THE HON'BLE MR. J. P. THOMPSON, I.C.S., Revenue Secretary to Government, Punjab and its Dependencies, To THE DIRECTOR OF AGRICULTURE AND INDUSTRIES, PUNJAB. Dated Lahore, the 4th September 1915. Revenue and Agriculture. General- SIR, I AM directed to acknowledge the receipt of the Annual Report of the Camel Specialist for the year 1914-15, forwarded with your letter No. 2032, dated 23rd July 1915. I have, etc., J. P. THOMPSON, Revenue Secretary to Government, Punjab. 20 DA- 871No. 2032. FROM C. A. H. TOWNSEND, ESQUIRE, I.C.S., Director of Agriculture and Industries, Punjab. To THE REVENUE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, PUNJAB. Dated Lahore, the 4th June 1915. SIR, I HAVE the honour to forward herewith the annual report of the Camel Specialist for 1914-15. 2. Mr. Cross is an enthusiast in his subject, and this interesting report bears witness to the good work he has done daring the year. The various suggestions he makes in it which relate to Silladar and Grantee Corps are, I presume, brought to the notice of the Military Department. 3. It has recently been decided that the appointment should bo made permanent, and steps are being taken to provide Mr. Cross with better accommodation in which to treat sick camels. Much of the report =e.g. that dealing with anti-fly emulsions= might appropriately be issued as a bulletin. A printed note on surra in camels has recently been issued and widely circulated. I have the honour to be, SIR, Your most obedient servant, C. A. H. TOWNSEND, Director oj Agriculture and Industries, Punjab.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CAMEL SPECIALIST For the year 1914-15. I held charge of the office of Camel Specialist throughout the year. I travelled 10,196 miles by rail and 1,637 miles by road. 2. Further experiments were carried out on the treatment of surra, particulars of which are given in paragraph 49. 3. Forty-four camels, belonging to various corps, suffering from surra, treated by " Arsenic alone method " or by " Arsenic and Soamin method " were returned cured. The Officer Commanding Local Transport, Derajat Brigade, Dera Ismail Khan reports that 68 camels of his corps suffering from surra were treated by one or other of these methods by his staff and 54 were cured. The number of cases cured during the year was, therefore, 44 + 54 = 98, which, at an average price of Rs. 140, represents a saving to Government of Rs. 140 × 98 = Rs. 13,720, as all these animals if they had not been sub- mitted to treatment would have been destroyed. 4. Three Veterinary Duffadars underwent a course of training in the diagnosis and treatment of surra in the camel. 5. Two hundred and twenty-one specimens were sent to this office for examination, and the result of the examination reported to those con- cerned. 6. The camels of the 54th, 55th, 56th and 57th Silladar Camel Corp, and the 59th, 60th, 61st and 62nd Grantee Camel Corps and Local Transport Bannu, and a number of private camels were examined, amounting to nearly 9,000 in all. Particulars are given in paragraph. 36 to 39. 7. Experiments with anti-fly emulsions were carried out, particulars of which are given in paragraph 52. 8. Investigations were carried out on the diseases known as Jhooling and Wail. 9. Investigations were carried out in connection with the course that surra runs in the camel, and the susceptibility of other animals to camel surra. Particulars are given in paragraph 40. 10. A tour was made in the Chenab Colony to investigate the diseases affecting the camel in this area. Particulars are given in paragraph 70. 11. Investigations on the action of purgatives on the camel and the doses of various purgatives that should be given were carried out. Particulars are given in paragraph 59 to 67. 12. Various rakhs and roads were examined for biting flies. 13. One hundred and ninety-seven animals belonging to private owners were treated for different diseases. 14. The accommodation is quite inadequate. Owing to want of sheds the susceptibility of camels to rinderpest, anthrax, haemorrhagic septicemia, etc., could not be carried out for fear of spread of the disease to villagers' cattle. Plans for sheds, etc., that are absolutely essential have been submitted to Government, and it is to be hoped that sanction will be accorded for the erection of the buildings.
2 15. Silladar Camel Corps.3 16. Mortality in the Camel Corps and Local Transport, calculated from the mortality returns, on employed and unemployed pay:4 18. Percentage of losses by deaths for the year 1914-15 :5 23. One case of surra was found in a donkey at in Jaran- walla Tahsil. 24. Total number of surra cases diagnosed amongst Government camels during the year = 455. 25. Total number of surra oases diagnosed amongst private camels during the year = 23. 26. Making a total of 478 cases of surra diagnosed during the year. 27. Remarks on mortality.6 (hyocyamus) and bhekker (adhaioda vasica) had been given pieces of brick. 33. Twenty-one deaths occurred from sore throat. I have been unable to obtain any material from such cases for investigation. 34. Six deaths are reported as " sudden deaths." Although one member of the staff was deputed to obtain material from such cases, only 2 cases were brought to his notice. The cause of death in these 2 cases was twist of the bowel and suppurative nephritis, respectively. 35. The mortality in the Silladar Camel Corps has increased this year; the increase is largely due to the number of animals destroyed in the 54th and 56th Corps on account of surra. In view of the fact that the camels of the 52nd Corps were on board ship for many weeks it would not have been, surprising had the mortality in this Corps been higher than it is. RESULT OF ONE DAY'S EXAMINATION OF THE CAMELS OF THE 54TH, 55TH, 56TH AND 57TH SILADAR CAMELS CROPS. 36. 54th Corvs7 Result8 39. Private camels.9 99 days : no appearance of trypanosomes. Improred in condi- tion. Goat No, 4.10 send one of his. Veterinary Staff for instruction in the treatment of surra at Sohawa, and to treat the surra camels at Dera Ismail Khan in a segregation camp instead of shooting them. The camels were treated by11 Camel No. 387.12 50. Experiments were carried out with Carbolic Acid, Sodium Bicar- bonate, Potassium permanganate and Borax, but no good result were obtained from any of these drugs. 61. Experiments have been started with chinosol and mercury per- chloride, but these are not yet complete. 52. Anti-fly emulsions experiments.13 no better results. The stomoxys appearing on the camel 2514 EXPERIMENT VI.15 54 The majority of the camels castrated between four and six years old were wanting in bone, were badly developed and resembled the dachi; these weldings compared very unfavourably with the ungelded camels, and were un- Ekely to develop into animals capable of doing hard work. 55. On the other hand, the majority of the camels castrated at seven years and upwards were a very even lot, in good condition and had good muscles and looked fitter than the ungelded camels. The geldings and ungeld- ed had been worked under the same conditions. 56. Conclusions.16 Result.17 Camel No. 13, 3 ½oz. of al18 Result19 Tabanidæ were found was 15th November when one Tabanus was caught on a buffaloe in the compound of this office. A full sized larva was found in Topi Rakh, Rawalpindi, on 18th March. Between the 20th May and 20th July Tabanidæ were numerous in the jungle close to the road at Ghora Gully. On the 16th June several Tabanidæ were caught on a camel at the Tonga terminus, Murree. 69. Surra in the 50th, 51st, 52nd arid 53rd Silladar Camel Corps.20 endless danger, and through him the disease is spread. In my opinion, if it is necessary to destroy and pay compensation for surra infected camels of the Silladar Camel Corps it is equally necessary to do so. in the case of the Grantee Camel Corps. 72. The question whether privately owned camels found to be suffering from surra should he destroyed and compensation given is a question to be decided by the Civil authorities. Destruction without compensation, although beneficial to the community, would be an individual hardship, and would in my opinion lead to a great deal of trouble and dissatisfaction and cannot be recommended. 73. The diseases most prevalent in this area, as far as I could discover, were surra, pneumonia, colic, pus in the frontal sinuses, a form of influenza, and mange. The term " Zahmat" appears to be applied to a variety of diseases, and not to one specific disease. The treatment of disease adopted by the camelmen is very crude, and consists of firing and bitter tonics, the hot iron being the favourite remedy. Surra cases are often treated by asafoetida, and butter milk. Wounds are covered with mud. In connection with the treatment of disease I would point out that although each Grantee Camel Corps has one Veterinary Duffadar, only five rupees are sanctioned for the purchase of drugs. As the strength of each corps is over 1,000, the amount sanctioned for the purchase of drugs is totally inadequate. 74.. Of animals that are grazed during the fly season in the area bordering the Deg Nullah, very few will escape surra. Near village No. 146 I met one " Gehna Musalli " with 5 camels. Out of these 5 I found the surra trypanosomes in 4. This man stated he had grazed his camels during the rains in the Deg Nullah, and a fortnight previously 2 of his camels had died. A good number of dead dogs were noticed during the tour, and in many villages the deaths were attributed to surra and mange. Whether the villagers were right in their diagnosis I am unable to say, but I am inclined to think they are, as they stated the symptoms of surra in the dog perfectly correctly. In a few villages the villagers stated that deaths from surra amongst ponies occurred. Passing through village Lundianwalla, Jaranwalla Tahsil, I noticed a dead donkey and 2 dead dogs. I ascertained that in this village 50 donkeys out of 53 had died during the year, also several dogs. I examined 2 donkeys that were in the village, and in the blood of one the surra trypanosome was present. Three camels only are kept in this village ; of these one had strayed, one was away, and the third, although no trypanosomes were present in the blood at the time of my examination, had the appearance of being surra infected. As the donkeys do not leave the village but are used to bring mud from a short distance from the village for the manufacture of' pots, in all pro- bability they had contracted the disease from the camels. The dogs had contracted the disease by eating the dead surra donkeys. In the majority of villages the men stated that surra was common amongst camels, and that the disease was more prevalent after the canal came than it was before. In Chakoo jungle I met one " Mahomed " with about 70 female and young camels. They belonged to him and his relatives. This was an old man who had done nothing but look after camels. He informed me that out of the 70 camels 50 were surra infected: I examined 32 and out of this number the surra trypanosome was found in four. During the last two years they had lost 60 camels principally from surra. 75. The area is unsuited for camel breeding owing to the want of grazing areas. According to the census returns there is an increase in the number of camels. These returns are compiled by the figures supplied by the patwaris, and it is open to question whether these figures can be relied upon owing to the fact that the patwari can only count those camels that happen to be in the village; with regard to those that are away grazing, the number stated by the camelmen has to be accepted. From my inquiries, I think, the number of females have decreased and that the price of camels has increased.
21 76. Veterinary Assistant Kahan Singh has worked extremely well during the year, and the office work has been satisfactorily carried out by Babu Sham Shanker. Statement of expenditure incurred by the office of the Camel Specialist during the official year 1914-15. Sub-heads of the budget grant.. Amount Rs. A. P. Salaries of officers ... ... 10,221 14 9 Pay of establishment ...... ... ... 2,744 12 5 Travelling allowance of officers... ... ... 3,004 0 0 Travelling allowance of establishment... ... ... 1,294 13 9 Supplies, etc. (chemical and apiraratus)... ... ... 1,940 10 11 Contingencies.... ... ... 3,920 5 10 Purchase and stable feed and keep of animals 4,796 9 5 27,923 3 1 H. E. CROSS, I.C.V.D., M.R.C.V.S., D.V.H., A.Sc, Camel Specialist..
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CAMEL SPECIALIST For the year 1915-16. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore: PRINTED BY THE SUPRITENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING PUNJAB 1916. Price : Re. 0-3-0 or bd.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CAMEL SPECIALIST FOR THE YEAR 1915-16.
Revised list of Agents Top the Sale of Punjab Government Publications. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, London, W. C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., Limited, 68-74, Carter Lane, E. C., and 25, Museum Street, London, W. C. BERNARD QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, London, W. T. FISHER UNWIN, Limited, No, 1, Adelphi Terrace, London, W. C. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S. W. H. S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, and 9, Pall Mall, London. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, London, S. W. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E. C. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W. C. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 51, Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & Co., Limited, Cam- bridge. OLIVER & BOYD, Tweeddale Court, Edinburgh. E. PONSONBY, Limited, 116, Grafton Street, Dublin. ON THE CONTINENT. RNEST LEROUX 28, Rne Bonaparte, Paris, France. MARTINUS NIJROFR, The Hague, Hol- land. IN INDIA. A. CHAND & Co., Imperial Book Depôt Office, Delhi. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-'Am Press, Lahore, MANAGER, Punjab Law Book Depôt, Anarkali Bazar, Lahore. S. MUMTAZ ALI & SON, Rafah-i-'Am Press, Lahore (for vernacular publi- cations only). RAMA KRISHNA & SONS, Book-Sellers and News Agents, Anarkali Street, Lahore. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent and Proprietor, Nazir Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & Co., Bombay. THACKER SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAMS, Limited, Madras. T. FISHER UNWIN, Calcutta. V. KALYANARAM: IYER & Co., 189, Esplanade How, Madras. G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. SUPERINTENDENT, AMERICAN BAPTIS MISSION PRESS, RANGOON.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CAMEL SPECIALIST For the year 1915-16. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore : PRINTED BY THE SUPRINTENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB 1916.
No. 560 (Rev. & Agri.NO. 2275. FROM THE HON'BLE MR. C. A. H. TOWNSEND, I.C.S., Director of Agriculture and Industries, Punjab. To THE REVENUE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, PUNJAB. Dated Lahore, the 21sl July 1916. SIR, I HAVE the honour to forward herewith the Annual Report of the Camel Specialist. As usual it contains an interesting record of much excellent work. 2. I am bringing to the notice of Deputy Commissioners the suggestion made at the close of paragraph 70 of the Report. I have the honour to be, SIR, Your most obedient servant, C. A. H. TOWNSEND, Director of Agriculture and Industries, Punjab.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CAMEL SPECIALIST For the year 1915-16. I held charge of the office of the Camel Specialist throughout the year. 2. I travelled 5,704 miles by rail and 2,445 miles by road. 3. A large number of experiments were carried out on the treatment of surra by various substances. 4. Observations regarding the course that surra runs in the camel were continued, and the course that camel surra runs in other animals was investi- gated. 5. Further experiments with anti-fly emulsions were carried out. 6. Experiments to determine the susceptibility of camels to rinder- pest, hæmorrhagic septicæmia and black quarter were carried out. 7. Investiga ions were carried out in connection with the diseases " sore- throat, jhooling, wal." 8. Camels of Silladar Camel Corps were inspected, camel fairs visited, collection of biting flies made, rakhs inspected and villages visited, etc. 9. Outbreaks of disease amongst Military camels were investigated at the request of the Military authorities. 10. Inquiries were made in various districts regarding diseases amongst camels and advice given to the owners. 11. Two hundred and fifty-eight animals belonging to private owners were treated for different diseases. 12. Nine hundred and seventy-eight specimens were sent to this office for examination, and the result of the examination reported to those concerned. 13. Nine hundred and twelve rupees were realised for the treatment of surra camels of various Corps.
2 14 Silladar Camel Corps.3 15 Mortality in the Camel Corps and Local Transport calculated from the mortality returns on employed and unemployed pay:4 19. Total losses from deaths and castings amongst the eight Silladar Camel Corps, 4 Grantee Camel Corps and the Local Transport, Dera Ismail Khan, Bannu and Kurram Valley Militia = 2,800 = 25.4 per cent., whereas the total losses from deaths alone = 2,500 = 22.7 per cent. 20. Percentage of losses by deaths in all Silladar Camel Corps : 5 my opinion he is a very hardy animal, if worked in the climate he is accustom- ed to and properly fed. Like any other animal, if hard-worked and given short rations, he will soon go to pieces. Moreover, the camel, being a ruminant, must have a bulky diet ; the substitution of a grain ration for a straw ration is altogether wrong. There is room for improvement in the feeding of Military camels and the treatment of sick camels. With regard to the treatment of Military camels when sick, no medicines should be administered except by the Veterinary Duffadar. Camelmen should not be allowed to fire their camels for every ailment. 26. The technique of blood examination, in some Corps, is very bad. Indian Officers, Kot Duffadars and Naiks should not be allowed to have anything to do with blood examination ; this is the work of the Veterinary Duffadar. If he has not had much experience of microscopical work he can always be sent to this office for training. 27. As many of the Corps are on duty overseas and no information has been received regarding mortality amongst the camels of these Corps, only the deaths occurring, while they were in India, have been given in the mortality- statements. 28. Anti-fly emulsion experiments.6 after being sprayed) for Tabanidæ A large number of Tabanidæ were found on the six sprayed and also on the control (unsprayed camel) : Tabanidæ attacked the sprayed and unsprayed equally. Experiment III. -The six camels were again sprayed at 7-30 A.M.., and were placed in the sun in close proximity to the unsprayed camel. In fifteen minutes Tabanidæ were found on the unsprayed camel, and though Tabanidæ flew round the sprayed camels they did not settle and suck blood till thirty minutes had elapsed after the application of the emulsion. Conclusions.7 COD LIVER OIL. 33. Three camels were used in this experiment one being smeared with oil and two being left unsmeared to act as controls. The three camels were tied at a short distance from one another, and 17 oz. of oil was smeared on one camel at 9-45 A.M.. The oil was applied with a rag. A few inmates after the camel was smeared Stomoxys settled on the smeared and unsmeared camels ; the oil had no repellent action whatever. Three hours after the application of the oil Tabanidæ settled on the smeared and unsmeared camels. Conclusions.8 At 10-45 A.M.. Tabanidæ were seen on the smeared camel, and for the next hour Tabanidæ were as frequently seen on the five unsmeared camels and ponies. No Tabanidæ attacked the dogs during the period of observation. Result.9 1st day.10 Camel No. 1. Male11 Control No. 2. Calf12 Conclusions.13 Camel No. 1. Male14 Control No. 1. Rabbit. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Control No. 2. Rabbit. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Control No. 3. Calf. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Control No. 4. Calf. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
15 Conclusions.16 (2) The average daily amount of water that a camel will drink when fed on green fodder when the temperature is not high and doing no work is 217 Remarks.18 Should a case of Jhooling occur amongst a number of camels, it should be at once isolated from all the other camels. The remaining camels should be divided up into lots and not allowed to mix. Should further cases be found they should be at once isolated. The disease spreads very rapidly amongst camels, and causes a great deal of trouble, so that every effort should be made to prevent the disease from spreading. No camel should be bought if small hard white spots are observed on the skin ; they are undoubtedly healed up old Jhooling lesions. RHEUMATISM. 45. Camels suffer a great deal from articular rheumatism. Though I have seen hundreds of camels suffering from articular rheumatism I have not so far observed any cases of muscular rheumatism. Distribution,19 Treatment20 Camel No. 2. 1st day ... 100 c.c. of ½ % solution of mercury perchloride intravenously : fed well. 3rd day ... 100 c.c. of ½ % solution of chinosol intravenously : fed well. 5th day ... 100 c.c. of ½ % solution of mercury perchloride intravenously: fed well. 6th day ... Diarrhoea : off feed. 7th day .... 100 c.c. of 1 % solution of chinosol intravenously : off feed : diarrhoea. 8th day . off feed : diarrh21 50. II.22 Camel No. 2. Received the same doses as camel No. 1. Remarks.23 THE COURSE THAT CAMEL SURRA RUNS IN PONIES. 54. Ponies Nos. 1, 2 and 3 were inoculated with camel surra. Ponies Nos. 1 and 2 were under 5 years of age whereas pony No. 3 was about 5 years old. 55. Pony No. 1.24 58. Conclusions.25 THE COURSE THAT CAMEL SURRA RUNS IN THE BUFFALO. 62. This experiment is not yet completed. ARE OLD CAMELS IMMUNE TO SURRA. 63. It is stated by many camelmen, that a certain number of camels recover from surra, and are afterwards immune to the disease. In order to ascertain whether old camels have any immunity, it was decided to inoculate with surra any old camels that could be obtained from Camel Corps. It was only possible to obtain one such camel this year. This was obtained, being no longer fit for service, from the 52nd Corps. According to the books of the Corps this camel on enlistment was five years old & his total length of service was over 13 years. His age therefore was over 18 years and he was in fair condition. He was inoculated with blood (trypanosomes numerous) from a camel suffering from surra. On the seventh day after inoculation trypanosomes appeared in the circulation and with the exception of one day, were present till he died eighteen days after inoculation. This old camel must have gone through many a surra outbreak but on inoculation with surra he showed no resistance whatever to the disease ; on the contrary he " wasted " very rapidly and died very quickly from the disease. Three one year old camels were inoculated with surra at the same time as this old camel, at the commencement of the disease the paroxysms were fre- quent, but gradully became less frequent and all three camels have improved in condition, and at the present time would not be suspected of having surra. The difference in the course that surra runs in old and young camels is very mark- ed. The same difference was observed in the case of camel surra in ponies (see paragraphs 55,56,57). Conclusions.26 should be kept under observation for surra. After a few weeks be informed me that 5 out of the 14 ponies had been found to be suffering from surra. Conclusions.27 70. Anti-anthrax serum could not be recommended, as we at present do not know what dose of serum, prepared from cattle horses or donkeys, a camel will stand ; neither do we know what amount of serum is necessary to give protection in the camel. (This will be investigated next year.) RemarksANNUAL REPORT OF THE CAMEL SPECIALIST For the year 1916-17. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore : PRINTED BY THE SUPERITENDENT GOVERNMENT PRINTED, PUNJAB. 1917. Price : Re. 0.3-0 or 3d.
Annual Report of the Camel Specialist for the year 1916-17.
Revised List of Agents for the sale of Punjab Government Publications. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, London, W. C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., Limited, 68-74, Carter Lane, E. C, and 25, Museum Street, London, W. C. BERNARD QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, London, W. T. FISHER UNWIN, Limited, No. 1, Adelphi Terrace, London, W. C. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S.W. H. S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, and 9, Pall Mall, London. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, London, S. W. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E. C. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W. C. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 57, Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & Co., Limited, Cam- bridge. OLIVE, Tweeddale Court, Edinburgh. E. PONSONBY, Limited, 116, Grafton Street, Dublin. WILLIAM WESLEY & Sox, 28, Esses Street, Strand, London. ON THE CONTINENT. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris, France. MARTINUS NIJHOF, The Hague, Hol- land. IN INDIA. A. CHAND & Co., Imperial Book Depôt Office, Delhi. GULAN SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i-'Am Press, Lahore. MANAGER, Punjab Law Book Depôt, Anarkali Bazar, Lahore. S. MUMTAZ ALI & SON, Rafah-i-'Am Press, Lahore (for vernacular publi- cations only). RAMA KRISHNA & SONS, Book-Sellers and News Agents, Anarkali Street, Lahore. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent and Proprietor, Nazir Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & Co., Bombay. THACKER SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAMS, Limited, Madras. T.FISHER UNWIN, Calcutta. V. KALYANARAM IYER & Co., 189, Esplanade Bow, Madras. G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. SUPERINTENDENT, AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, RANGOON.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CAMEL SPECIALIST For the year 1916-17. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore : PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB. 1917.
No. 643 S. (Rev. & Agri.No. 1395. FROM THE HON'BLE MR. C. A. H. TOWNSEND, I.C.S., Director of Agriculture and Industries, Punjab, To THE REVENUE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, PUNJAB. Dated Lahore, 25th April 1917. SIR, I HAVE the honour to forward the annual report of the Camel Specialist. It is shorter than its predecessors for the reasons given in paragraphs 5 and 6 of the report. 2. Mr. Cross has worked very hard during the year, and takes much interest in his work. Paragraph 16 of the report is particularly interesting : by the success of his treatment of the surra-infected camels in question Mr. Cross saved Government a large amount of money. I have the honour to be, SIR, Your most obedient Servant, C. A. H. TOWNSEND, Director of Agriculture and Industries, Punjab.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CAMEL SPECIALIST For the year 1917-18. I held charge of the office of the Camel Specialist throughout the year. There were no changes in the staff. 2.I travelled 11,499 miles by rail and 2,883 miles by road. 3.Three hundred and ninety-three animals belonging to private owners were treated for different diseases. 4.Nine hundred and thirty-five specimens were sent to this office for examination and the result of the examination reported to those concerned. 5.In compliance with the orders of the Government of India no statis- tics regarding military camels are being given in this report but the mortality returns according to instructions, have been forwarded to the Principal Veteri- nary Officer, so that the statistics can be published in the report of the Army Veterinary Service. 8.In compliance with the orders of the Government of India details of experiments are being omitted from this report. The following reports of experiments have been sent for publication in bulletin form by the Imperial Department of Agriculture :2 (2) Though they may have very acute rinderpest lesions they re- cover. (3)They present similar symptoms as are seen in cattle. Blackquarter.3 (3) Jemadar Veterinary Assistant Ghazanfar Ali of the Local Transport also undertook to cure 2 camels of the Frontier Constabulary and 2 Police Chanda camels with satisfactory results. (4) Camels of the 51st Silladar Camel Corps; Treated for surra ... 137 Cured ... ... 99 Veterinary Jemadar Ghazanfar Ali and Veterinary Jemadar Abdulla Khan deserve great credit for carrying out the work, which must have been exceedingly trying during the hot weather in such places as Dera Ismail Khan and Bannu. 17. Veterinary Inspector Kahan Singh and Veterinary Assistant Abdulla Khan have worked excellently throughout the year, and Babu Sham Skanker has carried out the office work very satisfactorily. 18. Statement of expenditure incurred by the office of the Camel Specialist during the official year 1916-17. Sub-heads of the budget. Amount. Rs. A. P. Salaries and travelling allowance of officers ......... 14,623 4 4 Pay and travelling allowance of establishment...... 4,468 11 3 Supplies, etc. (chemical and apparatus) ......... 1,216 0 1 Contingencies ... ... ......... 3,531 2 9 Purchase and stable feed and keep of animals 6,744 15 10 Total ... 30,584 2 3 H. E. CROSS, I.C.V.D., M.K.C.V.S., D.V.H., A.Sc, The 21st April 1917. Camel Specialist., DAANNUAL REPORTS OF THE CAMEL SPECIALIST For the years 192 7-18 and 1918-19. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore : PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, PUNJAB. 1920. Price : Re. 0-2-0.
Annual Reports of the Camel Specialist for the years 1917-18 and 1918-19.
Revised List of Agents for the Sale of Punjab Government Publications. IN THE UNITED KINGDOM. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, London, W. C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., Limited, 68-74, Carter Lane, E.C., and 25, Museum Street, London, W.C. BERNARD QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, London, W. T. FISHER UNWIN, Limited, No. 1, Adelphi Terrace, London, W.C. P. S. KING & SON, 2 & 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, S. W. H. S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, and 9. Pall Mall, London. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, London, S. W. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E. C. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W. C. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 61, Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & Co., Limited, Cam- bridge. OLIVER & BOYD, Tweeddale Court. Edinburgh. E. PONSONBY, Limited, 116, Grafton Street, Dublin. WILLIAM WESLEY & SON, 28, Essex Street, Strand, London. ON THE CONTINENT. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris, France. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Hol- land. IN INDIA. THE MANAGER, Imperial Book Depôt, Delhi. GULAB SINGH & SONS, Mufid-i- Am Press, Lahore. MANAGER, Punjab Law Book Depôt, Anarkali Bazar, Lahore. RAMA KRISHNA & SONS, Book-sellers and News Agents, Anarkali Street, Lahore. HONORARY SECRETARY, Punjab Reli- gious Book Society, Anarkali, Lahore. N. B. MATHUR, Superintendent and Proprietor, Nazir Kanun Hind Press, Allahabad. D. B. TARAPOREVALA, SONS & Co., Bombay. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta and Simla. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. R. CAMBRAY & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAMS, Limited, Madras. T. FISHER UNWIN, Calcutta. V. KALYANARAM IYER & Co., 189, Esplanade Row, Madras. G. A. NATESAN & Co., Madras. SUPERINTENDENT, AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, Rangoon.
ANNUAL REPORTS OF THE CAMEL SPECIALIST For the years 1917-18 and 1918-19. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lahore : PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PKISTIN'G, PUNJAB. 1919.
MEMO. No. 2855 (Rev. & Agri.-45.71. FROM S. M. JACOB, ESQUIRE, I.C.S., Director of Agriculture, Punjab, To THE REVENUE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, PUNJAB. Dated Lahore, the 10th January 1920. SIR, I HAVE the honour to forward herewith the reports of the Camel Speci- alist, Sohawa, for the years 1917-18 and 1918-19 (ending 31st March 1919) compiled by Captain Cross. The Laboratory was under the control of the Military authorities from the 15th June 1917 to 1st September 1919, and I therefore pass on the reports without comment. I have the honour to be, SIR, Your most obedient servant, S. M. JACOB, Director of Agriculture, Punjab. 125 DA-472ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CAMEL SPECIALIST For the year 1917-18. I HELD charge of the office of the Camel Specialist under the Civil administration from the beginning of the financial year till 15th June 1917, on which date the office and staff were taken over temporarily for the duration of the war by the Military Department. I was given the rank of Captain I.A.R.O. and continued in charge of the office till 27th August 1917 when I went on leave. I was relieved by Captain W. A. Pool, I. A.R.O., who remained in charge till the end of financial year. Mr. H. E. Cross travelled 1,519 miles by rail and 782 miles by road. Captain "W. A. Pool travelled 2,447 miles by rail and 90 miles by road. 2.No changes amongst the subordinate staff took place during the year under report. 3.Courses of instruction on the management and diseases of camels were given to officers of the Royal Army Veterinary Corps. Nine officers attended these courses. 4.One hundred and thirteen men from Camel Corps underwent a " dressers' " course; of these 83 passed the examination at the end of the course and 30 failed to do so. 5.A book " The Camel and its Diseases " written by me was publish- ed during the year under report. 6.Jliooling.-2 (ii)the disease in the majority of camels is of the chronic type ; (iii) horses inoculated with camel surra do not always lose condition: some remain in perfect health, to all appearances, for many months, when they suddenly develop cerebral symptoms and then die within a few days ; (iv)Tartar emetic in large doses gives considerable promise of success for the cure of surra. 9.Flies.ANNUAL REPORT OF THE CAMEL SPECIALIST For the year 1918-19. CAPTAIN W. A. Pool held charge of the office during the year. With the exception of Muhammad Zaman who was appointed Labora- tory Assistant there was no change in the subordinate staff. Captain W, A. Pool travelled 4,673 miles by rail and 821 miles by road. Courses of training.