ELEPHANTS AND THEIR DISEASES G. H. EVANS
ELEPHANTS AND THEIR DISEASES
LIST OF AGENTS FOR THE SALE OF GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS. IN INDIA. THACKER, SPINK & Co., Calcutta. W. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., Bombay. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras. PROPRIETOR, HANTHAWADDY PRESS, Rangoon. SUPERINTENDENT, AMERICAN BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, Rangoon. IN ENGLAND. E. A. ARNOLD, 41 and 43, Maddox Street, Bond Street, London, W. HENRY S. KING & Co., 65, Cornhill, London, E.C. CONSTABLE & Co., 10, Orange Street, Leicester Square, London, W.C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & Co., 43, Gerrard Street, Soho, London, W. BERNARD QUARITCH, 11, Grafton Street, New Bond Street, London, W. P. S. KING & SON, 2 and 4, Great Smith Street, Westminster, London, W.S. GRINDLAY & Co., 54, Parliament Street, London, S.W. T. FISHER UNWIN, 1, Adelphi Terrace, London, W.C. B. H. BLACKWELL, 50 and 51, Broad Street, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & Co., Cambridge. W. THACKER & Co., 2, Creed Lane, London, E.C. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, London, W.C. ON THE CONTINENT. R. FRIEDLANDER & SOHN, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin, Germany. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig, Germany. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig, Germany. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris, France. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague, Holland. RUDOLF HAUPT, 1. Dorrientrasse, Leipzig, Germany.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] [Frontispiece. AFRICAN AND INDIAN ELEPHANT.
ELEPHANTS AND THEIR DISEASES A Creatise on Elephants BY G. H. EVANS, LIEUT.-COLONEL SUPERINTENDENT, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT BURMA PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY RANGOON SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 1910 Price, Rs. 15 or 21s.]
PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT PRESS RANGOON
PREFACE. THE last edition of this book was published in 1901 and has been out of print for several years. The work has now been entirely rearranged to make it more convenient for reference ; portions which appeared of doubtful or of secondary interest have been omitted ; parts have been entirely rewritten ; and considerable additions have been made from my own experience and that of others. The book has been written primarily for the use of those entrusted with the anxious task of preventing or curing disease in elephants, rather than for those possessed of medical or other scientific know- ledge. The scantiness of the literature on the subject is, I am aware, a source of embarrassment to those in charge of these valuable animals and the need of some guide embodying the latest information has been widely felt. It is hoped that the present volume will, to some extent at least, supply this want. In many of the forests of Burma the readily accessible timber has been worked out, necessitating operations being conducted further and further afield. Thus the work of extraction becomes more and more arduous and the need for adequate elephant labour more than ever imperative, and this, too, with a steady increase in the price even of untrained or partially trained animals. The timber industry is not only the source of handsome revenues to Government but is a lucrative one for the capitalists engaged therein. The subject of elephant diseases therefore, apart from its high scientific interest, has become a matter of immense economic importance to the Province. I regret that my appeal in the last edition for information and notes concerning elephants and their diseases has, with a few exceptions, met with little response. I trust those who are in a position to do so will favour me with any facts and observations that may come under their notice. In this connection the detailed instructions for the preparation of blood-smears, if carefully followed, may materially assist in arriving at a correct diagnosis.
viii PREFACE. I have much pleasure in acknowledging assistance from many friends and acquaintances. Messrs. The Bombay Burma Trading Corporation, Limited, Messrs. Steel Brothers & Company, Limited, and Messrs. C. B. Lacey, H. Roberts and H. F. Bowden of the Bombay Burma Trading Corporation, Limited, Messrs. B. T. Petley, H. R. Kerr, G. H. Fraser and Baker of Messrs. Steel Brothers & Company, Limited, Mr. Dal- gleish of the Borneo Company, Siam, and Mr. W. Hepburn, M.R.C.V.S., have at various times afforded me information. For the drawings I am indebted to Major F. W. Thomas, Major T. Robinson and Captain A. G. Stuart, of the Indian Army, and for the coloured plates illustrating Fasciola Jacksoni, bacteria and other organisms to Captain J. D. E. Holmes, Mr. S. H. Gaiger, both of the Civil Veterinary'Depart- ment, and the Editor of the "Journal of Tropical Veterinary Science." My colleagues, Messrs. T. Rennie and C. J. N. Cameron, read the proof sheets and advised me as the book was passing through the press. Finally to Mr. R. W. Bishop, Superintendent, Government Printing, to whose care the publication was entrusted, my special thanks are due. It only remains to add, as on a previous occasion, that the book has been written at odd intervals of official duties which involve almost constant travelling, and no one can be more conscious of its short- comings than I. Nevertheless I am sanguine enough to hope that its publication will do something towards ensuring a better knowledge of elephants and perhaps the better supervision and health of these noble creatures. G. H. EVANS. RANGOON, June 1910.
BIBLIOGRAPHY. ADAMS.[Facing page XI. DIAGRAM OF ELEPHANT WITH BURMESE NAMES FOR VARIOUS POINTS. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
CONTENTS. PART I. PAGE CHAPTER I.xii CONTENTS. PART III. MEDICINES AND THEIR ADMINISTRATION. FORMULÆ. PAGE CHAPTER I.CONTENTS. xiii PAGE CHAPTER X.xiv CONTENTS. APPENDICES. PAGE APPENDIX A.LIST OF PLATES. African and Indian Elephant. {From Messrs. Hagenbeck & Co.) Frontispiece PLATE I.ELEPHANTS AND THEIR DISEASES A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS PART I. CHAPTER I. SUPPLY. AGE. HEIGHT. WEIGHT. VALUE. PURCHASE. SALES. MARKS OF IDENTIFICATION. SUPPLY. As in other countries, the introduction of steam-driven appliances where possible, in competition with man-power or that of his servants among the lower animals, has in Burma resulted in some diminution of the uses to which the elephant is put. This, however, has not been so great as at first sight might appear, nor has it had the effect of lessening the demand for elephants in general. Steam-power in the timber industry here can only be employed in such places as the log depots and mills, portage of machinery being anything but easy or cheap in other places, and it is here only that the elephant has been ousted from his former important and much admired duties. In Rangoon timber yards the number of elephants employed for the dragging and stacking of timber is inconsiderable. In jungle work, in hauling the logs from where they have been felled to the banks of streams or to cart-roads for transport, the elephant still proves indispensable, and for this work the consider- able extension of operations by various companies interested in the timber industry has brought about an increased demand. So much is this the case, that the supply appears to be insufficient; for years prices have been on the rise, and purchasers have had to go further and further afield to furnish their requirements. The Karens, Talmes and Laos tribes, inhabiting the country between the rivers Salween and Me-Ping, the Karens on the western side of the Salween, in Karenni, and to a smaller extent the Shans to the north, and the Laos tribes in certain parts of the valley of the Me-Nam, still continue to be a source of supply of more or less trained elephants. In this somewhat sparsely populated
2 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. and little cultivated country, intersected by rivers and mountain chains, the elephant finds a congenial home, and it is in this country, inhabited by shy and retiring people, that a number of elephants are bred in captivity. Elephants in these parts are used chiefly for transport purposes between villages, and are a con- spicuous element in all festivities held by Chiefs. Young tusker calves, when not more than five or six years of age, find a ready sale among the numerous Chiefs of the Shan and Laos tribes and Siamese officials, at prices from three to five hundred rupees. As much as twelve hundred rupees has been offered for a promising ten-year old tusker. The wealth of many Chiefs consists largely of elephants, some of them owning as many as one hundred animals, and continually adding to the number. One of the great amuse- ments of the Chiefs is to watch the training of their animals ; this training begins at an early age, when the elephant is taught to submit to a man riding on his back or neck ; he is then taught to carry a saddle and small load, and later to drag timber. When an animal is being taught to drag, he is taken with a trained elephant to the sandy bed of a dried-up stream and put in harness ; if he is obstinate and shows temper, the old elephant is given a long tow rope which is attached to the youngster, and at a given signal he moves off, towing the youngster, who frequently falls, but is nevertheless towed along on his back or side as the case may be ; after a few such lessons he learns how to drag, but it is not till an animal reaches the age of twenty that any serious work is expected of him. Till he is full-grown he is a pet and, if a fine animal, an object of admiration in a cavalcade of elephants on festival occasions. During the last few years purchases for Burma have been made in Assam and Siam. AGE. The limit of age in elephants, and the indications of the age an individual has reached, are not accurately known. It is natural to suppose that in the wild state they attain a much greater age than in captivity. In the latter condition they not infrequently die prematurely from preventible causes. That they do sometimes live to a great age is pretty certain. An instance of this is recorded in Beeton's " Dictionary of Natural History," namely, that amongst the papers of Colonel Robertson (son of the historian of Charles V.), who held a command in Ceylon in 1799, shortly after the capture of the Island by the British, is one showing that a decoy was then attached to the elephant establishments at Matura, which the records proved to have served with the Dutch during the entire period of
AGE. 3 their occupation (extending to upwards of one hundred and forty years), and was said to have been found in the stables by the Dutch, on the expulsion of the Portuguese in 1656. This, however, is an extreme example of longevity from which it would be unsafe to generalize. Burmans and Karens, having considerable experience with elephants, give the period of life from eighty to one hundred and fifty years. The former designate the periods of growth as follows :4 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. diminished. The skin around the nails presents a broken and warty appearance. The tail is cakey, hard and the extremity often devoid of hair. Sanderson notes on the peculiar action of aged animals : " Instead of walking firmly, and planting the feet flat, they bring the feet to the ground somewhat in the manner of a plantigrade animal, touching with the heels first." This peculiarity may some- times be observed in animals of middle age suffering from debility. The most ready way of forming an approximate idea of the age is by the amount of turn-over of the upper edge of the ear. In young animals, sometimes up to the age of eight or nine years, the edge is quite straight; it, however, then begins to turn over, and by the time an animal is thirty, the edges curl over to the extent of an inch, and between this age and sixty, this increases to two inches or slightly more. The teeth afford some evidence as to age, but this is of little practical value (see Appendix C). What in Burma is considered a sure sign of middle age is the condition known as kadoung-kyeik, that is, the animal presents somewhat the appearance of a Burman with his waist-cloth (loongyi) tucked up. This appearance has to be seen to be under- stood. The Burman belief is that once this condition appears the animal is annually liable to become musth. HEIGHT. Extravagant estimates of the height of elephants have from time to time been recorded ; their great bulk so far exceeds that of the ordinary animals we are accustomed to see that the tendency is to overestimate their size. The old method of measuring was also most misleading : a rope was simply thrown over the back, the ends brought to the ground on each side, and half the length taken as the height. Much amusing information on this subject is contained in Sanderson's excellent work. Madras elephants, he tells us, were at one time said to be from 17 to 20 ft. high, and an animal at Dacca was said to be 14 ft. Mr. Corse, a gentleman thoroughly conversant with elephants, determined if possible to see one of these enormous creatures. He accordingly took the trouble to go to Dacca, and was rather surprised to find that according to his measurement the animal said to measure 14 ft. did not exceed 10 ft. in height (a very good height). We may take it on the authority of Sanderson, a most careful observer, who had unrivalled opportunities of investigating such matters, that such a thing as an elephant measuring 10 ft. at the shoulder does not exist in India, nor, may I add, in Burma. The largest male he ever met with measured 9 ft. 10 ins. and the tallest female 8 ft. 5 ins. Cingalese
HEIGHT. 5 elephants are said to seldom exceed 9 ft.,* and the ordinary herd elephants do not average more than 8 ft. Of 300 males measured in this Province, the average height was 7 ft. 10½ ins., girth 11 ft. 10 ins. ; and of 100 females, the average height was found to be 7 ft. 5¾ ins., girth 10 ft. 11 ins. All these animals were measured at the shoulder as is done with horses. An elephant dealer, through whose hands some two thousand elephants had passed, stated that he had only met with one animal measuring 9 ft. 4 ins. at the shoulder. Mr. C. B. Lacey informs me that in Siam the tallest animal owned by the Bombay Burma Trading Cor- poration measures 9 ft. 6 ins. at the shoulder. This fact shows how rare it is to come across an animal 9½ ft. and over, for the Bombay Burma Trading Corporation have records of a thousand and more animals, yet this is the only one they possess measuring 9 ft. 6 ins. ; and at the present time they have some 2,000 or 3,000 elephants in their employ. Details of measurements of 300 male elephants6 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. As stated above, these animals should be measured like horses, i.e., vertical measurement taken at the shoulder. Twice the circumference of the foot is as nearly as possible the height at the shoulder. This rule, however, does not always hold good in the case of young growing animals. The following observations by Mr. B. P. Kelly, of the Forest Department, are interesting:VALUE. 7 "The dimensions of the animal were as follows: 8 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Timber elephants may again be divided into two classes, namely,[Facing page 9. PLATE I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] AN IDEAL SPECIMEN OF A TIMBER-WORKING ELEPHANT. Indications of enormous power in head and trunk ; neck short and thick ; stands well up at the shoulder ; sloping down gradually behind ; short hind-limbs indicating great dragging power. Tusks and curve of back perfect. Height about 7 feet 10 inches.
PURCHASE. 9 of the more prominent signs of health: These are constant motion, such as swinging of the trunk and tail, flapping the ears, swaying the body or the head from side to side, rubbing one leg against the opposite one, or swinging it. The skin is soft, almost black in colour, and the bristles covering the body are firm to the touch. The mucous membrane of the tongue and mouth is of a rich pink colour; the eyes clear and bright. The light-coloured spots and blotches on the head and trunk are pinkish in colour. A moist secretion exudes around and above the nails, and is easily observed by throwing some dust on the parts ; this must not, however, be confounded with an offensive discharge from beneath the nails, a wet rot, which runs high up, the affected parts being hot and painful. The appetite is good, and the animal sleeps for a few hours every night, and immediately on waking commences to feed. The signs of indisposition are that the animal is listless, there is general languor, absence of the incessant motion so characteristic in health. The skin appears greyish in colour, hangs loosely, and is dry and sometimes scaly ; the spots and blotches also assume this pale colour. The trunk presents a shrivelled appearance. The colour of the membrane of the mouth and that of the tongue changes to a muddy colour or is deep red, with or without blotches on the palate. The lower flap of the ear is very often cold to the touch, the eyes are dull, appear retracted, and there is frequently an abnormal flow of water from the eyes. The animal may be out of condition and feverish, the appetite small or even wanting; proper rest is not taken, and he may lie down and get up several times (generally a bad sign). If the excretions be examined, the urine may be noticed to be small in quantity and high coloured, and the dung hard and coated with mucus, or diarrhoea may be present. Elephants differ as widely in their points as do horses and other animals. The chief points of a good elephant are as follows (see Plates I, II, III, IV and X), namely, medium height, a good big barrel, skin soft and wrinkled (described by Burmans as crocodile skin), the head massive, full cheeks and a broad forehead ; the ears large, eyes bright and kindly, and free from opacity or excessive flow of tears; the trunk of good length, broad at the root, and blotched in front with pinkish coloured spots. The neck short, thick, and full; chest broad; the back straight and broad, broad loins ; short forelegs, convex in front (described by Burmans as sj]go5.o^S, i.e., set up like a lion or chinthay, qjccS, the attitude given to the leogryphs in front of pagodas). The hind-quarters full, sloping well down and supported by thick short limbs. The pads of the feet hard, nails smooth and polished, action free, paces fast and easy ;
10 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. the tail should be of good length, free from hardness, and provided with a good tuft of bristles. Animals such as described will not often be met with ; still when selecting, it will be as well to obtain those possessing most of the good points enumerated. The undesirable points are numerous. Some animals are flat- sided, others have high arched backs, with very prominent spinal ridges (see Fig. 1) ; others are narrow-chested, with lean low fore- [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. I.PURCHASE. I I Forsyth in his work, " The Highlands of Central India," mentions that there is no end to the tricks carried out by dealers, of which he had some experience at the Sônpur Fair; some he remarks on are man-killers reduced to temporary harmlessness by the daily administration of pills containing opium and Indian hemp, sores of the feet plugged, cracks " paid " with tow, and sore backs surface- healed. It is most important therefore that in examining a beast the utmost care should be exercised to see that the back and other parts liable to gall are free from sores, scars and tenderness ; in fact, the whole body must be inspected, the ears examined for sores and scabs, the ear holes for discharges, and the eyes must be free from dimness. The soles of the feet should be well tapped all over before and after exercise ; if any tenderness is manifested, the part must be thoroughly examined. Tender patches from excessive wear may readily be detected by the parts being smooth and pinkish in colour. The skin around the nails, as also the nails, must be inspected. Food and water should be presented to see that the trunk is quite sound, as this most important organ may have been injured by bamboos, spear wounds, da cuts, etc. Any individual idiosyncrasy which may exhibit itself, if bearing on the utility of the animal, should be taken into consideration. Some elephants are full of nasty tricks ; intending purchasers must therefore be on their guard, and endeavour to ascertain the pecu- liarities of any particular beast before taking possession. Most Burmese elephants prefer being approached from the right side ; very few from the left; some may be approached from right and left, and others only from the right or left. A new keeper unacquainted with such peculiarities incurs the likelihood of being attacked if the animal be bad-tempered, or of scaring him if of a nervous disposition. The following peculiarities in some animals reduce their value, as they are regarded with superstitious dread by the Burmese. It is thought that the ownership of such creatures may cost their masters loss of life or substance :12 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. (4)Swinging the trunk only to the left and right, called pa-ket- hlwe (, rocking the cradle). (5)A restlessness of the whole body, somewhat after the fashion of bears, called sa-gaw-waing (, action of a winnowing tray). (6)Holding the trunk up in the air and putting it into the mouth, called tein-nyun-sa (, literally to eat the clouds), star gazing. The conformation of an animal naturally affects its value. Wet-kôu (, pig's back), or flat backs, are considered best suited for carrying purposes. Nga-phai-kôn (, like the back of the nga-phai fish, i.e., an even curve), or those with a slight curve of the back, are considered best for dragging purposes, as it is supposed that the dragging gear fits this class of animal better than others. Those animals with backs described as pyat-that-kôn (, like the curve of a pyat-that, or sharp curve) may be employed for dragging or carrying, but great care must be exercised in attending to the gear, as such animals easily gall. A loose fold of skin across the lower part of the neck, called payit ( ), is not a bad omen and rather raises the value of the animal. Some elephants have four nails only on each foot; this decreases their value, as five nails on each foot raises the same ; four on each of the front feet and five on the hind ones does not interfere with their value. Out of a total of 623 Indian, Burmese and Siamese elephants, only three possessed twenty nails 5-5/5-5, 500 had eighteen 5-5/4-4, 104 sixteen 4-4/4-4, and 16 seventeen toes 5-4/4-4. The male elephants called han ( ) and haing ( ) are often from 30 to 40 per cent. cheaper than tuskers. Generally speaking, they are inclined to be ill-tempered. These are probably the animals mentioned by Steel as always found single. I think their solitary life is usually not of their own seeking, but is brought about by the presence of powerful tuskers which resent their mixing with the herd, for if they can decoy a cow from a herd, or pick up with a tame female, they will do so. A register recording age, height, sex, marks, year and place of purchase, price, name and residence of vendor, should be kept for reference. SALES. Elephants are bought and sold like other cattle, that is, the purchaser pays for the animal and takes it away. When Europeans contemplate purchasing elephants, it is advisable to come to some
{Facing page 12. DIAGRAM OF SOME BACK CURVES. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] I. Kha-dan or Wet-gôn. II. Nga-pe-gôn. III. Kôn-pyat-that. IV. Hngel-pyaw-gaing.
MARKS OF IDENTIFICATION. 13 arrangement with the vendor regarding a trial of the animals offered for sale. A good plan is to advance the vendor fifty or even one hundred rupees for a week's trial of an animal; at the end of which period, should the intending purchaser decide not to buy, he forfeits his advance. This course is recommended for several reasons ; the animal produced for sale may have been lost or stolen ; a vicious beast may be drugged with opium or ganja, or it may be a weakly old creature fattened up for sale. The intending purchaser atleast has an opportunity of observing the idiosyncrasies of the animal, also his working capabilities. Elephant-dealers, and some owners, are not above "doctoring" animals for sale. Some years ago Government directed that no sales of elephants should have effect except on fulfilment of certain formalities prescribed for the purpose. The object was if possible to place a check upon the extent to which elephant-stealing had attained. The measures, however, having failed, the regulations have been set aside. There is an impression current that a bill-of-sale is necessary in the case of an elephant ; this however is an error. Registration is prescribed for the sale of immovable property only. The solitary advantage the purchaser could derive from registering his purchase would be that, in the event of the animal having been stolen property, his honesty in the transaction would be open to no question. MARKS OF IDENTIFICATION. Particular attention must be paid to all marks as a means of iden- tification, as elephant-stealing about the frontiers is a popular and very remunerative pastime. In the forests, when the day's work is finished, the foresters as a rule put cane fetters on their animals, suspend a bell or wooden clapper ( ), hka-louk, from their necks, and then turn them loose to graze ; no watch is kept over the animals at night. The thief or thieves (who thoroughly under- stand the habits of elephants) hang about close by, waiting till the animal selected strays, when they go up remove or cut through the hobbles, mount him, untie the clapper, and then head for the frontier. To persuade the elephant that there is every need for hurry, a man behind makes use of an instrument somewhat resembling a cat-o'- nine-tails. It consist of a wristband carrying numerous tails at the end of each of which is a cube of lead. The hills, clad as they are with dense jungle, afford ample shelter; the owner, when he suspects that the animal is stolen, usually has the good sense not to waste time in pursuit. Accomplished thieves make a good deal of money, for they steal an elephant in our territory, sell him in Siam, steal him again a month or so after, bring him across our
14 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. frontier, and once more dispose of him to some one at a place many miles distant from where they originally stole the beast. Distinctive marks are as a rule not very numerous on these creatures. Govern- ment animals are not branded,* but those owned by firms frequently are. The shoulders or quarters are the usual places. There is an idea that brands do not do well on the skin of the elephant ; this is not the case when carefully done. I have seen many elephants carrying clear brands free from blemish. Elephants with any blemishes about the shoulders or quarters should always be looked upon with suspicion, as they are likely to be stolen animals, the brands having been tampered with. All brands should be large and clear. Efforts have constantly been made to place in the hands of stock- breeders a more humane and more satisfactory means of branding their animals than by the time-honoured method of the hot iron. Experiments have been made from time to time with caustic branding compositions which should prove painless and leave a plain and permanent brand. In Burma certain compositions have been tried by brushing the paste over a stencil ; the operation seems to produce no pain but the length of time taken for the scab to fall off is considerable. Perhaps the patented branding compositions may be tried. The inventors claim thatCHAPTER II. GENERAL HYGIENE :16 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. consequence often neglected, and as a result unjustly condemned. Though of such great size and strength, if neglected they rapidly go to pieces. They are constantly disabled from sore backs and feet, the majority of such cases being due to want of a little care and supervision. As with all animals, the first and most important matter to attend to is that they be allowed an ample allowance of drinking water and abundance of food, and above all, the greatest care must be taken to ensure that they receive their allowance. On service, where animals cannot be permitted to graze, it is imperative that the persons in charge should see that they receive a sufficiency of food and water. Elephants require only a small amount of sleep, but to ensure their obtaining it all food should be presented to them at an early hour of the evening, as otherwise they spend the night munching their food and get no sleep at all. Care must be taken to see that they are carefully loaded, not overloaded (which is too often the case), not recklessly exposed to heat, that parts exposed to irritation are regularly examined before and after work, also that they are not overworked, and are at all times saved unnecessary labour; then, and then only, will those in charge be repaid for their care and attention. FEEDINGFEEDING18 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. like wet-la-myet ( ) may also be given, when it is difficult to procure kaing; most of them however are far less appreciated by elephants. In addition to the supply of good food being plentiful, it must also be varied ; but here again the conditions of food-supply in Rangoon, as I have observed, do not agree with my ideas on the subject. In Rangoon, fodder is usually brought in boats, and con- sists invariably of wet-la ( ) and myet-thin-dong ( ). With reference to the former (Paperus pangoree, Cyprus tegetum), it is one of the least nutritious kinds of fodder that could be supplied, as it is full of watery sap, is a poor substitute for kaing, and probably accounts for a good deal of the indifferent health and reduced capacity for work exhibited by many of the yard elephants (which, in my opinion, are through ignorance half-starved). For a creature to derive sufficient sustenance from it, a very large bulk must be ingested, which unduly taxes its digestive capabilities ; added to this, being cut in stagnant marsh lands, it may have adhering to it the ova of many varieties of noxious intestinal parasities, as well as germs of disease, and is often provocative of diarrhoea. Thus, for want of proper supervision it usually happens that a considerable quantity of dead stalks and other unwholesome material is mixed with it. I have observed that usually the custom is to allow so many bundles for each animal, but I have never seen yet a European supervising the weighing of the fodder to ensure that each animal receives an adequate allowance, which I have often found was not the case. How often is any other kind of fodder supplied ? I fully realize why this food is presented year in and year out : it is undoubtedly the easiest procurable near Rangoon, but with a little more trouble and very little extra expense, if employers would insist upon it, far superior fodder could be and should be substituted or mixed with this wet-la. In out-stations the animals are sent out to graze or taken out into the jungle, and when fodder is collected they carry it into camp. Those in charge must not be led away by the sight of the mahouts bringing in large loads of fodder on their elephants' backs ; nothing short of personal inspection and weighing is satisfactory ; contractors are in most instances quite as bad as mahouts ; every bundle must be opened out and examined and all dirty worthless stuff rejected, such as slimy grass, insect-eaten leaves, and branches and leaves that have been soiled by birds. J know from experience that mahouts are frequently too lazy to obtain good grass, even when it can be procured a mile distant from camp ; this is notably the case when on the march ; they think as long as they can deceive the person in charge by bringing in a load of worthless stuff (which plan often answers their lazy inclinations
FEEDING20 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. It has been explained in the foregoing pages that whenever kaing grass is procurable it should be given in preference to anything else. The daily quantity of green fodder should differ in accordance with the quantity of dry fodder (straws) allowed ; yet I can strongly recommend that whenever practicable each animal should have as much green grass as it can consume. At times green crops that have partially failed and are no good for reaping should be bought up. As is well known to all culti- vators in jungle tracts inhabited by elephants, these animals are very fond of growing cropsFEEDING22 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. and others. These mussauls are very useful in the hot season, being stimulant to the digestive organs thus promoting digestion. The ingredients are usually mixed with clarified butter (ghi, ), jaggery, or honey. Useful as these undoubtedly are where an indication exists, they should only be used sparingly. The long continued daily administration of these mussauls tends to blunt the sensitiveness of the digestive organs, creates new wants, and reduces the full natural reactive powers of the system. It is essential that they be given a liberal ration of salt, at least two to three ounces per diem. In fact a ratib may have to be given merely as a vehicle for the salt in order to establish the habit. Salt greatly assists the assimilative powers and, moreover, is most useful in helping to free the intestines from parasites to which elephants are very subject. Wild elephants in common with other wild animals are frequent visitors to salt-licks, where they eat the earth which is impregnated with natron. As noted further on, petty peculation and appropriation of a portion of the ratib allowed by owners is a crime common to most elephant attendants and is, when the ratib cannot be given in the presence of a trusted person, one of the great drawbacks to allowing such extra food. TIMES OF FEEDING. With regard to the time of feeding, elephants should be allowed to feed at all times except when at work. If ample fresh fodder be brought in morning and evening and the animal is left alone, then of the twenty-four hours all but four to six will be devoted to munching. When continuous exertion of any kind is demanded, before and after work are the most appropriate times for supplying fresh fodder. I have repeatedly observed yard elephants after work waiting for an hour or two for their food. This is a malpractice which cannot be known to employers, for they could not countenance a practice so cruel and one so likely to be damaging to their own interests. The Commissariat scale of rations for elephants in Bengal, Madras and Burma is given in Appendix 39, Volume 5, paragraph 1917, Commissariat Transport, and is as follows:TIMES OF FEEDING. 23 provided that the latter does not consist of straw alone, i.e., without grain in it :24 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. (6)Commissariat Transport Officers are authorized to refuse to draw the allowance of four annas per diem for attendants if their elephants are not kept in good condition. (7)When the cost of the fodder ration for elephants in Canton- ments exceeds that of the command scale of rations, elephants in Cantonments should be fed on the latter scale. (8)The rules in the preceding paragraph do not apply to elephants with heavy batteries, which are allowed rations on the scale (Appendix 38, paragraph 1917). Appendix 38, paragraph 1917, gives the scale of rations as follows :[Facing page 25. PLATE II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] A WELL-KNOWN ELEPHANT IN MESSRS. MACGREGOR'S YARD, RANGOON.
WORK AND EXERCISE. 25 ailments are traceable to the use of bad water. Elephants like running water, and prefer to drink the water of tributary streams to that of the large rivers. At all times the water offered should be as sweet and clean as can be procured, though they are not averse to drinking muddy water (wild ones have little else during the rainy season). During the dry season good water-holes (such as the Burmans dig for their own use) should be dug in the sandy beds of streams ; failing these, well water must be given. On no account are they to be permitted to drink from the tanks and pools used by cattle. In their natural state they drink shortly after sunrise and before sunset. Domestic animals ought to be watered at least twice daily, three times when possible, namely, morning, midday and evening. They should be watered about three-quarters of an hour before they are fed. On the march if any animal attempts to drink, although he be heated, he may be allowed to do so (this does not apply to squirting water over the body). A lengthened hot march (over seven hours) should not be attempted unless water is procur- able on the way. When travelling with elephants during the hot season, marches should be regulated in accordance with the prospects of good water-supply. WORK AND EXERCISE. It is difficult to lay down fixed rules as to the amount of work which may be exacted. This must necessarily depend in some measure upon individual idiosyncrasies and constitution, which can only be ascertained by the careful observation of those in attendance (supervisors, etc.). What would undoubtedly prove moderate work in one individual might prove excessive in another, though to all appearances of equal size, age and condition. Again, the early symptoms of failing vigour which should be recognized by the mahouts are either not reported by them, or often after having been reported are paid no heed to by those in authority. I can call to mind instances in which an animal palpably suffering pain and going lame was found working. Regrettable as it is, the sufferings of an animal that may have toiled for years in his master's cause and contributed materially to his fortunes are passed unnoticed. Too often therefore it happens that an animal's energies are overtaxed to such an extent that he suddenly breaks down. So far as one can frame rules, I would strongly recommend that during the hot weather, from 15th February to the breaking of the rains, no animals should be worked in the open after 10 A.M., and never before 3-30 P.M. Moreover they should never be worked more than
26 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. three hours at a stretch without being given half an hour's interval or rest in the shade, during which time the gear should be loosened, parts examined for galls, and a little water and some bundles of fodder presented. I consider it imperative for humanity's sake that employers should detail, whenever possible, a European assistant to frequently (at least three times a week) inspect and report upon the health of the animals, their physical capability for work, also the sanitary condition of their surroundings, and above all the quality and amount by weight of fodder supplied. When elephants are idle, it is essential that they have daily exercise, as they frequently fall out of condition from sheer want of it, especially so if under these circumstances ratibs be allowed. In some cases the daily journey for fodder will suffice. When however this is too short, and no work can be found, it will be necessary to give them a march for an hour or so in the early morning and the cool of the evening. In the hot season they should be rested between 10 A.M. and 4 P.M. It is cruel to work them in the heat, and is also dangerous, as they are liable to go down with sun-stroke. Where there is work, and in a great many instances there is more than the animals kept for it can properly accomplish, the following system may be tried. Assuming that the gear is a good fit, that the parts where it presses are healthy, and the animal in other respects in full health and vigour, it will as just mentioned be conducive to the maintenance of both that he should perform a daily task, be it marching, dragging, or pushing. An hour or so morning and evening of continuous exertion, such as the animal can compass without evident strain, is about what might be demanded without giving any extra diet. The question of the amount of additional work he can do will then resolve itself into that of how many hours taken from his legitimate occupation of munching green fodder can we make reparation for by offering a more generous diet. This is a clear issue and makes the answer easy. We can by these means assuredly not more than double or treble the duration of the working hours. The healthy elephant with good treatment, liberal allowance of fodder, can work regularly for six or seven hours a day without injury. But the question just answered is in practice rarely ever asked. The more common question which too, for reasons assignable, we are bound to answer, is not what are the limits of fair work, but what constitutes overwork, particularly in respect to carrying. In a campaign sometimes these rules cannot be adhered to, for conditions may arise demanding the utmost strain upon the elephant's capabilities. It is useful to know to what degree ordinarily the powers of the elephant may be taxed within twenty-four hours, without depriving ourselves of his services
WORK AND EXERCISE. 27 for the next twenty-four hours or longer period. The reply is com- plicated, and can hardly be given in the form of any definite amount; so many are the elements of each problem, so variable may these separate elements be upon one and the same occasion, as to make the laying down of rigid rules inadvisable. There are to be considered (1) the load ; (2) the configuration of the ground over which the road lies ; (3) the nature of its surface; (4) the time of day; (5) the existence or absence of shade ; (6) the number of days' rest enjoyed immediately before, and in prospect immediately after, the march ; (7) the quality and quantity of fodder and water available. From which collectively may be deduced the number of miles the animal can safely traverse. It must never be lost sight of that the elephant is a nocturnal animal ; therefore all work should as much as possible- be done in the early morning and evening. It must also be borne in mind that in continuous exertion like marching, fatigue comes on almost imperceptibly ; we are then more likely to be deceived in measuring the staying power of the elephant than in work of a spasmodic and intermittent kind, such as dragging or pushing timber on the ground. If a log be too heavy, the animal will snort, refuse, or move it but a short way at a time ; but in carrying a load that at the first start off sits easily, the animal becomes exhausted almost unconsciously to himself. After a pause on the march he is unable to overcome the stiffness that immediately supervenes, and if he be goaded too much may drop down suddenly to rise no more. A good attendant will generally give timely notice of the possibility of such an occurrence. The elephant is by conformation a beast of burden, and though he goes in draught he is out of place in it, as it throws him into an unnatural position, and he loses much of the advantage his size, weight and strength give him. Elephants are employed for draught in the heavy siege batteries. Opinions vary as to the absolute weight an animal can carry. Of course the greatest weight he can sustain can be moved over short distances only, and medium loads over less space than light ones. Under some circumstances it is as much as an elephant can do to move the weight of his own body, not to speak of a heavy load, or a log of timber. The Government loads vary from 1,000 to 1,200 lbs., but 1,000 lbs. including everything is a good load, and if elephants are to be worked for any time, it is inadvisable to make them carry even so much. As regards dragging in the hills, if about three hours in the morning and three in the evening. and not more, be devoted to work, it will doubtless occur that the number of logs worked out in a season will fall below the average. Figures quoted with reference to this
28 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. heading can have but little general application ; local circumstances, such as the configuration of the ground, the distribution of the logs, and of the floating streams, will decide. A few facts may nevertheless be interesting. Two hundred logs, say two hundred and fifty tons per animal, dragged ex situ to the floating streams in the course of the season, may be regarded as an exceptionally favourable figure. It could not be accomplished except in a district newly opened up, where dead trees were still standing in consider- able numbers in proximity to the streams. But taking Burma jungles in their ordinary form, an elephant might have to drag the logs some miles to the streams, and would probably die before he collected half that amount. In some cases the hill streams are fit for floating timber, and the work is about a third less than in others where a second land journey has to be made from the confines of the hills through the plain to the point where the stream becomes suitable for floating. The principal and the most trying part of the dragging work, namely, that of the isolated trees from their original sites up and down hill to the preliminary dep6ts, should be under- taken in the cold-weather months when the deepest leaf covering is on the ground, which, moistened by heavy dews, allows the logs to slide more easily. A small dragging cart (Fig. 2) has been employed with profit even in the hills, and there is little doubt that by bringing thought to bear on improving such appliances and placing less reliance on sheer brute force, elephant labour might be economized (see Figs. 3 and 4) both in regard to the number of animals needed and the strain placed upon the powers of each. Before and after work it is necessary to inspect all parts liable to gall, and if the animal has been carrying a load the attendant should shampoo the back with his feet and hands. The trunk and feet should be carefully examined for cuts, bruises, and foreign bodies, such as thorns, bamboo spikes, and during the rains the body for leeches, which are very plentiful in some parts of the Province and the bites from which at times cause nasty sores. POWER OF ENDURANCE. Though such large animals, their power of endurance is much less than is generally supposed, as they are constitutionally delicate. Through lack of appreciation of this fact, these animals have not received the attention they justly deserve ; and owing to the popular impression that they are extremely strong, the error obtaining in this respect has led to their being too highly tasked, and much of the
POWER OF ENDURANCE. 29 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2.30 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. ill-health and mortality prevalent amongst them may in a great measure be attributed to this cause. The smaller kinds of animals employed for transport are born and bred in captivity, and have thus by custom, training and other causes become more or less inured to hardships, but with elephants the case is entirely different; here, we have animals that have lived a natural life for many years, when one day (unfortunately for themselves) they are surrounded in their native haunts and captured. Soon after capture they are trained, put to work, frequently overworked, often neglected, and altogether submitted to conditions in every way foreign to their nature and well-being. It should not be a matter of surprise that the mortality runs high. Therefore it cannot be too forcibly impressed on the persons entrusted with their care, that untiring and vigilant supervision over the attendants, not merely giving orders but seeing them carried out whenever circumstances permit, is the means above all others for the proper preservation of the efficiency of the animals ; they must remember that the class of men usually attending the elephants, if left to themselves, are from general indolence, carelessness, or from a desire to avoid the fatigue and hardships of jungle-life, or a campaign, quite liable to render their elephants unserviceable; ample supervision and systematic checks can alone prevent malpractices. A little neglect will often deprive an owner or a force of the valuable services of many animals. As regards elephants employed in forest operations in Burma, the life of the elephant is frequently the only security capitalists have against advances made for timber to be worked through their aid. The percentage of deaths that annually occur amongst elephants employed in this branch of industry is probably from 10 to 20 per cent. Not an inconsiderable number of such deaths are due to over-exertion and exposure, and ignorance on the part of native owners as to the powers of endurance of an animal and their inability to detect the first symptoms of exhaustion ; while in many instances they attempt to exact from a poor beast the last effort of strength it is capable of exerting. With reference to timber- dragging operations in Burma and Siam, the duration of daily employment naturally varies with the time of year, physical aspect of the country, and the food and water-supply. In timber-yards in Rangoon and Moulmein, where elephants are much exposed to the sun, they usually work from three to four hours in the morning and three hours in the afternoon. In forests, where the shade of the trees afford shelter from the direct rays of the sun, and where the country is not too hilly, or the drag too heavy, the hours of work generally extend from about seven or eight o'clock in the morning
REST AND SLEEP. 31 till three o'clock in the afternoon during the working season, i.e., from about the month of June to the middle or end of February. During the hot season the animals are allowed to rest, or at most they may be employed for a couple of hours in the morning in shady places and where good water and grazing are at hand, so that on being released from work they can be set free to eat to their heart's desire. In all such matters, however, it only requires common- sense and a little intelligent supervision to soon be in a position to ascertain the powers of endurance of each animal one may have to deal with, as these powers vary in individual elephants as much as in human beings, except that in the former case, when once an animal's strength is overtaxed, the evil is less readily remedied owing to the difficulty of treatment. PACES. The only pace of the elephant is a walk ; any increased pace he may put on is a fast shuffle. He can neither trot, canter, gallop nor jump. A ditch 6 ft. or 7 ft. wide and 6 ft. deep is impass- able. A moderately loaded animal can, on a good road, travel three miles an hour. REST ANDSLEEP. Rest extraordinary comes into question only before and after work extraordinary. Sleep in the case of the elephant is confined to a very few hours ; generally speaking from about 11 P.M. to 3 A.M., but often only for a couple of hours. It is of the utmost importance that the animal should have his sleep, such as it is, and this will be interfered with prejudicially if too frequent night marches or other night work be required, or if the feeding hours are too often curtailed by long continued work at any period of the day. To keep an animal waiting for his fodder on coming off work is already mentioned as one of the worst offences of which a mahout can be guilty, for by that means the animal's feeding time is wantonly subjected to further diminution, and the opportunity for sleep as well lessened in proportion. If the animal have not time to eat a sufficiency before midnight, it will continue eating all night, supposing that enough fodder has been provided. Care should be taken to see that the standing selected is on a slope, the ground even, free from stones, and that the elephant is allowed plenty of room.
32 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. EXPOSURE. As already observed, the elephant is by nature a nocturnal animal, and is therefore most impatient of the sun. He appears to be more himself during the night, and in the mornings and evenings than during the day, even when protected by shade ; at these times he is more active, and can in every way perform more work. Animals tethered in the sun will show their dislike to it by heaping bundles of fodder, blankets, in fact anything that will afford pro- tection on to their heads, and constantly kick up sand which they collect and throw on their heads and backs. When working in the heat they frequently place the trunk in the mouth and squirt watery fluid over their bodies. Perhaps no elephants are exposed more to the sun and weather than those working in timber-yards, where they are at work from early morning till eleven o'clock and again from 1 or 2 P.M. to 5 P.M. The work however varies, sometimes light, at others heavy ; occasionally they get a rest, owing either to there being no work, or to some part of the mill machinery having given away. It is possibly owing to the frequency of these rests, the variation of the work, and the extras in the way of food they receive, that they stand it longer than might be expected ; but on the whole the mortality is high. If the animals are picketed out during the hot season, when the glare is very great, it is advisable to hang moist cloths or shades over the eyes. It is also desirable that elephants working in the sun be provided with a pad of material similar to the guddela, or of a lighter material, say cotton large enough to cover the neck and head and hang down a span or two around the latter. A careful attendant will often be seen spreading his turban or jacket over his animal's head to shield it from the sun. Exposure to rain and even having to dis- pense with other shelter than that of a tree, provided the drainage be good, does not seem to act prejudicially. On the other hand, exposure to cold night winds in open sheds erected upon bare, unsheltered and elevated sites, which again become heated to a pro- portionate degree during the day, has been justly regarded as a source of disease. Artificial shelter is required only where good natural shelter fails. The best shelter is a grove of evergreen trees standing on a slight slope, where the drainage is good and so large as to permit of the standings being frequently changed. But for elephants working in yards, sheds have to be built. They should be erected on sheltered and well-drained sites, and ought to be provided with jhamps on the north-east and south-west sides, and have raised sloping floors of concrete or laterite. Floors made of slabs of wood are objectionable, unless well raised with a concrete
BATHING AND GROOMING: 33 floor beneath which can be swept as well as flushed, otherwise urine, etc., runs down between the boards, thus saturating the soil beneath. Several short stout posts with or without ring-bolts should be planted firmly within and without for the purpose of tethering the animals. Quarters should also be provided for the attendants in connection with the sheds in order to remove any excuse for absence from their respective animals. Elephants are often kept in stations without their presence being turned to good account, and where facilities not only for obtaining their natural fodder and for bathing but natural shelter also fail. Much sickness, mortality, as well as current outlay would be done away with were the elephant depots to be moved to the nearest place which offered natural advantages for the keep of the animals. Some localities have been observed to be very badly suited for the keep of elephants, in which nevertheless their services are required for sorting timber, etc. Such places will generally be found to be of a kind varying to the furthest extent from the conditions in which we meet with elephants in their natural state. Perhaps none are more objectionable than the daily inundated tidal marsh lands, where the sheds are situated on patches of ground which barely escape inundation. In selecting camping-grounds it is essential that the ground be sloping; the elephants should face with heads uphill, otherwise if they lie down they might experience much difficulty in rising ; care should also be taken to see that the standings are not on uneven ground, and that they are free from stones and stumps. All dung, litter, etc., should be removed morning and evening to a considerable distance from any standing. BATHING AND GROOMING. Bathing is one of the natural functions of the elephant, and most important to his health. In the wild state the animals pay daily visits to the deep cool pools in hill streams, and even the large rivers, and immerse their bodies, lashing the water about them, or squirting it over themselves. Inactive as the exhalatory functions of the skin appear to be, dirt speedily produces much irritation, and continued want of a bath general indisposition. It is of advantage that the water be deep enough to admit of immersion of the whole body in the crouching position, if not other- wise. They should on no account be kept in places where facilities for bathing fail. They may when in health be taken into the water in the early morning, as they appear to possess no sense of 3
34 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. chilliness, for if left to themselves they will not hesitate to enter water shortly after daybreak. Sunset is the best hour for the evening bath. While bathing the attendants should rub the body over with a soft stone or the husk of a cocoanut; the animal will squirt water over himself constantly. The natural orifices and feet must be kept clean. When a halt has to be made at a place where no body of water exists, the attendants must draw water from wells and pour it over the animals. Bathing is never to be undertaken when animals are in a heated condition. If a river is encountered on the march, they should be halted and not permitted to enter till their bodies have cooled. When dry after bathing, it is customary for the attendants to smear oil all over the upper portion of the head, the idea being that it has a very cooling effect and soothes the irritation with which the scurfy state of the head is so commonly attended. If this part was kept thoroughly clean and protected from the sun by a pad, this remedial anointing might perhaps be dispensed with. It must be remembered that the application of oil deepens the colour of the skin to a perfect black, thus vastly increasing the capability of the surface for absorption of heat. If a sun pad is necessary under ordinary conditions, it would appear to be doubly so after oiling. ATTENDANTS AND THEIR DUTIES. Every domesticated elephant necessarily has its own particular attendant, oo-si (, the man who rides in front) or mahout. In the case of Government animals and those of some private owners, the oo-si is allowed an assistant, known as the pai-si (, the man who rides behind). In India he is called cowardie. The oo-si either is directly under the control of his employer, or, where there are a number of animals, indirectly through an overseer, sin-ôk ( ), singaung, sometimes called kyun-ôk or jemadar. The duties of an oo-si are the continual immediate care of his elephant, both on and off work. In the former case, he rides on the neck of the elephant, guides it on the march or directs it in dragging, pushing of timber, etc., and it is at all times his duty to be on the alert for means of economizing the strength of the animal, saving it unnecessary exertion and exposure. Off work it should be his first care to see that the animal receives its drinking water, bath, and a sufficiency of good clean fodder; also to see that it is kept in the shade, or in a shed, his personal con- venience being secondary. He must wash and examine every part of the body daily, notice any departure from the normal state as
PLATE III. [Facing page 34. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] THIS ELEPHANT WAS PROBABLY ONE OK THE BHST-TRAIND ANIMALS IN BURMA. Photographed when aged ; hence prominence of spinal ridge and worn condition of tusks. He shows all the good points of elephant in Plate I. Height about 8 feet.
ATTENDANTS AND THEIR DUTIES. 35 regards appetite, evacuations, external temperature of the body, and report the same without delay. If the animal is turned loose after work, he must after careful inspection of the body take him to where the grazing is good, see that the drinking water is clean and near at hand, and also take care to fetter the elephant carefully and securely to prevent straying, fighting, etc. He should in the very early morning follow up his elephant and note how the night has been spent. It is important in addition to signs of feeding, amount and condition of the evacuations, to note how often the animal has slept. One " bed " is usual ; two or more or the absence of any " bed " at all is an indication of something being amiss, as also if the animal has been known to sleep during the day. He is responsible for the proper adjustment of the harness and arrangement of loads, also that no long-continued undue pres- sure takes place upon any part; he must be on the look-out and report the first symptoms of fatigue, whether arising from exposure, overwork, overloading, or from failing health. The oo-si should have experience of the most approved methods of fettering, catching, subduing, and approaching unruly animals. He should administer all medicines directed to be given, but should not on any pretence whatever be permitted to prescribe or give any drug unless specially authorized to do so. The pai-si has to attend to the instructions of the oo-si and assist him in such manner as may be desired. He is generally employed on cooly work, i.e., collecting fodder, keeping the standings clean. On the march it is his dtity to precede the elephant to explore the route, with a view to the avoidance of quagmires and quicksands, as well as of sharp stumps or stones. This important duty is however frequently not carried out efficiently owing to laziness, the pai-si riding on the elephant. In the case of timber-working elephants, it is the duty of the pai-si to fix the dragging chain on to the logs, and he is then frequently called the pai-chaik ( ), or the man who " hooks behind." It is in the capacity of pai-sis that oo-sis serve their apprenticeship. The sin-ok or jemadar, when one is kept, controls the oo-sis in the duties above detailed ; he should possess superior experience and judgment in the recognition of the more ordinary ailments, also a knowledge of the uses of some of the common drugs, as well as ability to dress wounds, etc., and perform minor operations such as opening abscesses. All who are directly connected with the care of elephants should be firm, kind, and above all even-tempered, qualities for which they have a ready per- ception. I have known the training of a previously well-behaved animal to be lost to such a degree that she would endure neither load nor rider, simply owing to the accident of being placed in the
36 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. charge of an irascible fitful keeper, who first negligently indulged, and then wantonly punished her. A rider who ordinarily shouts out his words of command in a needlessly harsh and loud voice, and who extensively and passionately employs the goad {see Fig.5), is usually of this class. In timber working many elephants are ruined in this way ; hence the danger in changing drivers. The essence of good riding consists in con- trolling the animal entirely by word of command, and the proper application of the knees and feet when necessary. There is a word in Burmese which describes a good driver as a " knee rider." Elephant- keepers are a peculiar class of men, who require delicate handling, but with a little tact much good can be got out of them. Elephant driving is an art which takes some learning ; good men know their value, so must be pampered a little ; they are well aware of the fact that most Europeans are ignorant as regards elephants and their management, and are consequently very often a little above themselves. One point in connection with elephants must never be lost sight of, namely, the importance of securing a maximum degree of permanency of the particular attendant of a particular animal. A keeper who is possessed even in a moderate degree of the qualifications already enumerated, and who has been with his elephant a sufficiently long time to have studied the peculiarities of his charge, has become invaluable to his employer. The knowledge in question can only be gained by experience, and lengthened individual observation ; it cannot be placed on record or otherwise handed down ; hence any animal placed in the hands of a succession of keepers is subjected to treatment extremely calculated to prove prejudicial to its health, temper, and utility. Much ill success in the maintenance of elephant establishments is to a great extent traceable to this cause ; accordingly it will be found expedient to condone much in a good keeper. The common offence for which mahouts are dismissed is the appropriation to their own use, or sale for their own benefit, of the ratibs (special allowances, such as flour, rice) allowed by their employers. The best remedy for this is extra supervision and whenever practicable to make certain of the animals receiving their full daily allowance by having them fed in the presence of some trusted person. If this cannot be done, flagrant as is dis- honesty of this kind, a really good keeper should not be dismissed, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 5.ATTENDANTS AND THEIR DUTIES. 37 unless his peculation is of such a degree as to affect the health of the animal in his charge, thus evincing a lack of concern in its well- being. Petty peculation, submission of false and exorbitant bills for medicines said to have been purchased and given in emergency, and regularly stealing a portion of the ratibs, are drawbacks which in an elephant establishment must be regarded as lesser evils. Elephant attendants appear to be unable to abstain from these methods of defrauding their employers, and any attempt to enforce honesty by severe measures would eventually be visited upon the animals, and thus a much greater evil brought about than that which it was sought to avoid. Supervision will ensure the animals receiv- ing the food ordered for them, and by keeping a supply of ordinary drugs and mussaul ingredients, the attendants would soon recog- nize that it was quite unnecessary for them to submit bills for medicine. As a rule a driver is proud of his elephant, and it is astonishing to see what a good man can make his animal do ; all his orders are given in a quiet persuasive manner, and his hints (conveyed by his knees and feet behind the animal's ears) are given in such a quiet way as to make it almost appear that the movements of the elephant are spontaneous. There are many offences for which keepers should be severely punished or dismissed, namely, a man who takes no pride in his animal, and shows no concern about its prosperity, evinced by making the immediate wants of the animal subordinate to his own, by cooking his food, sitting down to smoke before he has watered and fed his elephant, neglecting to bathe it when proper oppor- tunity offered, taking the animal into water when the body is heated, overworking or overloading it, tying it up at nightfall instead of allowing it to graze so as to save bother in tracking it up the next morning, failing to administer medicines ordered, and neglect- ing to report any symptoms of ill-health, injuries, etc. Nevertheless, keepers of almost tantamount value with their animals and to their employers are frequently dismissed or discour- aged for offences which by comparison with the above are mere bagatelles ; often too upon charges not thoroughly enquired into or proved. Much care as may be exercised in the choice of a good keeper, it is singular how little is occasionally bestowed on that of the disposition and attainments of the person empowered to deal summarily with him. As a matter of fact in a great many instances the occupation of the care and treatment of elephants as oo-si or mahout runs in families for generations, the father training his son to a knowledge of the work.
38 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. In this Province, when elephants are purchased, they are generally in the care of Burman, Karen, or Shan drivers. There is little doubt that in regard to the handling and general management of domestic elephants, they are rarely as good as the Indian mahout as seen in India, but they are in every respect better than the majority of so-called mahouts met with here, who are readily dis- cerned to be adventurers as far as their pretensions to any previous knowledge or experience of elephants goes. The few Indians employed are generally on Government animals, or those working in yards. There are many excellent keepers amongst the Burmans and Karens ; many however are careless and lazy, and a few are impatient and at times cruel. As a general rule they are kind, can stand the climate and heavy jungle work, and are usually cheery willing fellows. The pay of a sin-ok or jemadar ranges, according to qualifica- tions, from Rs. 20 to Rs. 40 per mensem ; the pay of an oo-si or mahout, from Rs. 12 to Rs. 18 per mensem ; the pay of a pai-si or cowardie, from Rs. 10 to Rs. 12 per mensem. Burman employers usually supply their men with food and in addition give them a few rupees monthly. It is a good plan to give a good mahout a bonus at the end of the year, but I think it would be preferable to give such men a small increase of pay. Increments of pay are thought much more of by these people.
CHAPTER III. HYGINE :-GEAR FOR DRAGGING. PACK-GEAR. CARE OF GEAR. SUMMARY OF GENERAL HYGIENE. GEAR FOR DRAGGING. For timber-dragging, the harness in most general use consists of numdah, saddle, girths, back sling, and chains, and to describe them in order we will take first the numdah :40 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. kwechee ( ), is a light frame-work, and it appears to be a matter of opinion, not unmixed with a good deal of feeling, with the workers of elephants as to which kind of saddle is the more comfortable for the animal. Girths and sling.GEAR FOR DRAGGING. 41 of the twisted chain will chafe the animal's side and may even dig the big hook into its shoulder. The chain consists of two traces, one 14 ft. long, and the other 8 ft. (to take an average measurement), but it is best to determine the length of chain most suitable to its build after examining the animal at work. At the working end of the longer chain is a link sufficiently small to pass through the drag-hole of the log and hook on to the short trace, which is fitted with a strong stub-hook. It not infrequently happens that even the larger-sized chains part under a heavy pull, and accidents though frequent are not as one might suppose serious. It is rarely that any injury beyond an abrasion results to the elephant. The driver is provided with a strap from the saddle with which to hold on at critical moments. The foregoing is sufficient harness for an ordinary well-trained elephant, but it is occasion- ally necessary to supple- ment the gear with backing chains and a crupper made of plaited cane for animals given to jibbing and other tricks (see Fig. 6a). Description. 42 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Other articles of elephant's equipment are fetters, soolay, and foot-chain. The latter two are seldom used, except on runaway beasts and confirmed bolters ; they are only removed to be changed occasionally from one fore-foot to another. The foot-chain alone is used in dry country, when the mahout would have difficulty in pick- ing up his elephant's tracks, and for animals given to wandering or straying. In such cases 40 ft. of 3/8-in. chain is tied to the fetter between the fore-legs, and allowed to trail. PACK-GEAR. This is a most important subject and cannot receive too careful attention. Unless the gear fits properly and is carefully adjusted, galls are likely to result and thus incapacitate animals often for lengthened periods. This may be a matter of the utmost impor- tance, for instance when such animals are employed for transport in warfare. Different patterns have been devised from time to time, but there is only one which can be recommended, and that is what is known as " Sanderson's improved pattern," and which is the pattern adopted by Government. The subject of gear has been ably and fully treated of in a Government pamphlet, edited by this well-known authority on all matters concerning the elephant, entitled " Pack- gear for Elephants," published by the Superintendent, Government Printing, Calcutta, and which I would advise anyone employing Sanderson's gear to obtain. The following remarks are chiefly quoted from this work :PACK-GEAR. 43 (b) The guddee (Fig. 7) is a reed-stuffed pad, placed on the guddela, and is furnished with a longitudinal opening to receive the spine and protect it from pressure and friction. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 7.44 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. can be hauled up when slack ; the D is then hooked into any required link of the chain ; a short rope attached to the top ring connects the girth with the bobbins of the saddle. Tight-girthing is essential to prevent the gear from slipping and the load from swaying. (e) Neck-rope (Fig. 9) is furnished with a loop at one end [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 9.PACK-GEAR. 45 time, and been found to fulfil all requirements. Moreover, I may add that they are constructed of such excellent material that their durability far exceeds any other that I am acquainted with. The gear is made in six sizes to suit animals of different heights, and the guddee may be obtained stuffed or empty. Therefore it is only necessary to state vertical height at the shoulder when order- ing it46 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. on the back. With many animals these have an inclination to move backwards and forwards so that the guddee works beyond the guddela and abrasions are thus likely to result. A careful mahout knows his animal's peculiarity and makes allowance for this when putting on the gear. Constant attention must be given on the march to see that they retain their relative positions. Saddle.CARE OF GEAR. 47 CARE OF GEAR. Guddela must be dried after being wetted, by hanging it with its length parallel with ground. It should be rolled up at night to keep from damp and white-ants. Guddee should always be lifted off, not thrown off, as is usually done, as this hot only tends to shift the stuffing but strains the sewing. It should be stood on end till required. Girths, neck, and crupper- ropes should be placed where they cannot become wet or soiled. If, as a matter of routine, each part of the gear is always kept in its appointed place near each animal, sets will not become mixed, and the attendants will know exactly where to lay hands on them at [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 12.48 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. and pattern for carrying purposes (see Figs. 12 and 13). They are cheap and easily repaired, but quite unsuitable for military purposes. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 13.CHAPTER IV. MOUNTING. RESTRAINT. FETTERING FOR GRAZING. SECURING FOR OPERATIONS. BOLTING. CROSSING RIVERS. QUICKSANDS. DESTRUCTION OF ELEPHANTS. MOUNTING. In order to mount an animal that is nervous of his keeper, which will sometimes happen if it be in dread of a wound being handled, or dressed, or other cause, a good plan is to throw a rope over the body making a running noose and haul it tight round the belly, whereby to climb up. RESTRAINT. For this purpose fetters, chains, and ropes are employed. Fetters are of various patterns: those most commonly used consist of short lengths of chain. A fetter is carried for each foot, [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 14.50 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Fetters made of plaited cane are more often employed by the Karens. The fetter is a simple hoop of plaited cane (see Fig. 15) ; when in position, it is lashed between the legs with a rope or thong. Special fetters are sometimes used, such as the soolays; these consist of three pieces of iron, jointed and fitted with spikes on the inside ; the hind-fetter consists of two pieces of iron jointed and spiked ; they are only used on unruly beasts, or when there is a chance of animals stampeding through fear, or on those given to bolting (see Figs. 23 and 24). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 15.[Facing page 50. PLATE IV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FINE SPECIMEN OF A COW ELEPHANT.
FETTERING FOR GRAZING. 51 is secured, in which case a rope is wound round the leg about half-way up and tied; the tethering chain is applied above this. For animals given to trying to throw the mahouts off, an iron spiked chain collar is sometimes employed. FETTERING FOR GRAZING. When elephants are set free to graze during the day or night, care should be taken to have each animal properly fettered, more particularly the males, as it not only prevents them wandering away for miles, but may interfere with the males fighting, as they are apt to do at times, goring each other seriously. An unfettered small male has a great advantage over a much larger fettered opponent; and cases have occurred of elephants dying from the effects of such conflicts. In the case of a fight between two elephants belonging to different owners, one being fettered, the other free, the owner of the former received a decree in Court for all the damage done to his animal by the unfettered one. The degree of injury done by goring depends naturally on the length, thickness and sharpness of the tusks. Sharp tusks will readily pierce the tissues inflicting terrible wounds ; but blunt ones, whether from pushing timber, or from being intentionally cut, will in many cases cause contusions only, the effects of which, however, may be of a very serious nature. A case recently tried in Upper Burma will prove of interest to owners of elephants. I therefore give it in full from the " Burma Law Reports," Volume VII, Part II, page 73, 1901 (see Appendix A). SECURING FOR OPERATIONS. As a rule elephants are very good about being operated on ; they do not appear to mind being cut ; there are however many troublesome dangerous beasts who require to be carefully secured. The two more common methods employed are as follows :52 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. legs together, when they are tied in a similar manner to the fore-legs, only much higher up (about half-way up the limb) and a tethering chain applied. The free end is secured round a tree or post. To fix the head a long rope is taken : one end is tied round the post and the free portion passed under and over the neck and round the post three or more times and carefully tied. An elephant can shake a man off his back. To diminish the chances of such an accident, take a long rope, pass it round the neck and tie a knot between the shoulders ; carry the free end under the tail round to the loop where it should be knotted near where the first knot is tied ; by this means it is almost impossible for a man to be shaken off. This leaves only the trunk to be dealt with, and any mischief from this source can be guarded against by the presence of the mahout on the neck, and a man or two below armed with spears. (b) Fetter both the fore-limbs ; then take the tethering chain attached to fetter, say on left leg, and pass it over the neck ; the animal is now made to assume the crouching posture ; the free end of chain is then passed through fetter on right side, brought back over the neck, and the operation repeated once or twice and the chain secured. It is as well to apply a few gunny-bags over the neck, as it is liable to become galled if the animal strains much. These means are not sufficient to secure all animals for opera- tion. There are some so vicious at times that little can be done without endangering the lives of attendants. In the jungle and in Siam a " break " or "crush" is sometimes used (see Figs. 17 and 18). This consists of a number of stout rough logs set in a V-shaped manner. The elephant is ridden or driven in at E, and when he gets past the double posts at BSECURING FOR OPERATIONS. 53 I only tried it once, and this was at Pakokku. The elephant, a fine powerful and most troublesome tusker, was suffering from a severe wound on the spine, also two enormous abscesses on [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 18.54 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. cooly to mount and dress the wounds. This elephant after a course of tonics made an excellent recovery (see Appendix B). The kya-pazat is used for the recapture of escaped elephants. Some animals after being free for a time, though permitting men they know to ap- proach them, will not allow them to mount, so this kind of kya-pazat is used (see Fig. 20) ; the head is similar to an ordinary pitch-fork, but barbed like a fish-hook, it is wide enough to stick on to a limb ; a light chain or rope is attached to a ring on it. The head can be fixed on a long bamboo. The man sneaks about the jungle after his animal and when opportunity offers sticks the pitch-fork on a hind limb ; the handle soon comes out, but before long the rope or chain gets entangled in bushes, and the animal cannot get away. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 20.BOLTING. 55 The following are the instructions laid down for securing elephants in the "Manual of Mountain Artillery," 1882 :56 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. leg ; the free end should be attached to the saddle within easy reach of the driver, so that if occasion arises he can release it in the hope that it may be caught in some bush or stump. Sanderson cured a bolter by having a hoop of iron made with sharp spikes to encircle a hind-leg, soolays of the Burmese (see Figs. 23 and 24). This was kept in osi- tion round the leg by being suspended from the pad by a rope, and it fitted the leg so loosely as not to inconvenience the elephant except when required. To the ring was attached a chain 15 ft. long, at the other end of which was a pick-axe head. This grap- pling-iron was slung to the pad by a cord in a slip-knot, handy to the mahout who could set the anchor free with a pull at the cord. In the Karen Hills I noticed that unruly beasts and those given to bolting generally have a hole about the size of a rupee pierced through the lobe of one ear. A piece of cord is passed through the hole, and the free ends kept handy by the driver. On giving trouble the driver hangs on to the string; the method appears to be fairly effective. The oo-sis, when bringing certain animals in from grazing, pass a cord through the hole in the ear, take hold of the free ends and lead the animals into camp. A method employed in Siam with nervous elephants is very effective : a bent hook like a magnified fish-hook hangs loosely on the ear close to the head; a string is attached to the eye on the straight end. When the animal is nervous and shows signs of wanting to bolt, the cooly pulls on the string. Some mahouts take the trouble to teach their elephants certain methods by which they alone can approach and catch their animals when out grazing. For instance, a driver seeing his elephant hails him, upon which the animal at once charges down on his keeper with (to a stranger) apparently alarming intent, but having done this he permits himself to be caught. Other elephants will permit their fetters to be removed from the near or off-side only, and some will only allow approach from behind, or the driver must pass under the elephant's uplifted trunk, before he proceeds to remove a fetter. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 24.[Facing page 57. PLATE V. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] ELEPHANTS BEING RAFTED.
CROSSING RIVERS. 57 These little eccentricities are useful in a way, in that they help to prevent a casual thief, or a professional, who has perhaps not had an opportunity of studying the habits of certain animals he desires to steal, from capturing them. CROSSING RIVERS. The impropriety of taking an elephant into water, whether for fording or other purpose, or permitting him to squirt water over the body when heated, has already been noted; a number of serious ailments, of which cramp is not the least formidable, may follow the disregard of this precaution. Before crossing a river, if the animals be heated they should be halted, allowed to cool, and have their gear removed. A good landing place on the opposite bank should be selected, and if the river is wide or moderately so and in flood, due allowance must be made for current. It is always a good plan to send in a well-trained animal with an intelligent driver to lead the way ; the remaining elephants should be sent in batches of twos or threes. A rope should be tied round the neck, or round the girth, and a second rope attached, the free end of which the mahout can hold when the animal is in deep water. If the elephants have had a longish swim, or a stiff current to contend against, they should be allowed a short rest. With an unruly animal I found the plan recommended by Steel answer well, namely to put the troublesome elephant between two quiet animals and to tie them neck to neck ; the attendant should carry a knife in case it may be necessary to cut the rope. In rivers where the fords are not well known, a quiet elephant and a good swimmer, with an intelligent driver, should be first sent across to explore the route. Elephants are good and powerful swimmers. In deep water the driver should stand, as the animals are fond of ducking themselves. When materials are available for making rafts these may be employed for transporting them across long stretches of water (see Plate V). QUICKSANDS. If an elephant, for want of being preceded by an attendant to explore the route, should chance to get into a bad quicksand or quagmire, the best plan is to throw him large billets of wood or branches of trees, which he can work down under his feet until he has obtained a sufficiently strong footing to extricate himself. On such occasions it is dangerous to approach within reach of his
58 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. trunk, as he will seize every object he can for the purpose just stated. It may be necessary to sacrifice the load. DESTRUCTION OF ELEPHANTS. It occasionally happens that owing to severe injury or incurable disease an animal has to be destroyed. To those who may be DIAGRAM FROM "SANDERSON" SHOWING POSITION OF THE BRAIN WITH REFERENCE TO THE SHOOOTING OF ELEPHANTS. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 25.DESTRUCTION OF ELEPHANTS. 59 (a) Front or forehead.[Facing page 61. DIAGRAM OF SKELETON OF ELEPHANT. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 1. Lower Maxilla. 6. Sacrum and Pelvis. 11. Ulna. 16. Patella or knee-cap. 2. Upper Maxilla. 7. Coccygeal bones. 12. Carpal bones. 17. Tibia. 3. Cervical Vertebræ. 8. Scapula. 13. Digital bones. 18. Fibula. 4. Dorsal Vertebræ. 9. Humerus. 14. Sternum. 19. Os calcis (one of the tarsus) 5. Lumbar Vertebræ. 10. Radius, 15. Femur. 20. Digital bones.
PART II. Outlines of Anatomy and Physiology. CHAPTER I. THE SKELETON. THE anatomy and physiology contained in this and the following chapters is merely intended to convey a general knowledge of the animal's structure, the position of the various organs and their functions, sufficient for the reader unacquainted with these subjects to recognize the structures probably affected in such injuries or diseases as may come under his observation. External form is dependent upon an internal basement structure. This consists of a number of definitely but diversely shaped masses of a hard substance called bone. This basement structure is known as the skeleton. The bones entering into its formation are of various forms and sizes, depending on the uses for which they are intended. They are divided into four classes : long, short, flat and irregular. The first named are situated in the limbs ; they have a shaft and two extremities. Examples :62 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. The skeleton gives support to the animal frame, and affords fixed objects for the attachment of various parts. In order to admit of motion, the bones are connected one to another by means of strong bands known as ligaments. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 29.THE SKELETON. 63 In the skull we find the bones united by a dovetailed arrange- ment (sutures), the edges of the bones are serrated, the projections of one bone fitting into depressions of the other, which are held together by the periosteum (the membrane covering bone). In joints such as these no motion is required. The connection between bones in the spinal column is an example of another form of joint. Here only a very limited amount of motion is required, and we find that the contiguous surfaces of the bones are connected by interposed cartilaginous tissue running from one bone to the other. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 30.64 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. which separate the outer from the inner table of the skull ; the structure is so disposed as to afford great strength with little material. During early life these cavities are small, but with age they increase greatly. The nasal bones are short, triangular, and pneumatic, forming the lump or boss seen immediately above the root of the trunk. The cavities or sinuses are broken up into numerous subdivisions by irregular partitions, and are lined with a delicate membrane ; they communicate freely with one another and with the nasal cavities, and while their aggregate bulk constitutes a very considerable portion of the skull, so very thin and light are they, that if a section be made of that portion of the head which includes the greater portion of them, it will be found to weigh from 8 to 11 lbs., whereas that of the entire skull often exceeds 100 lbs. in weight. The average weight of five skulls of male elephants was found to be 114 2/5 lbs. ; one of these, however, was an exceptionally large head, weighing 175½ lbs., i.e., upper jaw 59 lbs., lower jaw 116½ lbs. Owing to the peculiar structure of the skull referred to, a large extent of bony surface is provided for the attachment of muscles, without materially adding to the weight of the head, and by means of the air contained in the sinuses the skull is rendered buoyant, the animal being thus enabled to support the enormous weight of the teeth and lower jaw. The large amount of cell structure interposed between the outer and inner tables of the skull affords such an important organ as the brain great protection. The bony nostrils are formed by the nasal and premaxillary bones ; the nasal chambers are very short and vertical. The turbinal bones situated within the nasal aperture are rudimentary, and it is here that we find the apertures admitting air into the extensive air chambers of the skull. The lachrymal bone is small, protuberant, and imperforate. The cavity in which the brain is lodged is situated low and far back. The brain is oval in shape (see Fig. 31), and the division between the large and small brain is vertical, i.e., they lie on a level plane without overlapping. " The olfactory lobes from which the nerves of smell proceed are large, whilst the nerve of sight and muscular nerves of the muscles of the eye are singularly small for so vast an animal ; and one is immediately struck by the prodigious size of the nerve which supplies the proboscis with its exquisite sensibility, as well as by the great size of the motor portion of the nerve which supplies the same organ with its power of movement and action."THE SKELETON. 65 The lower jaw is short, the ascending portion being almost as large as the horizontal branch ; the junction between the two is [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 31.66 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. first set of grinders or milk-teeth are not shed, but are gradually worn away during the time the second set are coming forward ; and as soon as the body of the grinder is nearly worn away, the fangs begin to be absorbed. From the end of the second to the begin- ning of the sixth year the third set come gradually forward as the jaw lengthens, not only to fill up this additional space, but also to supply the place of the second set, which are during the same period gradually worn away and have their fangs absorbed. From the beginning of the sixth to the end of the ninth year the fourth set of grinders come forward to supply the gradual waste of the third set. In this manner to the end of life the elephant obtains a set of new teeth as the old ones become unfit for the mastication of his food. The milk-grinders consist each of 4 teeth or laminae ; the second set of grinders of 8 or 9 laminae ; the third set of 12 or 13; the fourth set of 15, and so on, to the seventh or eighth set, when each grinder consists of 22 or 23 ; and it may be added that each succeeding grinder takes at least a year more than its predecessor to be completed." Not more than one or portions of two on each side of each jaw come into wear at once ; they come into use successively from behind, and as they wear out are shed in front. The term "tush" is applied to the small tusks of females and some males, though the latter ordinarily carry the large teeth known familiarly as " tusks." Tusks and tushes are simple teeth found in the upper jaw embedded in deep bonv sockets, the pulp cavity (in young elephants) extending into them for a considerable distance ; but in aged animals the cavities are much diminished in size. On removing a tusk the pulp which resembles a large conical-shaped sausage may be taken from the cavity without trouble. The Burmans prize the pulp, as it is considered a specific for some disease. With regard to the tushes, Steel states: ''The tushes afford indications of age appreciable to natives. Sanderson erroneously affirms they are never renewed or shed. They vary much in different varieties, and no doubt his remark applies to some ; how- ever, in others the milk tusks are shed between one and two years of age and replaced by the permanent ones which often attain 70 lbs. weight in the male." Sanderson, page 67, says: "The tusks of the male elephant-calf show almost from birth. I believe that they are never renewed, and that the first tusks are permanent. In many works on the elephant it is stated that the first tusks are shed before the second year, but I believe this to be an error[Facing page 67. BURMESE NAMES APPLIED TO DIFFERENCES IN DIVERGENCE, CURVES, ETC., OF TUSKS. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] I. Bowl-shaped or curved inwards. II. Shaped like a plantain bud. III. Short and thick. IV. Spread apart. V. One higher than the other. VI. Curved. VII. Pointing straight downwards. VIII. Side view of No. III.
THE SKELETON. 67 have found them unanimous in dissenting from the idea of any such process of renewal." He also remarks : " I have had many young elephants in my charge and never noticed anything of the change alluded to." I have asked many foresters, Burmese and Karen, about this matter; they are of opinion that the tusks are never shed ; I have however also been informed of one or two instances of milk tusks being shed and renewed. Blanford * states that the incisors (tusks) are preceded by milk teeth, shed at an early age, and have enamel only on the tips before these are worn away. A small percentage of males have simple tushes, which are similar to those of the female, except that they are a little longer and thicker, and some have none at all ; the first are known as han ( ) and the latter as haings ( ). Some few males have a single tusk only. The Burmans consider it lucky to own an animal possessing a right tusk only ; such an animal is known as a tai ( ) (see Plate X). Selous remarks it is far from uncommon to meet with one-tusked animals amongst elephant cows in South Africa, though rarer amongst the bulls. He also states that when an elephant has only one tusk the bone on the other side is quite solid and shows no sign of a hollow where the fellow ought to be. Males occasionally lose a tusk when fighting, or through other injury, but some are born with a single tusk. The late Mr. Darwood, who owned many elephants, records a case where one of his elephants dropped a male calf which grew up with only one tusk. Burmans, Karens, and others, when judging the age, carefully examine the tusks with regard to their soundness, size, colour, sweep, spread, and amount of wear shown. Tusks are formidable weapons of offence ; they can be brought into use at almost any angle. Tuskers in a herd maintain discipline, and are justly feared by the members of it. At times most ghastly wounds are inflicted with these weapons ; and when tuskers fight, one or other of the combatants is frequently killed, or dies of wounds inflicted. Well-trained tuskers are highly valued, as owing to the possession of these organs they are enabled to perform a variety of work which cannot be undertaken by animals without them. Strange as it may appear, there are occasional instances where a haing is feared even by powerful tuskers. Mr. C. B. Lacey informed me of one or two cases within his knowledge. Mr. Danson also informed me of a case, and I myself have met with one instance. It is also a generally recognized fact amongst the Burmans. In such cases it will usually be found that the haing is an enormously powerful elephant with an unusually fine development of the trunk; * Fauna of India : " Mammalia."68 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. the strength and dexterity in its use when fighting against a tusker is said to compensate fully for the absence of tusks. In Pegu, some years ago, a reliable Burman tracker casually informed me about a fight he witnessed in the jungle between a very large haing and an ordinary sized tusker; though the haing received some nasty wounds, he put the tusker to flight. Tusks are occasionally snapped during fights. Mr. Danson, of Messrs. Darwood & Co., showed me a piece of a very fine tusk fractured about a foot or so from the point. This piece when found in one of the Shweli forests was covered with congealed blood. Mr. Petley, who knew the facts, informed me that the fight occurred between a good-sized wild tusker and an enormous solitary haing which was well known in the district (Shweli). Several Burmans witnessed the combat, during the course of which the haing snapped off the large portion of tusk referred to. Emerson Tennent states that Mr. Mercer, Civil Political Officer of Government at Badulla, sent him a jagged fragment of elephant tusk 2 ft. long, weighing between 20 and 30 lbs., which had been brought to him by natives who, being attracted by noise in the jungle, witnessed a fight between a tusker and one without, and saw the latter seize one of the tusks of his antagonist and wrench from it the portion in question.THE SKELETON. 69 readily recognized, as it possesses a conical tooth-like process, and has a massive spine which is bifid posteriorly. The bodies of the fourth, fifth, and sixth are short; the spinous processes are also short. The seventh may be distinguished by its long spine, and also by its having on its posterior edge a cavity for the articulation of the first rib. Owing to the immense weight of the head we find that the neck is extremely short. The latitude of motion possessed by each bone on those to which it is attached is not as great in elephants as in most other animals ; accordingly, we find the general flexibility of the neck is comparatively limited, and that when an animal is desirous of observing an object posterior to the direct line of vision it is necessary for him to turn his body more or less in that direction. Dorsal vertebrae.70 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. become consolidated. The lateral surfaces present indentations for the reception of the cartilages of the sternal or true ribs. The sternum also helps to protect the heart and lungs from injury. Ribs.THE SKELETON. 71 The scapula or shoulder-blade is of great size ; it is unequally divided by a ridge or spine, and from about its centre is a process directed backwards. The cavity with which it articulates with the next bone is very shallow, and looks downwards. The humerus is also large, and affords extensive surfaces for the attachment of muscles. The fore-arm consists of two bones, the ulna and radius, which in the elephant are distinct and peculiar, in that they are obliquely and permanently crossed. "The upper end of the latter (radius) is small; while the ulna not only contributes the principal part of the articular surface for the humerus, but has its distal end actually larger than that of the radius72 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. the parts contained within it. In the elephant the " hoof slipper " consists of the sole and toe-nails. The shape of the sole in the fore-feet is nearly circular, while that of the hind-feet is more or less oval. It consists of a layer of soft elastic horn ; and though thick and tough, it may be made to bend under pressure of the fingers. Anteriorly it bears the nails ; posteriorly the margins curl upwards. On removal of the slipper and inspection of its inner surface, it will be seen to be covered with numerous indentations; these small holes lodge projections from the sensitive sole. The toe-nails vary in number from 16 to 20, but the more usual number is 18, namely, 5 on each fore, and 4 on each hind foot. It has been already noted that the knee and hock joints are situated very low down, the digits running obliquely downwards. The terminal bone of each digit lies within one of the nails. If the internal surface of a nail be examined, it will be found to be traversed in a vertical direction by a series of horny leaves, or laminæ; it will also be observed that the extremity of the digit as exposed by removal of the nail is also traversed by a series of laminæ known as the sensitive laminæ ; they fit in between the horny laminæ of the nail. It is by means of the indentations on the interior of the sole and the laminæ above noted that union is brought about between the horny and underlying sensitive structures. The " hoof slippers" are not rigid boxes like the hoof of the horse ; each digit is provided with tendons for flexing or extending it, thus permitting of a great degree of motion. The noiseless tread of the elephant is a subject of common remark. The reason for it is that a large quantity of a fibro-fatty substance enters into the formation of the foot, which goes to make a wonderful elastic cushion. The elephant is by nature intended to roam about the vast forests, where the soil is usually soft or the ground is covered to a depth of many inches by fallen leaves. Under natural conditions the " hoof slipper" affords ample protection to the underlying sensitive structures.
CHAPTER II. THE SKIN, MUCOUS AND SEROUS MEMBRANES. MUSCULAR SYSTEM. THE SKIN. The skin.74 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. posterior borders and tip, extending much higher up on the anterior, where they are usually longer. Young elephants usually have much more hair about them than adults. (2) NailsMUCOUS AND SEROUS MEMBRANES. 75 It is furnished with blood vessels, nerves, etc. In health it is- of a delicate pink colour ; in fever and inflammations it becomes, reddish, and the minute blood vessels are frequently injected ; when, the liver is deranged they assume a yellowish tint; and in debility and anæmia the membrane is usually pale and bloodless. In the elephant the colour of the mucous membrane covering the mouth, tongue and palate is easy to note ; sometimes that covering the eye can also be seen, and this latter being of a highly delicate- structure shows any changes in a marked manner. SEROUS MEMBRANE Is a firm white membrane lining the closed cavities of the body, i.e., those not communicating with the external air. The membrane is reflected over the organs contained within these cavities. Its duty being to protect and keep them in position also by means of a very small quantity of lubricant fluid (serous fluid) which it secretes, it permits the organs to glide freely over each other without injury. In particular positions the membrane receives distinctive names: that portion lining the thorax is called the pleura ; that lining the abdominal cavity, the peritoneum ; while the portion which suspends the bowel is known as the mesentery. In the elephant the peri- toneum is very thick, and there is a general absence of fat which is usually to be found in most animals. MUSCULAR SYSTEM. This system is remarkable, in that a large amount of tendinous fibre runs through the muscles, making them very tough. About the shoulders and buttocks the muscles are fleshy, but even here there is a considerable admixture of tendinous fibre. The flesh is much relished by Burmans, Shans and Karens.
CHAPTER III. THE CHEST AND ORGANS OF RESPIRATION. The thorax, or chest, is a large chamber bounded laterally by the ribs and their muscles, above by the spine, below by the breast- bone, and behind by an obliquely placed musculo-tendinous partition which separates it from the abdominal cavity, and known as the diaphragm or midriff. It contains the heart and respiratory organs and is deep and narrow. From researches conducted in recent years by M. Alfred Giard * and others it has been found that the pleural cavity, although present in the young elephant, is obliterated in the adult. This is a condition entirely different from what occurs in most mammals in which the lungs, though lying in contact with, have no actual attachment to the walls. This peculiarity is adapted to his mode of life, which seldom subjects him to respiratory emergencies, and his organization which does not necessitate rapid blood oxygenation. In the lungs the blood cells are furnished with oxygen, which being circulated by means of the heart distribute it to the tissues which build up the system. Oxygen is necessary to the life of those tissues. To effect this charging of the blood cells with oxygen breathing is constantly going on, and consists of two acts : the first during which air is conveyed through the respiratory passages to the lungs to purify the blood (inspiratory act), and the second during which air with impure products generated in the system is thrown out (expiratory act). During inspiration the chest expands and on expiration it contracts. In health this double act is performed on an average 12 to 16 times a minute. The respiratory organs.THE CHEST AND ORGANS OF RESPIRATION. 77 the back of the mouth, and so through the wind-pipe to the lungs. These passages are lined throughout with mucous membrane, in the uppermost part of which are lodged the nerves concerned in the sense of. smell. It may conveniently be divided into two parts, namely, the muscular portion or trunk, and the osseous or bony. The muscular portion or trunk is a most remarkable appendage, but is not peculiar to the elephant, as the tapir has a somewhat similar organ. It is composed of an intricate arrangement of muscles which furnish it with great flexibility, contractility, and power, so that its uses are manifold. The animal is enabled to snap off boughs, pull down saplings, pluck up bunches of grass and herbs78 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. of distension and, in addition to serving as conductors of air to the lungs and air cells, are converted into temporary reservoirs in the act of drinking. The end of the trunk during this act is placed in the water, and by suction (an inspiratory effort) a quantity is drawn up into the canals. The trunk when a sufficiency has been taken up is withdrawn, and inserted far back into the mouth, where by an expiratory effort the contents are expelled and swallowed or in the act of bathing ejected over its body. It is highly improbable that the mucous membrane lining these canals is in any way concerned with the sense of smell. Every one familiar with elephants must have observed the pecu- liar habit they have when heated of inserting the trunk into the mouth and by suction withdrawing fluid which they squirt over the body. Many theories have been advanced as to where this fluid is accumulated : some investigators say that the stomach is the reservoir and that the cell-like formation at one end (much exaggerated in the drawing) can hold as much as ten gallons of water, and Dr. Harrison found a muscle connecting the back of the wind-pipe with the forepart of the gullet, one of the functions of which he thought might be to raise the cardiac orifice of the stomach and so enable it to regurgitate its contents into the gullet. (The muscle alluded to must have been abnormal as I believe other anatomists have not found it.) Others are of opinion that a special pouch at the back of the throat (pharyngeal) is the reservoir. The point at present is not satisfac- torily settled ; but as Steel states, the " pouch " is capable of holding a fair amount of fluid which may be supplemented by gradual regurgitation from the stomach. The subject is a most interesting one, and those desirous of obtaining full information should refer to the excellent works of Steel, Sterndale, and Sanderson. Selous in his book, "A Hunter's Wanderings in Africa," page 181, refers to this habit among African elephants. Sounds.THE CHEST AND ORGANS OF RESPIRATION. 79 droning noise, which may be due either to pleasure or calling the attention of stragglers to the herd. Again, when being loaded or driven hard they may roar. This sound is produced by the throat, the mouth being wide open and the trunk often uplifted. Pleasure may be indicated by the usual low squeaking through the trunk, as is often heard when elephants have been separated during the day and meet in the evening. A further well-known sound is the low rumbling made in the throat expressive of want or anger; this in a modified way is often made by calves when separated from their mothers. The common sound of "prut, prut," which is often heard when elephants are travelling, I think may indicate impatience. When elephants desire to frighten anything such as dogs, etc., they often blow through their trunks. Vascularity.80 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. departure from those conditions may indicate disease of this tract, and may be summed up as follows :[Facing page 81. PLATE VI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] EXTRACTING A HEAVY LOG.
CHAPTER IV. THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM. The circulation of the blood is carried on by means of the heart, arteries, capillaries, and veins. Arteries.82 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. The orifices between the auricles and ventricles are guarded by valves, as also is the entrance to the pulmonary artery and aorta. What happens is roughly as follows. The blood pours into the right and left auricles which when full contract, thus driving the blood into the ventricles, which on filling, the valves shut off their communication with the auricles ; the ventricles now contract, driving the blood on the right side through the pulmonary artery to the lungs for purification, and through the aorta on the left side for distribution of the blood over the system; the valves close when the vessels are filled, preventing a reflux into the Ventricles. The elephant's heart is peculiar, in that its apex presents two points instead of one like most mammals. This peculiarity is however shared by certain whales, dugong, etc. Another peculiarity is the fact that there are two large veins (anterior venæ cavæ) enter- ing the right auricle instead of one as in most other mammals, in addition to the posterior vena cava. There is an absence of fat about the organ. The heart beats from 46 to 50 times a minute. Weight-average of three hearts, 24 lbs. Pulse.CHAPTER V. THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM. The abdominal cavity or belly is of large size, the nature of the food requiring voluminous intestines. The cavity is bounded in front by the diaphragm or midriff, which separates it from the chest cavity; posteriorly by the pelvis ; above by the back- bone ; laterally by the ribs and their muscles, and below by the abdominal muscles. The cavity contains a portion of the gullet, the stomach, intestines, liver, spleen, pancreas, kidneys, and the uro- genital organs. On opening the cavity shortly after death, it will be observed that the intestines are alternately contracting and relaxing, but always working down the gut, so as to force onward the contents. The movement, like that of the heart, is automatic. It will be noted that the cavity is lined by a glistening serous membrane which is also reflected over the organs. This membrane is known as the peritoneum. Its function is to secrete a small - quantity of fluid to prevent friction and so permit the continual motion of the bowels to go on without injury. A striking point is the slight amount or entire absence of fat in these creatures. The alimentary tract.84 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. consequently play in the act of prehension."THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM. 85 measured 3 ft. 4 ins. It has two extremities, the cardiac and pyloric, and two openings, one communicating with the gullet known as the cardiac, and the other with the intestines, the pyloric. The stomach is situated towards the left side and the spleen is attached to it. The cardiac end is long and tapering; the interior is lined by mucous membrane. " A number of transverse, nearly circular folds project inward from the cardiac wall; they almost disappear when the stomach is greatly distended, and are at all times too shallow to serve as water-cells, though they have been figured and described as such."86 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. portions, namely the caecum (is very capacious), the colon (which is the largest portion), and the rectum (which terminates at the anus), the orifice of which is guarded by a special muscle. The intestines are attached to the spine by a strong membrane called the mesentery, which also serves to sustain the bowels, and affords passage for important vessels. The total lengths of the large intestine of four elephants were respectively 38, 40, 46 and 43 ft. Steel records the length of bowels in an elephant 9½ ft. at the shoulder as follows : small intestines 76 ft., caecum 5 ft., colon 20 ft., and rectum 12 ft. Total large intestine 37 ft., and of intestinal tract 113 ft. " Hunter gives 17 ft. as the length of the small intestine ; Mayer makes it 37 ft., while he gives the total length as 75 ft." THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM. 87 The spleen.CHAPTER VI. THE URINARY SYSTEM. This consists ofTHE URINARY SYSTEM. 89 the above should lead one to suspect disease of the urinary tract, namelyCHAPTER VII. ORGANS OF REPRODUCTION. MILK. BREEDING. PREGENANCY. PARTURITION. ORGANS OF REPRODUCTION. The male organs of generation.MILK. 91 The fallopian tubes are two tubes leading from the horns of the uterus to the ovaries. The ovaries or female testicles are small bodies surrounded by a firm, fibrous capsule. The substance consists of a network of tissue, blood vessels, etc., in which are embedded the ova which are destined, on being fertilised, to develop into the offspring. Impregnation.92 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. some little time before parturition milk is secreted. The glands consist of lobes bound together by connective tissue and fat. The milk as secreted is carried by sets of channels which converge at a point where they form dilatations which act as reservoirs. The ducts again become contracted and open finally on the summit of the nipples or teats, of which there are two. "The milk of the elephant is said to be very rich, with an agreeable taste and odour, its butter and sugar being largely increased at the expense of the water as compared with other milks." BREEDING. 93 took an excellent photograph ; the trunks and tails came out rather indistinctly ; this, Mr. Porter afterwards informed me, was due to the fact that they were in constant and rapid motion. The congress lasted some time. Some time ago I received a remarkable photo from Mr. H.G. Batten, of the Burma Commission, depicting elephants during congress in an open space and they were more or less surrounded by men armed with spears. During February 1902 the late Mr. Slade had opportunities of obtaining most accurate information on this subject. He was enabled to take a remarkable series of photographs, the elephants paying no attention whatsoever to the people being round about. The animals in question were his baggage elephants. The mahouts having suspicions informed Mr. Slade who ordered a close watch to be kept. The tusker showed no sign of musth. A cow he was said to have a particular liking for screamed and strained on her chains at his approach and was accordingly set free ; another cow also tethered evinced no fear. Mr. Slade remarked that there was considerable play beforehand, which may have led to the erroneous opinion that congress lasted some time, whereas it only occupied one minute. The position of the male is, as I have noted, similar to that of other animals, except that the fore-legs are placed one on each side of the spine (not on the sides) and are run along the back as far as the shoulders ; the tusker neither grips nor steadies himself with the fore-legs and he gradually sinks on his hind-legs till he almost assumes a sitting posture, then gradually raising himself till his hind-legs are straight. After congress the tusker moves off and remains silent; the females showed some excite- ment by trumpeting softly, flapping their ears and whisking their tails. As the male keeps his fore-feet so close together, the statement made by Burmans to the effect that a fettered male loose in the jungle is capable of mounting is correct. Mr. Slade could not discern any signs of the cows being in season, though by their behaviour he was certain three of the four with him were so during the 10 days he was in camp. In fact he was quite certain that it was the female and not the male that came into season and until she does the male takes no notice. Mr. Slade observed that this tusker mounted one cow daily from the 20th to the 27th February, inclusive; on the 28th she did not respond to his addresses, though not evincing any fear. The three cows were Hla U, Kalè Ma, and Nu Nyun. No result followed in the case of Hla U, who was covered on the 21st, 22nd, 23rd, 24th and 28th February. Kalè Ma gave birth to a male calf on the 14th February, practically two years after, and Nu Nyun dropped a dead calf in September 1903, 19 months after.
94 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Sanderson witnessed the act on four occasions and on none of these did the male's exhibit any signs of musth, which goes to prove that, it is not only when under this influence that male elephants court the society of the female. One jump is considered to be sufficient. Sanderson states: "there is ample proof that it is not the male elephant that comes into season." Owing to the periodical attacks of musth many people have supposed that such is the case ; and he remarks that "the period of heat is not marked by any particular signs in the female, which has probably helped to strengthen the erroneous opinion spoken of. In approaching a male elephant, a female desirous of his attentions utters certain sounds and courts his society; but only those conversant with elephants would notice this." I have never observed any apparent signs of "heat" in the female and several friends I consulted informed me .that though they had seen a great many elephants, and had been amongst elephants many years, they had not seen any- thing noticeable amongst female elephants beyond the fact already stated that the female when in that state utters certain peculiar sounds. PREGNANCY. Sanderson states that female elephants usually give birth to their first calf at 16 years of age and continue to breed till they reach the age of 80. A remarkable instance proving that they may begin to breed much earlier is recorded by Mr. W. A. Bell, of the Bombay Burma Trading Corporation, who had authentic knowledge of the facts. One of the Corporation elephants dropped a female calf on the 6th May 1894. Exactly nine years and one month from that date this young cow, to the astonishment of everyone, dropped a calf and subsequently died. No one had the faintest suspicion that she was in calf. The calf was practically full term. They breed about every two and a half or three years. Calves are not weaned for two or three years. I have seen two calves (wild) at heel; the elder one I do not think was more than three years of age. Sanderson has seen three. The same authority observes that the female will not permit a bull to approach until eight or ten months after calving. Burmans and Karens put it down at even a longer period (see Appendix F). Elephants in calf may be worked up to almost their full term, but it is only fair to relieve them from work six weeks or so before the calf is expected. Towards the end of pregnancy females become very lazy and sluggish; the size of the animal, taken
PREGNANCY. 95 together with the fullness of the mammary glands and the presence of milk, should afford sufficient indications of approaching parturition. The dams after calving should be given a good rest and a plentiful allowance of good nourishing fodder. The young suckle with their mouths and not with the trunk. The duration of pregnancy may be said to vary between eighteen and twenty-two months. Sanderson gives it at eighteen months for a female calf and twenty-two for a male. Burmans and Karens state that it may extend to two and a half years. Mr. Petley kindly gave me notes on two cases :96 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. during March. I think one may reasonably say that in large wild herds one may at any season find a youngster or two only a few weeks old. PARTURITION. Generally speaking, the period of labour is short and the act of parturition occupies but a short time. One calf occurs at a birth as a rule. Mr. Lidderdale kindly wrote to me describing the birth of a young elephant at Pazundaung. The cow had been working in the timber-yard during the afternoon and after work was as usual tethered in her shed about 6 P.M. About 11 P.M. she became very restless and groaned loudly ; at about 3 A.M. she suddenly broke her hind shackles ; so those on her fore-feet were removed, after which she walked out of the shed into some deep mud about five yards distant, where she promptly assumed the recumbent posture and gave birth to a female calf in caul which I believe is not an infrequent event (head and fore-feet presented). The act of parturition occupied but a few minutes. The Burman attendant, who had been present at other cases, immediately ruptured the membranes, etc., the calf remaining lying on its side (the mother standing over it) for an hour or so, after which it managed to stand up and in a short time could walk. The "after-birth" (achin) came away 15 or 20 minutes after the birth of the calf. The dam ate it. An intelligent Burman gave me the following description :PARTURITION. 97 wild state, when a calf has been dropped, the herd remain in the vicinity until it is able to follow the mother, which is generally in about forty-eight hours. Elephants generally eat the after-birth. At birth the calves are usually covered with longish hair, and stand from two and a half to three feet at the shoulder. A cow belonging to Sanger, of Circus fame, dropped a still-born calf in the London Zoo. Measurements were as follows :CHAPTER VIII. THE NERVOUS SYSTEM AND SPECIAL ORGANS. The nervous system.THE NERVOUS SYSTEM AND SPECIAL ORGANS. 99 It will be seen to alternately move the body from side to side in order to see what is occurring behind instead of walking straight forwards. However, the limited field of vision is fully compensated for by the extreme acuteness of smell and perhaps partially by its keen hearing. As is the lease with many animals, in addition to an upper and lower eyelid there is a membranous fold placed at the inner corner of the eye and beneath the lids which is capable of being moved outwards over a considerable portion of the eyeball : this is called the nictitating membrane, the haw (of horses), and by some authors the " third eyelid." This outward movement is effected by a retraction of the eyeball which displaces some fat behind the orbit and so mechanically thrusts the lid forwards. Lachrymal apparatus.CHAPTER IX. ELEMENTARY PHYSIOLOGY. The body is made up of various parts or organs, each with a separate action or function. Organs again are composed of certain definite structures or tissues differing widely from one another, not only in their physical characters and appearance but also in their functions. All tissues are composed of certain similar elements more or less modified, which are called cells, and the functions of the different tissues are due to the activities of their cells. The cell is a minute mass of living substance or protoplasm, in which is situated a more or less well-defined body, the nucleus. These are the essential parts of a cell. Each little cell possesses the power of assimilating particles of food brought to it, of movement and of reproduction. From the protoplasm of the cells the various tissues of the bodyELEMENTARY PHYSIOLOGY. 101 cells. As examples of the co-ordination between muscle and. nerve, we have only to observe the rapidity with which an animal, if pricked in the leg, lifts that member almost immediately, and again there is the well-known saying, "his mouth watered at the sight of so many good things," as showing the stimulation of the salivary glands by the sight of food. Nutrition of the tissues : blood and lymph.102 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. carbonate and phosphate of sodium. Calcium, potassium and magnesium also occur in small amounts. White cells are of different varieties. Their most important function is the removal of useless and effete tissues, dead micro- organisms, etc. They may be looked upon as the scavengers of the body. Red cells are circular biconcave discs devoid of a nucleus as a rule. Their colour is due to an iron-containing substance called haemoglobin. Haemoglobin possesses the property of taking up oxygen from the air and of giving it up to the tissues ; it thus acts as the middleman between the air and the tissues. In certain diseases the number of red cells or the amount of haemoglobin in the red cells is reduced, and the animal is said to be anaemic. Lymph.ELEMENTARY PHYSIOLOGY. 103 tissue metabolism. These waste materials are partly got rid of by a portion of the blood being sent through the liver and kidneys. The blood returns to the right side of the heart (the right auricle), and from here it is pumped by the right ventricle through the lungs, where it gets rid of the carbonic acid gas and other effete material received from the tissues and takes up a fresh supply of oxygen. From the lungs it returns to the left side of the heart (left auricle) to be again pumped through the body by the left ventricle.
CHAPTER X. ELEMENTARY PHYSIOLOGYELEMENTARY PHYSIOLOGY. 105 Saliva is a turbid frothy fluid secreted by the salivary glands and various smaller glands in the lining membrane of the mouth. The active constituent of saliva is a ferment called ptyalin. The functions of saliva are two-fold :106 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. (2) Pancreatic juice is the secretion of the pancreas ; it is a clear slimy fluid containing two ferments, one a protein-splitting ferment, which completes the work begun in the stomach, and the other, a starch-splitting ferment similar in its action to ptyalin but more powerful. There is also a fat-splitting ferment present which breaks up the fats into their component parts and aids in their absorption. (3) The intestinal juice is a pale yellow-coloured fluid secreted by various glands in the lining membrane of the intestine, and containing a ferment which assists the pancreatic juice in various ways but principally by splitting peptones and many other proteins into still simpler bodies. Movements of the intestine.ELEMENTARY PHYSIOLOGY. 107 are the abdominal muscles which compress the viscera, pushing them upwards and thus press the diaphragm further up into the chest. At the same time they pull back the ribs and thus decrease the size of the chest from side to side. Special respiratory movements, i.e., coughing, sighing and yawning[Facing page 109. PLATE VII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] ELEPHANT WORKING IN JUNGLE.
PART III. Medicines and their Administration. Formulæ. CHAPTER I. PREPARATION AND MODE OF ADMINISTRATION. As already pointed out, Veterinary Surgeons rarely have an oppor- tunity of treating elephants, and as owners usually do not know much about their ailments, the treatment is invariably left to the mahouts. These men employ a multiplicity of drugs to make up their formulae or mussauls ; they are purchased in the bazaar and I have frequently seen them ; excepting the curry-stuffs, the vegetable drugs are usually old, mildewed and inert, and the minerals impure. The expense incurred by the purchase of reliable drugs from a chemist, where purity, freshness and uniformity in strength are guar- anteed, would at the end of a year be far less than the cost of the ordinary expensive mussauls so frequently indented for. A good many of the curry-stuffs supposed to enter into them often find their way to the mahout's quarters. Domestic elephants must carry a special heat-generating apparatus in their interiors, as gurmi or heat seems to be the most prevalent ailment amongst them and the amount of cooling mussauls required is truly surprising. No drug is known to have an emetic action on this animal. Gilchrist mentions that " tartar emetic has been given in 2-oz. doses morning and evening till half a pound was taken but no- emetic or other obvious medicinal effect followed." Mahouts are strongly averse to the administration of purgatives ; in fact they never intentionally purge an animal, though such drugs as croton seeds, aloes, enter into the composition of many of their mussauls. Doses.110 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. thus leading to this error as they are often impure or inert. To be on the safe side, I have been guided by the doses given by Steel, and as he employed drugs of known strength I would recommend others to do the same. I have however given the doses quoted by other authors and have also added many of their mussauls. Roughly speaking the doses of most drugs for elephants are about four times that given to cattle. Doses must be regulated according to age. young animals requiring much less. In tropical countries care must be taken not to give too strong doses of purgative medicines. The strength of blisters should also be modified. Preparation.MEDICINES112 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. of morphia is employed instead. Injections may now be procured made up in the form of pellets containing the correct dose of the active principles. They are not only more convenient, but are, when not kept too long, more reliable than made-up solutions. Good needles are requisite ; they should be fairly long, say 3 ins. or so, and not too thick, in fact the finer they are the better as the animals do not resent their insertion. The injections may be given at such places where the skin is thin and the underlying tissues loose. A fold of skin should be taken up with the finger and thumb of the left hand ; the needle should then be passed through the skin obliquely under the surface. The syringe containing the injection should then be attached to the needle and the fluid injected slowly. Injections of serum, be they preventive or curative, are applied in the same way. Too much care cannot be taken in seeing that aseptic methods are observed. Syringes and needles should be boiled before and after use, and only water that has been filtered and boiled should be used for dissolving pellets or other drugs to be injected. In the matter of hypodermic injections, it is better to err on the side of being too careful rather than run any risks.
CHAPTER II. INSTRUMENTS. WEIGHTS AND MEASURES. INSTRUMENTS. The following list of instruments may be found useful as part of the equipment of sick elephant camps. Clinical thermometers.114 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. The seton should be pulled backwards and forwards at least once a day. A seton may be left in for two or three weeks, but it is desirable to change the tape every four or five days. A seton must not be kept in too long, or it may result in a ridge being formed through the exudation becoming organised. Hoof knife.WEIGHTS AND MEASURES. 115 instruments for tapping dropsical swellings and for making explora- tory punctures into swellings where deep-seated fluid or pus is suspected. No harm can result from their use but on the contrary much useful information may be obtained. They are useful to evacuate fluid from swellings. In case of abscesses, when pus is found, free use of the knife in addition should be made. Where delicate structures are underlying, care must be taken that they are not pushed too far. Care of instruments.116 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Weights used by Mahouts. One tola = 3 drachms = weight of one rupee. One scruple = 1/9th tola = weight of two-anna piece. One drachm = CHAPTER III. FORMULÆ118 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Astringents are drugs which aid in checking secretions such as diarrhoea and dysentery :FORMULÆ. 119 It has already been noted that, though useful when occasion arises, their indiscriminate employment is undoubtedly a source of mischief:120 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. (20) Sour milk ... Boiled rice ...} 10 lbs. of each. Onions ... Green ginger ... ... 1 lb. Give once a day, and continue if necessary for two or three days. (21) Oil of turpentine, 2-oz. doses, mixed with white of egg or gruel, but must not be used when the kidneys are affected. This drug must not be given with water. (22) Radishes have a diuretic action. Dose 6 to 24 lbs. The bark, root and seeds of the common moringa or drumstick fruit tree may be given in doses of 1 to 4 lbs. Laxatives or aperients.FORMULÆ. 121 Aloin is the active principle of Barbadoes aloes ; it is claimed that its action is more rapid and safer, and it has the great advan- tage of being tasteless and odourless. Its strength is three times that of Barbadoes aloes ; that is, 1dr. equals about 3 drs. of aloes. Being a tasteless drug, it is well worthy of trial in elephant establish- ments. It should be mixed with some aromatic, even though it causes less griping than aloes :122 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. tonic being substituted during this period. Elephants can take fairly large doses of arsenic, but it is safer to give small doses and employ it with caution. Liquor arsenicalis is tasteless and readily taken mixed in a bucket of water. Strength : 1 oz. of liquor arsenicalis contains 4 grs. of arsenic :FORMULÆ. 123 Vermicides.124 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. External applications : blisters.FORMULÆ. 125 (56) Powdered cantharides (Spanish fly)... 1 oz. Oil of turpentine..... 2 ozs. Methylated spirit...... 1 pt. Mix and allow to digest for a fortnight, occasionally stirring, then strain. Never to be applied to the loins. Useful blister. Caustics are corrosive applications which by chemical action destroy tissues to which they are applied and are used in foul ulcerated surfaces, spreading inflammations, or to keep down proud flesh :126 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. (66) Boracic acid (powdered). (67) Oxide of zinc......... } Equal parts. Starch......... (68) Powdered catecho. (69) Chinosol......... 1 part. Boracic acid......... 8 parts. Iodoform, one part, may be added to three parts of any of the above except the last and will tend to keep away flies. Lint, gauze, tow, cotton, wool, medicated with antiseptics such as carbolic acid, boracic acid, corrosive sublimate, eucalyptus, iodoform, are largely employed in dressing and protecting wounds from air, dirt, etc. Carbolized tow is inexpensive and most useful. Embrocations or liniments are local agents used for stimulating the skin and subjacent parts in sprains, enlarged glands, etc., and require to be rubbed into the affected parts for ten to fifteen minutes once or twice a day. Solution of ammonia, which is much used in the preparation of embrocations, is made as follows :FORMULÆ. 127 (c) Compound soap liniment. (73) Soft soap......... 4 ozs. Camphor........ 1 oz. Methylated spirit...... 2 pts. Solution of ammonia...... ½ pt. Dissolve the soap and the camphor in the spirit, then add the ammonia and strain for use. (d) Simple mustard liniments. (74) Oil of turpentine ...... } Equal parts. Mustard oil (75) Mustard mixed with warm water (not boiling) and made into a thin paste. (e) Anodyne liniment to relieve pain. (76) Laudanum 1 part. Soap liniment...... 3 parts. OR Liq. Plumbi subacet fort (B.P.) 2 ozs. Sweet oil ... 8 ozs. Note.128 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Instructions for their use :FORMULÆ. 129 (78) Turpentine, up to 4 or 5 ozs., beaten up with the whites of 3 or 4 eggs and added to 1 pt. of gruel or starch and well mixed with warm water. (79) Powdered aloes......... 1 oz. Bicarbonate of soda...... ½ oz. Boiling water......... 4 qts. When cool enough, inject. (80) Salt or Epsom salts...... 10 to 12 ozs. Warm water........ 1 gal. (b) Where there is wind as in flatulent colic. (81) Assafcetida......... 1 to 1½ ozs. Soft soap......... ½ oz. Warm water......... 3 to 4 qts. In procedure (3) add the following :130 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. (c) Stimulant enemas. As a stimulant, if animal is very weak :FORMULÆ. 131 (c) Eye ointment. (96) Yellow oxide of mercury ... 1 to 3 grs. Vaseline 1 dr. A small quantity about the size of a split pea is inserted under the upper lid. (d) Eye powder. (97) Calomel, a few grains on a camel's hair brush flicked into the eye once daily. (Particularly useful in ulceration of the cornea.) Fomentations are local applications of hot water with the object of relieving pain or promoting the healing process in any part by increasing the flow of the blood within it. They may be employed over small areas such as the eye, or extensive areas such as the back. Several gallons of water must be kept heated and when a large surface is to be fomented, such as the belly or chest, a large common or cooly blanket furnished with six ropes, one attached to each corner and one at the centre of each short side, long enough to meet and be secured over the back, is the best method. Fomentations may be applied in two ways, either (a) by first soaking the blanket in water so hot that the hand just bears it, wringing it out thoroughly and applying to the part at once and tying it over the back, a second dry blanket or tarpaulin being placed so as to envelop it and thus retain the heat ; or (b) as Hawkes recommends, by first securing the cumbly or blanket dry, with a layer of straw placed between it and the body. Hot water that the hand will just bear is poured continuously from both sides. A large quantity of water is requisite. Other parts, such as limbs, may be similarly enveloped with pieces of blanket of suitable size. The success of all fomentations depends on the degree and retention of heat: if the water be too hot the skin may be scalded and if not hot enough it is useless in allaying pain. In order to maintain heat, the blanket should be changed at least every ten minutes until the pain is allayed. Everything should be ready prepared, so that the blanket may be clapped on immediately it is wrung out and to do this satisfactorily it is desirable to have at least two blankets in use. The relief of pain locally may be supplemented by sprinkling over the first blanket two or three tablespoonsful of turpentine ; this may be repeated once or twice during the day. When the last fomentation is withdrawn, it is necessary to guard against chill by covering the fomented area with a dry blanket for some hours, or by rubbing the part till thoroughly dry, after which some mild
132 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. liniment may be applied. At times pain is so severe or deeply seated, or the patient so troublesome to deal with, that local efforts are of little avail and recourse must be had to internal remedies. Injections are medicines thrown by means of a syringe into cavities, such as abscesses or sinuses, to promote healing or for purposes of cleanliness :FORMULÆ. 133 (c) Astringent, for reducing discharges. (109) Alum......... 5 to 10 grs. Water......... 1 oz. (110) Sulphate of zinc......... 2 to 4 drs. Water........ 1 pt. (111) Nitrate of silver......... 1 gr. Water......... 1 oz. (112) Nitric acid (dilute)...... 2½ drs. For foul ulcers. Water......... 8 ozs. (113) Sulphate of iron......... 2 to 4 grs. Water......... 1 oz. (d) Disinfecting. (114) Carbolic acid......... 8 to 12 grs. Water......... 1 oz., (1134 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. (122) Camphor... 1 oz. Methylated spirit or other spirit Sufficient to dissolve the camphor. Oil of turpentine... 2 ozs. Sweet oil... 4 ozs. Add the spirit to the camphor and rub down in a mortar till quite dissolved, then add the other ingredients. A dressing to sores especially useful in keeping away flies* :FORMULÆ. 135 Excellent anti-fly dressing :136 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. (b) Absorbent. (138) Liniment of iodine or liniment of double strength applied once every other day, painted on the swelling to be removed. Also see 135- Poultices.FORMULÆ. 137 (b) Opium ... ... ... 3 tolas. Ginger ... ... ... 4 tolas. Catechu ... ... ... 2 tolas. Brandy ... ... ... CHAPTER IV. LIST OF USEFUL DRUGS IN THE TREATMENT OF ELEPHANTSLIST OF DRUGS. 139 Drugs that can be procured in a pure state from the Bazaar 140 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. List of Drugs employed in the Treatment of Elephants, with their Native Names, Actions, Uses, and Doses.* Drugs. Hindustani. Burmese. USES. DOSES. Remarks. Internal. External. Steel. Slymm. Gilchrist. Abrus precatorious leaves Gunchi ... Root and leaves yield ex- tract like liquorice. Bruised leaves to swell- ings as a suppurative and detergent, specially indicated in blind boilsLIST OF DRUGS. 141 Acid carbolic oint- ment ... ... ... Dressing for wounds, sores and ulcers. To slough- ing and unhealthy wounds142 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. List of Drugs employed in the Treatment of ElephantsLIST OF DRUGS. 143 Anti-dysenterica bark ... Diuretic, anodyne, stimu- lant144 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. List of Drugs employed in the Treatment of ElephantsLIST OF DRUGS. 145 Brandy ... Brandy sharab ... See Arrack ... ... 8 to 12 ozs. Well diluted Butea seed Palas papra, palas ka binj Anthelmintic ... ½oz. 2 to 8 tolas ½ oz. Butea frondosa ; good for removal of worms Calotropis gigantea root Aak ka jur, mudar ... Narcotic ; in small doses, alterative, tonic, emetic (large doses) ; restores tone to bowels in cases of flatulency; diarrhoea and dysentery Vesicant (juice), anodyne, detergent About 3 drs. 1 to 6 tolas 2 to 6 tolas ... Mudar root Calotropis gigantea flowers Aak ka phul... ... Do." Vesicant; cleanses foul ulcers146 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. List of Drugs employed in the Treatment of ElephantsLIST OF DRUGS. 147 Chloral hydrate ... ... ... : Stimulant, sedative, ano- dyne, anti-spasmodic, narcotic148 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. List of Drugs employed in the Treatment of ElephantsLIST OF DRUGS. 149 Dikamali ointment ... ... ... Wound dressing to keep away flies Dill seeds Maythee suva 150 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. List of Drugs employed in the Treatment of ElephantsLIST OF DRUGS. 151 Hydrargyri iodidum rubrum ointment (red ointment) ... ... ... Blister, counter-irritant, caustic, stimulant: ac- cording to strengtli ... ... ... , .. Red mercury blister Honey Shath152 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. List of Drugs employed in the Treatment of ElephantsLIST OF DRUGS. 153 Macc Janantri Carminative154 TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. List of Drugs employed in the Treatment of ElephantsLIST OF DRUGS. 155 Oil of turpentine ... Tarpin tel Diuretic, stimulant156 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. List of Drugs employed in the Treatment of ElephantsLIST OF DRUGS. 157 Potass, iodidi ... ... Alterative, deobstruent, diuretic; in articular rheumatism, dropsy and enlargement of lymphatic glands158 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. List of Drugs employed in the Treatment of ElephantsLIST OF DRUGS. 159 Spirit ammon., aromatic ... ... Diffusible stimulant, anta- cid, anti-spasmodicl60 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. List of Drugs employed in the Treatment of ElephantsLIST OF DRUGS. 161 Verdigris Zangar Tonic, astringent[Facing page 163. PLATE VIII. OUNGING AND DRAGGING.
PART IV. Non-infective Diseases. CHAPTER I. GENERAL TREATMENT OF SICKNESS. IT will be as well to remark here that elephants generally are bad patients from three points of view : (a) they are naturally very timid suspicious creatures, difficult and often dangerous for strangers to handle ; (b) their vital processes are slow, hence diseases run a protracted course, take a low form and loss of condition is only slowly regained. Their natural timidity in health is often augmented by disease ; they very readily lose heart, becoming indifferent or oblivious to their surroundings in serious ailments ; (c) the difficulty usually encountered in the administration of medicines. If successful treatment is to be achieved, these facts must never be lost sight of, everything calculated to frighten the patient should be as far as possible avoided and every effort to conciliate and gain his confidence employed in preference to any method of restraint to effect one's purpose. Restraint in any form increases his fears, stimulates him to offer resistance and exhausts his energies. For this reason it is advised that the details of treatment laid down by the person in charge should be carried out under his personal supervision through the agency of the oosis alone. (1) Rest.164 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. necessary to tempt the patient with some favourite fodder, small quantities of which should be presented frequently, such as leaves and boughs of favourite trees well-known to attendants, plantain stems, bamboos, maize or millet stalks in or out of ear, sugarcane or fruits such as pineapples, plantains, bael, green cocoanuts, etc.,CHAPTER II. GENERAL INDICATIONS OF ILL-HEALTH. After what has been said about the elephant in health, it will be as well before discussing individual diseases to enumerate some of the major indications of indisposition commonly displayed :166 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. 97.4° F. to about 98° F. or 36-6° C. Anything above this con- stitutes fever and a temperature of 100° F. indicates considerable fever; a rise of four or five degrees a grave condition. Very high temperatures may on rare occasions be met with in heat-stroke, lock jaw and in some contagious diseases. Subnormal temperatures are also uncommon ; they are generally met with in cases of severe haemorrhage and before death. Fever and high temperature are usually considered synonymous terms, but the latter is only one of the many symptoms connected with the complex condition known as fever. It must be distinctly understood that fever is not a disease in itself: merely a symptom which may arise from manifold conditions. It accompanies almost all acute constitutional ailments resulting from whatever cause, such as anthrax, hæmorrhagic septicaemia and kindred ailments, heat-stroke, chills, all forms of blocd poisoning, etc., but may also attend conditions which are purely local, such as an abscess beneath the skin, inflammations, wounds and other injuries. The degree of fever in elephants is measured by the insertion of a thermometer into the rectum ; but this is as may be imagined sometimes by no means the easy operation it is in other animals owing to the extreme suspicion and nervousness displayed, in fact it is quite impossible in the case of some animals. The method recommended is as follows: A large number of elephants are not averse from having some of the contents of the rectum evacuated artificially, that is by the oosi or mahout inserting his arm previously anointed with some lubricant. A good mahout can generally accomplish this and after having removed some dung can introduce the thermometer without trouble. Another method is to divert suspicion by going through the operation of harnessing or loading, and at the same time offer sweetmeats, sugarcane, etc. As the anus or fundament is surrounded by much loose hanging skin, care must be observed to see that the hand carrying the thermometer is inserted well into the rectum where it should remain for at least a minute. If the animal be worried and excited, the temperature may temporarily be slightly raised. No special thermometer is required : an ordinary clinical thermometer suffices. Hauptner's * " Reform " thermometers are well suited for working with elephants. They are excellent and cheap, are 4" long, with glass scale encased in tube ; a cord can be attached. Care should be taken to shake down the mercurial column to 950 F., or if a centigrade thermometer be used, to 35°C. before introducing it. It is necessary to wash a thermometer thoroughly, preferably * Messrs. Hauptner & Co., Surgical Instrument Makers, N. W. Luisent- Strasse, 53, Berlin.
GENERAL INDICATIONS OF ILL-HEALTH. 167 in a disinfecting solution after use, to obviate the risk of infecting sound animals. Nowadays the centigrade thermometer is coming into general use. [To convert Fahrenheit into Centigrade, subtract 32, multiply by 5, and divide by 9 ; and to convert Centigrade into Fahrenheit, multiply by 9 and divide by 5 and add 32.] Should no thermometer be at hand, there are other indications which after long practice may lead one to a correct conclusion as to the presence of fever ; these are168 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Nitrate of Potash ... ½ oz. Common Salt ... ... 2 ozs. Aniseed ... ½ oz. Tamarind or jaggery ... A sufficiency. Give twice a day in bolus. Salammoniac ... ...½ oz. of each. Cardamoms Ginger Give twice daily. Aconite leaves, powdered ... 3 drs. Calomel ... 6 drs. Jaggery ... 8 ozs. Divide into eight pills ; give one every night. Also see " Diuretics " and " Mussauls." Any stimulant may be given every few hours. (3) Pain.GENERAL INDICATIONS OF ILL-HEALTH. 169 mild work carried on for many hours at a stretch and therefore curtailing the time for feeding, sleep and rest. (d) Insanitary conditions.170 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. external genital organs sometimes occur as a result of this dropsical effusion into the tissues. The impoverished state of the blood and feeble circulation may sometimes produce sloughing or mortification of a portion of the ears and end of tail. 5. The digestive apparatus in like manner suffers, and in consequence we may find loss of appetite or depraved appetite, fGENERAL INDICATIONS OF ILL-HEALTH. 171 animal found the least out of condition should be given a rest by sending him away into the jungle. Curative : {a) General.172 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Blood when abstracted is taken from the vessel behind the ear or from the large vein on the inside of the thigh in cases such as apoplexy, heatstroke. The animal having been carefully fettered, the part is washed and a string is tightly tied round the limb above where it is intended to open the vessel; this raises the vein. An incision must be made through the skin and the vein opened. Elephants cannot afford to stand a large abstraction of blood ; the state of the animal and condition of the pulse should denote when enough has been taken. Failure of the heart and collapse, and anaemia from excessive loss of blood, are the more imminent dangers likely to result from injudicious blood-letting.
CHAPTER III. STOMATITIS. DISORDERS OF THE TEETH. CONGESTION AND INFLAMMATION OF THE TEMPORAL GLANDS. STOMATITIS OR INLAMMATION OF THE MOUTH. Causes.174 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. removed with a fret or other fine saw ; the working of the saw is greatly facilitated by dripping water on it from a sponge or cloth. Small growths may be removed with a cold chisel. The diet of course should be as soft and nutritious as is procurable. Occasionally a tooth may be displaced from its normal position owing to the presence of some morbid growth about the root or fang, and thus interfere with mastication by its irregularity; or from the animal lacerating the mucous membrane during mastication ; loss of condition follows. The offending portion when possible should be removed with a saw. Owing to the peculiar manner in which the teeth are replaced, the front ones loosen and are shed. This is termed koochlie by the Indian mahouts. It is a natural process. Carious teeth." MUSTH." 175 be much lower. A better method is to fit it with a ring which is forcibly driven on to the tusk till it maintains a secure hold. Tusks that have been shortened often show a tendency to split. In the female and so-called tuskless males, the tusks are liable to be broken off or to become diseased. Should there be a cavity, it must be cleaned and washed out with permanganate of potash 2 or 3 grains to the pint and then dried after which it should be plugged with a single piece of tow or cotton wool, medicated with a few drops of carbolic acid, creosote, or oil of cloves. If it should happen that too much of the tusk has been cut off and the pulp exposed, the following treatment should be adopted :176 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. ( ) by the Burmans. It is probably analogous to the rut in deer. Causes." MUSTH." 177 him she must be removed. Foresters generally have some females loose with males when out grazing as a precaution, lest an animal becoming musth should stray away in search of such companionship and be lost as they occasionally are. Grain must be entirely withheld and green food only given in small quantities for several days. To calm the excitement, drugs are generally necessary and the best of these in the early stage is a strong purgative (Formulæ 29 to 38), also in the early stages opium, or ganja 4 to 6 drachms, given mixed with boiled rice, plantains, or jaggery. The following may be tried :178 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Symptoms.CHAPTER IV. WOUNDS. ABSCESS. SEROUS ABSCESS. WOUNDS. Definition.180 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. should he happen to be in possession of blunt, short tusks, a contused-lacerated wound is likely to be the result. (5) Poisoned wounds, bites of venomous snakes, stings of insects. Treatment of wounds in general:WOUNDS. 181 vessel is divided transversely than when the wound is in a longitu- dinal direction and the more rapid the loss the greater the danger. Symptoms of severe bleeding are a blanched state of the mem- branes, coldness of the body and extremities, a swaying staggering gait, marked weakness and prostration. If the pulse can be taken it will be found to be irregular. The animal falls, usually becomes unconscious, the excretions may be passed involuntarily, a few slight convulsions and the animal is dead. (b) Removal of foreign bodies.182 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. resented by the patient is to apply strips of the best resin plaster each strip must be passed sharply backwards and forwards over hot embers to ensure perfect adhesion. Hair should be removed. To apply it cut two strips of plaster about 2 feet in length and of width according to length of wound, say from 1 inch to 3 inches shaped as Nos. 1 and 2 ; pass No. 1 through the window C of No. 2 and adjust before sticking down, so that the length of one piece overlies the length of the other [see Fig. 36). Having done this; stick A end of No. 1 on one side of the wound and the B end of No. 2 on the other, leaving the B end of No. 1 and the A end of No. 2 free. Exert traction on both these free ends, which will approximate the edges of the wound. Having performed this stick the ends down. In case the above is not clearly expressed, cut strips out of paper and practise the method. This plan answers well in some wounds. Another method may be tried as follows : Suturing or sewing. This is a less easy matter in the case of elephants owing to the thickness of the hide and the strength of the muscle beneath the skin. It is certainly worth trying in recent incised wounds. Ordi- nary stitches do not as a rule hold well. The use of some new suture buttons suggested by Mr. Pugh, and manufactured by Messrs. Arnold & Sons, West Smithfield, London, is therefore recommended. The button is to be had in various sizes and in two shapes, oval and round. It is made of aluminium and is there- fore light ; there is a hole in the centre for passage of the wire and on each side of the hole is a clip, around which the wire can be twisted in a figure of eight. The advantages claimed are : its simplicity and lightness, it prevents cutting or tearing of the edges of the wound, and lastly it is easily rendered aseptic for future use by boiling. In stitching elephant wounds separate stitches are the best. It is better to make the first stitch at the centre of the wound. To make a stitch, the needle is passed through the skin on one side of the wound from without inwards ; then through the other edge from within outwards ; the ends of the wire are to be taken and drawn in gentlv so as to bring the edges of the wound together ; when this has been effected, the ends of the wire are to be twisted securely. The employment of buttons will be preferable. Stitches should not be too close : a space of at least 1¼ inches to 1½ inches should be allowed. The most dependent part of the wound must be left open in order to permit free escape of all discharges. The lips of large gaping wounds must not be forcibly dragged together, as the stitches will cause much pain and are almost certain to give way Again, stitches should not be made too near the edges; they should
WOUNDS. 183 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Method of applying to wound. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] A and B in position over the wound. FIG. 36.
184 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. be placed far enough from them and of sufficient depth to ensure a good hold. (d) Dress the wound.WOUNDS. 185 In open country186 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Apart from damaging granulations, the more pain occasioned the more timidity will be aroused in the patient and greater will be the difficulty in future applications. Owing to the neglect and improper treatment of wounds, elephants are constantly incapacitated for work for months, which is absurd. Experience proves that with care and attention wounds in elephants, though perhaps not disposed to heal as rapidly as in most other creatures, will heal in about one-fourth the time it takes a mahout to cure them. Owners of elephants and especially firms who have European assistants should insist that elephants placed in their charge shall not be treated (except under their personal direction) by mahouts. The assistants should be careful to note that the strength of all antiseptics, disinfectants, etc., laid down should be adhered to. In many cases much unnecessary pain and injury to the tissues is caused by using these solutions much too strong. The method of pouring an unknown quantity of drugs such as phenyle and carbolic acid, etc., into a bucket of water is to be strongly condemned. ABSCESS. The term applied to a circumscribed collection of matter (pus) usually occurring in the deeper layers of the skin or tissues beneath it. Causes.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] [Facing page 187. CASE OF LOSS OF SOME OF THE SPINAL PROCESSES FROM SOREBACK (AFTER SANDERSON).
ABSCESS. 187 firmly on one side of the swelling and with the fingers of the other hand gently press the tumour ; if the swelling be felt to rise and fall under the first hand, it is due to the presence of fluid, and the sensa- tion imparted is what is understood as fluctuation ; it is as well to try and obtain it in two directions at least. To recognize fluctuation only requires a little practice, but much skill is necessary to detect matter in small quantity or where it is deeply seated. As already observed if matter be not liberated it will burrow and increase the extent of the mischief; hence it is essential to evacuate it as soon as possible after it has formed. A swelling that has shown no sign of reducing and is attended by pain, local heat and tenderness, and especially if there be any fever present, even if fluctuation be not obtained, a knife should be plunged deeply into it, for it is better to do this when no matter exists than to postpone doing it for some time after it may have accumulated; no harm beyond laying the animal up for a few days can arise from the first contingency, but considerable harm in the latter. A better method, whenever there are any reasonable grounds for suspecting the presence of matter, such as continued high tempe- rature after an injury, is to use a fine trocar and canula (Campbell's) and plunge this into the suspected swelling and on the removal of the trocar fluid if present will flow through the canula and the swelling may then be freely opened with a knife. Two or three punctures may be made in different parts. No harm is likely to result from this procedure provided the instrument is well boiled before use ; on the contrary some swellings where pus has not been detected have dispersed after puncture. Mahouts are proverbially dilatory in opening an abscess and prefer to leave it, saying that it is not ripe or too hard and are there- fore responsible for the loss of an animal's service for a much longer period than need be. Method of procedure in opening an abscess.188 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. region of the spine or bony points, the hands or fingers should after disinfection be thrust in and the wound explored for dead pieces of bone, which may occasionally be found and should be removed, after which the cavity should be cleansed by syringing it out with dis- infecting lotions and the wound dressed, and a large piece of lint steeped in some camphorated oil, dikamali ointment or some other preparation which will keep flies away {see Part III, Formulae 128, 130 and 137) should be placed between the lips of the wound to prevent its closing too rapidly. Dressings can be kept in place by using strips of good resin plaster. The cavity will require dressing at least once daily till healed. In neglected cases when the skin has become undermined, and this may be extensive in every direction, to promote the healing process it is necessary to have recourse to caustic solutions. The cavities should be syringed out with tincture of iodine, 1 to 2 drs. to the pint, carbolic acid (1 to 20), or sulphate of zinc or copper lotion, 5 grs. to the ounce (also see Part III, Formulae 98 to 102), after which as a rule healing commences: if not, the injection must be repeated every second or third day till the wound assumes a healthy aspect. Where pockets exist, one or more openings should be made so that the discharges can completely drain away. Pieces of tape previously disinfected may be passed from the original wound through the new openings and then knotted, or a piece of wood tied at each of the ends to keep them from slipping through ; the tapes should be moved up and clown once or twice a day and removed as soon as a healthy discharge issues (see Setons, page 113). In old standing cases a blister or strong liniment applied over the undermined portion but not on the wound itself often promotes healing. All incisions through the skin should as much as possible be made in the direction of the natural folds or wrinkles, not across them., otherwise they will gape and when healed leave ugly scars {see Fig. 36). SEROUS ABSCESS. What are known as serous abscesses are occasionally met with, they may contain blood or serum. Causes.SEROUS ABSCESS. 189 Treatment.CHAPTER V. ULCERATION. SINUSES AND FISTULÆ. BURNS AND SCALDS. An ulcer is an open sore of some superficial structure, whether skin or mucous membrane. Causes.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] [Facing Page 101. PLATE IX. Cow ELEPHANT " MA PU." Showing loss of cartilage of ear, the result of extensive ulceration ; also showing original ulcer nearly healed.
ULCERATION. 191 Treatment: 192 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. A Burman who informs me he has seen two or three cases of this with elephants before says the disease slowly eats into the brain through the ear hole or the throat, when the animal dies, and there is no cure for it. As a matter of fact these cases after proper treatment usually do quite well. Treatment.ULCERATION. 193 Royle and Baker of Messrs. Steel Brothers in the Katha District came across similar sores about the body, especially in the region of the saddle. Animals in good condition are attacked as well as others ; the first thing observed is a swelling which may be about the size of a pigeon's egg, i.e., half to an inch in diameter, more or less circular in shape, hard to the touch and not painful, in fact it resembles a chafe. If disregarded, the centre softens and breaks down and a white fibrous-looking core sloughs out, leaving a raw healthy-looking ulcer with clean cut edges. Treatment.194 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. (Formula 138), or applying a blister, may reduce the swellings. If ulcerated, treat as laid down under that heading. ULCERATION OF THE FOREHEAD. The skin of the forehead is liable to become tender and sore from constant exposure to a hot sun. Ill-tempered careless drivers are given to a too free use of the goad, inflicting punctured wounds. Injury may also occur to the forehead when not protected, while the animal is engaged in pushing or overthrowing obstacles. Care must be taken with these cases, as the inflammation is liable to spread to the sinuses of the skull. Treatment.ULCERATION. 195 and carelessness is to place the attendants on half pay during the period their charge is incapacitated from work. ULCERATION OF THE EAR. This may be seen on the edges of the ear, on the flaps, or in the canal which leads internally. Causes.196 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. of the tail may slough off. In some cases, in spite of active and careful treatment, the destructive process continues till it reaches some 8 or 10 inches from the root of the tail. Mr. Petley informed me that the Burmans state that if unchecked the-disease spreads to the spine. The disease is known to the Burmans as khoo-sah-de (eaten by a caterpillar), . The elephant a tai in Plate X shows a bandage round stump of his tail. This animal was treated for a long time by Mr. Petley but nothing seemed to arrest the disease. Treatment.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] [Facing page 196. PLATE X. FINE SPECIMEN OF A TAI, SUFFERING FROM PROGRESSIVE ULCERATION OF THE TAIL.
BURNS AND SCALDS. 197 out with antiseptic solution and then an injection of one part of corrosive sublimate to four parts of glycerine and an equal quantity of water should be made into the joint once. This produces great swelling and a considerable amount of pain for twenty-four hours, but at the end of that time the sinus will generally be found closed. A full dose of opium should be given before the injection, as considerable difficulty may be experienced in administering it later. BURNS AND SCLADS. When left to himself the elephant is not subject to this class of injury, but in captivity he may be accidentally injured. The degree of injury varies from simple scorching to complete destruction of the skin and underlying tissues of the part. When deep or extensive they may cause a fatal termination through shock or the absorption of toxic products produced by tissue destruction. Treatment.CHAPTER VI. SPRAINS. FRACTURES AND DISLOCATIONS. CRAMP. RHEUMATISM. SPRAINS. The elephant though a sure-footed animal is liable to sprains, especially of the joints a little above the pad in the fore and middle of hind limbs. They occur when animals have to pass over rocky ground, getting a foot suddenly wedged between heavy logs, placing a foot on unsound ground (and it is surprising how frequently elephants will do this, though they are credited with being so very careful), working in heavy mud such as tidal creeks. Wild elephants do not appear to be more cautious than tame ones, as it is not unusual when following up a herd to find that a member of it has walked upon ground apparently sound, and on which one of his legs has gone through to a depth of a couple of feet or more, and I have on two or three occasions come on places where a bank has given way, and by the saplings and bushes knocked clown, there was little doubt that the elephant went down also. I also witnessed an accident where a loaded elephant was walking along on a newly made road, when it suddenly gave way under him and he rolled down some 40 or 50 feet screaming and trumpeting. We had to get a couple of elephants down to assist him to rise after the load was removed. The camp was fortunately not far off, so he was walked in quietly without his load. He showed no symptoms that day beyond stiffness but next morning he could hardly move ; one of his legs, near hind, was much swollen from foot upwards for about a foot, and he was very tender and sore over the loins. He made a good recovery under treatment but it took two months. Fording streams with a rocky bottom, especially where there are a number of large loose stones, renders animals liable to sprain, as also does overloading, hurrying them especially in hilly country. Symptoms.FRACTURES AND DISLOCATIONS. 199 liniments (Formulae 70200 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. pain, loss of power, excessive mobility, inability to bear weight. In a limb there may be shortening. Fractures may be complicated by injuries to surrounding structures such as blood vessels, nerves or other important organs. Treatment.RHEUMATISM. 201 recur troublesome. The disease affects the muscles, tendons and their sheaths, especially about joints. Recovery is often tardy. Causes.CHAPTER VII. DISEASES OF THE SKIN. Inflammation of the skin.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] [Facing Page 203. PLATE XI. AN OPEN SORE DUE TO AN INJURY.
ABRASIONS. 203 destruction of the skin may die or slough so as to incorporate the whole thickness of the skin (forming the condition familiarly known in horses as- " sitfast"), the slough on separating leaving a hole. Treatment: Preventive.204 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. removal of stuffing from the guddee to form a hollow large enough to take in and protect the part from further injury. NOTE.ECZEMA. 205 URTICARIA. Nettle-rash or surfeit may occasionally be met with. It consists of an eruption on the skin, which is usually very sudden in its appearance. The rash may be general or appear only in patches. Causes.206 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. and is non-contagious. Several animals may, however, be attacked at the same time, but the reason for this is, that generally speaking those that suffer have been partaking of the same kind of food and in other matters subjected to similar treatment. The disease may attack animals in good condition, but is more common and severe in those that are aged or debilitated. The malady is met with most frequently during the hot weather and is liable to recur. Symptoms.BOILS. 207 and if the animal be weak tonics should be administered, especially arsenic and iron. Local.208 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Symptoms.HÆMATIDROSIS. 209 The only reason that could be assigned was that the animals were, and had been for some time, on dry coarse fodder, and that there was a general disturbance of nutrition of the blood vessels. Some animals which had recovered presented a spotted appearance and at each of the hæmorrhagic points the skin had lost its pigment. The treatment consisted in regularly washing parts with weak antiseptic lotions and giving internally arsenic and bicarbonate of soda. Haemorrhages of this kind occur in cattle and in certain breeds of horses. In some cases the haemorrhage may be due to the presence of minute round worms (filariæ). 14
CHAPTER VIII. DISEASES OF THE SKIN (continued)[Facing page 210. WING NEURATION OF SOME OF THE MORE IMPORTANT BITING FLIES AS COMPARED WITH THE HOUSE-FLY. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Muscidæ (restricted)BLOOD-SUCKING FLIES. 211 such as malaria, surra, n'gana (tsetse-fly disease), sleeping sickness, etc., has been fully established. There are several varieties of blood-sucking flies in Burma and the Shan States. Blood-sucking is generally confined to the female sex. Sand-flies ......... Hpyôk. Simulium { Blood-blister fly Po-laung. ... Buffalo gnat Mosquitoes ......... Kyin. Stomoxys ......... { Yin-ye. { Yin-kya. Tabanus Horse flies Hmet. Breeze flies Hmet-gyi. Sometimes called gad-flies... Hmet-kya. The hmet-gyi is the large horse-fly and is not anything like so plentiful as the hmet-kya or smaller hmet which swarms on to animals causing herds to run away. Taungpyauk ( ) is an Upper Burma name for the hmetkya. Sand-flies and mosquitoes need no description to those concerned with this work ; nevertheless, of all the biting flies at present known, the mosquito ranks first in importance as it has been conclu- sively proved that certain species take a prominent part in the diffusion of certain diseases such as malarial fevers, filariasis. Furthermore they act as hosts in which the germs pass a certain portion of their life cycle, hence without these insects the parasites could not exist. Simulium (The blood-blister fly).212 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. be assailed by them. They are heavy, large bodied flies, in size ranging from ¼ to 1 inch in length. The head is large, convex in front, eyes usually greenish in colour, but in some species may be of other brilliant colours. Eyes in the male meet, but in the female there is a space between them. Proboscis in most genera is short and stout. Colour of the body varies, usually greyish. In some especially the smaller kinds the flight is noiseless, the first intimation of their presence being their sharp bite. The eggs are deposited on rushes or other smooth surfaces over water or damp ground. It is probable that at least some of the genera of this species aid considerably in the dissemination of surra. Stomoxys.NON-BLOOD-SUCKING FLIES. 213 will not bite at night, but along the Chobe river (where they swarm), and by moonlight, I can feelingly say that this is a mistake. They kept flying up from the ground on to my naked legs, and bit as furiously as in the day-time." Wild elephants and buffaloes usually protect themselves by wallowing in mud-holes, thus coating their bodies with mud. Cartmen when starting on the march often tie a smoky wood-oil torch to the front of the yoke while carrying another to protect themselves and the hind parts of their oxen. NON-BLOOD-SUCKING FLIES. Certain non-blood-sucking flies require notice owing to the fact that their larvae as maggots occur in wounds, others causing ''warbles" under the skin, or appearing as internal "bots" cause much trouble. Maggots.214 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. chapters on internal parasites. In others the suitable region is the subcutaneous tissues of the selected animal. Warbles or swellings due to the invasion of the subcutaneous tissues by the larvae of one or more of the family TICKS. 215 abdomen, which in the female is capable of great distension. The legs are strong and terminate in claws. The wings are obtuse and rounded, and the veins are confined to the anterior third. They can run with great rapidity, are difficult to catch and not easy to crush owing to their leather-like skin. In some animals they cause great annoyance, one or two being sufficient to cause them to kick furiously. TICKS. Ticks ( ) are plentiful enough both as regards species and numbers. They are blood-suckers ; the mouth is provided with a serrated rostrum or beak, by means of which they can pierce the skin and retain a firm hold. More important, however, than the annoyance caused by their fixation to the skin is the fact that in recent years it has been proved that several species are responsible for transmission of certain diseases in man and various animals. What particular ailments may be carried amongst elephants by ticks have not been established, but it is extremely probable that piro- plasmosis affecting these animals is at least one of them. As far as they have been recognized, elephant ticks belong to the family Ixodidæ ; it is unlikely that the members of the family Argasidæ will be found owing to the conditions under which these latter live. It is advisable that all ticks be removed as soon as seen, but care should be taken not to remove them forcibly : they are likely to leave their heads behind, nasty sores resulting from the irritation. They may be induced to release their hold by applications of turpentine and oil, or by adding a little crude earth oil or kerosine oil to some ordinary sweet oil. If an animal is badly infected the following dressing, noted in one of the Queensland Agricultural Journals, may be employed. It is very effective in dogs :2l6 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. The situations in which they are most likely to be met with are the head and neck, under the abdomen, about the root of the tail. In some cases they may be noticed on all parts of the body. The eggs (nits) are attached to the hairs. Though lice may infest animals in the best condition they are more common on those that are ill kept and badly nourished. Their presence is usually an indication of neglect. Symptoms.LEECHES. 217 covered and allowed to stand for half an hour or so, after which the liquid may be strained through a piece of calico. If the elephant has been standing in a shed, it is essential that all woodwork be thoroughly washed with boiling water, to which crude carbolic acid or phenyle has been added. All gear had better be destroyed by fire, or at least be saturated with carbolized boiling water. This should be repeated daily for two or three days. Poultry, which are proverbially full of vermin, should not be allowed in elephant sheds. LEECHES ( ). Family Hirudinæ. During the rains the large water and land leeches may attach themselves and when fixed will suck blood freely until they become distended to very many times their original size. They should not be removed forcibly. The ordinary Burmese method, namely to place the lighted end of a selaik (Burmese cheroot) in close proximity to their bodies soon causes them to relax their hold.
CHAPTER IX. DISEASES OF THE FEET. TENDER FEET OR "THULLEE." This is a very common ailment. Causes.220 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. CRACKED SOLE. This is a condition in which ulceration takes place in the natural cracks or crevices of the sole. It is a most troublesome affection and difficult to cure. In some cases proud flesh occurs. Causes.220 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. CRACKED SOLE. This is a condition in which ulceration takes place in the natural cracks or crevices of the sole. It is a most troublesome affection and difficult to cure. In some cases proud flesh occurs. Causes.CRACKED HEELS. 221 This dressing may be applied when the animal is convalescent, at which period he may be sent out with an attendant, who should take care that the animal does not enter water. Slym recommends for this affection the following dressing :222 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. 1 drachm to 12 ounces, or sulphate of zinc or copper, 4 or 5 grains to the ounce of water, should be applied once daily. An occasional application of weak solution of chloride of zinc proves beneficial. The affected parts must be covered with tow and the foot enveloped in sacking ; on recovery the animal should not be worked in water for two or three months. ABSCESS OF THE FOOT. Causes.DISEASE OF THE NAILS. 223 treat the abscess as described. If a fistulous opening appears in the parts abovementioned, injection of sulphate of zinc or copper, 2 to 5 grains to the ounce (see Formulae 98 to 102) should be tried, and if necessary repeated and the parts dressed. In all injuries of the feet the foot should be dressed, enveloped in gunny and placed in a leather boot. DISEASE OF THE NAILS. Warty growths around the nails.224 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. discharge may be observed issuing at the junction of the nails and skin and also from beneath them. These cases are at times trouble- some, especially when there is much discharge from under the nails. Treatment.CHAPTER X. DISEASES OF THE RESPIRATORY TRACT. CATARRH OR COLD. Symptoms.226 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. MUMPS OR SORE-THROAT. Causes.PNEUMONIA. 227 OR Myrrh ... ... ... 3 drs. Assaf228 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. is characterized by a more or less sudden subsidence of the symptomsCHAPTER XI. DISEASES OF THE CIRCULATORY SYSTEM. HEART AND LARGER BLOOD VESSELS. Diseases of the heart as evidenced by post-mortem examinations are much more common than might be supposed. The diagnosis of such during life, however, much less the differentiation of one condition from another, is surrounded by difficulties. The position of the heart, coupled with the extreme suspicion and nervousness displayed by most elephants on the approach of any stranger, renders efforts at examination difficult and unsatisfactory. Post-mortem examination sometimes reveals that heart-disease in an advanced stage may exist without being suspected during life. Symptoms pointing to heart affections are alterations in the character of the pulse, which may be regularly or irregularly inter- mittent ; i.e., in the former case, a pause or miss of a beat is observed at regular intervals, say after every fifth or tenth beat ; in the latter, the pause occurs at irregular intervals. The pulse may be accele- rated and in some instances retarded ; breathlessness (the mucous membranes being of a bluish colour) more apparent when an animal is put to work, or rapid exhaustion, muscular weakness, giddiness or fainting shortly after ; coldness of the extremities, the presence of dropsical swellings about the body, limbs, etc. ; in fact conditions pointing to defective circulation, such as sloughing of portions of the ears and tail, gradually increasing weakness and emaciation, and finally sudden death not attributable to other causes. In elephants death may occur suddenly from long continued and unobserved disease of the heart. It must not be forgotten that functional troubles may give rise to many of these symptoms ; hence careful observation for some time is necessary to avoid as much as possible drawing hasty conclusions and thus making very serious errors, such as disposing of a valuable animal which may be considered useless, and finding later on the symptoms have dis- appeared and that the animal is working as usual. Causes.230 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. The conditions met with post-mortem in one case showed atrophy of the organ (wasting of its substance) ; in several others, hypertrophy (enlarged heart). The heart is in some cases enor- mously large and may rupture from extreme and sudden exertion or show disease of the valves on both sides. Sometimes rupture of the aorta may occur. Treatment.LIVER. 231 due to filarial infection, and in these cases certain kinds of mosquitoes have been proved to be the intermediary hosts. The long slender white worms in the heart so commonly occurring among dogs in this province and China, are the filariæ immitis. In animals mosquitoes, ticks and lice may be the intermediary hosts, or the worms may be taken ingested direct from infected water. In the elephant, blood examination has on many occasions revealed the presence of embryonic filariæ in the peripheral blood. Whether the fully developed filariæ are of any significance in connection with any elephant disease remains to be seen. In one case the elephant was the subject of flukes, in two others the animals were emaciated and surra was suspected and again they were present in some cases of surra. In several cases, however, the infected animals appeared to be in good health. DISEASES OF THE LIVER. As is the case in most diseases of the internal organs, their diagnosis is obscure owing to the indefinite and undecided nature of the symptoms. Yet we know from post-mortem examination that this organ is frequently the seat of disease. When we observe jaundiced (yellowish) membranes with very high-coloured urine, it is a decided symptom pointing to liver derangement, but the absence of such is no proof that the liver is not the seat of serious mischief. ICTERUS OR JAUNDICE. This is not a disease but merely a symptom, and is applied to a condition in which the visible mucous membranes take on a yellowish colour. This is due to the liver being surcharged with bile, which is re-absorbed by that organ and passed into the blood. It is a common symptom in many liver complaints which may arise from a variety of causes. Causes232 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. bile in the intestines ; the dung is light or clay coloured, and the stench considerable. The animal is weak, very dull and comatose. Death may result in these cases. Treatment.NEPHRITIS. 233 RUPTURE OF THE SPLEEN. The possibility of a rupture of the spleen as the result of a severe blow or fall must not be overlooked. The symptoms in the case of an extensive rent are those of rapid internal haemorrhage, great paleness of the mucous membranes, rapid loss of strength, coldness of the limbs, ears, etc., weak pulse, a falling body temperature, frightened appearance of the animal, ending in death in a short time. Death from haemorrhage also occurs as a result of penetrating wounds of this organ. Treatment.234 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. fresh and in small quantities. A purgative of aloes and calomel may be given. Liquor ammonia acetatis in doses of 3 ounces may be added to drinking water, or acetate of potash in 3-dr. doses or bicarbonate of soda in 1-oz. doses twice or three times a day. Care must be taken not to act on the kidneys too much. When the urine is suppressed the case is very serious. During convalescence tonics should be administered. CYSTITIS OR INFLAMMATION OF THE BLADEER. This is rare and when it occurs probably indicates some irritation of the bladder due to an abnormal state of the urine. Causes.HÆMATURIA. 235 passed well into the rectum, the bladder may be felt distended (the bladder is situated immediately below the rectum). Treatment: Local.236 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. OR Tincture of perchloride of iron (dilute) ... 1 oz. doses. Water ... ...... A sufficiency. OR Gallic acid......... ½ to 1 dr. Jaggery......... Sufficiency. Every three hours. DIABETES. One form of diabetes is occasionally seen in the elephant, characterized simply by profuse staling. Causes.LYMPHANGITIS. 237 Treatment.CHAPTER XII. DISEASES OF THE STOMACH AND INTESTINES. The dung is passed from eight to twelve times in the twenty- four hours and has the following characters :CHRONIC INDIGESTION. 239 constipation treated by enemas or laxatives, or a dose of aloes and calomel. Starvation for some hours, after which nothing but gruel for twenty-four hours should be given, when if the dung is natural, ordinary food may be allowed in small quantities and gradually increased, carefully watching the excretions. In cases of disorders of the stomach and intestines and also in debility, molassine meal is worthy of a trial. CHRONIC INDIGESTION. Causes.240 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. should not be checked, as the bowels may thus be relieved of some irritating matter. They must be kept regular by gentle laxatives or enemas and exercise. To restore tone to the digestive organs vegetable and mineral tonics are indicated, such as the following :DIARRH242 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. General.SUPER-PURGATION. 243 diarrhoea. Calves subjected to such treatment present the following appearance :244 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. water be very cold, the chill should be taken off. The animal should not be bathed till the effects of the physic have passed off. It often takes from 16 to 24 hours for the physic to operate, and its action continues for from 4 to 12 hours at intervals. If a purgative " hangs fire," a little walking exercise, or a soap-and-water enema, will hasten its action. Debilitated and otherwise delicate animals should only receive mild purgatives. Diet should be restricted while the animal is undergoing physic. Gruel in moderate quantity only is to be allowed. The animal should be kept quiet and the body clothed. CurativeCONSTIPATION. 245 Causes246 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION OR STOPPAGE OF THE BOWELS. Causes.INTUSSUSCEPTION. 247 " He remained quite well during the first five, days of the voyage. He then began to show signs of illness. He refused food and assumed a sullen disposition. There was no movement of the bowels and no vomiting. A brother passenger to the patient, taking similar diet, was enjoying his customary good health. " On the following day the condition of the patient became worse ; he groaned loudly and seemed to be in much pain. He then lay down upon the deck, the eyes lost their lustre, the lids dropped, and he seemed oblivious of all. A low, monotonous whine indicated that our patient was still suffering, while the lateral decubitus which he had adopted showed that his general condition was serious248 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. intussusception, owing to the large size and great distension of the intestines, and the impossibility of reducing it without using the knife, it seems that the chances of preventing a fatal result would have been almost "nil." FLATULENT COLIC. 249 Treatment.250 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Treatment.PERITONITIS. 251 Davis & Co. prepare a most reliable fluid extract, and of this 6 to 8 drachms may be given, repeated as necessary. Plenty of linseed gruel should be allowed, also stimulants. Purgatives must on no account be given. If the animal recovers, bring him gradually on to his full ration. No harm will be done by keeping him short till he has quite recovered. PERITONITIS. Inflammation of the glistening membrane which lines the abdo- minal cavity and is reflected over the bowels, etc. Causes.252 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. neck indicating the seat of the impaction. There is great distress and the condition is accompanied by hiccough. It may occur at any season of the year. Prognosis.POISONING. 253 they are picked up. If these creepers were poisonous to men and animals the people would be more careful about polluting water not far from villages. Steel records some very interesting cases of wholesale poisoning of elephants in India by means of the poisonous Nepaul root called darka (Aconite ?) being given in balls of grain or other delicacies, of which these animals are fond. In this province I have never heard of tame or wild elephants being intentionally poisoned. We must nevertheless be on our guard as such a thing is possible. Many poisonous drugs are administered by mahouts in the treatment of elephants ; an overdose might be given through ignorance" or care- lessness, or by accident. Elephants are very particular as regards the selection of their food ; still a case of poisoning might occur. In two cases where animals died rather suddenly, arsenic was detected in the contents of the stomach by the Chemical Examiner. I have little doubt that these animals were being treated by the mahouts with bazaar arsenic, which is often very impure. The symptoms manifested which might lead us to suspect poison- ing are that they occur suddenly, generally while an elephant is in perfect health. As a rule, they arise soon after food has been taken or medicine administered. If more than one animal is taken ill after food or medicine and all suffer from similar symptoms, poisoning may reasonably be suspected. The poisons we might have to deal with are those employed in treatment, such as arsenic, opium, belladonna, croton beans or croton oil, ganja, dhatura, nux vomica, metallic salts. For the treatment of poisons antidotes are administered ; they act in two ways, either by mechanically preventing the action of the poison or counteracting its effect. Poisons and their Antidotes. POISONS. ANTIDOTS. Arsenic ... ... Preparations of magnesia. Aconite ... ... Tannic acid, and animal charcoal. Opium ... ... Dashing cold water over the body, stimu- lants ; endeavour to keep the animal moving about. Permanganate of potash. Belladonna ...... Keep the animal moving about ; give lime- water and stimulants ; dash cold water over the body. Croton beans or oil... Demulcent drinks ; stimulants, and opium to relieve pain and check the purging. Ganja...... Stimulants ; keep the animal moving about.
254 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. POISONS. ANTIDOTES. Nux vomica or strychnia ... Bromide of potassium ; weak decoction of tobacco. Tobacco ... ... Warm stimulants, tannic acid, and small doses of strychnia. Metallic salts ... ... Steel states that "the formation of tumours over the body, progressive anaemia and even disorders of the feet have been attributed to the empirical use of the compounds of mercury in too large quantities." Plenty of white of eggs, wheaten flour conjee, and other demulcent drinks. Acids ... ... Alkalies, such as carbonate or bicarbo- nate of soda or potash. Carbolic acid ... ... White of eggs, demulcent drinks, stimu- lants. The dose of poison may be so large that treatment is of little avail. Antidotes are not always procurable in time to be of service ; again the elephant is, especially when in pain, an awkward animal to give drugs to, and such things as inhalation of ammonia are impossible. If a death occurs under suspicious circumstances, a post-mortem should be held, notes taken, and some of the contents of the stomach and commencement of the small intestine, small piece of liver and kidney should be placed in clean jars with some spirit, sealed with a private seal by some responsible person and despatched without delay to the Chemical Examiner, who will readily aid and give his opinion on the case. MOOKUNDA Is an affection described by various authors as a result of permit- ting an elephant to have his ration of rice during the period he is eating earth as a remedy for worms. Symptoms.CHAPTER XIII DISEASES AFFECTING THE BRAIN AND NERVOUS SYSTEM. INFLAMMATION OF THE LINING MEMBRANE OF THE CAVITIES IN THE BONES OF THE SKULL. Causes.256 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. stagger in his walk. In the later stages other symptoms may become pronounced, notably excitement. The animal may become violent and then fall down in a fit of convulsions ; after several fits and much struggling the animal becomes comatose and death follows. Treatment.PARALYSIS. 257 Symptoms.258 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. SUNSTROKE. This term is applied to a condition usually brought about by exposure to great heat and glare. Sunstroke in the elephant may be divided as follows :HEAT APOPLEXY. 259 ration for some clays. Whenever possible, arrangements should be made for the load and gear to be taken into camp. After a rest of from thirty-six to forty-eight hours, he may during the cool hours of the morning or late evening be quietly taken to camp. Great care, however, must be taken to avoid subjecting the elephant to exposure to sun for a considerable time afterwards. Death may occur quite suddenly from failure of the action of the heart. HEAT APOPLEXY OR HEAT-STROKE. The symptoms are similar to those met with in heat exhaustion, but the ' animal may be somewhat excited ; he staggers about, trembles all over, breathes very hurriedly and finally falls down in a more or less unconscious state. In some cases there may be symptoms of delirium ending in convulsions, great difficulty in breathing, coma and death. The temperature ranges high. Causes.260 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Curative.CHAPTER XIV. DISEASES OF THE EYE. THE EYE. It is a matter of common remark amongst those who have much to do with elephants that a large percentage of them have blemished eyes. Major Hawkes notes, of a batch of 27 elephants examined, that one was totally blind, two nearly so, two blind in one eye, one had cataract in both eyes, and three had partial opacity of the cornea in both eyes. I think if we give the subject a little consideration the cause of this high percentage will be readily apparent. The eye of the elephant is as delicate and sensitive as our own, and the preservation of sight is a blessing to the animal and an advantage to the owner ; yet mahouts are allowed (through ignorance of owners or those in charge) to inflict intense suffering on these creatures by blowing powdered glass, powders containing ingre- dients such as lunar caustic, blue-stone, camphor, etc., into their eyes to remove so-called films, or to treat the eyes with mixtures (applied unsparingly) containing other irritating ingredients in uncertain quantities, such as chillies, ginger, quicklime, preparations of mercury. When such delicate organs are subjected to treatment such as described, it is not surprising that we find so many elephants whose vision is permanently impaired or totally lost. It should be made clear to elephant attendants that any treat- ment of the eyes carried out by them will result in their immediate dismissal. Captain Forsyth, a careful observer and sympathetic master, remarks : " The eyes of the elephant are extremely delicate and appear to possess in an unusual degree a sympathetic con- nection with the digestive organs. Nearly every indisposition of the animal is accompanied by a clouding or suffusion of the eyes. Few elephants that have been long caught, especially if in the hands of natives, have perfect eyes." Note the remark " especially if in the hands of natives." Mahouts are everlastingly tinkering with their elephants ; if not treating their eyes, they are treating them for some other supposed ailment. This amateur doctoring by them is a curse in elephant establishments. If more attention was given to seeing that these men take their animals to good grazing grounds,
262 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. that they give them their salt, flour or grain ration, that they are washed and groomed, and not tethered in the sun or overworked, the elephants would keep in better health. In the human subject, the eyes are often affected in general bad health. In fact Nettleship remarks that " Ulcers of the cornea are so often a sign of bad health that we ought never to neglect such means as may be called for to improve the general condition."OPHTHALMIA. 263 better than old soft linen, or lint, which should be cut into small pieces and used as required. After use, the soiled pieces should be buried or burned in order that flies should not rest on them and thus, if an affection be contagious, carry it to other animals. In fact it is a sound rule never to use pieces of lint, cloth or sponges a second time. Natives have no idea of the importance of cleanliness in these diseases, and will wipe the eyes with filthy rags, will even drop them on the ground, and use them immediately after. Elephants are often unusually nervous when their eyes are sore. When it is desired to examine the eyes, the keeper should always be present, and the animal's attention diverted as much as possible by feeding him with some favourite food.. The medicine must be made up and the mahout given careful instructions how to use it ; a responsible person should be present to see the eye dressed. Elephants with impaired vision or those whose sight is lost should be approached with great caution ; they should be spoken to and given the wind, otherwise, if approached quietly and the wind be not in their favour, even a quiet creature might through sudden fear cause serious damage. It is almost useless for a stranger to try and dress an elephant's eyes ; the keeper alone is generally the only person who can do this. Elephants will not as a rule permit much handling of their eyes, as on the least interference they bring the nictitating membrane into play. The best thing is to get as good a view as possible without touching. When examining an eye the attention may be attracted by some one on the opposite side. Considerable experience has proved that with patience and care excellent results can be obtained by judicious treatment. During the hot season, if elephants are tethered in the glare of the sun, it is a good plan to cover the forehead and eyes with a cloth frequently wetted, or a shade. OPHTHALMIA OR SORE-EYES. Causes.264 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. increased secretion (at first watery, later turbid), obvious pain and discomfort. Treatment: Local.CATARACT. 265 lost. Under proper treatment this should resolve and the cornea in course of time regain its original transparency but it often happens that a scar persists, shown by an opacity which may be permanent. The symptoms leading to a suspicion of the presence of ulcera- tion are similar to those manifested in ophthalmia and the treat- ment identical. When the ulcer has healed and an opacity is left, calomel on a camel's hair brush should be flicked into the eye once daily to hasten absorption (Formula 97) ; or a small portion (about size of a split pea or hemp seed) of yellow oxide of mercury ointment (Formula 96) inserted under the lid once daily may prove beneficial. Opacity of the cornea is sometimes seen in old age ; it is gene- rally observed around the margin of the cornea, appearing as a faint milky ring. Treatment.266 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. is an opalescence or haziness of the pupil replacing the jet black normal appearance. They generally develop slowly (months or even years) but when due to severe blows or injuries of the eye may appear in a few days. They tend to culminate in complete blindness. As a rule the cornea is quite clear, but should there be opacity, it is independent of the cataract. Treatment.CHAPTER XV. INTERNAL PARASITES :268 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. (1) Bots (Cobboldia elephantis)PARASITES. 269 (a) Ascaris lonchoptera may be met with in common with other round worms, they are from 1½ to 2½ inches in length. Symptoms.270 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. with blood. With the exception of from 1 to 2 mm. in length at the beginning and end, the mucous membrane of the small intestine was very much swollen and covered with a greasy layer. It was studded with punctiform hæmorrhages and large petechiæ, and contained many flat depressions with reddened bases. In these depressions and along the whole mucous membrane, forming thick convolutions, numerous small round worms clung. These parasites were undoubtedly the cause of death. By their presence they had occasioned severe changes in the intestinal mucous membrane, and established the state known as worm cachexia. It was also evident from the state of the body that they had occasioned considerable and continued loss of blood. " The worm was examined by Professor Dr. Ostertag, who pronounced it to be Uncinaria os papiliatum, a worm which only occurs in Indian elephants. "The remaining elephants were treated with santonin, which effected the removal of a great quantity of the worms. The state of health of the survivors has since been satisfactory. A prophylactic taenicide in freshly imported young elephants has not hitherto been noted." Uncinaria are found in elephants in Burma. A parasite which appears to belong to this species is not infrequently found in the ducts of the liver where it sets up much irritation. On several occasions post-mortem examination has demonstrated some of the ducts to be choked with these parasites and local changes to have occurred in the organ to such an extent as to warrant even death being attributable to their presence. Observation, however, on the effects of extensive infestation by round worms in elephants is very desirable. Uncinaria, though insignificant in size, are often by their numbers and blood-sucking propensities the cause of debility, diarrhoea and loss of life. In making post-mortem examinations therefore trouble should be taken to examine the mucous membrane of the small intestines thoroughly for small hæmorrhages and to see if there are any small parasites adhering thereto. (c) Cobbold mentions that certain round worms are found in small tumours in the coats of the stomach. If such tumours are met with they should be incised, and if parasites are present they should be carefully preserved and labelled. Treatment for round worms.[Facing page 371. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Amphistoma Hawkesii (after Cobbold). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Jackson liver fluke (after Cobbold). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Bots about natural size. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Ascaris lonchoptera, about natural size.
PARASITES. 271 (3) Flukes272 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. mucous membrane of the bile ducts with such tenacity as to resist the contraction of the bile ducts to expel them with the bile into the intestinal canal. The colour varies a great deal, depending to a great extent on the amount of bile they contain ; if their digestive system be full of bile, the colour is a dark brown or greenish black ; if empty. a dark yellowish brown. Cobbold gives the length, when unrolled, from ½ to PARASITES. 273 distoma, for I believe it to be such, at least as far as I am able to judge in comparing its diagnosis with those mentioned in Davaine, " Traite des entozoaines," of which at pages 49 and 322 a very accurate description is given, with the exception of some slight variations, which only determine this to be a different species. " The form of the one (a specimen is herewith sent) now spoken of is somewhat more round, which I think may be likened in shape to the old-fashioned lady's reticule, and of about the size of the nail of the forefinger. The body is compressed, soft, with two distinct orifices274 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. necessarily subject to the same influences as the trained ones. I would particularly mention that those elephants of this department which were during the hot weather kept in the cattle lines, partially in sheds and well cared for, have up to this time escaped. " The sufferers have been those sent from the scarcity of forage to the jungles to graze. * * * * " With reference to this outbreak the symptoms appear to have developed suddenly, and the disease to have run a very rapid course. It is possible that the deaths were really due to some specific disease. It will be observed that the elephants that were kept in the lines escaped, while those only that were sent out to graze contracted the malady. There is no doubt that flukes and amphistomes were present in these cases. The natural history of the Fasciola or Distoma hepaticum of the sheep has been carefully worked out, and to those interested in the life history of this parasite I would recommend a small book by J. B. Simonds on " The Rot in Sheep." It will be sufficient to state here that the progressive changes and transformation through which this parasite passes from the egg to the mature fluke take place outside the body of the creature they ultimately inhabit. They enter the body in their penultimate form and are parasitic only in their mature state. They do not multiply in the body. It is a well established fact that the fluke disease or rot is essentially a disease of low-lying, inundated tracts, and wet seasons. There is little doubt that some of the cases called thut by the Burmans and zahirbad by the Indians are true rot. As is the case in most ailments due to parasites, the early symp- toms of rot are ill-defined, and may not even lead to a suspicion of the cause. In these diseases the symptoms depend on the number of para- sites and inconvenience caused by their presence, and also to the importance in the animal economy of the particular organ invaded. A few flukes in the bile ducts may give rise to but slight irrita- tion and impairment of function ; whereas, when they invade the ducts in large numbers, the pressure and persistent irritation caused may lead to such rapid and extensive structural alterations as to speedily cause death. Under certain conditions the progress of rot may be very rapid, such as in animals that are hard-worked, ill-fed and exposed to all weathers ; also in cases where animals already in a debilitated state are attacked. Young animals are sometimes invaded by such large numbers of flukes that they impair the func- tion of the liver to such an extent as to rapidly destroy life. As a general rule the progress of rot is slow ; one constant symptom is progressive wasting away, due to anaemia. This is not
[Facing page 274. PLATE XII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FASCIOLA JACKSONI. Enlarged and natural size. Natural Colours.
PARASITES. 275 surprising when we know that an organ of such importance as the liver is the seat of disease. The secretion of the liver, namely the bile, has a most important office to perform. When the ducts are crowded by these creatures, the pressure, irritation, etc., must lead to impaired secretion and consequent alteration in the quality and quantity of the bile. The gland gradually ceases to perform its office in an efficient manner, thus the blood becomes affected and impure in quality. The flukes as they become mature travel up from the main channel into its numerous ramifications in the liver, for the purpose of depositing their eggs. The result of this persis- tent irritation is increased vascular action, which leads to the coats of the ducts being considerably thickened and their calibre decreased. Symptoms.276 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Tonics, especially arsenic, sulphate of iron, copper and nux vomica, most useful during convalescence. (4) Bladder worms (Hydatids).TYMPANITES. 277 It will be seen from the above that, if the ova of the tape-worm gain access to the canine stomach, no tape-worm can result, since it must of a necessity pass through the system of a sheep or kindred animal and pass through the stage of hydatid cyst. In the same way, should a scolex find its way into the stomach of an elephant no hydatid cyst will result, since the scolex must of necessity pass through the system of a canine animal before again arriving at this stage. Elephants therefore cannot directly communicate the parasite to one another but only indirectly through the media of dogs, wolves, and jackals. The dangers of hydatid cyst are278 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Treatment.TYMPANITES. 279 heart could not be counted owing to the muscular spasms. Respi- rations 36, laboured, the muscles of the chest being mainly employed in the act. At times the animal groaned as if in pain. The abdo- men was immensely distended and any pressure in that region caused the animal to groan. The usual rumbling peristaltic motion of the bowels was not heard. Examination per rectum showed that it contained yellowish brown liquid faeces. Higher up the hand encountered firm masses which appeared to be impacted. " Treatment.PART V. Infective Diseases. CHAPTER I. GENERAL REMARKS. CONTAGIOUS diseases are not only communicable directly from one animal to another, but may be indirectly so by the poison (virus) being carried by attendants or their clothes, contaminated fodder, or in water presented in utensils to which sick animals have had access. Dogs, etc., should not be kept in elephant camps. It is as well to remember these points. 2. It should be a rule to treat all newly purchased animals as having been exposed to contagion. They with their attendants should be kept quite separate for at least a fortnight. The animals should be inspected certainly once, if not twice a day. Any case of sickness should be forthwith isolated, the healthy animals divided into small groups and kept well apart. A strict watch should be kept. 3. At all times it is advisable to segregate any case of fever and keep it so until proof is afforded that the disease is non-infective. 4. In case of a disease being contagious the most important step is without delay to separate the sick with their attendants, gear, utensils, etc., from the healthy. Divide the healthy into small batches, picket them well apart and to windward of the sick camp. Take the temperature of the healthy animals twice a day, by this means any fresh cases will be detected in the earliest stage of disease and they can be removed to the sick camp at once, thus to a great extent arresting the further spread of disease. If this very necessary aid to detecting cases early be adopted, it will as a rule be found that the disease is confined to one or two groups and can be effectively dealt with. 5. With regard to the isolated area set apart for the sick camp this should, when possible, be near a stream and situated well below all other camps. The attendants and their sick animals should not be permitted to leave it. Forage, if it has to be brought, should be carried to the edge of the sick camp and then removed by attendants in the isolated area. One of the first duties should be to
282 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. have a number of pits dug for the reception of rejected fodder, moist dung and discharges, which should not under any pretext be allowed to lie about or be pushed a few yards away from the standings. Apart from the unpleasantness of such insanitary conditions filth tends to collect flies, and they not only irritate and worry sick animals but can and do carry infection in certain diseases. The pits should be covered in with two feet of earth. During the dry season there is no reason, apart from laziness, why all such material should not be destroyed by fire. The constant burning of such material on the windward side generally suffices to keep away the various kinds of insect torments frequenting elephant camps. When camps are within easy reach of railways or steamers a plentiful supply of cheap disinfectants should be obtained, perhaps the easiest carried is powder, such as McDougal's, Sanitas, etc., which should be freely used. Quicklime is very useful to throw over the refuse before filling in the pits. Standings should be changed frequently if only to a distance of 20 or 30 yards. When an animal is removed the ground should be covered with straw, grass or leaves, etc., and fired. Before moving from a camp care should be taken to see that it is left thoroughly clean, not only on account of the possibility of having to use it again, but to safeguard the animals of other owners who may perchance camp there. 6. As to diet of sick animals, plenty of good, freshly-made gruel should be allowed and freshly-cut green fodder offered. The healthy animals should be kept on green fodder ; coarse, dry, indi- gestible food is objectionable at any time, but especially so during outbreaks of disease. 7. Ropes and other gear easily replaced that have been used or in contact with sick animals should be burned. All iron work, i.e., chains, etc., should be run through a fire. Should a case of any dangerous infectious malady occur in a shed, if inexpensive, it should be burned. If costly, the walls must be thoroughly washed with boiling water mixed with very strong carbolic acid or phenyle. As the floor becomes soiled with the discharges, it is necessary to remove the earth to the extent of two feet at least, throw in new earth and disinfect the whole standing. The shed should not be occupied for some little time. All posts and other wood should be washed with strong carbolic and, later on, dressed with tar. 8. The carcases of animals that die should be buried as near to the place of death as possible. If they have to be dragged to any distance the natural orifices should be plugged with tow or cloths wrung out of some disinfecting fluid to prevent, as far as is possible, soiling the ground. The grave, whenever possible, should be dug alongside the carcase. Where cremation is possible it should be
GENERAL REMARKS. 283 carried out though it takes time and is usually an expensive process. Anthrax carcases should not be opened. Anthrax graves should be marked in some way, such as by fencing with rough logs, to prevent animals grazing over them or grass-cutters cutting grass over them. 9. A guard should be placed over a grave for 24 hours to prevent Burmans who are, as is well known, particularly partial to elephant's flesh from removing the earth and taking any flesh. 10. As later on it will be observed that certain diseases are common to other animals, it would be as well, before selecting camps near villages or grazing grounds, to ascertain from the villagers or herdsmen if such diseases as anthrax, hæmorrhagic septicaemia or foot-and-mouth disease are or have been lately prevalent amongst the cattle, etc., and if so such localities should be avoided. If this is not feasible the animals should be tethered on the highest ground available and no strange animals allowed near the camp. Animals should not be allowed to graze in the locality. Fodder and water should be brought to them ; the former, if grass is given, should be cut well above the ground and rushes, reeds and swamp grasses on no account used. It is even better to restrict the fodder to boughs of trees, bamboos, etc. On the march, caravan and other tracks used by cattle-drivers and their camps should be avoided. 11. In such cases, where it is deemed advisable to help to a correct diagnosis of disease, blood smears should be taken and it is well to be acquainted with the method. Method of making a blood smear.284 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. cotton wool. Thick slides and those that are packed film to film are no use for blood examination (see Diagram). To prepare cover-glass specimens, a minute quantity of blood, or pulp from the spleen or other organs, or jelly-like diseased material is taken on the point of a needle which has just previously been heated in a flame. The material is placed between two cover-glasses, which are to be pressed gently together in order to expel any excess of material, and to leave a very thin layer between them ; they are then to be separated by sliding them gently one over the other and allowed to dry under a watch or wine-glass to exclude dust, or the layer may be fixed by taking the cover-glass, coated surface uppermost, between the finger and thumb (see Diagram), [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] and passing it rapidly two or three times over the flame of a spirit lamp. When dry, they should be carefully packed separately in cotton wool with slips of paper intervening and placed in a small wooden box, and for extra protection this box should be again packed inside a tin one. About half a dozen specimens should be sent. All cover-slips, also slides, should be boiled and cleaned and kept in spirit.
(Facing page 234. DIAGRAM SHOWING METHOD OF MAKING BLOOD SMEARS. The drop may either be taken up on the end edge or the middle, towards one end of one slide as in I. Another slide should be approached so as to contain the drop in the angle between the two slides, II. The drop will spread itself out along the line where the two slides meet. The drop should then be spread evenly over the bottom slide, by gently either pushing or pulling the end of the upper slide along its surface, III. Only a very small drop should be taken,
CHAPTER II. GENERAL SEPTIC INFECTION AND INTOXICATION. BLOOD POISONING. 1. Septicaemia is met with in two forms :286 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. scattered over the body and in the organs. The cause of the formation of these abscesses is as follows. In the case of many wounds veins are injured and this leads to the formation of blood clots blocking the lumen of the injured vessels. The clot may extend until it reaches a considerable collateral branch. The clot is adherent to the wall of the vessel except at its free end which protrudes into the blood current. Clots may soften and break down. Small portions are thus detached and carried by the circulation to distant parts. As a rule they are arrested at the bifurcation of vessels. At such points infective centres or foci for suppuration are formed. Thus, according to the seat of injury different organsPUERPERAL SEPTICÆMIA. 287 the animals were said to have had no milk and would not have anything to do with their offspring. There was thirst, complete loss of appetite, considerable fever, hurried breathing, dulness, eyes lustreless, occasional moaning. In another case the symptoms started on the third day, there was suppression of milk but the mother was induced to take charge of the calf which was hand-fed. This animal suffered from severe abdominal pain, strained greatly and moaned frequently. No swelling, etc., was observed about the genital organs. The course of this disease is very rapidCHAPTER III ANTHRAX. Before considering the disease as it occurs in elephants, it will be advisable to discuss it as it affects some other animals. From numerous records of the disease and the heavy mortality reported therefrom, as well as its infectious character, we have learnt to consider it one of the most formidable diseases we have to encounter. Definition.[Facing page 288. PLATE XIII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] ANTHRAX. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] TETANUS. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] HÆMORRHAGIC SEPTICÆMIA. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] SURRA TRYPANOSOMES.
ANTHRAX. 289 Sources of infection.290 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. As regards the disease in elephants it will be sufficient to observe that all degrees of severity and diversity of symptoms may be met with. It frequently happens that the most virulent forms are encountered during the early period of an outbreak. Death some- times ensues so rapidly without any symptoms having been noticed, that it has been attributed to apoplexy, heat-stroke, lightning-stroke and snake-bite. During the rains, when anthrax is prevalent, occa- sionally more or less sudden deaths are recorded in which the mouth, tongue and throat have been observed to be in a diseased state, and these symptoms have been attributed by Burmans to a black hairy caterpillar which is common at this season of the year in certain localities where it often does immense damage to teak and other trees. Burmans state that if an elephant takes up one of these creatures with its food death will result. In the same way similar cases in horned cattle have been ascribed to this caterpillar, but these are often cases of anthrax. I have handled the caterpillar and have not suffered except some slight irritation. Prognosis.ANTHRAX. 291 before death or within an hour after death, it is generally useless making specimens. Microscopical examination of the blood taken immediately before or shortly after death will afford a correct diagnosis. The disease will be best understood by quoting a few illustrative cases. Some of these occurred among elephants at the same time that this disease was raging amongst horned cattle in the same locality. Case No. 1.292 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. The remaining elephants were thrown out of work, rested for a few days and were then moved to another creek. Case No. 4.ANTHRAX. 293 Case No. 10.294 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Case No. 12.ANTHRAX. 295 severe colicky pains which, gradually getting worse, continued throughout the night and terminated in death at 9-20 A.M. the following morning, 13th July. NOTES.296 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. and on no account be made use of in any surgical case, as for instance, opening an abscess. Care must be taken not to scatter organs or blood about the place, but to restrict the area infected to the smallest limits. A very deep pit should be prepared alongside and the carcase tumbled in. The soiled area should be well sprinkled with carbolic powder or other strong disinfectant, the ground dug up and thrown into the pit, a thick layer of straw should then be spread all over the ground and fired. The area should be strongly fenced in. The belly is usually greatly inflated, bloody discharge may be noticed from the natural openings, decomposition sets in rapidly, swellings may be present beneath the skin. The blood is of a dark, tarry and fluid character, often staining the cavities of the heart and interior of the blood vessels a peculiar red tinge. Any of the organs or all, namely, liver, spleen, kidneys, lungs, brain, may be found engorged with blood, and their substance softened, and the spleen especially is usually found enormously enlarged. In one case it weighed 62½ lbs. The cavities, that is, the abdomen, chest, heart-bag, and cranial, may contain blood-stained fluid, and the lining membranes have scattered over them purplish blood spots or blotches. The bowels may be thickened, their contents bloody, and the lining membrane scattered over with purplish blood spots or patches. The tumours above referred to consist of a yellowish greengage jelly-like material, which may have a dark centre and may be found in other parts, notably in the mesentery, or membrane connecting the bowels to the spine, around the kidneys, furrows of the heart, about the throat and other places, and when present may be taken as very indicative of anthrax. The following cases are recorded by Frost :ANTHRAX. 297 skin covering the enlargement, a true anthracoid tumour presented itself. The same jelly-like exudate occupied a space of about 8 inches by 6 inches. " The blood in the veins was of a dark, tarry consistence and colour, and in almost all the veins a certain degree of coagulation had taken place. Only the normal quantity of fluid in the abdo- minal cavity. Peritoneum healthy, mesentery congested. Spleen of a dark colour, with considerable bloody spots and blotches all over its surface. The same deposit alluded to before existed between the layer of membrane attaching it to the stomach. On removing the spleen from the body I found it weighed 37½ lbs. On cutting into its structure, and on withdrawing the scalpel, the blade had adhering to it a thick layer of blood as dark as ink. The gland could easily be broken down by pressure of the linger. "On the under surface of the stomach, close to the pyloric orifice, I found a patch of the size of a dinner plate consisting of the same kind of deposit as I noticed in the tumour. In the tissue under the loins I also found the same thing to exist. Above the penis another large tumour was found. " Intestines and kidneys healthy. There was a slight deposit in the substance of a lung which, to a certain extent, blocked up the bronchial tubes. A large quantity of frothy mucus was found in the windpipe and large bronchi, yet there was no symptom of breathlessness noticed before death. " On laying open the pericardium (bag of the heart) my attention was arrested by the large quantity of fluid which was contained in the sac. From a careful but rough calculation, I came to the conclusion that it contained from 35 to 40 ounces of serum, possessing more the colour of venous blood slightly diluted with water than true serum. The external surface of the heart presented a peculiar appearance. Intensely dark blood spots studded its surface298 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. after death ; in good condition. On each side of the penis, about the region of the scrotum in other animals, I found two large tumours of the true anthrax character. Further, with the excep- tion of the intestinal mucous membrane I did not notice anything peculiar. The mucous membrane of the intestines was highly congested. The blood in the vessels was fluid. Spleen weighed 24 lbs., liver 61½. I saw this animal at 9-30 A.M. (while still alive) and examined the tumours. They were cold as ice, and on cutting into them no pain was exhibited by the animal, nor did any discharge take place subsequent to the incision being made. Once I saw the nature of the effusion, I had no doubt of the result, which was death soon after. Treatment : Preventive.ANTHRAX. 299 injected without force. The metallic wire is removed from the needle and the latter adjusted on the syringe, or the needle may be introduced first and syringe adjusted after. After the contents of the tube have been well shaken the stopper is removed and the required amount withdrawn. Care must be taken to see that the syringe is working properly. Air bubbles may be removed by holding the syringe upright and gently pressing the piston till a drop issues from the needle. The second inoculation should be made on the opposite side. It is a matter of vital importance that the vaccine be introduced in a pure state ; for this reason, if a tube be opened, the contents must be used forthwith. If the whole contents cannot be employed at once, the portion remaining must be dispensed with. It is of equal importance that the syringe be absolutely clean. New syringes are generally safe enough, but one that has been used must be cleaned before and after the inoculations are performed. In order to effect this, the syringe is taken to pieces, placed in water, and boiled in it for five or ten minutes. Immediately before use it is as well to draw up some absolute alcohol : this will render syringe and needle sterile. Cheap and easily sterilized syringes are procurable from most instrument makers. If the vaccine be not pure, or the syringe not clean, foreign organisms may be introduced, which may render vaccination ineffective, or what is still more serious may give rise to virulent blood-poisoning. Every care must be taken to see that the first vaccine is properly introduced under the skin ; for if this operation be performed hurriedly or carelessly no protection will be afforded and death may result after the introduction of second vaccine. There is no denying that vaccination is attended with certain risks, owing to defects in the operation, quality of the vaccine employed, and susceptibility of individuals. In sheep and cattle vaccination has in some cases resulted in death ; in others serious illness, swellings, have followed the operation. On the Continent the accidents vaccination gives rise to are said not to be so frequent as to cause much alarm. Generally speaking, the animals inoculated become sufficiently protected to resist natural and even experimental infection. It is stated that vaccine sent to a long distance is not easy to preserve, and in order to obtain really good results it must be used as soon as possible after preparation. Firms having an interest in or owning a large number of elephants and desirous of trying experiments should make some arrangement by which they could, on despatch of telegraphic order, be supplied with fresh vaccine, syringes, etc. All information and appliances can be obtained from the Director of " The Sociètè du Vaccin Charbonneux Pasteur," 14, Rue des Pyramides, Paris.
300 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Arrangements can be made for each tube to contain sufficient vaccine for one elephant. The price of a close of first and second vaccine is, I believe, 4d. to 6d. With reference to vaccination in sheep and cattle, Koch has noted the following points :ANTHRAX. 301 have heard the results were not encouraging, so much so that no further inoculations have been carried out since. Curative treatment.CHAPTER IV. HÆMORRHAGIC SEPTICÆMIA. When examining the blood of elephants suspected of having succumbed to anthrax, Mr. Cameron, C.V.D., myself and others have seen the organism of this disease which in all probability is far more common than we imagine. The symptoms so closely resemble those met with in anthrax that a mistaken diagnosis is an easy matter. By means of a microscope the diagnosis is rendered easy, as the organisms are very different. Definition.HÆMORRHAGIC SEPTICÆMIA. 303 appearance of a swelling or swellings of variable size diffuse or circumscribed in different parts of the body. These swellings are most frequently met with in the head, between the jaws, in the neck, on the shoulders or immediately behind them, sometimes under the abdomen and tail and also in the groin. The area most frequently affected is perhaps the throat region, and in some cases the swelling may be so extensive as to involve also the face, trunk and neck, causing marked disfigurement. The swellings under the tail often attain a considerable size and may spread downwards between the hind-legs and along the under surface of the abdomen. When they first appear the swellings are hot, doughy and painful, later becoming hard and tense. In those cases in which the throat is affected the respirations are increased in number and are laboured and difficult, and as a rule noisy. The respiratory difficulty is very acute towards the end and death may take place in convulsions from suffocation. When the limbs are affected lameness is often manifested. The tongue may appear swollen and dark in colour. The cavity of the mouth may be dry or may be coated with a sticky saliva. The palate may also appear dark in colour, with mulberry-coloured spots. A discharge of a slimy material from the trunk may also be observed. In some cases vomiting may occur. All mucous membranes are of a diffuse red colour, with generally mulberry-coloured (hæmorrhagic) spots. The bowels are usually not much disturbed, though the passage of dung is often preceded or followed by a discharge of liquid, dark, foetid material, which sometimes contains mucus and traces of blood. Diarrhoea may be present in some cases. The urine is scanty, high-coloured and turbid. The internal temperature is always high, but the surface temperature of the body is variable. In acute seizures there is in some cases vomiting, loss of power behind, evidenced by inability to move, in others a staggering gait with a tendency to fall forwards may be observed. Treatment.304 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Post-mortem appearances.[Facing page 305. PLATE XIV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] TRYPANOSOMES IN ELEPHANT SURRA. Magnification 750.
CHAPTER V. TRYPANOSOMIASIS306 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. The parasite.TRYPANOSOMIASIS. 307 about this disease. Notwithstanding that an animal will take his food well throughout the disease, he gradually and steadily loses condition and strength. The blood undergoes profound changes, thus seriously interfering with proper nutrition of the tissues. Accompanying the debility and prostration of strength, though not constant there may be dropsical swellings which may appear between the jaws, lower parts of abdomen, chest, or the feet or limbs may be swollen. When daily observations of the temperature and microscopical examinations of the blood can be made it will be found that, even with a slight rise or no rise in temperature, trypanosomes may be found in the blood. From the notes on cases in my possession the temperature rarely rises to 1020 F. During intermissions it may occasionally be found subnormal. The animals are dull and heavy during the paroxysms. Diagnosis.308 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Dr. A. Lingard, late Imperial Bacteriologist to the Government of India, experimented on two elephants as to their susceptibility to equine surra. The conclusion he arrived at was that old Indian elephants in health are either insusceptible or only very slightly susceptible. In carrying out these experiments he injected subcu- taneously in large doses virulent blood containing " Trypanosoma evansi " in numbers. I am indebted to Captain J. D. Holmes, C.V.D., now holding the above appointment, for the following note on these experiments. One elephant inoculated with 20 c.c. of blood drawn from the jugular vein of a control pony and kept under observation for about four months did not show any organism in the blood and was then discontinued. The second elephant inoculated with 500 c.c. equine surra blood defibrinated, showed few organisms on the fourth day after inoculation, and these continued for six weeks. The following numbers of Paroxysms and Intermissions were observed :TRYPANOSOMIASIS. 309 coloured jelly-like material about the base, and beneath the lining membrane blotches and dark-coloured spots may be seen. They are also to be seen beneath the internal lining membrane of the heart. Treatment.310 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. (4) March the animals at night through country known to be infested with flies. (5) Isolate sick animals and protect them from the bites of flies. (6) A course of arsenic in any form at the beginning of the rains may be tried. NOTE.[Facing page 311. PLATE XV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PIROPLASMA (CATTLE), LARGE FORMS. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] PIROPLASMA (CATTLE), SMALL FORMS.
CHAPTER VI. PIROPLASMOSIS312 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. June 9th. Absent from camp. June 10th. June 11th. June 12th.CHAPTER VII. APHTHÆ EPIZOOTICÆ314 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. hours these blebs burst, leaving red, raw, angry-looking surfaces which may heal rapidly or become ulcerated. Owing to the soreness of the mouth and inability to eat, loss of condition may rapidly ensue. When the feet are attacked they become so tender that the slightest movement causes the animal to limp, and the pain may be so severe as to necessitate his lying down. On examination, the parts above the nails around the margin of the hoof-slipper will be found hot, swollen and tender. A discharge may be apparent ; if not pressure on the parts may reveal some oozing. In the elephant, owing to the great weight to be sustained and the severe pain, fever may run high. The great danger is that the discharge may burrow, underrun the sole and thus lead to irritative fever, septicaemia (blood poisoning) in some form, and casting of the hoof-slipper. Diagnosis.ELEPHANT-POX. 315 serious and tedious. The bowels should be kept regular with mild laxatives (see Formulae 23 to 28). During convalescence tonics should be given, such as316 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. "but his forehead, trunk, mouth, chest and shoulders, and a few places on the rump were covered with an eruption which had then arrived at the pustular stage. Treatment : Preventive.CHAPTER VIII. RABIES. TETANUS. TUBERCULOSIS. RABIES. Rabies is a specific disease caused by the introduction into the system of a specific poison, through the bite of an animal, generally that of a clog, but jackals and wolves may also communicate it. It is a rare affection amongst elephants. The following case was com- municated to Dr. Gilchrist by a mahout personally acquainted with the facts :318 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. jungle, well fettered and watched. The wound was as soon as possible bathed with strong phenyle and water, regularly dressed and healed in the usual manner. Nothing unusual beyond that the attendant considered the animal had got a little thin was observed till the 4th July, on which date the animal became exceedingly rest- less, refusing to eat or drink anything. On the 5th she frequently screamed and gave utterance to most unusual noises, also lying down at intervals. The seat of the bite was noticed to be swollen. No one could approach, as she was more or less unmanageable. A watery discharge dripped continuously from the trunk. On the 6th, the animal was very violent and made four desperate efforts to break away. She was continuously butting and kicking at imaginary objects, which from her circular motion were apparently following her from behind. Her condition was such that Mr. Bowden intended to shoot the animal. During the afternoon, however, her strength seemed to be flagging, and on approaching" cautiously the mouth and tongue were noticed to be bluish in colour and a large quantity of sticky saliva was being discharged from the mouth. The end of the trunk was noticed to be raw. On the 7th, the animal appeared to regain strength, but about 10 A.M. she went down, and started grovelling on the ground and (as narrated) snapping at the air. She rapidly became exhausted and died at 1 P.M. An account of a case is also contributed to the " Oriental Sporting Magazine " by Captain F. H. Hood, B.S.C., Volume III. Treatment.TUBERCULOSIS. 319 Incubation320 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Dammann and Stedefer* of one of two elephants which were sent to the surgical clinique of the Hanover Veterinary School in July 1908 for the treatment of wounds about the feet. It is stated that the larger of these two elephants died in August 1908 as a result of blood poison (septicæmia) arising possibly from the wounds. The post-mortem examination revealed tuberculosis of the lungs and of the bodies of several vertabræ. The result of the bacteriological examination, according to Dam- mann and Stedefer, seemed to show that the disease was of human origin, which is not surprising, seeing how fond people are of feeding animals in captivity. It does not require much demonstration to show that the consumption of food offered by tuberculous persons may lead to the animal being infected. From the report quoted it does not appear that the elephant in question showed any symptom of tubercular disease during life. In any case the disease is not likely to be diagnosed in the jungle. * Dammann and Stedefer, Deuts. Tierarztl, Wochens, June 12th, 1909, page 345.
CHAPTER IX. EPIDEMIC PNEUMONIA. EPIDEMIC DYSENTERY. RINDERPEST IN CATTLE. EPIDEMIC PNEUMONIA. This is based on the description of an epidemic in 1839 on the coast of Tenasserim and recorded by Dr. MacDonald. Many elephants were attacked simultaneously, and at that time bullocks were suffering from apparently the same disease. The mortality was very high ; no symptoms are recorded, but on post- mortem usually one lung was found extensively diseased, the other " pretty healthy," which leads one to infer that it was not quite healthy. The diseased portions of lung were engorged, and in colour varied from florid red to black. Referring to the works I have had access to, it is significant that no other author has seen a similar outbreak. The post-mortem appearances recorded are more or less compatible with cases of pulmonary anthrax. EPIDEMIC DYSENTERY OR MURRAIN. Such a condition has been described, which does not differ in symptoms or treatment from the above, but as it attacks several animals simultaneously it may be regarded as infectious, and beasts so affected must be isolated with the same precautions as laid down under " Anthrax." The mortality mentioned is 80 per cent. I have never seen this condition in elephants, but have met with a similar condition among buffaloes in this province at the end of the hot season, when after the first few showers the young grass crops up rapidly. It may be due to the entrance of a micro-organism. The disease was as fatal as severe cattle-plague. RINDERPEST32 2 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. rinderpest and suffer from the disease during outbreaks amongst cattle and other animals, a female elephant, in perfect health and condition, normal temperature ranging between 360 and 37.3° C, was subcutaneously inoculated with 500 c.c. of virulent defi- brinated blood obtained from a hill bull, the subject of well-marked rinderpest. A diffused swelling occurred at the seat of inoculation, which has decreased in extent after a period of twenty-four hours and only a slight thickening of the skin was perceptible a few clays later. No rise in temperature was recorded, and the animal never exhibited any untoward symptom of any kind during the following twenty-three days." This experiment on one animal only can hardly be regarded as conclusive evidence that the elephant does not contract rinderpest, as this particular animal may have been naturally insusceptible or have been immunized by a previous attack. There is reason to believe, however, that elephants are insusceptible. I have never heard of nor seen a case, and in Burma it would have been impos- sible for some of the vast number of elephants so frequently exposed to contagion to escape contracting rinderpest. Nevertheless, it may not be time wasted to give a summary of the symptoms of this disease, as foresters generally employ a considerable number of buffaloes in addition to elephants, and when they get rinderpest among the formerRINDERPEST. 323 Second stage.APPENDICES. APPENDIX A.326 APPENDICES. A man should be liable for injury caused by his animal, whether tame or wild, if it is proved that the injury was due to the owner's negligence. Maung Gyi v. Po To (1) approved. In that view it would not be necessary to draw a distinction between wild and domestic animals. The point for decision would be whether the owner was guilty of negligence or whether he used such care as in the circumstances of the case was reasonable and ordinarily sufficient. The amount of care required would vary according to the class of the animal and according to its own dispo- sition. It would not be laid down in this country that a man is liable for any damage done by his elephant without any proof of negligence or that he knew it to be of a vicious disposition. In view of the manner in, and extent to, which elephants are employed in this country, such a proposition would be manifestly unjust. APPENDICES. 327 If it escapes and does mischief, he is liable without proof of negli- gence, neither is proof required that he knew the animal to be mischievous, or if it is a notoriously fierce or mischievous species (5)." In Smith's leading cases, in the notes on Fletcher v. Rylands (6) it is said:328 APPENDICES. in the first place on the plaintiff who avers it. It might be other- wise if injury by a tiger or bear were concerned. I agree with the Lower Courts in thinking that it is not proved that the defendant knew that the elephant " Kya Gyi " was of a vicious disposition. It was not therefore incumbent on her to take more than ordinary precautions with him. It does not seem to be shown that ordinary precautions were neglected. It is alleged that " Kya Gyi " twice gored the deceased elephant " Do," and the mahout called by the plaintiff declares that he had neither bell nor fetters. On the other hand, as pointed out in the judgment of the Court of First Instance, the plaintiff himself admitted that " Kya Gyi " had a bell and fetter on the second occasion. It is admitted that all the other elephants of the defendant had bells and fetters ; there is direct evidence, at least as good as that for the plaintiff, that " Kya Gyi " was properly provided with them. In my opinion it has not been proved that there was any negligence on the part of the defendant and any prima facie case made out by the plaintiff has been rebutted. I therefore hold that the Lower Courts have rightly decided that the defendants are not liable ; and I dismiss this appeal with costs. (See Part I, page 51.) APPENDIX B.APPENDICES. 329 With regard to the amount of turnover of the ear as an indica- tion of age it must be remembered that exceptions occur ; occasion- ally one may meet with an elephant of five or six years with a turnover of an inch, but no one would be likely to take such a beast to be thirty or even ten years. Again, a youngster may be seen with the edge of one ear turned while the other is perfectly straight. In judging the approxi- mate age all such like exceptions must be taken into account. (See Part I, page 4.) APPENDIX D.330 APPENDICES. APPENDIX E.APPENDICES. 331 List of Trees, Creepers, etc., on which Elephants browse and which are supposed by Burmans to possess sundry medicinal properties. Burmese Name. Vernacular. Scientific. Remarks. Nyaung (Banyan) ... Ficus indica Most of the species of " ficus " are eaten by elephants and are considered to have a cons- tipating effect Tha-pan ... or Ficus glomerata Ye-tha-pan Ficus lanceolata Sin-tha-pan Ficus Roxburghii Leaves readily eaten. Considered constipating Okhne Streblns aspera Said to be useful in flatulence Than-that Albizzia lucida Considered to be active diuretics Ka-aung-gyi Clerodendron infortu- natum Pauk-nwai Butea parviflora Spatholobus Roxburghii Kyn-bin Terminalia citrina Eagerly sought after by ele- phants, but it is stated that if the sap gets into an ele- phant's eyes it causes opacity Pai-kwai ... Doh-nwai ...... Shn-bnuk-nwai Butea superba Su-bôk Acacia concinna rugata Stated to cause congestion of the liver (See Part I, page 20.) APPENDIX F.332 APPENDICES. was not. This all occurred in an open paddy field and only a few yards from where Mr. Dalgliesh was standing. He has now witnessed this act on five occasions and not on any one did the congress last more than three minutes. In all cases the animals except for a slight movement of the tail remained motionless. (b) No. 218, Ne-Nooan, belonging to the Borneo Company, Limited, dropped a still-born calf (sex not reported) in December 1907 ; the same elephant dropped a male calf in October 1909; that is well within two years. This case proves that cow elephants will permit of intercourse with a bull shortly after calving. The explanation in this instance may be that the first calf was still-born. (See Part II, pages 93APPENDICES. 333 adopted was the administration of arsenic in gradually increasing doses until symptoms of poisoning set in ; out of five animals attacked three recovered and two died. Mr. Hepburn had no opportunity of making a post-mortem examination. With regard to the above method of treatment I may remark that I have doubts about the ordinary preparations of arsenic in the doses given effecting a cure within a reasonable time. My grounds for this statement are that I have had several elephants under arsenical treatment for many months. Blood smears were taken daily from the affected animals and examined. It was observed that the period of time which elapsed from the disappearance of the parasites from the peripheral circulation and their reappearance therein extended in more than one case to over three months. Unless therefore careful daily examinations of the blood are made for a lengthened period after apparent cure wrong conclusions may be arrived at. In cases which are observed early, i.e., when the animals appear healthy and in good condition, provided they are rested or at most put only to light work the exhibition of arsenic undoubtedly keeps them in a more or less stationary condition as regards general appearance and bodily health. (See Part V, page 310.) APPENDIX I.334 APPENDICES. original organism. It must be remembered that the spore is infinitely- more resistant than is the parent organism so that ordinary methods of disinfection are not sufficient to destroy its vitality. In the case of the anthrax organism for instance, so highly resistant is the spore that it may remain quiescent for years in unfavourable circumstances, and it only develops into a bacillus on gaining entrance to the animal body either through a wound, by being ingested along with the food or water, or by being inhaled with particles of dust, etc. Even boiling water does not immediately destroy the anthrax spore. The anthrax bacillus only forms a spore outside the animal body and then only in the presence of oxygen and provided the temperature is between 7o°F. and 107° F. So long as the carcase remains intact no spore formation can take place because the bacilli being deprived of oxygen soon die. Hence the great impor- tance of not cutting into the carcase of an animal suspected to have died of anthrax, and of carefully disinfecting the bloody discharges which generally exude in such a case from the natural orifices. After disinfection these orifices should be plugged with some material such as tow or rags previously soaked in carbolic acid or a similar disinfectant. Note II[facing page 334. PLATE XVI (1). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] ELEPHANTS AT WORK.
PLATE XVI (2). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] ELEPHANTS AT WORK.
PLATE XVI (3). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] ELEPHANTS AT WORK.
PLATE XVI (4). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] ELEPHANTS AT WORK.
INDEX. PAGE "AAK KA JUR" ...... 145 " Aak ka phul" 145 " Aam ka bitchee " .. 153 '' Aam ka zad ka chal" 153 Abdominal cavity, anatomy of 83 Abrasions, causes and treatment 202 Abrus precatorious 140 Abscess, causes, symptoms and treat- ment 186 336 INDEX. PAGE Bistoury 114 Bladder, description of 88 INDEX 337 PAGE Corrosive sublimate, actions, uses and doses of .. 147 " Cowardie," duties of .. 34338 INDEX. PAGE Fever, general treatment of .. 167 Filariasis 230 Fistula, definition and treatment of.. 196 Flies, blood-sucking .. 210 INDEX. 339 PAGE Intestines, intussusception of 246 340 INDEX. PAGE Measurements, details of, in three hundred elephants 5 INDEX. 341 PAGE Parasites in alimentary canal 267 342 INDEX. PAGE Saddles, pack 43 Saddling, instructions for 45 " Sa-gaw-waing " 12 "Salai" ........ 144 Sales .. .. .. .. 12 "Sallaki"........ 144 Salt, common, actions, uses and doses of .. 157 Saw 114 Scalds, treatment of .. 197 Scales and weights 114 Scalpels 114 Scissors 114 Scurf, causes, symptoms and treatment 204 " Seeta phul ka putta " 148 '' Sengna" 154 Septicaemia 285 INDEX. 343 PAGE Teeth, development of 65 G. B. C. P. O.