SUMMARY OF FURTHER REPORT ON SURRA: BY ALFRED LINGARD, Bachelor of Medicine and Master of Surgery (Durham) Diplomate in Public Health (Cambridge); Fellow of the Bombay University ; Professor of Bacteriology and Comparative Pathology, Civil Veterinary Department, India. BOMBAY: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS, 1894.
SUMMARY OF FURTHER REPORT ON SURRA: BY ALFRED LINGARD, Bachelor of Medicine and Master of Surgery (Durham) Diplomate in Public Health (Cambridge); Fellow of the Bombay University; Professor of Bacteriology and Comparative Pathology, Civil Veterinary Department, India. BOMBAY: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1894.
No. 76 OF 1894 IMPERIAL BACTERIOLOGICAL LABORATORY, Dated Poona, the 14th July 1894. To THE INSPECTOR GENERAL, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, MEERUT. SIR, I have the honour to forward, in continuation of Volume I. of ray Report on Horse Surra, a summary of further investigations, in accordance with the instructions from the Government of India, R. & A., conveyed in their letter No. 3151CONTENTS. I. I. HORSE SURRA. A.2 (ii) By communicating the disease in a somewhat similar manner to that in which it is naturally contracted, viz., by small repeated doses of the hæmatozoon in water. The chemicals made use of during these experiments were: (a) Arsenic. (b) Tri-iodide of Arsenic and Bin-iodide of Mercury. In the first instance, although the latent period was not lengthened, the course of the disease was undoubtedly modified, only a few hæmatozoa being at any time in the blood; and although the disease had run for some weeks, the animals still maintain a fair condition. Owing to the reasons given below, the drugs administered were insufficient to withstand the severe and unnatural test of subcutaneous inoculation. As a lengthened period is required to communi- cate Surra by the second method, the experiments are not yet concluded; but the results, as yet obtained, warrant one in believing that they will be suc- cessful. It appears that animals suffering from Surra have a greater tolerance of Arsenic than healthy animals, when the drug is administered for a lengthened period, as in the above experiments. Difficulty was experienced in getting the horses, accustomed to be watered at a river or tank, to take the drug (in water), or even pure water from a bucket. No such difficulty occurred in treating previously recorded Surra-cases received from Bombay, where horses had always been used to the latter method. During an acute attack of a disease only lasting a few days, it is easy to administer drugs by drenching; but in the treatment of Surra, when it is necessary to administer medicines two or three times daily for a period of some weeks, drenching is out of the question, as any unnecessary disturbance of the animal, and possible injury to the mouth is prejudicial, and would certainly retard recovery. 5. Several interesting physiological problems have been worked out relat- ing to the ingestion and excretion of Nitrogen during health, and the course of the disease (Surra) under treatment. The results of these will be published when the cases are complete. II. RAT SURRA. A.3 (also of mice), gave negative results. Vandyke Carter's inoculation experiments included the subcutaneous injection into healthy animals of tainted blood of the rat, the animals so employed being rats, dogs, cats, horses (6), and monkeys. On microscopical examination of the last-named anunalVblood, taken from a digit 18 and 24 hours after inoculation, two hæniatozoa and one hæmatozoon were respectively observed. It did not however seem quite certain that a reproduction of the rat's organism had taken place in the circulation of the monkey; but possibly this was so to a very limited extent. These inoculation experiments therefore all proved negative in their results, except in the doubtful case of the monkey. B.4 5. The blood of raits obtained from certain localities was almost always free from the hæmatozoon, while that of the majority of rats from other localities was affected. 6. The hæmatozoon of the rat appears to disappear from the circulation at irregular intervals, thus producing paroxysms and intermissions, as in the case of Surra in the Horse. 7. The presence, in varying numbers, of the hæmatozoon in the circulation of rats, does not appear to produce any noticeable symptoms in the great majo- rity of them. But some few rats, whose blood swarmed with the hæmatozoon, have succumbed to leucocytosis, with extravasations of blood, containing the organism, into the anterior chamber and vitreous humours of the eye, opacity of the cornea, enlarged spleens, and extravasations of blood, or in some cases ulceration of the mucous membrane of the stomach. 8. It has been observed in a considerable number of cases that although the hæmatozoon may be present in vast numbers in the blood of pregnant rats (M, d.), in no case has the hæmatozoon been discovered in the circulation of the foetus. 9. Parasites, Stomach.5 Although the latent period of Rat Surra was so prolonged in the first instance, when inoculated from rat to horse (average 40.7 days), it immediately returned to the normal period (average 7 to 8 days), when a second horse was inoculated with the blood of the first affected. The latent period however becomes still more reduced (5 days), when a third animal is inoculated with the blood of the second. 2. Horses unsuccessfully inoculated, and re-inoculated subcutaneously with the Bat hæmatozoon, when subsequently inoculated with Horse Surra blood, show no protection from the former, but acquire the disease after an incubation period of six to ten days. 3. Animals other than horses, which contracted the disease, were: Bovines, monkeys, and field rats; while the rabbit, guinea-pig, fowl, cat, dog, and donkey proved refractory to the rat hæmatozoon. But all the above animals, with the exception of the fowl, were very susceptible to the rat hæmatozoon, when it had first been passed through the horse. (b).6 2. We have no direct evidence as to whether human beings are susceptible to the virus of Surra; but there is no doubt that they do not readily contract the disease. During the performance of one hundred autopsies on horses which have succumbed to the disease, I have contracted wounds which were at once treated antiseptically; and the Mahars have had severe cuts and jags from their blood-stained instruments; but no infection followed. 3, In Burmah7 the hounds, were caught within ten minutes, their bodies being afterwards devoured. A certain amount of carrion was picked up by the hounds during their runs; and one animal left the pack and returned to the Kennels during the following night, gorged with carrion. This animal was the first to present Surra symptoms, and died after an illness lasting 31 days. 5. In February 1894, Surra broke out in the Mhow pack : and several hounds8 (d) In hounds, by eating carrion or the soiled blood of animals hunted; in other dogs, by destroying affected rats and bandicoots. 4. In the case of horses contracting the disease, there can be little doubt that many of the outbreaks are due to the ingestion of rats' or bandicoots' excrement with corn. . In the hot season, the hæmatozoon or its resting form in the excrement would naturally be destroyed by the continued drought; while in the rains, the moisture would be found sufficient to sustain the life of tho infusorian, and enable the resting form to germinate, and possibly mature in sitû. 5. Hence the dung of rats and bandicoots is a source of danger; and protective measures should therefore be taken at all times to remove rat and bandicoot excrement from the corn given to Equines. 6. As however the complete removal of the excrement would be a matter of some difficulty owing to its breaking into fragments, artificial means to promote the dessication of the corn, and the consequent destruction of the organism or spores, should be adopted. This would perhaps seem the most rational preven- tive measure, as the prolonged drought during the hot season appears to produce the same effect. 7. The following table bears out the above remarks, and was drawn up from particulars kindly furnished by the Bombay Tramway Company. TABLE III. Showing the Monthly Rainfall in Bombay for the years 1888