A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. THEIR TREATMENT IN HEALTH AND DISEASE, BY VETY.-CAPT. G. H. EVANS, A.V.D., SUPERINTENDENT, CIVIL VETERINARY DEPARTMENT, BURMA. Author of "Manual of Diseases of Cattle and Ponies," "Veterinary Materia Medica (Burmese)," &c. Published by Authority. RANGOON: PRINTED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA. 1901. [Price,PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION. WHEN accepting the task of revising the work on elephants originally written by the late Mr. M. J. Slymm, Deputy Conservator of Forests, Burma, I did not comprehend the magnitude of the task I had somewhat hastily undertaken. For reasons which will be noted hereafter, I have ventured to strike out on lines very different from that author, and this has necessi- tated re-writing the whole work, not revising it as I first attempted to do. During a residence of twelve years in this province I have been thrown much into contact with elephants, both wild and domestic, and I have often had cause to deplore the treatment meted out to this most useful and valuable animal while in health. I have there- fore dealt thoroughly with this subject, and its important bearing on disease. For our present knowledge of the diseases, of elephants we are chiefly indebted to the labours of Gilchrist, Hawkes, and Steel, who, in addition to their multifarious duties, found time to give this very important subject their careful attention. Steel brought the subject out of chaos, and gave us the lines on which to treat the animal scientifically. I have availed myself, whenever possible, of the valu- able information contained in the works of the authors referred to, and combined it with the teachings of my own experience, and I hope that the resulting whole will be found to meet to a consider- able extent the needs of those for whom it is primarily intended. Since the last edition of Slymm's work, published in 1878, science has progressed by strides, and much that at that time was en- shrouded in mystery has been made clear, rendering necessary ex- tensive additions to, and modifications of, the original work. The science of the treatment of the diseases of the elephant is, however, still in its infancy, and increase of knowledge of the peculiarities of heir diseases must come slowly.
2 PREFACE. Few Veterinary Surgeons are thrown much in the way of these creatures, and fewer still have had an opportunity of a lengthy ex- perience of them. The majority of animals, when sick, are out of reach of any skilled medical treatment and observation, and in con- sequence many opportunities of furthering the study of their com- plaints are lost. It is a regrettable fact that so invaluable, patient, and long-suffering an animal should usually be left to the tender mercies of his mahout. 1 have seen a good deal that goes on behind the scenes in the treatment of elephants which does not reflect credit on the humanity of some owners, who, it is to be hoped, are quite ignorant of what goes on behind their backs. The fact that the elephant is a delicate animal and that much care is required to be bestowed on him, even when in health, is not generally known, and this is probably the reason why European supervision over the mahouts and the elephants under their charge, is not insisted on by elephant-owners. European supervision, whenever possible, is in my opinion, of paramount importance to ensure that the elephants receive humane treatment and are kept in health. Without this there is the perpetual risk of illness and the inconveniences arising therefrom. In order to correct the existing state of affairs and bring European supervision to dominate over native, I have en- deavoured, in re-writing the work, to make it one of practical value to those who most frequently have to deal with elephants, and in whose power it is to exercise supervision and humanity rather than to those who have medical or other scientific attainments. Frequent discussion with many gentlemen largely interested in the welfare of elephants leads me to think that this work may meet an existing want, which is its main object. With this end in view I have tried, whilst incorporating the pith of the original work, to simplify it by re-casting and tabulating, so as to make it more easy to refer to. I have modified parts where the progress of science demanded it, and have eliminated, as far as possible, all technical phraseology and medical terms, substituting easy, familiar language that can, I trust, be readily understood by all. Several parts of doubtful value have been omitted, especially the voluminous
PREFACE. 3 prescriptions with a multiplicity of ingredients4 PREFACE. H. Steel, A.V.D., the valuable works of Gilchrist, Hawkes and others, but more especially to those of Sanderson, Steel, and Miall and Greenwood, from which books I have freely quoted, and must tender my apologies for the liberty taken in doing so. I trust, however, that a desire to foster and procure greater care and more humane treatment for the elephant may be accepted as my excuse. From what has been said it will be seen that a great portion of the book represents the summing-up of others' researches on this interesting subject, thereby reducing my share of it to a minimum. FYTCHE ROAD: GEO. H. EVANS, Army Veterinary Department RANGOON.
LIST OF THE PRINCIPAL WORKS AND PAPERS CONSULTED. ADAMS.TABLE OF CONTENTS. Page. CHAPTER I. General usesii. CONTENTS. CHAPTER X. Page. The alimentary tractCONTENTS. iii. LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. Plate A.NOTE. As already stated in the preface, it has been my endeavour and object to try and make this work a practical guide to the better treatment of elephants in health and disease. It must be apparent to those who have much to do with elephants how meagre is the information concerning their diseases and treatment, and this work is in this respect far from being as complete as I should wish; however, much can be done now to augment our knowledge on the subject, more especially by those gentlemen who constantly have a large number of elephants under their care. I therefore appeal to them to assist by kindly favouring me with careful notes on cases, specimens of parasites, &c., in order that, should it be found desirable to bring out another edition, it may be more complete. Suggestions, notes on cases, specimensA TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. CHAPTER I. GENERAL USES-SUPPLY2 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. consists in their peculiar suitability to the work of collecting logs to- gether over great stretches of hilly country. It is necessary to see some of these immense logs to understand the amount of labour required to drag them through jungle, over ridges, down ravines, to the floating streams. Again, when a stream is in flood and the logs become jammed and piled up, or are stranded on sandbanks, the volume of water coming down, and the strength of the current are so great that elephants only can perform the Herculean task of entering the stream to clear a block or " dike " (%&gt;5), push stranded logs into the stream, and guide them round sharp turnings. When the timber arrives at the rafting stations, elephants, owing to their immense strength, materially assist in sorting the timber for the rafts. In the large saw-mills machinery is replacing most of the work done by elephants, but in the smaller ones they are still employed to drag the logs from the river, and after they are squared, they remove and stack them almost as neatly as a human being. In all these ope- rations they are efficient and cheap. My experience of elephants as transport animals is, that they are decidedly good. Provided they receive proper care and super- vision, they do not as a rule fall sick, and are capable of perform- ing a vast amount of work. They have few vices, are gentle, obedient, and patient. Too frequently, however, they do not even receive the ordinary attention bestowed on other transport animals, being left to the tender mercies of the native attendants, and they are in consequence often neglected, and as a result unjustly con- demned. Though of such great size and strength, if neglected, they rapidly go to pieces. They are constantly disabled from sore backs and feet, the majority of such cases being due to want of a little care and supervision. As with all animals, the first and most important matter to attend to is, that they be allowed an ample allowance of drinking water and abundance of food, and, above all, the greatest care must be taken to ensure that they receive their allowance. On service, where animals cannot be permitted to graze, it is imperative that the persons in charge should see that they receive a sufficiency of food and water. Elephants require only a small amount of sleep, but to ensure their obtaining it all food should be presented to them at an early hour of the evening, as otherwise they spend the night munching their food and get no sleep at all. Care must be taken to see that they are carefully loaded, not overloaded (which is too often the case), not recklessly exposed to heat, that parts exposed to irritation are regularly examined before and after work, also that they are not overworked, and are at all times saved un- necessary labour; then, and then only, will those in charge be repaid for their care and attention. In this and adjacent countries these
SUPPLY. 3 creatures are valuable, as in most places except perhaps parts of the north of Siam, food and water are abundant. The physical condition of the country, the absence of roads, deep forests, marshy tracts, deep and wide rivers, steep hills and deep ravines, all point to the elephant as being the transport animal best calculated to surmount such difficulties. The advantages in employing them are4 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. elephant finds a congenial home, and it is in this country, inhabited by shy and retiring people, that a number of elephants are bred in captivity. Elephants in these parts are used chiefly for transport purposes between villages, and are a conspicuous element in all fes- tivities held by Chiefs. Young tusker calves, when not more than five or six years of age, find a ready sale among the numerous Chiefs of the Shan and Laos tribes, and Siamese officials, at prices from three to five hundred rupees. As much as twelve hundred rupees has been offered for a promising ten-year old tusker. The wealth of many Chiefs consists largely of elephants, some of them owning as many as one hundred animals, and continually adding to the number. One of the great amusements of the Chiefs is, to watch the training of their animals ; this training begins at an early age, when the elephant is taught to submit to a man riding on his back or neck ; he is then taught to carry a saddle and small load, and later to drag timber. When an animal is being taught to drag, he is taken with a trained elephant to the sandy bed of a dried- up stream, and put in harness ; if he is obstinate and shows temper, the old elephant is given a long tow rope which is attached to the youngster, and at a given signal he moves off, towing the youngster, who frequently falls, but is nevertheless towed along on his back or side, as the case may be ; after a few such lessons, he learns how to drag; but it is not till an animal reaches the age of twenty that any serious work is expected of him. Till he is full grown he is a pet and, if a fine animal, an object of admiration in a cavalcade of ele- phants on festival occasions. Elephants used also to be brought from the Mèkong Valley, quite a large number annually finding their way from this source through Siam to Burma; but in the future it is improbable that many animals will be obtained from this direction. In a recent re- port of Her Britannic Majesty's Minister at Chiengmai, I noticed the following paragraph :AGE. 5 buyers are now looking to the west or Moulmein side rather than to the east or Nan and Luang Prabang side for the supply." Domestic elephants are plentiful enough, and the supply under ordinary circumstances is equal to the demand ; but of late years the demand in the timber industry has been, and is still, so exces- sive, that prices have run up very considerably, but it is anticipat- ed that in the course of a few years they will fall to, or even below, the ordinary rates. One point, however, must never be lost sight of, namely, that the supply of these animals must always be kept up. As necessary as it is to provide a future supply of timber, so needful is it to preserve the means of turning the timber, when matured, to account. Age. The limit of age in elephants and the indications of the age an individual has reached are not accurately known. It is natural to suppose that in the wild state they attain a much greater age than in captivity. In the latter condition they not infrequently die pre- maturely from preventible causes. That they do sometimes live to a great age is pretty certain. An instance of this is recorded in "Beeton's Dictionary of Natural History," namely, that amongst the papers of Colonel Robertson (son of the historian of Charles V), who held a command in Ceylon in 1799, shortly after the cap- ture of the Island by the British, is one showing that a decoy was then attached to the elephant establishments at Matura, which the records proved to have served with the Dutch during the entire period of their occupation (extending to upwards of one hundred and forty years), and was said to have been found in the stables by the Dutch, on the expulsion of the Portuguese in 1656. This, how- ever, is an extreme example of longevity from which it would be un- safe to generalize. Burmans and Karens, having considerable ex- perience with elephants, give the period of life from eighty to one hundred and fifty years. The former designate the periods of growth as follows :6 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. I think it is the general opinion of those who have experience of these creatures that, with the age of seventy or eighty, they gene- rally show evidence of having reached the average term of life; but there are no data to substantiate this opinion, still less any precise statistics available on the subject. The care bestowed varies considerably, and to enable true conclusions with regard to their age limit to be drawn, only those cases in which elephants have received adequate care and attention should be considered. " The " elephant is full grown, but not fully mature, at about twenty five " years of age, but is not in full vigour and strength till thirty-five" HEIGHT. 7 Height. Extravagant estimates of the height of elephants have from time to time been recorded; their great bulk so far exceeds that of the ordinary animals we are accustomed to see that the tendency is to overestimate their size. The old method of measuring was also most misleading; a rope was simply thrown over the back, the ends brought to the ground on each side, and half the length taken as the height. Much amusing information on this subject is contain- ed in Sanderson's excellent work. Madras elephants, he tells us, were at one time said to be from seventeen to twenty feet high, and an animal at Dacca was said to be fourteen feet. Mr. Corse, a gentleman thoroughly conversant with elephants, determined, if possible, to see one of these enormous creatures. He accordingly took the trouble to go to Dacca, and was rather surprised to find that according to his measurement the animal said to measure fourteen feet did not exceed ten feet in height (a very good height). We may take it on the authority of Sanderson, a most careful ob- server, who had unrivalled opportunities of investigating such mat- ters, that such a thing as an elephant measuring ten feet at the shoulder does not exist in India, nor I may add in Burma. The largest male he ever met with measured 9' 10", and the tallest female 8' 5". Of three hundred males measured in this province, the average height was 7' 10½", girth 11' 10"; and of one hundred females, the average height was found to be 7' 5¾", girth 10' 11." All these animals were measured at the shoulder, as is done with horses. An elephant dealer, through whose hands some two thousand elephants had passed, stated that he had only met with one animal measuring 9' 4" at the shoulder. Mr. C. B. Lacey informs me that in Siam the tallest animal owned by the Bombay-Burma Trading Corpora- tion measures 9' 6" at the shoulder. This fact shows how rare it is to come across an animal 9½ feet and over, for the Bombay-Burma Trading Corporation have records of a thousand and more animals, yet this is the only one they possess measuring 9' 6"; and at the present time they have some two or three thousand elephants in their employ. Twice the circumference of the foot is as near as possible the height at the shoulder. As stated above, these animals should be measured like horses, i.e., vertical measurement taken at the shoulder.
8 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Details of measurements of 300 male elephantsVALUE10 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. such as swinging of the trunk and tail, flapping the ears, swaying the body or the head from side to side, rubbing one leg against the opposite one, or swinging it. The skin is soft, almost black in colour; and the bristles covering the body are firm to the touch. The mucous membrane of the tongue and mouth is of a rich pink colour; the eyes clear and bright. The light coloured spots and blotches on the head and trunk are pinkish in colour. A moist secretion exudes around and above the nails, and is easily observed by throwing some dust on the parts; this must not, however, be confounded with an offensive discharge from beneath the nails, a wet rot, which runs high up, the affected parts being hot and painful. The appetite is good, and the animal sleeps for a few hours every night, and immediately on waking commences to feed. The signs of indisposition are:IDIOSYNCRASIES. 11 will not often be met with; still, when selecting, it will be as well to obtain those possessing most of the good points enumerated. The undesirable points are numerous. Some animals are flat- sided, others have high arched backs, with very prominent spinal ridges, see figure 31 ; others are narrow-chested, with lean low fore-quarters, or are leggy, and devoid of those enormous masses of muscle seen on the fore-limbs of a good elephant. In some animals the legs are of almost uniform girth throughout; tall, leggy beasts, and those with bad fore-quarters are invariably rough in action and slow in their paces; they are, moreover, much more liable to gall, and are generally indifferent workers. Elephants with thin, light- coloured skins, even if they possess many good points, should be avoided ; they are as a rule not strong, and frequently fall sick. Those animals possessed of lean heads, hollow cheeks, small restless eyes, shortish thin trunks, should be treated with suspicion, as they very often are bad-tempered. Forsyth in his work " The Highlands of Central India" men- tions that there is no end to the tricks carried out by dealers, of which he had some experience at the Sonpur Fair; some he re- marks on are man-killers reduced to temporary harmlessness by the daily administration of pills containing opium and Indian hemp. Sores of the feet plugged, cracks "paid" with tow, and sorebacks surface-healed. It is most important, therefore, that in examining a beast the utmost care should be exercised to see that the back and other parts liable to gall are free from sores, scars, and tenderness ; in fact the whole body must be inspected, the ears examined for sores and scabs, the ear holes for discharges, and the eyes must be free from dimness. The soles of the feet should be well tapped all over before and after exercise; if any tenderness is manifested, the part must be thoroughly examined. Tender patches from excessive wear may readily be detected by the parts being smooth, and pinkish in colour. The skin around the nails, as also the nails, must be inspected. Food and water should be presented to see that the trunk is quite sound, as this most important organ may have been injured by bamboos, spear wounds, da cuts, etc. Idiosyncrasies. Some elephants are full of nasty tricks; intending purchasers must therefore be on their guard, and endeavour to ascertain the pecu- liarities of any particular beast before taking possession. Most Burmese elephants prefer being approached from the right side; very
12 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. few from the left; some may be approached from right and left, and others only from the right or left. A new keeper unacquainted with such peculiarities incurs the likelihood of being attacked if the animal be bad-tempered, or of scaring him if of a nervous disposition. The following peculiarities in some animals reduce their value, as they are regarded with superstitious dread by the Burmese. It is thought that the ownership of such creatures may cost their masters loss of life or substance. (1) A loose fold of skin, descending from the throat down to the fore-legs, known as pyazwe ( ) (resembling bees settling in a swarm). (2) Same as above, but the fold of skin is continued between the fore-legs on to the abdomen, called kalaga ( ) (like a purdah). (3) Moving the head up and down, and simultaneously from left to right, called moungdoung ( ) (like the action of pounding rice in an ordinary Burmese rice mortar). (4) Swinging the trunk only to the left and right, called pa-ket- hlwe, ( ) (swinging the cradle). (5) A restlessness of the whole body, somewhat after the fashion of bears, called sa-gaw-waing ( ) (action of a winnowing tray). (6) Holding the trunk up in the air and putting it into the mouth, called tein-nyun-sa ( ) (literally to eat the clouds), star gaz- ing. The conformation of an animal naturally affects its value. Wet- kon ( ) (pig's back), or flat backs, are considered best suited for carrying purposes. Nga-phai-kon ( ) (like the back of the nga-phai fish, i.e., an even curve), or those with a slight curve of the back, are considered best for dragging purposes, as it is supposed that the dragging gear fits this class of animal better than others. Those animals with backs described as pyat-that-kôn ( ) (like the curve of a pyat-that, or sharp curve) may be employed for dragging or carrying, but great care must be exercised in attending to the gear, as such animals easily gall. A loose fold of skin across the lower part of the neck, called payit ( ), is not a bad omen and rather raises the value of the animal. Some elephants have four nails only on each foot; this decreas- es their value, as five nails on each foot raises the same ; four on each of the front feet and five on the hind ones does not interfere with their value. The male elephants called han ( ) and haing ( ) are often from 30 to 40 per cent cheaper than tuskers. Generally speaking
SALES14 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Siam, is beyond question. It is true that under certain circum- stances, e.g., when animals are constantly tied up, &c., it is very rare for them to breed ; but with elephants, the property of large firms engaged in the timber industry, and those owned by contractors the case is different; after work the animals are permitted to roam about the jungles, where they lead a more natural life, and under these conditions calves are often dropped. There are many well-known cases of elephants now working, whose mothers were working for years before their birth. In Burma, where wild elephants are numer- ous, cases of wild males taking up with tame females are not in- frequent, and tame elephants appear to have little or no difficulty in gaining admission to wild herds. As long as a sufficient number can be procured by capture, it would be absurd to attempt to breed them. Owners, especially of working elephants, have been known to offer to give away calves owing to the expense attending their keep, and the remoteness of the prospect of some return upon the outlay ; and the offer has for similar reasons frequently been refused. In the female the loose external generative opening hangs down in much the same situation as that occupied by the penis in the male. This peculiarity led to a good deal of speculation as to the manner in which union of the sexes took place ; so much so, as to suggest a deviation from the analogy of other animals for this pur- pose. The question as to the manner in which the fecundation of the female is brought about, was set at rest at Thayetmyo, where two elephants were observed in the act, and in the position common to quadrupeds, but in order to place the matter beyond the possi- bility of contradiction, Mr. Porter, Schoolmaster of the Bedford Regiment, took an excellent photograph; the trunks and tails came out rather indistinctly ; this Mr. Porter afterwards informed me was due to the fact that they were in constant and rapid motion. The congress lasted some time. Sanderson witnessed the action on four occasions, and on none of these did the males exhibit any signs of musth, which goes to prove that it is not only when under this in- fluence that male elephants court the society of the female. One jump is considered to be sufficient. Sanderson states : " There is " ample proof that it is not the male elephant that comes into season." Owing to the periodical attacks of musth, many people have sup- posed that such is the case; and he remarks that " the period of " heat is not marked by any particular signs in the female, which has " probably helped to strengthen the erroneous opinion spoken of. In " approaching a male elephant, a female desirous of his attentions " utters certain sounds, and courts his society ; but only those conver- " sant with elephants would notice this." I have never observed any apparent signs of heat' in the female, and several friends I consulted informed me that, though they had seen a great many elephants, and
PREGNANCY. 15 been amongst elephants many years, they had not seen anything noticeable amongst female elephants beyond the fact already stated that the female when in that state utters certain peculiar sounds. Pregnancy. Sanderson states that female elephants usually give birth to their first calf at sixteen years of age, and continue to breed till they reach the age of eighty. They breed about every two and a half, or three years. I have seen two calves (wild) at heel, the elder one I do not think was more than three years of age. Sanderson has seen three. The same authority observes that the female will not permit a bull to approach until eight or ten months after calving. Burmans and Karens put it down at even a longer period. Elephants in calf may be worked up to almost their full term, but it is only fair to relieve them from work six weeks or so before the calf is expected. Towards the end of pregnancy, females become very lazy and sluggish; the size of the animal, taken together with the fullness of the mammary glands, and the presence of milk, should afford sufficient indications of approaching parturition. The dams, after calving, should be given a good rest, and a plen- tiful allowance of good nourishing fodder. The mammary or milk glands are situated on the chest, a trifle be- hind the fore limbs. The young suckle with their mouths, and not with the trunk. The duration of pregnancy may be said to vary between eighteen and twenty-two months. Sanderson gives it at eighteen months for a female calf, and twenty-two for a male. Burmans and Karens state that it may extend to two and a half years. Mr. Petley kindly gave me notes on two cases:16 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. (d) In the Indian Forester for April 1899, Vol. XXV, page 158, signed C. B. S., a case is recorded. A female turned out with others to graze was covered in May 1897. The act was observed every evening for about a week, from about the 18th to the 25th May. Neither of the animals showed signs of sexual excite- ment previously, though the male paid assiduous court to the female for a few days before coition was permitted. They were both working regularly dragging timber, and gave no trouble. A female calf was born on the 3rd November 1898. The day the youngster was born, the mother had carried a light load for a short march. The calf was so weak, that it had to hold on to a bam- boo with its mouth to keep itself upright. After a day it could stand and suckle. Period of gestation a little over 17 calendar months. (e) In two other instances brought to my notice, the periods were 19 and 21½ months respectively; in the former case the calf was a female, in the latter a male. The greater number of calves are dropped during the last quarter of the year. Parturition. Generally speaking, the period of labour is short, and the act of parturition occupies but a short time. One calf occurs at a birth as a rule. Mr. Lidderdale kindly wrote to me describing the birth of a young elephant at Pazundaung. The cow had been working in the timber- yard during the afternoon, and after work was as usual tethered in her shed about 6 P.M. About 11 P.M. she became very restless, and groaned loudly ; at about 3 A.M. she suddenly broke her hind shackles, so those on her fore-feet were removed, after which she walked out of the shed into some deep mud about five yards distant, where she promptly assumed the recumbent posture and gave birth to a female calf, in caul, which, I believe, is not an infrequent event (head and fore-feet presented). The act of parturition occupied but a few minutes. The Burman attendant, who had been present at other cases, immediately ruptured the membranes, &c., the calf remaining lying on its side (the mother standing over it) for an hour or so, after which it managed to stand up, and in a short time could walk. The "after-birth" (achin) came away fifteen or twenty minutes after the birth of the calf. The dam ate it.
MILK. 17 An intelligent Burman gave me the following description:CHAPTER II. ATTENDANTS AND THEIR DUTIES-MANAGEMENTATTENDANTS AND THEIR DUTIES. 19 The pai-si has to attend to the instructions of the oo-si and as- sist him in such manner as may be desired. He is generally em- ployed on cooly work, i.e., collecting fodder, keeping the standings clean. On the march it is his duty to precede the elephant, to explore the route, with a view to the avoidance of quagmires and quicksands, as well as of sharp stumps or stones. This important duty is, however, frequently not carried out efficiently owing to lazi- ness, the pai-si riding on the elephant. In the case of timber-work- ing elephants, it is the duty of the pai-si to fix the dragging chain on to the logs, and he is then frequently called the pai-chaik ( ) or the man who " hooks behind." It is in the capacity of pai-sis that oo-sis serve their apprenticeship. The gaung or jemadar, when one is kept, controls the oo-sis in the duties above detailed; he should possess superior experience and judgment in the recognition of the more ordinary ailments, also a knowledge of the uses of some of the common drugs, as well as ability to dress wounds, &c., and perform minor operations, such as opening abscesses. All who are directly connected with the care of elephants should be firm, kind, and above all even-tempered, qualities for which they have a ready per- ception. I have known the training of a previously well-behaved animal to be lost to such a degree that she would endure neither load nor rider, simply owing to the accident of being placed in the charge of an irascible fitful keeper, who first negligently indulged, and then wantonly punished her. A rider who ordinarily shouts out his words of command in a needlessly harsh and loud voice, and who extensively and passionately employs the goad (see Fig. 6), is usually of this class. In timber working, many elephants are ruined in this way; hence the danger in changing drivers. The essence of good riding consists in controlling the animal entirely by word of com- mand, and the proper application of the knees and feet when neces- sary. There is a word in Burmese which describes a good driver as a " knee rider." Elephant-keepers are a peculiar class of men, who require delicate handling, but with a little tact much good can be got out of them. Elephant driving is an art which takes some learn- ing ; good men know their value, so must be pampered a little ; they are well aware of the fact that most Europeans are ignorant as regards elephants and their management, and are consequently very often a little above themselves. One point in connection with elephants must never be lost sight of, namely, the importance of se- curing a maximum degree of permanency of the particular atten- dant of a particular animal. A keeper who is possessed even in a moderate degree of the qualifications already enumerated, and who has been with his elephant a sufficiently long time to have studied the peculiarities of his charge, has become invaluable to his
20 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. employer. The knowledge in question can only be gained by expe- rience, and lengthened individual observation ; it cannot be placed on record or otherwise handed down ; hence any animal placed in the hands of a succession of keepers is subjected to treatment ex- tremely calculated to prove prejudicial to its health, temper, and utility. Much ill success in the maintenance of elephant establish- ments is to a great extent traceable to this cause ; accordingly it will be found expedient to condone much in a good keeper. The common offence for which mahouts are dismissed is the appropriation to their own use, or sale for their own benefit, of the " ratibs" (special allowances, such as flour, rice) allowed by their employers. The best remedy for this is extra supervision and, whenever practicable, to make certain of the animals receiving their full daily allowance by having them fed in the presence of some trusted person. If this cannot be done, flagrant as is dishon- esty of this kind, a really good keeper should not be dismissed, un- less his peculation is of such a degree as to affect the health of the animal in his charge, thus evincing a lack of concern in its well- being. Petty peculation, submission of false and exorbitant bills for medicines said to have been purchased and given in emergency, and regularly stealing a portion of the " ratibs " are drawbacks which, in an elephant establishment, must be regarded as lesser evils. Ele- phant attendants appear to be unable to abstain from these methods of defrauding their employers, and any attempt to enforce honesty by severe measures would eventually be visited upon the animals, and thus a much greater evil brought about than that which it was sought to avoid. Supervision will ensure the animals receiving the food ordered for them, and, by keeping a supply of ordinary drugs and "mussmil" ingredients, the attendants would soon recognize that it was quite unnecessary for them to submit bills for medicine. As a rule a driver is proud of his elephant, and it is astonishing to see what a good man can make his animal do ; all his orders are given in a quiet persuasive manner, and his hints (conveyed by his knees and feet behind the animal's ears) are given in such a quiet way as to make it almost appear that the movements of the elephant are spontaneous. There are many offences for which keepers should be severely punished, or dismissed, namely, a man who takes no pride in his animal, and shows no concern about its prosperity, evinced by making the immediate wants of the animal subordinate to his own, by cooking his food, sitting down to smoke before he has watered and fed his elephant, by neglecting to bathe it when proper oppor- tunity offered, taking the animal into water when the body is heated, overworking or overloading it, failing to administer medicines
MANAGEMENT22 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Remarks on the subject of fodder apply principally to those animals which are tethered and fed at their standings, namely, animals working in yards, and of course most Government animals. In this province all others have to forage for themselves, that is, when work is finished the mahouts are supposed to take them always to a part of the jungle where good fodder is procurable. The fore-feet are simply hobbled with the cane fetter (@§°^s, htoo) (Fig. 5) which is lashed between the legs with a piece of rope, or when animals are given to straying far, a long chain is sometimes put on a hind-leg, the free portion dragging-behind. In Karenni, Shan States, Siam, and Tenasserim iron locks and fetters are also used. This operation completed, the animals are set free. In order that they may be readily found when required, a bell or large wooden clapper (ogcodoS, hka louk) is suspended from the neck; this in the stillness of the jungle can be heard for a considerable distance. With regard to the plants most appreciated, this can only be stud- ied by observing the fodder usually chosen by wild animals, and this without doubt consists mainly of grasses, tree fodder being of secon- dary importance. Wild animals wander about a good deal according to the season of the year ; at times they keep to the hills, at others they are to be found in the low country ; generally speaking they spend the greater part of the day in dense shady jungle, where they rest and browse on the leaves and branches of young trees. They traverse the bamboo tracts, but except when the young shoots are sprouting at the beginning of the rains, or where regeneration of the bamboos has recently taken place, they do not remain very long in these localities. They visit the water morning and evening, and my experience is that when possible, in coming to drink and bathe, they select those places where there are patches of so-called kaing grass (d^SsoS) (Hind., Kussullut). It may justly be concluded that the succulent stems of the kaing form the most important item of the elephant's daily food, so much so that we may accept it as the staple for animals in captivity, when this grass is procurable, as it is at nearly all times of the year (the months perhaps in which the fires rage being excepted, mid-February to April). So fond are wild elephants of this grass, that I have on several occasions during the rains, when the sky is dull and overcast, known a herd to remain for days in large stretches of it. If wild animals be watched when grazing, it will be observed that, after tearing off a bunch of grass close to the roots, they remove the dirt adhering to the stems by beating it against their legs or sides, after which they simply bite off the lower third which is fresh, sweet, and succulent; tame ones naturally do the same if allowed sufficient fodder to permit of such waste, a rare oc- curence. A large margin should always be allowed, as elephants are
NATURAL FODDER. 23 given to trampling and soiling a certain amount of their ration; this they refuse to touch; if the residue be weighed after an animal has finished his meal, it will be found to be a good slice off the ration; hence, if only the bare allowance be given, an animal may gradually lose flesh owing to his being half-starved. With regard to grass, then, he should not be stinted. I may state that at least from three hundred and fifty to four hundred pounds of kaing, where procurable, freshly cut morning and evening, should be a necessary portion of the daily fodder. The quantity mentioned is a preliminary index to what the average animal will consume. The true criterion as to quantity is, however, not to be sought in any fixed standard such as height, but in the animal's ability to dispose of it during twenty-four hours, presupposing always that the fodder is to his taste, fresh, sweet, clean, and succulent. Some kinds of grass, such as kyu ( ) (Hind., null) for instance, myet-thin-dong ( ), and rushes like wet-la-myet ( ) may also be given, when it is difficult to procure kaing; most of them, however, are far less appreciated by elephants. In Rangoon, fodder is usually brought in boats, and consists invariably of wet-la ( ) and myet-thin-dong ( ). With reference to the former, it is a poor substitute for kaing and probably accounts for a good deal of the indifferent health and reduced capa- city for work exhibited by many of the yard elephants (which in my opinion are through ignorance half-starved). In out-stations the animals are sent out to graze or taken out into the jungle, and, when fodder is collected, they carry it into camp. Those in charge must not be led away by the sight of the mahouts bringing in large loads of fodder on their elephant's backs ; nothing short of personal inspection and weighing is satisfactory; contractors are in most instances quite as bad as mahouts; every bundle must be opened out and examined and all dirty worthless stuff rejected, such as slimy grass, insect-eaten leaves, and branches and leaves that have been soiled by birds. I know from experience that mahouts are frequently too lazy to obtain good grass, even when it can be procured a mile distant from camp; this is notably the case when on the march; they think as long as they can deceive the person in charge by bringing in a load of worthless stuff (which plan often answers their lazy inclinations admirably), their duty is done, and it is a matter of little consequence to them how much or how little the animals may eat. These men, owing to the fact that it is easier to lop off branches than to collect good grass, are fond of reporting that there is no good grass near camp. Every means must be taken to ascertain the truth of such statements, as, though grass may not be plentiful in the immediate vicinity, it may be
24 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. abundant only a short distance away. The other varieties of food which elephants consume in their natural state are numerous, such as leaves, bark of trees, palms, canes, creepers, fruits, &c.; even could we ascertain what they all were, it is most unlikely that we could procure them in great abundance for use in the depots. Branches of certain trees may be given to augment or vary the ordinary grass fodder, and may on emergency replace it. Of those readily procurable may be mentioned the peepul, banian, and other varieties of the ficus (which genus is well-represented in Burma), the sindong-ma-nwe (Tinospora nudiflora), jack tree, young shoots and feathering tops of a great variety of bamboo, palms, paddy, millet, and maize straws, all kinds of grain, growing or dry, sugarcane, plantain leaves and stems, fruits, such as pine- apples, plantains, melons, cane and other jungle fruits, are all much appreciated. Whenever circumstances permit of elephants being set free to graze and choose their own fodder, the opportunity should not be neglected; nothing is more conducive to their health, so much so that enfeebled and diseased animals will more often recover by this practice than by any other treatment. Other varieties of green fodder may be used, such asNATURAL FODDER. 25 It may be said with truth that most grasses, the leaves and branches of many trees, in fact most green stuffs, are acceptable. No amount of grain will compensate for a continued short allowance of fodder. When good fodder is abundant, the extras may be reduced in quantity or entirely dispensed with. The leaves and branches of the peepul tree (nyoung-ni) are reputed to be heating, and should therefore be given sparingly. Plantain stems and leaves are not recommended in cold weather. When dry fodder is given for a short time, such as stems of maize, millet, a change to green fodder will be necessary. Sanderson points out that branches and leaves are best for food when the twigs snap rather than bend under pressure; the branches are not relishedwhen the sap runs. Only the inner bark of the stems of the larger branches is eaten, but the whole of the smaller branches. Artificial Food.26 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. ( ) which acts as a cooling laxative, may also be added. A loaf from three to six pounds in weight, consisting of flour and other needful ingredients, which may be added in lesser proportion, may be given daily when much muscular exertion is demanded. Medicines are sometimes mixed up with the " ratibs " and " mus- sauls." The best time to give " ratibs " is after some of the ordinary fodder has been consumed. Aromatic spice balls known in India as " mussauls " ( ) (see Appendix) are also given occasionally. They consist of a variety of vegetable substances, many aromatic, such asNATURAL FODDER. 27 I have repeatedly observed yard elephants after work waiting for an hour or two for their food. This is a malpractice which cannot be known to employers, for they could not countenance a practice so cruel and one so likely to be damaging to their own interests. The Commissariat scale of rations for elephants in Bengal, Madras, and Burma is given in Appendix 39, Volume 5, paragraph 1917, Commissariat Transport, and is as follows. (1) Elephants when not on the line of march will be allowed two ounces of salt and one ounce of oil each. The following are the scales of green or dry fodder, as the case may be, provided that the latter does not consist of straw alone, i.e., without grain in it:28 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. (5) Elephant attendants will get a special allowance of four annas a day when fodder is to be cut by them, and is provided free of charge. The allowance is admissible when animals are at graze. (6) Commissariat Transport Officers are authorized to refuse to draw the allowance of four annas per diem for attendants if their elephants are not kept in good condition. (7) When the cost of the fodder ration for elephants in Canton- ments exceeds that of the command scale of rations, elephants in Cantonments should be fed on the latter scale. (8) The rules in the preceding paragraph do not apply to ele- phants with heavy batteries, which are allowed rations on the scale, Appendix 38, paragraph 1917. Appendix 38, paragraph 1917, gives the scale of rations as fol- lows :NATURAL FODDER. 29 that of the large rivers. At all times the water offered should be as sweet and clean as can be procured, though they are not averse to drinking muddy water (wild ones have little else during the rainy season). During the dry season good water-holes (such as the Burmans dig for their own use) should be dug in the sandy beds of streams ; failing these, well water must be given. On no account are they to be permitted to drink from the tanks and pools used by cattle. In their natural state they drink shortly after sunrise and before sunset. Domestic animals ought to be watered at least twice daily, three times when possible, namely, morning, midday, and evening. They should be watered about three quarters of an hour before they are fed. On the march, if any animal attempt to drink, although he be heated, he may be allowed to do so (this does not apply to squirting water over the body). A lengthened hot march (over seven hours) should not be attempted unless water is procur- able on the way. When travelling with elephants during the hot season, marches should be regulated in accordance with the pro- spects of good water-supply. Bathing and Grooming.30 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. scurfy state of the head is so commonly attended. If this part was kept thoroughly clean, and protected from the sun by a pad, this remedial anointing might perhaps be dispensed with. It must be remembered that the application of oil deepens the colour of the skin to a perfect black, thus vastly increasing the capability of the surface for absorption of heat. If a sun pad is necessary under ordinary conditions, it is doubly so after oiling. Rest and Sleep.NATURAL FODDER. 31 amount of additional work he can do will then resolve itself into that of how many hours taken from his legitimate occupation of munch- ing green fodder can we make reparation for by offering a more generous diet This is a clear issue, and makes the answer easy. We can by these means assuredly not more than double or treble the duration of the working hours. The healthy elephant with good treatment, liberal allowance of fodder, can work regularly for six or seven hours a day without injury. But the question just answered is, in practice, rarely ever asked. The more common question, which, too, for reasons assignable, we are bound to answer is not, what are the limits of fair work, but what constitutes overwork, particularly in respect to carrying. In a campaign, sometimes these rules cannot be adhered to, for conditions may arise demanding the utmost strain upon the elephant's capabilities. It is useful to know to what degree ordinarily the powers of the elephant may be taxed within twenty-four hours, without depriving ourselves of his services for the next twenty-four hours or longer period. The reply is com- plicated, and can be given only in the form of an illustrative table ; so many are the elements of each problem, so variable may these separate elements be, upon one and the same occasion, as to make the laying down of rigid rules inadvisable. There are to be considered (1) the load ; (2) the configuration of the ground over which the road lies; (3) the nature of its surface; (4) the time of day; (5) the ex- istence or absence of shade ; (6) the number of days' rest enjoyed im- mediately before, and in prospect immediately after, the march; (7) the quality and quantity of fodder and water available. From which collectively may be deduced the number of miles the animal can safely traverse. It must never be lost sight of, that the elephant is a nocturnal animal, therefore all work should, as much as possible, be done in the early morning and evening. It must also be borne in mind that in continuous exertion like marching, fatigue comes on almost imperceptibly ; we are then more likely to be deceived in measuring the staying power of the elephant than in work of a spasmodic and intermittent kind, such as dragging or pushing timber on the ground. If a log be too heavy, the animal will snort, refuse, or move it but a short way at a time ; but, in carrying a load that at the first start off sits easily, the animal becomes exhausted almost unconsciously to himself. After a pause on the march, he is unable to overcome the stiffness that immediately supervenes, and, if he be goaded too much, may drop down suddenly to rise no more. A good attendant will generally give timely notice of the possibility of such an occurrence. The elephant is by conformation a beast of burden, and, though he goes in draught, he is out of place in it, as it throws him into an
32 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. unnatural position, and he loses much of the advantage his size, weight, and strength give him. Elephants are employed for draught in the heavy siege batteries. Opinions vary as to the absolute weight an animal can carry. Of course the greatest weight he can sustain can be moved over short distances only, and medium loads over less space than light ones. I, however, have rarely met a person travelling with elephants not his own, but referred to the loads as " light loading you know," " loads that a cooly could move," and so forth. Under some circumstances it is as much as an ele- phant can do to move the weight of his own body, not to speak of a heavy load, or a log of timber. Taking the weight of an average animal to be four thousand pounds, or that of about forty Indian coolies, it is obvious that the latter can carry much more over a greater distance than the former. Doubtless the coolies could also drag greater weights if their efforts could be united simultaneously. A cooly can well carry half his own weight, but an elephant could not sustain the weight of twenty men for any time ; ten ordinary men, with the indispensable gear, would be a decidedly heavy load. The Government loads vary from 1,000 to 1,200 lbs., but 1,000 pounds including everything is a comfortable load, and, if elephants are to be worked for any time, it is inadvisable to make them carry even so much. Appendix A is a table illustrating the manner in which different circumstances should be taken into account in deciding the length to which a march may be extended. It is not the intention to devise a rule whereby to limit the discretion of thoughtful and con- scientious servants, who will seldom commit an error of judgment in this direction ; but to prepare a key by means of which the care- less or uninterested may more readily be brought to book. As regards dragging in the hills, if about three hours in the morn- ing and three in the evening, and not more, be devoted to work, it will doubtless occur that the number of logs worked out in a season will fall below the average. Figures quoted with reference to this heading can have but little general application ; local circumstances, such as the configuration of the ground, the distribution of the logs, and of the floating streams, will decide. A few facts may neverthleess be interesting. Two hundred logs, say, two hundred and fifty tons per animal, dragged ex situ to the floating streams in the course of the season, may be regarded as an exceptionally favourable figure. It could not be accomplished except in a dis- trict newly opened up, where dead trees were still standing in con- siderable numbers in proximity to the streams. But, taking Burma jungles in their ordinary form, an elephant might have to drag the logs some miles to the streams and would probably die before he
NATURAL FODDER. 33 collected half that amount. In some cases the hill streams are fit for floating timber, and the work is about a third less than in others, where a second land journey has to be made from the confines of the hills, through the plain to the point where the stream becomes suitable for floating. The principal and the most trying part of the dragging work, namely, that of the isolated trees from their original sites, up and down hill to the preliminary depôts, should be under- taken in the cold-weather months, when the deepest leaf covering is on the ground, which, moistened by heavy dews, allows the logs to slide more easily. A small dragging cart (Fig. 36) has been employed with profit even in the hills, and there is little doubt that, by bringing thought to bear on improving such appliances, and placing less reliance on sheer brute force, elephant labour might be economized (see Figs. 36a and 36b) both in regard to the number of animals needed and the strain placed upon the powers of each. Before and after work it is necessary to inspect all parts liable to gall, and, if the animal has been carrying a load, the attendant should shampoo the back with his feet and hands. The trunk and feet should be carefully examined for cuts, bruises, and foreign bodies, such as thorns, bamboo spikes, and during the rains the body for leeches, which are very plentiful in some parts of the province, the bites from which at times cause nasty sores. Powers of endurance.34 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. not merely giving orders but seeing them carried out whenever circumstances permit, is the means above all others for the proper preservation of the efficiency of the animals ; they must remember that the class of men usually attending the elephants, if left to themselves, are, from general indolence, carelessness, or from a desire to avoid the fatigue and hardships of jungle-life, or a campaign, quite liable to render their elephant's unserviceable; ample super- vision, and systematic checks can alone prevent malpractices. A little neglect will often deprive an owner or a force of the valuable services of many animals. As regards elephants employed in forest operations in Burma, the life of the elephant is frequently the only security capitalists have against advances made for timber to be worked through their aid. The percentage of deaths that annually occur amongst ele- phants employed in this branch of industry is probably from ten to twenty per cent. Not an inconsiderable number of such deaths are due to over-exertion and exposure, and ignorance on the part of native owners as to the powers of endurance of an animal and their inability to detect the first symptoms of exhaustion; while in many instances they attempt to exact from a poor beast the last effort of strength it is capable of exerting. With reference to tim- ber-dragging operations in Burma and Siam, the duration of daily employment naturally varies with the time of year, physical aspect of the country, and the food and water-supply. In timber-yards in Rangoon and Moulmein, where elephants are much exposed to the sun, they usually work from three to four hours in the morning and three hours in the afternoon. In forests, where the shade of the trees afford shelter from the direct rays of the sun, and where the country is not too hilly, or the drag too heavy, the hours of work generally extend from about seven or eight o'clock in the morning till three o'clock in the afternoon during the working season, i.e., from about the month of June to the middle or end of February. During the hot season the animals are allowed to rest, or at most they may be employed for a couple of hours in the morning in shady places and where good water and grazing are at hand, so that on being released from work they can be set free to eat to their heart's desire. In all such matters, however, it only requires common- sense and a little intelligent supervision to soon be in a position to ascertain the powers of endurance of each animal one may have to deal with, as these powers vary in individual elephants as much as in human beings, except that, in the former case, when once an ani- mal's strength is overtaxed, the evil is less readily remedied owing to the difficulty of treatment.
NATURAL FODDER. 35 Paces.-The only pace of the elephant is a walk, any increased pace he may put on is a fast shuffle. He can neither trot, canter, nor gallop. Exposure.36 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. slabs of wood are objectionable, as urine, &c., runs down between the boards, thus saturating the soil beneath. Several short stout posts with or without ring-bolts should be planted firmly within and without for the purpose of tethering the animals. Quarters should also be provided for the attendants in connection with the sheds in order to remove any excuse for absence from their respective animals. Elephants are often kept in stations without their presence being turned to good account, and where facilities, not only for obtaining their natural fodder and for bathing, but natural shelter also fail. Much sickness, mortality, as well as current outlay, would be done away with were the elephant depots to be moved to the nearest place which offered natural advantages for the keep of the animals. Some localities have been observed to be very badly suited for the keep of elephants, in which nevertheless their services are required for sorting timber, &c. Such places will generally be found to be of a kind varying to the furthest extent from the conditions in which we meet with elephants in their natural state. Perhaps none are more objectionable than the daily inundated tidal marsh lands, where the sheds are situated on patches of ground which barely escape inundation. In selecting camping-grounds it is essential that the ground be sloping, the elephants should face with heads uphill, otherwise if they lie down they might experience much difficulty in rising; care should also be taken to see that the standings are not on uneven ground, and that they are free from stones and stumps. All dung, litter, &c, should be removed morning and evening to a considerable distance from any standing. Gear. For timber-dragging, the harness in most general use consists of numdah, saddle, girths, back sling, and chains, and to describe them in order we will take first the numdah :GEAR. 37 which are cooling and hardening to the skin on which it is directly laid. There are other barks used, name- ly, shaw (Sterculia ornata, versicolor and villosa), all prepared in much the same way; but the first men- tioned is more generally used. Over the bark is spread a green hide or two, on which are placed the ohn-dones. Saddles or ohn-dones ( ), see Fig. 13.38 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. soon absorbs enough fat to make it soft and pliable. This strap, however, even with care, only lasts from three weeks to a month. The mahouts make the breast-straps for their animals, and usually keep a fair stock. Chains.PACK-GEAR. 39 Different patterns have been devised from time to time, but there is only one which can be recommended, and that is what is known as " Sanderson's improved pattern, " and which is the pattern adopted by Government. The subject of gear has been ably and fully treated of in a Government pamphlet, edited by this well-known authority on all matters concerning the elephant, entitled " Pack-Gear for Ele- phants, " published by the Superintendent, Government Printing, Calcutta, and which I would advise anyone employing-Sanderson's gear to obtain. My remarks are chiefly quoted from this work. The gear consists of the following parts:40 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. (f) The "crupper rope" (Fig. 17) is also furnished with a loop at one end, both of these ropes are secured to rings on the saddle or tags on the guddee, and can be re-tightened as required. (g) The "crupper" (Fig. 18) is a piece of bent iron pipe through which the crupper rope is passed. I would urge that all gear be obtained as directed by Sanderson, as follows:PACK-GEAR. 41 Guddee.42 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. To re-tighten girth on the march.GRAZING. 43 question of ownership of such animals has often been raised in India. The following case is quoted from Sanderson : " The fol- lowing is a case on appeal decided in the High Court of Judicature, Calcutta, in favour of the Government establishment that re-cap- tured an escaped elephant. " Plaintiff, a zemindar, alleged that he had the female elephant in question in possession for six years, when she fled to the jungles. He made diligent search for her, and reported her loss at the nearest district police-station. He heard a year later that she had been re-captured in the Sylhet district in the Government khed- dahs. His claim to the animal being rejected by the Superintend- ent of Kheddahs, he instituted a suit for her recovery in the Court of the Collector of Sylhet. The Collector gave judgment in favour of the Superintendent of Kheddahs on behalf of Government. Plaintiff thereupon appealed to the High Court of Judicature, Cal- cutta, but his appeal was dismissed on the grounds that such ani- mals being originally fer44 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. case recently tried in Upper Burma will prove of interest to owners of elephants. I therefore give it in full from the Burma Law Reports, Volume VII, Part II, page 73, 1901. " Civil Second Appeal No. 25 of 1900, May 7th, 1900. Before the Judicial Commissioner, Upper Burma. MAUNG KYAW DUN, Applicant. v. (1) MA KYIN, (2) NARAYANAN CHETTY, Respondents. Injury caused by animal, tame or wildGRAZING. 45 ' is bound to keep it secure at his peril. If it escapes and does mischief, ' he is liable without proof of negligence, neither is proof required that he ' knew the animal to be mischievous, or if it is a notoriously fierce or mischie- ' vous species (5).' In Smith's leading cases, in the notes on Fletcher v. Rylands (6) it is said :46 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. evidence, at least as good as that tor the plaintiff, that ' Kya Gyi' was pro- perly provided with them. In my opinion it has not been proved that there was any negligence on the part of the defendant and any prima facie case made out by the plaintiff has been rebutted. I therefore hold that the Lower Courts have rightly decided that the defendants are not liable ; and I dismiss this appeal with costs." Quicksands. If an elephant, for want of being preceded by an attendant to ex- plore the route, should chance to get into a bad quicksand or quagmire, the best plan is to throw him large billets of wood or branches of trees, which he can work down under his feet, until he has obtained a sufficiently strong footing to extricate himself. On such occasions it is dangerous to approach within reach of his trunk, as he will seize every object he can for the purpose just stated. It may even be necessary to sacrifice the load. Mounting. In order to mount an animal that is nervous of his keeper, which will sometimes happen, if it be in dread of a wound being handled, or dressed, or other cause, a good plan is to throw a rope over the body, making a running noose, and haul it tight round the belly, whereby to climb up. Crossing Rivers. The impropriety of taking an elephant into water, whether for ford- ing or other purpose, or permitting him to squirt water over the body when heated, has already been noted; a number of serious ailments, of which cramp is not the least formidable, may follow the disregard of this precaution. Before crossing a river, if the animals be heated, they should be halted, allowed to cool and have their gear removed. A good landing-place on the opposite bank should be selected, and, if the river is wide or moderately so, and be in flood due allowance must be made for current. It is always a good plan to send in a well-trained animal with an intelligent driver to lead the way, the remaining elephants should be sent in batches of twos or threes. A rope should be tied round the neck, or round the girth and a second rope attached, the free end of which the mahout can hold when the animal is in deep water. If the elephants have had
BOLTING. 47 a longish swim, or a stiff current to contend against, they should be allowed a short rest. With an unruly animal I found the plan re- commended by Steel answer well, namely, to put the troublesome elephant between two quiet animals, and to tie them neck to neck; the attendant should carry a knife in case it may be necessary to cut the rope. In rivers where the fords are not well known, a quiet ele- phant and a good swimmer with an intelligent driver should be first sent across to explore the route. Elephants are good and powerful swimmers. In deep water the driver should stand, as the animals are fond of ducking themselves. Bolting. This is one of the most dangerous but fortunately rare vices of the elephant. It is nearly always the result of fear. Small ani- mals such as fox-terriers are particularly distasteful to them and, ridiculous as it may appear, often cause them to bolt. On one occasion in the Shan States I saw a tusker carrying my kit sud- denly run away trumpeting, the only cause I could assign was that a couple of cackling hens ran out close to him from under a hut. In the open it is poor fun being on the back of a run- away elephant, but in jungle, it is needless to remark, a very serious matter. Blind-folding with a cloth often answers in check- ing their flight, but all animals known to be liable to bolt, should have a fairly long heavy chain attached to a hind leg; the free end should be attached to the saddle within easy reach of the driver, so that if occasion arises he can release it in the hope that it may be caught in some bush or stump. Sanderson cured a bolter by having a hoop of iron made with sharp spikes to encircle a hind leg, kya-pazat ( ) of the Burmese (see Figs. 2 and 3). This was kept in position round the leg by being suspended from the pad by a rope, and it fitted the leg so loosely as not to inconvenience the elephant, except when required. To the ring was attached a chain fifteen feet long, at the other end of which was a pick-axe head. This grappling- iron was slung to the pad by a cord in a slip-knot, handy to the ma- hout who could set the anchor free with a pull at the cord. In the Karen Hills I noticed that unruly beasts and those given to bolting, generally have a hole about the size of a rupee pierced through the lobe of one ear. A piece of cord is passed through the hole, and the free ends kept handy by the driver. On giving trouble the driver hangs on to the string ; the method appears to be fairly effec- tive. The oo-sis when bringing certain animals in from grazing, pass a cord through the hole in the ear, take hold of the free ends,
48 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. and lead the animals into camp. A method employed in Siam with nervous elephants is very effective : A bent hook like a magnified fish-hook hangs loosely on the ear close to the head, a string is at- tached to the hole on the straight end. When the animal is nervous and shows signs of wanting to bolt, the cooly pulls on the string. Some mahouts take the trouble to teach their elephants certain methods by which they alone can approach and catch their animals, when out grazing. For instance, a driver seeing his elephant, hails him, upon which the animal at once charges down on his keeper with (to a stranger) apparently alarming intent, but having done this, he permits himself to be caught. Other elephants will permit their fetters to be removed from the near or off-side only, and some will only allow approach from behind; or the driver must pass under the elephant's uplifted trunk, before he proceeds to remove a fetter. These little eccentricities are useful in a way, in that they help to prevent a casual thief, or a professional, who has perhaps not had an opportunity of studying the habits of certain animals he desires to steal from capturing them. Restraint. For this purpose fetters, chains, and ropes are employed. Fetters are of various patterns, those most commonly used consist of short lengths of chain. A fetter is carried for each foot, the fore- fetters are connected by a short chain like hand-cuffs, and those for the hind-legs are also joined in a similar manner (see Fig. 4). The fetters are fastened by means of a specia link-hook. Some elephants can undo this fastening; in such cases a peculiar spring lock of native pattern is applied to fasten the fetter. Many foresters employ these locks when they let their animals free in the jungle to prevent their being stolen. Fetters made of plaited cane are those generally employed by the Burmese. The fetter is a simple hoop of plaited cane (see Fig. 5); when in position, it is lashed between the legs with a rope or thong. Special fetters are sometimes used such as the kya-pazat ( ) tiger's-mouth ; this consists of three pieces of iron, jointed and fitted with spikes on the inside ; the hind fetter consists of two pieces of iron jointed and spiked; they are only used on unruly beasts, or when there is a chance of animals stampeding through fear, or on those given to bolting.
TO SECURE FOR OPERATIONS. 49 Tethering chains are of variable lengths and thickness; they are usually fitted with a stout iron ring at one end. Tethering.50 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. An elephant can shake a man off his back. To dimmish the chances of such an accident, take a long rope, pass it round the neck and tie a knot between the shoulders; carry the free end under the tail round to the loop where it should be knotted near where the first knot is tied, by this means it is almost impossible for a man to be shaken off. This leaves only the trunk to be dealt with, and any mischief from this source can be guarded against by the presence of the mahout on the neck, and a man or two below armed with spears. (b) Fetter both the fore-limbs, then take the tethering chain attached to fetter, say on left-leg, and pass it over the neck, the animal is now made to assume the crouching posture; the free end of chain is then passed through fetter on right-side, brought back over the neck, and the operation repeated once or twice and the chain secured. It is as well to apply a few gunny-bags over the neck as it is liable to become galled if the animal strains much. In the jungle and in Siam a ' break ' or ' crush ' is sometimes used (see Figs. 11 and 12). This consists of a number of stout, rough logs set in a V-shaped manner. The elephant is ridden or driven in at A and when he gets near B, posts at D are run through to prevent his getting out, and also at C to prevent his backing. In this cramp- ed position he is unable to apply his strength. It may on very rare occasions be necessary to throw an elephant for the purpose of operation. I only tried it once and this was at Pakôkku. The elephant, a fine powerful and most troublesome tusker, was suffering from a severe wound on the spine ; also two enormous abscesses on the back; he would not permit any interference. While the ma- hout was trying to dress the wound the elephant started the bear-like motion and the man fell off and was injured. The cooly could do nothing beyond applying fetters ; the animal could not be induced to assume the recumbent posture, so we determined to try and throw him. Two heavy tuskers were brought in case matters became serious. The animal was tethered by one fore-leg to a tree with a good stout chain ; fetters were then placed on all four legs, a long chain being fixed on one fore-fetter ; this chain was passed through all the fetters, the free end was given to a very fine old elephant ' Rajgopal '; he immediately started to walk away ; the men about then took their spears mounted on long bamboo shafts and whenever opportunity offered they touched a fore or hind foot causing him to draw it away. As ' Rajgopal ' had a steady strain on the chain, we soon got the legs so far under the beast that he was obliged to sink down amidst much shrieking and trumpeting.
TO SECURE FOR OPERATIONS. 51 The abscesses were promptly opened and dressed, the wound owing to the presence of maggots was opened up and the maggots removed, after which he was allowed to get up which he only suc- ceeded in doing after several efforts. The shaking he got or the relief afforded by the operation quietened him down ; he did not try to injure any one, and next day after a little trouble he allowed the cooly to mount and dress the wounds. This elephant after a course of tonics made an excellent recovery. Another form of kya-pazat is used for the recapture of escaped elephants. Some animals after being free for a time, though permit- ting men they know to approach them, will not allow them to mount, so the kya-pazat is used (see Fig. 1); the head is similar to an ordi- nary pitch-fork, but barbed like a fish-hook, it is wide enough to stick on to a limb, a light chain or rope is attached to a ring on it. The head can be fixed on a long bamboo. The man sneaks about the jun- gle after his animal, and when opportunity offers, sticks the pitch-fork on a hind limb ; the handle soon comes out, but before long the rope or chain gets entangled in bushes, and the animal cannot get away. A more barbarous method employed by Karens and Shans is to load a gun with a piece of pointed cane, which is fired into a leg at close range, thus laming the beast. Most mahouts arm themselves with a light iron hook fixed into a cane or bamboo handle about 2 feet in length (Fig. 7). It should only be employed in emergencies. Some drivers only use a pointed stick. From time to time endless other coercive appliances have been devised for purposes of restraint (Fig. 8); though patience and gen- tleness should be exercised in dealing with any animal, it is still more necessary in these" creatures, and everything should be tried before forcible measures are resorted to. The following are the instructions laid down for securing elephants in the Manual of Mountain Artillery, 1882:52 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Instructions for securing elephants for transport by train or sea are given in the Government Regulations on the subject. Destruction. It occasionally happens that owing to severe injury or incurable disease an animal has to be destroyed. To those who may be call- ed upon to do this it is necessary to know the shots by which the brain may be readily reached. The brain is not large and is situated low and far back. The places usually selected are the fore- head, ear, and behind the ear (see diagram No. 26), (a) Front or forehead.DESTRUCTION. 53 dom hear of the animals wounded by small bores and not bagged. A small bore is a poor weapon when face to face with an infuriated elephant. To inexperienced persons I recommend the heaviest weapon they can conveniently carry, such as a 450 cordite (nickel bullets) a .577 express, with steel tipped bullets, or, better still, an 8- bore with hardened lead bullets. It is desirable to have a second rifle at hand in case of accidents. The body shot should be taken rather low, a little above and be- hind the elbow just near the wrinkle usually observed in that region. This shot should not be taken where people are about, as even with a four-bore bullet placed in this position, an animal may run for 60 or 80 yards.
CHAPTER III. OUTLINE OF THE ANATOMY OF THE ELEPHANT-ARTICULATIONS-SKULLARTICULATIONS56 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. The nasal bones are short, triangular, and pneumatic, forming the lump or boss, seen immediately above the root of the trunk. The cavities or sinuses are broken up into numerous subdivisions by irregular partitions, and are lined with a delicate membrane ; they communicate freely with one another and with the nasal cavities, and while their aggregate bulk constitutes a very considerable portion of the skull, so very thin and light are they, that if a section be made of that portion of the head which includes the greater portion of them, it will be found to weigh from eight to eleven pounds, whereas that of the entire skull often exceeds 100 lbs. in weight. The aver- age weight of five skulls of male elephants was found to be 114 2/5 lbs.; one of these, however, was an exceptionally large head, weigh- ing 175½ lbs., i.e., upper jaw 59 lbs., lower jaw 116½ lbs. Owing to the peculiar structure of the skull referred to, a large extent of bony surface is provided for the attachment of muscles, without materially adding to the weight of the head, and by means of the air con- tained in the sinuses, the skull is rendered buoyant, the animal being thus enabled to support the enormous weight of the teeth and lower jaw. The large amount of cell structure interposed between the outer and inner tables of the skull affords such an important organ as the brain great protection. The bony nostrils are formed by the nasal and premaxillary bones ; the nasal chambers are very short and vertical. The turbinal bones situated within the nasal aperture are rudimentary, and it is here that we find the apertures admitting air into the extensive air chambers of the skull. The lachrymal bone is small, protuberant, and imperforate. The cavity in which the brain is lodged is situated low and far back. The brain is oval in shape (see Fig. 23), and the division between the large and small brain is vertical, i.e., they lie on a level plane without overlapping. ' The olfactory lobes from which the nerves ' of smell proceed are large, whilst the nerve of sight and muscular ' nerves of the muscles of the eye are singularly small for so vast an ' animal ; and one is immediately struck by the prodigious size of ' the nerve which supplies the proboscis with its exquisite sensibility, ' as well as by the great size of the motor portion of the nerve which ' supplies the same organ with its power of movement and action.'TEETH. 57 Teeth. The teeth are large, complex, and special in their mode of re- placement. Steel in his " Indian Veterinary Manual" gives an excellent description of the process, which I take the liberty of quoting: " Generally on each side of each jaw, two or three teeth " may be seen ; the front one is small, often loose, and is sometimes " shed, because the growth of the second gradually cuts off the sup- " ply of nutriment by compression of the fangs. The second or main " tooth consists of a number of subdivisions composed of dentine " coated by enamel, arranged in a linear series from before backwards. " All these are buried in an enormous bed of cementum, layers of " which are between each subdivision and coating every part of the " surface, except the depressions for the pulp cavities and the table " or grinding surface of the tooth." In the Indian elephant the enamel on the tables is arranged in transverse ridges. Only two teeth, as a rule, can be seen on each side of the jaw ; these are pushed out and replaced by others growing from behind. Many male elephants possess tusks ; these are placed in the premaxillary bone, they grow from a persistent pulp. The statement of Corse in Brewster's Edinburgh Encyclopae- dia with reference to the growth of the teeth, and quoted by Steel (Indian Veterinary Manual, page xxviii) is most interesting. " The " first set of grinders or milk-teeth are not shed, but are gradually " worn away during the time the second set are coming forward, and " as soon as the body of the grinder is nearly worn away, the fangs " begin to be absorbed. From the end of the second to the begin- " ning of the sixth year the third set come gradually forward as the " jaw lengthens, not only to fill up this additional space, but also to " supply the place of the second set, which are, during the same " period, gradually worn away and have their fangs absorbed. From " the beginning of the sixth to the end of the ninth year the fourth set " of grinders come forward to supply the gradual waste of the third set. " In this manner to the end of life the elephant obtains a set of new " teeth as the old ones become unfit for the mastication of his food. " The milk-grinders consist each of four teeth or laminæ, the second " set of grinders of eight or nine laminae, the third set of twelve or " thirteen, the fourth set of fifteen, and so on to the seventh or eighth " set, when each grinder consists of twenty-two or twenty-three ; and, " it may be added that each succeeding grinder takes at least a year " more than its predecessor to be completed." The term " tush " is applied to the small tusks of females and some males, though the latter ordinarily carry the large teeth known 8
58 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. familiarly as " tusks." Tusks and tushes are simple teeth found in the upper jaw embedded in deep bony sockets, the pulp cavity (in young elephants) extending into them for a considerable distance, but in aged animals the cavities are much diminished in size. On re- moving a tusk the pulp which resembles a large conical-shaped sausage, may be taken from the cavity without trouble. The Bur- mans prize the pulp, as it is considered a specific for some disease. With regard to the tushes Steel states : " The tushes afford indi- " cations of age appreciable to natives. Sanderson erroneously affirms " they are never renewed or shed. They vary much in different va- " rieties, and no doubt his remark applies to some; however, in others " the milk tusks are shed between one and two years of age and re- " placed by the permanent ones which often attain 70 lbs. weight " in the male." Sanderson, page 67, says: " The tusks of the male " elephant-calf show almost from birth. I believe that they are never " renewed, and that the first tusks are permanent. In many works on " the elephant it is stated that the first tusks are shed before the " second year, but I believe this to be an error, one that has gained " ground through so many writers deriving their information from a " common source. I have made this a point of particular enquiry " amongst experienced elephant-attendants, and have found them " unanimous in dissenting from the idea of any such process of " renewal." He also remarks : "I have had many young elephants in " my charge and never noticed anything of the change alluded to." I have asked many foresters, Burmese and Karen, about this matter ; they are of opinion that the tusks are never shed; I have, however, also been informed of one or two instances of milk tusks being shed and renewed. A small percentage of males have simple tushes, which are simi- lar to those of the female, except that they are a little longer and thicker, and some have none at all; the first are known as han ( ) and the latter as haings ( ). Some few males have a single tusk only. The Burmans consider it lucky to own an animal possessing a right tusk only; such an animal is known as a te ( ) (see Plate C). Males occasionally lose a tusk when fighting, or through other injury, but some are born with a single tusk. The late Mr. Darwood, who owned many elephants, records a case where one of his elephants dropped a male calf which grew up with only one tusk. Burmans, Karens, and others when judging the age, carefully examine the tusks with regard to their soundness, size, colour, sweep, spread, and amount of wear shown. Tusks are formidable weapons of offence; they can be brought into use at almost any angle. Tuskers in a herd maintain discipline, and are justly feared by the members of it. At times most
THE SPINE60 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. human subject, and is in form something after the shape of a sig- net ring. The second or axis, may be readily recognized, as it pos- sesses a conical tooth-like process, and has a massive spine which is bifid posteriorly. The bodies of the fourth, fifth, and sixth are short, the spinous processes are also short. The seventh may be distinguished by its long spine, and also by its having on its posterior edge a cavity for the articulation of the first rib. Owing to the im- mense weight of the head, we find that the neck is extremely short. The latitude of motion possessed by each bone on those to which it is attached is not as great in elephants as in most other animals ; accordingly we find the general flexibility of the neck is compara- tively limited, and that when an animal is desirous of observing an object posterior to the direct line of vision, it is necessary for him to turn his body more or less in that direction. Dorsal Vertebræ. Nineteen to twenty in number. They are intermediate in size between the cervical and lumbar, and are to be distinguished by their long superior spinous processes, which proceed upwards and incline backwards ; they form the " withers " and greater portion of the spinal ridge. Lumbar Vertebræ. The lumbar vertebrae are three in number; they may be distin- guished by their longish, flattened, transverse processes, which give support to the muscles of the loins. Sacral Vertebræ. The sacrum is short and arched, and formed by the union of three or four bones, which in the young animal are separate. It is more or less triangular in shape, with its base anteriorly and apex posteriorly placed. In very old animals the last lumbar vertebra may become united to the sacrum. The sacrum forms a roof to the pelvis, and affords protection to its contents. Caudal Vertebræ. Thirty-one in number, but in many specimens it will be found that from accident, &c., there are less. The anterior ones show in
STERNUM62 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. shock, especially during such acts as leaping and galloping, where- as in the elephant the bones are not set at angles, but almost in a vertical line ; the reason for this is apparent when we consider the immense size of the body to be supported. It is this particular for- mation that renders these animals incapable of making the slightest spring. Sanderson states that " a trench seven feet wide is impass- " able to an elephant, though the step of a large one in full stride is " about six and a half feet." From the position of the bones it is evident that the elephant is intended to sustain weight, i.e., is a beast of burden; and this fact to some extent accounts for the dis- comfort experienced when riding these creatures. The fore extremities.FOOT. 63 " from the perpendicular about 70 degrees, a favourable position for " transmitting weight upon the heads of the femora." There is no question that this construction is adapted for bearing downward pressure ; it is a conformation in which immense strength is secured at the expense of suppleness, and is another reason why the gait of the elephant is such a source of discomfort to the rider. The femur or thigh bone is a long bone, more or less cylindrical in form, at its upper extremity is a rounded head which fits into the socket or acetabulum, and forms the hip joint. The lower ex- tremity articulates with the tibia (the stifle joint of the horse). " The patella, or knee-cap, is slightly convex-lengthwise, and con- cave transversely at its articular surface."64 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. wards. The terminal bone of each digit lies within one of the nails. If the internal surface of a nail be examined it will be found to be traversed in a vertical direction by a series of horny leaves or laminæ ; it will also be observed that the extremity of the digit as exposed by removal of the nail, is also traversed by a series of laminæ known as the sensitive laminae ; they fit in between the horny laminæ of the nail. It is by means of the indentations on the interior of the sole, and the laminæ above noted, that union is brought about between the horny and underlying sensitive structures. The hoof slippers are not rigid boxes like the hoof of the horse; each digit is provided with tendons for flexing or extending it, thus permitting of a great degree of motion. The noiseless tread of the elephant is a subject of common remark. The reason for it is that a large quantity of a fibro-fatty substance enters into the formation of the foot, which goes to make a wonderful elastic cushion. The elephant is by nature intended to roam about the vast forests, where the soil is usually soft, or the ground is covered to a depth of many inches by fallen leaves. Under natural conditions the " hoof slip- per " affords ample protection to the underlying sensitive structures. The Alimentary Canal. Mouth.MUCOUS MEMBRANE66 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. the last elephant I examined (a large tusker) measured 3 feet 4 inches. It has two extremities, the cardiac and pyloric, and two openings, one communicating with the gullet known as the cardiac, and the other with the intestines, the pyloric. The stomach is situated towards the left side, and the spleen is attached to it. The cardiac end is long and tapering, the interior is lined by mucous membrane. " A " number of transverse nearly circular folds project inward from the " cardiac wall ; they almost disappear when the stomach is greatly " distended, and are at all times too shallow to serve as water cells, " though they have been figured and described as such."LIVER68 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. of cirpular muscular fibres, their office being to keep the orifice of the bladder closed. The urine is discharged from the body by means of the urethra, a membranous canal extending in the male from the neck of the bladder to the extremity of the penis. In the female it is very short, and opens into the uro-genital canal. The Organs of Generation. In the male we find glands to secrete the seminal fluid (testicles), and an instrument, the penis, by means of which this fluid may be conveyed to the necessary receptacle in the female. The testicles are two glandular bodies, globular in shape, the substance is soft, and on section, of a light brownish colour. They are suspended freely in the abdomen, and are situated below the posterior extremities of the kidneys. The penis is a long fleshy body, which serves to afford passage to the urine, and also to eject the semen. At its extremity is the opening of the urethra, which in this animal is Y-shaped. With a view to preventing that peculiar sexual disturbance known as "musth" many attempts have been made to castrate these creatures; but owing to the immense size of the carcass, and the peculiar position of the testicles, the operation is necessarily a very formidable and dangerous one. The operation must be performed on both sides. The female organs of generation are divided into external and internal. The external or uro-genital opening known as the vulva is not situated near the anus, as in many animals, but is drawn forward, and. so occupies the position of the penis in the male. The sides are loose, and the labiæ or lips, covered with mucous membrane, form a prepuce or covering for the clitoris. On separating the lips of the vulva, a fleshy body varying in length from 12 to 16 inches, known as the clitoris, is observed. It is the analogue of the penis in the male. The internal organs are the vagina, uterus, fallopian tubes and ovaries. The vagina is a canal lined by mucous membrane. " It is about 12 to 15 inches long." At the end of the vagina is the entrance to the uterus or womb, which organ is peculiar in that the greater part of it is divided into two horns. Outwardly, the uterus is with difficulty distinguished from the vagina.
IMPREGNATION70 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. his mode of life, which seldom subjects him to respiratory emergen- cies, and his organization which does not necessitate much blood oxygenation. Heart. As in other mammals the heart is a four-chambered muscular organ which is contained in a fibrous bag called the pericardium and is placed between the lungs. It is peculiar in that its apex presents two points instead of one like most mammals. This peculiarity is, however, shared by certain whales, dugong, &c. Another peculiarity observable is, the absence of fat about the organ. Weight-average of three hearts, 24 lbs. Respiratory organs:NOSE. 71 (a) The muscular portion or trunk72 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. piratory effort the contents are expelled and swallowed, or in the act of bathing ejected over its body. It is highly improbable that the mucous membrane lining these canals is in any way concerned with the sense of smell. Every one familiar with elephants must have observed the pecu- liar habit they have when heated of inserting the trunk into the mouth and by suction withdrawing fluid which they squirt over the body. Many theories have been advanced as to where this fluid is accumulated ; some investigators say that the stomach is the reser- voir and that the cell-like formation at one end (much exaggerated in the drawing) can hold as much as ten gallons of water, and Dr. Harrison found a muscle connecting the back of the windpipe with the forepart of the gullet, one of the functions of which he thought might be to raise the cardiac orifice of the stomach and so enable it to regurgitate its contents into the gullet. (The muscle alluded to must have been abnormal as, I believe, other anatomists have not found it. I have tried to on several occasions but failed.) Others are of opinion that a special pouch at the back of the throat (pharyngeal) is the reservoir. The point at present is not satisfactorily settled, but as Steel states, the "pouch" is capable of holding a fair amount of fluid which may be supplemented by gradual regurgitation from the stomach. The subject is a most interesting one, and those desirous of obtaining full information should refer to the excellent works of Steel, Sterndale, and Sanderson. Sounds:EYE74 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Muscular System. This system is remarkable in that a large amount of tendinous fibre runs through the muscles, making them very tough. About the shoulders and buttocks the muscles are fleshy, but even here there is a considerable admixture of tendinous fibre. Skin. In the wild state it is somewhat difficult to estimate the true colour, as when met with, they are generally bedaubed with various coloured clays or mud ; but in reality the true colour is a deep greyish black. In the domesticated animal it is certainly much darker, which is due to constant washing, grooming, and anoint- ing with oils. The looseness of the skin is familiar to all, and as is the case with many other animals, it may be freely moved at will through the aid of a special muscle, the panniculus carnosus, lying beneath it. The action of this muscle is frequently demonstrated when the creature is tormented by flies. Some elephants have a bad habit of shifting their gear, or load, by frequently bringing this muscle into play. The skin is of considerable thickness, but varies in different parts of the body. It neverthless does not prevent its being highly sensitive WEIGHT OF CARCASS. 75 Brought forward Cwt. qrs. lb. ... 11 2 2 Left hind-leg... ... ... ... 2 2 11 Right hind-leg ... ... ... 2 3 0 Left ribs ... ... ... 1 1 20½ Right ribs ... ... ... ... 2 0 26 Loins and part of buttock ... ... ... 3 0 16 Pelvis ... ... ... 3 1 19½ Neck ... ... ... 0 3 13 Breast-bone... ... ... ... 0 3 0 Heart ... ... ... ... ... 0 1 14 Lungs and diaphragm ... ... ... 0 3 14 Kidney ... ... ... 0 0 16 Intestines (small and large bowel) ... 2 1 23 Liver ... ... ... ... 0 2 20½ Spleen ... ... ... 0 0 4½ Stomach ... ... 0 3 12 Weight of carcass and organs ... 34 1 12 Dung weighed ... ... ... 2 1 9 Water in bowels and cavity of abdomen, about ... 2 1 18 Total weight ... 39 0 1 Pounds, Avoirdupois ... 3,369 The dimensions of the animal were as follows :76 CHAPTER IV. ON THE CAUSES AND PREVENTION OF DISEASE-GENERAL TREATMENT OF SICKNESS- GENERAL INDICATIONS OF ILL-HEALTH. On the causes and prevention of disease. BEFORE entering upon a description of the diseases, I would like to offer a note of warning to those who employ these creatures. Though a certain amount of predisposition to disease may be assign- ed to a change from freedom and a natural life to domestication and an artificial one, and to accidental causes which cannot perhaps be anticipated and accordingly prevented, there undoubtedly is a very considerable amount of disease which can be directly attributed to conditions to which the domesticated animal is subjected, and which, with proper care and humane consideration, can be greatly or wholly avoided. Twelve years' experience in this province, during which time I have had abundant opportunities for observing domesticated elephants and their treatment by masters and mahouts, has com- pelled me to believe that in many instances (and I say so with re- luctance) a maximum amount of labour is exacted with a minimum regard bestowed upon their wants -and creature comfortsCAUSES AND PREVENTION OF DISEASE. 77 his habits must have repeatedly noticed the manner in which he piles fodder, or a blanket if handy, or other things on his head and neck, or if such be not available, he throws dust over himself, or if working, frequently inserts his trunk in the mouth, withdraws fluid and squirts it over his body, but it is not everyone who has to deal with him who appreciates the significance of these acts. How often has an elephant been seen working in the sun, in a Government or private timber-yard, provided with any head protection? One does occasionally see a careful mahout take off his turban or coat and throw it over his animal's head. (b) It is difficult to lay down fixed rules as to the amount of work which may be exacted. This must necessarily depend in some measure upon individual idiosyncrasies and constitution, which can only be ascertained by the careful observation of those in attendance (supervisors, &c.). What would undoubtedly prove moderate work in one individual might prove excessive in another, though to all appearances of equal size, age, and condition. Again, the early symptoms of failing vigour which should be recognized by the mahouts, are either not reported by them, or often after having been reported, are paid no heed to by those in authority. I can call to mind in- stances in which an animal palpably suffering pain and going lame, was found working. Regrettable as it is, the sufferings of an animal that may have toiled for years in his master's cause and contributed materially to his for- tunes are passed unnoticed. Too often, therefore, it hap- pens that an animal's energies are overtaxed to such an extent that he suddenly breaks down. So far as one can frame rules, I would strongly recommend that dur- ing the hot weather, from 15th February to the breaking of the rains, no animal should be worked in the open after 10 A.M., and never before 3-30 P.M. Moreover, they should never be worked more than three hours at a stretch without being given half an hour's interval or rest in the shade, during which time the gear should be loosened, parts examined for galls, and a little water and some bundles of fodder presented. I consider it imperative for humanity's sake that employers should detail, whenever possible, a European assistant to fre- quently (at least three times a week) inspect and report upon the health of the animals, their physical capability
78 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. for work, also the sanitary condition of their surroundings, and above all the quality and amount, by weight, of fod- der supplied. (c) I have already dealt with the subject of food, but as this is so important a matter, the remarks beginning on pages 23 and 27 will bear some repetition and addition. In addition to a plentiful supply of good food being essential, it must also be varied; but here again the conditions of food-supply in Rangoon, as I have observed, do not agree with my ideas on the subject; for instance, the basis of their diet is composed of a spe- cies of rush called by the Burmans wet-la (Paperus pangoree, Cyprus tegetum), which is one of the least nutritious kinds of fodder that could be supplied, as it is full of watery sap. It therefore follows that for a creature to derive sufficient sustenance from it, a very large bulk must be ingested which unduly taxes its digestive capabilities; added to this, being cut in stagnant marsh lands, it may have adhering to it the ova of many varieties of noxious intestinal parasites, as well as germs of disease, and is often provocative of diarrhoea. Thus, for want of proper supervision, it usually happens that a considerable quantity of dead stalks and other unwholesome material, is mixed with it. I have observed that usually the custom is to allow so many bun- dles for each animal, but I have never seen yet a European supervising the weighing of the fodder to ensure that each animal receives an adequate allowance, which I have often found was not the case. How often is any other kind of fodder supplied ? I fully realize why this food is presented year in and year out: it is undoubtedly the easiest procurable near Rangoon, but with a little more trouble and very little extra expense, if employers would insist upon it, far superior fodder could be and should be substituted or mixed with this wet-la. To sum up then, the elephant is far too much in the hands of his mahout, receives insufficient supervision, and I venture to state that were more consideration given to the above remarks, more work could be exacted, better health maintained, and there would be less need to refer to the subsequent pages. General treatment of sickness. It will be as well to remark here that elephants generally are bad patients from three points of view : (a) they are naturally very timid, suspicious creatures, difficult and often dangerous for strangers to handle; (b) their vital processes ate slow, hence diseases run a protracted course, take on a low form, and loss of condition is only slowly regained. Their natural timidity in health is often augmented
GENERAL TREATMENT OF SICKNESS. 79 by disease 5 they very readily lose heart, becoming indifferent or oblivious to their surroundings in serious ailments ; and (c) the diffi- culty often encountered in the administration of medicines. If successful treatment is to be achieved, these facts must never be lost sight of, everything calculated to frighten the patient should be as far as possible avoided, and every effort to conciliate and gain his confidence employed, in preference to any method of restraint to effect one's purpose. Restraint in any form increases his fears, stimulates him to offer resistance, and exhausts his energies. For this reason I advise that the details of treatment laid down by the person in charge, should be carried out under his personal supervision, through the agency of the mahouts alone. (1) Rest.80 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. often not being detected until the animal is passing them in thousands, has serious diarrhGENERAL INDICATIONS OF ILL-HEALTH. 81 considerable fever in these creatures, and a rise of 4 or 5 degrees-a grave condition. Fever, it must be distinctly understood, is not a dis- ease in itself, but merely a symptom of disease, and may arise from manifold conditions. It accompanies almost all acute constitutional ailments resulting from whatever cause, such as anthrax, foot-and- mouth and kindred diseases, heat stroke, chills, blood poisoning, &c, but may also attend conditions which are purely local, such as an abscess beneath the skin, inflammations, wounds and other injuries. Fever is ascertained by taking the temperature in the rectum or fun- dament ; but this is sometimes by no means the easy operation that it is in other animals, owing to the extreme suspicion and nervousness displayed. The method recommended is as follows : Many ele- phants are not averse to having the contents of the rectum evacuated artificially, i.e., by inserting the arm and raking out the dung; the arm should previously be anointed with soap or oil. A good mahout can do this and at the same time having removed some dung can introduce the thermometer without arousing suspicion. With cau- tion this is the simplest method I know of, and an ordinary clinicial thermometer may be used; the elephant may be standing or recum- bent. This method failing, the only alternative and much more troublesome means, and with ill-tempered animals not always suc- cessful, is as follows: The elephant must be made to assume the re- cumbent position. One or often two men are required to hold the tail aside; a longish thermometer about 12 inches is desirable, and for economical purposes it is as well, in order to avoid breakage to use one of a special pattern guarded by a metal case ;* but it must be borne in mind as a standard rule which on no account should be relaxed that after the use of such an instrument, the thermometer must be withdrawn from its special case and thoroughly cleansed in disinfecting fluid, whilst the case itself must be boiled for some minutes. It is sufficient to thoroughly wash an ordinary clinical ther- mometer in some disinfecting solution. These precautions are im- perative to obviate the risk of infecting sound animals. As the anus or fundament is surrounded by much loose hanging skin, special care must be observed to see that the hand with the thermometer, or thermometer alone, previously anointed with vaseline or other lubricant, is inserted for at least 6 or 8 inches, where it should be permitted to remain for at least three minutes in order to obtain a reliable reading.82 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. In order to efficiently conduct the operation, one good method is to divert his suspicion by going through the operation of harnessing and loading him, and at the same time to offer sweetmeats, sugar- cane. Care must be taken to observe that the mercury in the thermometer is shaken down below 97 degrees before handing the instrument to the mahout, who alone should be entrusted to insert it. Should no thermometer be at hand, there are other indications which may lead one to a correct conclusion as to the presence of fever; these are (a), shivering often passed unnoticed, is frequently a precursor of fever, (b) uneven surface temperature of the body, i.e., either the trunk, ears, or extremities may be cold whilst the body is hot, or may be alternately hot and cold, and the skin of the trunk contracted and shrivelled, (c) loss of appetite, (d) dryness of mouth and evident thirst, (e) constipation, (f) scanty and deep coloured muddy urine, (g) unusual redness of the membranes of the mouth and palate, (h) watery and reddened eyes, (i) acceleration of the pulse, which normally beats from 46 to 50 per minute, (k) change of colour of skin which becomes lighter, and any white spots about trunk, becoming paler. Treatment.GENERAL INDICATIONS OF ILL-HEALTH. 83 (3) Pain.84 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. lacking in quality or quantity; the organs and vital processes from poverty of nutriment are unable to perform their functions as satisfac- torily as in health. Debility is directly therefore the outcome of depravity of the blood, and is shown in very many ways. Symptoms.GENERAL INDICATIONS OF ILL-HEALTH. 85 not a pronouced symptom). The boils may or may not burst. Bur- mans anxiously watch for the boils to come to a head and burst, if they disappear without bursting they give the animal up. Debility as seen in its most aggravated form exhibits a train of symptoms almost exactly coinciding with those recorded by many authors under the name of zahirbad. Whether this is a specific disease or not, as some would have us believe, is a matter of doubt, but the very symptoms noted to characterize that disease are met with in cases of debility, pure and simple. In many ailments of the elephant there is a marked tendency to glandular enlargements, swellings, and in my experience I have come into contact with cases of debility, pure and simple, which have advanced so rapidly that it has led me to think, as it may have done others, that there was some specific cause, but have failed to discover it, such as " surra " and kindred diseases. When a num- ber are attacked simultaneously, such suspicions are no doubt justi- fied, but at the same time it must not be lost sight of that the de- fective conditions in general management, feeding, shelter, may have been shared by all and therefore all may suffer alike. Owners might help in clearing up much of the present obscurity by sending me or other persons with some knowledge of bacteri- ology, specimens of the blood in fatal cases, the instructions con- cerning which have been fully laid down under 'Diagnosis' in the Chapter on Anthrax, page 89. Preventive treatment.86 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. pendix 11 to 15, and stimulants such as rum or whisky in six-ounce doses twice or thrice daily should be given. During convalescence a course of tonics is indicated, especially the preparations of arsenic, iron, or copper, mixed with vegetable bitters or aromatics, see Appendix Nos. 39 to 46. Also dilute nitric acid in doses of one to three drachms in a bucket of water, or dilute sulpruric acid in simi- lar doses once daily, or iodide of iron in two drachm doses once a day. If worms are the cause, for treatment see Appendix Nos. 47 to 53. (b) Local.CHAPTER V. ANTHRAX FEVER, OR CHARBON-AVOIDANCE88 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. (c) Respiration.ANTHRAX FEVER OR CHARBON. 89 and snake-bite. During the rains, when anthrax is prevalent, occa- sionally more or less sudden deaths are recorded in which the mouth, tongue, and throat have been observed to be in a diseased state, which symptoms have been attributed by Burmans to a black hairy caterpillar which is common at this season of the year in cer- tain localities where they often do immense damage to teak and other trees. Burmans state that if an elephant takes up one of these creatures with its food death will result. In the same way similar cases in horned cattle have been ascribed to this caterpillar, but these cases are often cases of anthrax. I have handled the caterpillar and have not suffered except some slight irritation. Prognosis.90 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. other and allowed to dry under a watch or wine glass to exclude dust, or the layer may be fixed by taking the cover glass, coated surface uppermost, between the finger and thumb, and passing it rapidly two or three times over the flame of a spirit lamp. When dry, they should be carefully packed in cotton wool with slips of paper intervening and placed in a small wooden box, and for extra protection this box should be again packed inside a tin one to en- sure safety. About half a dozen specimens should be sent. All cover slips must be boiled and cleaned and kept in some disinfect- ing fluidANTHRAX FEVER OR CHARBON. 91 body were cold, and he was very dull. His mahout took him into the jungle, and during the night he was observed to fall once and lie down several times; in the morning he was standing alongside a clump of bamboo looking very sick; his mucous membranes were yellow, trunk swollen, and he was unable to move; he dropped and died. This was on the 6th May. Cause of death supposed to be sunstroke, but proved to be anthrax. The remaining elephants were thrown out of work rested for a few days and were then moved to another creek. Case No. 4.92 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. behind the jaws and also on the belly, and the trunk appeared swollen, especially in its upper portion; on trying to take the animal to water he seemed very weak. He was left under a bamboo clump. In the evening he was worse, was very dull, the trunk flaccid, breathing very audible. Next morning he seemed no worse, refused food, and, though he took water in his trunk, appeared to have some difficulty in swallowing. He died about 3 P.M. Case No. 10.AVOIDANCE. 93 P.S.94 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. be no fast running stream in the vicinity, it will be necessary to procure water from deep wells. On no account should animals be permitted to wander into cattle grazing-grounds, stagnant pools, or swamps. When a case has been discovered or is suspected, the affected animal, with its attendants, must be segregated forthwith at a dis- tance (a quarter mile) from water-supply and public roads. The healthy animals should, if numerous, be divided into batches two or three in each and sent off without delay to the highest ground near at hand. To facilitate inspection these elephants should be picketted only a few hundred yards apart. Inspection should be carried out at least once daily and the temperature of each animal taken. Any animal showing a rise must be promptly removed and treated as already laid down, which treatment has proved successful on more than one occasion in my experience when the outbreak was checked forthwith. Attendants on suspicious or diseased animals must not on any pretence approach or attend to the wants of healthy animals. All refuse, dung, &c., should be mixed with some strong disinfec- tant, removed without delay and destroyed by fire, or buried in a deep pit. Any gear, ropes, that may have become soiled should be burned, and any ironwork, chains, passed through a fire. The standings are to be kept clean and frequently sprinkled with some disinfectant, and if the animal be removed to another place a deep layer of straw may be spread over the old standing and then fired. Drinking utensils should not be used for other animals unless passed through a fire or thoroughly washed with boiling water. If elephants can be spared, it is a good plan to send them to the hills from 15th of April to the end of June, or for a longer period when convenient. Should a case of anthrax occur in a shed, if inexpensive, it should be burned. If costly, the walls must be thoroughly washed with boiling water mixed with very strong carbolic acid or phenyle. As the floor becomes soiled with the discharges, it is necessary to remove the earth to the extent of 2 feet at least, throw in new earth and disinfect the whole standing. The shed should not be occupied for some little time. All posts and other wood should be washed with strong carbolic and later on dressed with tar. Strange elephants and those that are newly purchased should always be kept separate from the others for a few days. Disposal of carcasses. It sometimes happens that an elephant dies at a place where the removal of the carcass for burial is a necessary measure. As a rule a couple of elephants are put on to drag it away. In such cases
VACCINATION. 95 all ropes, &c., employed should be burned and chains treated as already noted. The carcass too, should have the mouth, trunk, and anus plugged with tow or old cloth to prevent, as far as possible, any soiling of the ground over which it is dragged. Whenever pos- sible it is a good plan to dig a deep pit alongside the body; when completed the carcass should be tumbled in. There should be at least 4 feet of earth over the body. Anthrax graves should be fenced in with rough logs, or marked in some special way in order to prevent animals grazing over them, or grass-cutters cutting grass in their vicinity. And here I may add a caution: Burmans, as is well known, are partial to elephant flesh ; it is therefore necessary to warn them of the extreme danger of eating anthrax-infected flesh. Vaccination. I have been questioned so frequently with regard to vaccination that I have mentioned the subject in detail more for information than with any intention of recommending it. By the practice of protective vaccination the heavy mortality has in certain countries, France, &c., been reduced to less than i per cent. Two inocula- tions are necessary. The first is a weak vaccine. This is followed in from 12 to 15 days by a second, which is stronger. The second vaccine matter must never be used before the first, for the second might kill unless the animal had been protected by the first. The vaccinal liquid is sent out in glass tubes, sealed by rubber stoppers, and bear labels "First vaccine matter" or "Premier vaccin charbonneux," usually a red label, and "Second vaccine matter," or "Deuxième vaccin charbonneux," white label. A note is printed on the second vaccine label to the effect that it should be employed 12 days after the first. The vaccine is introduced under the skin by means of a Pravaz or other special hypodermic syringe ; behind the ear is about the best place to inoculate an elephant. The elephant having been made to assume the recumbent posture, the hands of the operator must first be thoroughly washed with soap and warm water, and then disinfected, as also the site selected for inoculation, this completed, a portion of the skin is to be taken up between the thumb and forefinger of the left hand, the needle carefully introduced beneath the skin and the contents of syringe injected without force. The metallic wire is removed from the needle and the latter adjusted on the syringe, or the needle may be introduced first and syringe adjusted after. After the con- tents of the tube have been well shaken the stopper is removed
96 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. and the required amount withdrawn. Care must be taken to see that the syringe is working properly. Air bubbles may be removed by holding the syringe upright and gently pressing the piston till a drop issues from the needle. The second inoculation should be made on the opposite side. It is a matter of vital import- ance that the vaccine be introduced in a pure state; for this reason, if a tube be opened, the contents must be used forthwith. If the whole contents cannot be employed at once, the portion remaining must be dispensed with. It is of equal importance that the syringe be absolutely clean. New syringes are generally safe enough, but one that has been used must be cleaned immediately after the inoculations are performed. In order to effect this, the syringe is taken to pieces, placed in water, and boiled in it for 5 or 10 minutes. Immediately before use it is as well to draw up some absolute alcohol, this will render syringe and needle sterile. Cheap and easily sterilized syringes are procurable from most instrument makers. If the vaccine be not pure, or the syringe not clean, foreign organisms may be introduced, which may render vaccination ineffec- tive, or, what is still more serious, may give rise to virulent blood- poisoning. Every care must be taken to see that the first vaccine is properly introduced under the skin; for, if this operation be performed hurriedly 6r carelessly, no protection will be afforded and death may result after the introduction of second vaccine. There is no denying that vaccination is attended with certain risks, owing to defects in the operation, quality of the vaccine employed, and susceptibility of individuals. In sheep and cattle vaccination has in some cases resulted in death; in others serious illness, swellings, have followed the operation. On the Continent the accidents vaccination gives rise to are said not to be so frequent as to cause much alarm. Generally speaking the animals inoculated become sufficiently protected to resist natural and even experimental infection. It is stated that vaccine sent to a long distance is not easy to preserve, and in order to obtain really good results it must be used as soon as possible after preparation. Firms having an interest in, or owning a large number of elephants, and desirous of trying experiments should make some arrangement by which they could on despatch of telegraphic order be supplied with fresh vaccine, syringes, &c. All information and appliances can be obtained from the Director of "The Sociètè du vaccin Charbonneux Pasteur," 14, Rue des Pyramides, Paris. Arrangements can be made for each tube to contain sufficient vac- cine for one elephant. The price of a dose of first and second vaccine is, I believe, 4d. to 6d.
VACCINATION. 97 With reference to vaccination in sheep and cattle, Koch has noted the following points :98 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Curative treatment.POST-MORTEM EXAMINATION100 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. lungs, brain, may be found engorged with blood, and their substance softened, and the spleen especially is often found enormously en- larged. In one case it weighed 62½ lbs. The cavities, that is, the abdomen, chest, heart-bag, and cranial, may contain blood-stained fluid, and the lining membranes have scattered over them purplish blood spots or blotches. The bowels may be thickened, their con- tents bloody, and the lining membrane scattered over with purplish blood spots or patches. The tumours above referred to consist of a yellowish greengage jelly-like material, which may have a dark centre and may be found in other parts, notably in the mesentery, or membrane connecting the bowels to the spine, around the kidneys, furrows of the heart, about the throat and other places, and when present may be taken as very indicative of anthrax. The following cases are recorded by Frost:APPEARANCES OF CARCASS. 101 " On the under surface of the stomach, close to the pyloric orifice, I found a patch of the size of a dinner plate consisting of the same kind of deposit as I noticed in the tumour. In the tissue under the loins I also found the same thing to exist. Above the penis another large tumour was found. " Intestines and kidneys healthy. There was a slight deposit in the substance of a lung which, to a certain extent, blocked up the bronchial tubes. A large quantity of- frothy mucus was found in the windpipe and large bronchi, yet there was no symptom of breathlessness noticed before death. ' On laying open the pericardium (bag of the heart) my attention was arrested by the large quantity of fluid which was contained in the sac. From a careful but rough calculation, I came to the conclu- sion that it contained from 35 to 40 ounces of serum, possessing more the colour of venous blood slightly diluted with water than true serum. The external surface of the heart presented a pecu- liar appearance. Intensely dark blood spots studded its surface- some of the size of a rupee, others the size of an eight-anna piece, and others still smaller; these were particularly numerous on the right auricle. " The horizontal and vertical grooves of the heart were filled with peculiar jelly-like deposit. Large clots in right heart and pulmo- nary artery and none in left. Although it is a remarkable fact that in anthrax the blood is generally found in a fluid state, I did not find this to be the case in the present instance. There was no un- pleasant odour from the body, although the post mortem did not take place until 15 hours after death." These are the leading post mortem appearances noticed by me. Post mortem No. 2 on an elephant that died at 10 A.M., 29th of June 1878, after two days' illness. Body examined seven hours after death ; in good condition. On each side of the penis, about the region of the scrotum in other animals, I found two large tu- mours of the true anthrax character. Further, with the exception of the intestinal mucous membrane I did not notice anything pecu- liar. The mucous membrane of the intestines was highly congest- ed. The blood in the vessels was fluid. Spleen weighed 24 lbs., liver 61½. I saw this animal at 9-30 A.M. (while still alive) and examined the tumours. They were cold as ice, and on cutting into them no pain was exhibited by the animal, nor did any discharge take place subsequent to the incision being made. Once I saw the nature of the effusion, I had no doubt of the result, which was death soon after.
102 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Elephant-pox. This is a specific fever characterized by eruptions somewhat similar to small-pox in man, but there is no evidence to prove that it is communicated from man or vice versâ. These eruptions begin as pimples, then become blebs or blisters, with clear fluid contents. Later the contents consist of matter. Finally they burst, leaving sores which tend to scab. Prognosis.SURRA. 103 Sources of infection.104 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. twenty-one days, death occurs sometimes after the first paroxysm, but it may be delayed until the seventh or even later. Diagnosis.FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE. 105 jelly-like material about the base, and beneath the lining membrane blotches and dark coloured spots may be seen. They are also to be seen beneath the internal lining membrane of the heart. Note.106 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Symptoms.BLOOD POISONING. 107 ing any dirt. The parts should then be dressed with camphorated oil No. 122, carbolic oil No. 121, or ointment of eucalyptus No. 128, covered with tow, and a piece of clean cloth tied round the foot, which should then be enveloped in a clean gunny-bag which has previously been dipped in some disinfecting solution and the same precautions observed with regard to soiled dressings as laid down in anthrax. In severe cases a leather boot must be applied. Every care must be taken to see that the affected parts are protected from flies and dirt. No specific remedy is known. Blood-poisoning. (1) Septic108 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. In septic poisoning no further symptoms are observed, but in septic infection there may be swelling of joints and collections of fluid in the body cavities (chest, belly), and in pyTETANUS OR LOCK-JAW. 109 " died fifteen days after the one above alluded to, with the same " symptoms, but it was not clearly known whether the animal had " been bitten by the dog, though it was one of those it attempted to " bite. The above cases occurred about the month of October. A " man and bullock had been bitten by the same dog, and both died " mad." An account of a case is also contributed to the Oriental Sporting Magazine, by Captain F. H. Hood, B.S.C., Volume III. Treatment.110 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. cauterization with pure carbolic acid, and careful dressing. Search should be made for thorns, splinters, and, if found, removed, and wounds treated as above. (b) General.RHEUMATISM. 111 march, by being taken into cold water for bathing, or being al- lowed to stand without protection, insufficient shelter, removing gud- dela, &c., before the body has had time to cool, working in and out of streams for hours together. It is naturally more prevalent at high elevations and during the rainy season. By exposure I wish to imply that elephants for want of a little forethought are subjected to constant conditions without any reference to changes of weather and temperature ; for instance, when it is raining with a very cold wind blowing it may be difficult to protect him from rain, but re- moval to a distance of 50 yards might give ample shelter from the wind, yet no one thinks of it. The animal remains tethered and even after the storm cannot free himself to revive his vitality and warmth. Prognosis.CHAPTER VI. THE HEART-PULSE-BLOOD-LETTING OR BLEEDING. Heart. THE heart is a hollow muscular organ consisting of four chambers, situated within the chest and enclosed within a bag (the pericar- dium). The two upper chambers are called auricles, the lower two, ven- tricles. The circulation of the blood is carried on by means of the heart, arteries, capillaries, and veins. (a) The heart beats from 46 to 50 times a minute. (b) The arteries are the channels which convey blood from the heart, distributing it over the system. If an artery be pressed by the finger, an impulse or shock is felt, known as the pulse. (c) Capillaries are the very minute channels which allow certain portions of the blood to pass through their walls into the surround- ing tissues for their nourishment. (d) Veins are the channels which carry blood back to the heart. The veins unite and reunite, finally carrying the venous blood to the right auricle, from which it passes into the right ventricle, and from thence through the artery of the lungs (pulmonary, the open- ing of which is in the ventricle) to those organs, where after oxyge- nation it is carried to the left auricle, then to the left ventricle into the aorta, a large artery which distributes the purified blood over the body. The orifices between the auricles and ventricles are guarded by valves, as also is the entrance to the pulmonary artery and aorta. What happens is roughly as follows : The blood pours into the right and left auricles, which when full contract, thus driving the blood into the ventricles, which on filling the valves shut off their com- munication with the auricles ; the ventricles now contract driving the blood on the right side through the pulmonary artery to the lungs for purification, and through the aorta on the left side for distribution of the blood over the system ; the valves close when the vessels are filled, preventing a reflux into the ventricles.
PULSE. 113 Pulse. " The impulse or shock caused by the overfilling of the aorta during the ventricular systole (contraction of ventricles) is the cause of the pulse"114 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Other conditions have been mentioned post mortem, namely, atrophy (wasting of the substance) of the heart, hypertrophy or enlarged heart, and rupture from extreme and sudden exertion. Blood-letting. This consists in the abstraction of blood from the system locally or generally. I cannot recommend it in elephants. The objects areCHAPTER VII. THE NERVOUS SYSTEM-INFLAMMATION OF THE LINING MEMBRANE OF THE CAVITIES IN THE BONES OF THE SKULL-CONGESTION OF THE BRAIN AND ITS MEMBRANES- APOPLEXY OF THE BRAIN-PARAPLEGIA-REFLEX PARALYSIS116 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. stimulating mussauls to elephants who work much in the sun, and to sudden cooling of the body by taking a heated animal into water. Symptoms.PARAPLEGIA118 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Paralysis of the trunk. Loss of power in this important organ must necessarily lead to starvation, unless special means are taken to ensure the affected animal being hand-fed, and also that he be taken to water deep enough to enable him to drink with his mouth. Causes.HEAT APOPLEXY, OR HEAT STROKE. 119 animal is fatigued, slows down in his pace ; the breathing is hurried, and the ears droop ; the trunk is lax, and not swung about freely ; if these symptoms escape notice, the prostration increases until the animal more or less suddenly falls down in a faint. The temperature may be subnormal. These cases are met with most frequently when the atmosphere is moist, oppressive, and still. Treatment.120 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. of 10 and half past 3. If work has to be performed during these hours, the head should be protected by a quilted cotton pad. Frequent rests are desirable and the animals permitted to take water in small quantities occasionally. It may even be advisable, on a long march, to halt the animals half way, and relieve them of their loads, allowing a rest for three-quarters of an hour. Before being sent on the march, or put to work, it is a good plan to have every animal carefully inspected ; any showing symptoms of fatigue, or ill health, should on no account be sent out. On the march some person ought to be held responsible to look after the elephants while travelling; should any show signs of distress, evidenced by slowing down, staggering in their gait, or trembling, they should be halted (in the shade, if possible) without delay, the load and gear quickly removed, and cold water dashed over the head and spine ; even if relieved by these means, they should not be permitted to proceed on the journey till the evening or early next morning. Remember that one attack predisposes the animal to another; therefore every care ought to be taken to avoid causes calculated to induce a recurrence. Curative.CHAPTER VIII. THE RESPIRATORY ORGANS122 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. trunk and watering from the eyes, the eyelids often swollen and half closed. The causes which produced the condition in this tract often affects other parts ; hence diarrhBRONCHITIS. 123 Prognosis.CHAPTER IX. THE URINARY SYSTEM-NEPHRITIS OR INFLAMMATION OF THE KIDNEYS-CYSTITIS OR IN- FLAMMATION OF THE BLADDER-RETENTION OF URINE-HÆMATURIA OR BLOODY URINE- DIABETES. The Urinary System. THIS consists ofCYSTITIS126 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. paralysis of the muscles ; to debility of the walls ; and to the presence of growths interfering with the action of the muscle. Obstruction may also be a cause, such as from the presence of a stone, tumours pressing on the bladder and blocking the passage. It also appears as a common complication in paraplegia, excessive accumulation of fDIABETES. 127 moderate in amount. In order to control the bleeding if very exces- sive, good results may be expected by the exhibition of such drugs as gallic acid, acetate of lead, alum, and some preparations of iron. Acetate of lead ... ... 1 drachm Gallnuts (powdered) ... ... 2 drachms Jaggery ... ... ... Sufficient twice or thrice daily, orCHAPTER X. THE ALIMENTARY TRACT-DIARRHDIARRH130 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. order that they may be retained (a few quarts), and the most bene- ficiale are 2 or 23 ounces of tincture of opium added to three or four quarts of thin starch gruel. General.SUPER-PURGATION 131 Symptoms.132 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Also see Appendix Nos. 1 to 10 and 82 to 84. Constipation. Like diarrhoea this is to be regarded as a symptom rather than as a disease. It is applied to a condition of the bowels in which the dung is unduly hard, and not, as is often supposed, total inaction of the bowels. Causes.BELLY-PAIN, COLIC, OR GRIPES. 133 mon, as elephants eat large quantities of rank, rapid growing fodder, which at that period is unwholesome, as it contains very little nourishment and has a tendency to ferment. Dirty and unwhole- some grain or fodder causing indigestion, may induce colic. Drink- ing a large quantity of cold water when the body is heated, and permitting an animal to drink too freely when fatigued by a long journey also act as causes. Tethered animals exposed to cold and wet may be attacked. Symptoms.134 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Flatulent colic. Symptoms.CHRONIC INDIGESTION. 135 Chronic Indigestion. Causes.136 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. No. 3. Fenugreek ... ... ... ... 12 ounces. Aniseed ... ... ... ... 6 ounces. Carbonate of iron ... ... ... 2 ounces. Black pepper ... ... ... ... 4 ounces. Ginger ... ... ... ... 4 ounces. To be reduced to powder and well mixed. Two ounces for a dose, once or twice daily (also see Appendix 11 to 14). Above all, strict attention to diet, which should be good, clean, and nutritious ; grain should be withheld for a time. Work should be stopped and, when possible, the animal given a change to some graz- ing. Stomatitis, or Inflammation of the Mouth. Causes.DISORDERS AND IRREGULARITIES OF THE TEETH. 137 Treatment.138 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. If a tusk shows any tendency to split, it should be capped with brass or iron, or an iron band applied; it should be put on hot and shrunk on as a tyre is applied, but of course the temperature should be much lower in the former case; or fitted with a ring, which is forcibly driven on to the tusk till it maintains a secure hold. This is the better method. Tusks that have been shortened often show a tendency to split. In the female and so-called tuskless males, the tusks are liable to be broken off, or to become diseased. Should there be a cavity, it must be cleaned and washed out with permanganate of potash 2 or 3 grains to the pint, and then dried, after which it should be plugged with a single piece of tow or cot- ton wool, medicated with a few drops of carbolic acid, creosote, or oil of cloves. If it should happen that too much of the tusk has been cut off and the pulp exposed, the following treatment should be adopted. The bleeding is not, as a rule, very excessive ; the injured part must be washed or syringed out with a warm, weak solution of perman- ganate of potash 2 or 3 grains to the pint, or carbolic lotion 1 to 60, or thymol 10 grains to the pint of hot water, after which the part may be dressed with carbolic oil, idoform ointment, camphorated oil, &c. (Appendix Nos. 121, 122, 128, 129), and then carefully bandaged. Hawkes employed an ointment, which I can strongly recommend ; it is as followsDYSENTERY. 139 be not infrequent in the hot season if elephants are fed largely on the leaves and branches of the peepul, nyaung-bin (Ficus religiosa). Symptoms.140 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Epidemic dysentery, or murrain. Such a condition has been described, which does not differ in symptoms or treatment from the above, but as it attacks several animals simultaneously it must be regarded as infectious or con- tagious, and beasts so affected must be isolated with the same pre- cautions as laid down under anthrax. The mortality mentioned is 80 per cent. I have never seen this condition in elephants, but I have seen a similar condition among buffaloes in this province at the end of the hot season, when after the first few showers the young grass crops up rapidly. It may be due to the entrance of a micro-organism. The disease was as fatal as severe cattle plague. Intestinal obstruction, or stoppage of the bowels. Causes.PERITONITIS142 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. in swallowing; plenty of well-boiled rice and gruel may be given after the acute symptoms have subsided. To try and allay the vomiting, the following may prove benefi- cial :POISONING. 143 The poisons we might have to deal with are those employed in treatment, such as arsenic, opium, belladonna, croton beans, or croton oil, ganja, dhatura, nux-vomica, metallic salts. For the treatment of poisons antidotes are administered; they act in two ways, either by preventing the action of the poison or counteracting its effect. Poisons and their antidotes. Poisons. Antidotes. 1. Arsenic ... ... Preparations of magnesia. 2. Aconite ... ... Tannic acid, and animal charcoal. 3. Opium ... ... Dashing cold water over the body, stimu- lants ; endeavour to keep the animal moving about. Permanganate of po- tash. 4. Belladonna ... ... Keep the animal moving about; give lime-water and stimulants; dash cold water over the body. 5. Croton beans, or oil ... ... Demulcent drinks; stimulants, and opium to relieve pain and check the purging. 6. Ganja ... ... Stimulants; keep the animal moving about. 7. Nux-vomica, or strychnia... Bromide of potassium ; weak decoction of tobacco. 8. Tobacco ... ... Warm stimulants, tannic acid, and small doses of strychnia. 9. Metallic salts ... ... Steel states that "the formation of tu- mours over the body, progressive anæ- mia, and even disorders of the feet have been attributed to the empirical use of the compounds of mercury in too large quantities." Plenty of white of eggs, wheaten flour conjee, and other demulcent drinks. 10. Acids ... ... Alkalies such as carbonate or bicarbo- nate of soda or potash. 11. Carbolic acid ... ... White of eggs, demulcent drinks, stimu- lants. The dose of poison is usually so large that treatment is of little avail. Antidotes are not always procurable in time to be of service; again the elephant is often an awkward animal to give drugs to, and such things as inhalation of ammonia are impossible. If a death occurs under suspicious circumstances, a post mortem should be held, notes taken, and some of the contents of the sto- mach and commencement of the small intestine, small piece of liver and kidney should be placed in clean jars, with some spirit, sealed with a private seal by some responsible person, and de- spatched without delay to the Chemical Examiner, who will readily aid and give his opinion on the case.
CHAPTER XI. INTERNAL PARASITES-SYMPTOMS OF THE PRESENCE OF PARASITES. Internal parasites. PARASITES IN THE ALIMENTARY CANAL. THIS is a subject of the greatest importance, and is deserving of the careful and earnest attention of all those persons who may be placed in charge of these valuable animals. Though Gilchrist, in his work on elephants, published in 1841, and others since then have mentioned the subject, we owe the greater part of the know- ledge we now possess to the late Dr. Cobbold, the eminent Helmin- thologist, and Colonel Hawkes, late of the Commissariat Depart- ment. It may be accepted as a fact that elephants in Burma are much troubled with parasites. It is exceptional not to find them in the intestines, or livers of tame, and even wild elephants after death. Elephants in India seem also to be much troubled with them. Forsyth writes : "Elephants are very liable to intestinal worms. They generally cure themselves, when they get very troublesome, by swallowing from 10 to 20 pounds of earth. They always select a red-coloured earth for the purpose. In about twelve hours purging commences, and all the worms come away." Cobbold, writing on the important part played by internal para- sites in the production of endemics and epizooty, remarks: "De- pend upon it, many a death, hitherto reported as resulting from in- flammation of the intestines, colic, splenic apoplexy, sunstroke, or to some other obscure cause has been primarily due to entozoa, the presence of which may not even have been suspected during life." The parasites most likely to be met with areINTERNAL PARASITES. 145 means of cephalic or head hooks, which they insert into the mucous membrane. After attaining a certain growth they voluntarily re- lease their hold and are carried down the intestinal canal, until they eventually escape with the dung. In appearance "bots" when fresh resemble whitish red grubs, about an inch in length ; the body is divided into eleven segments, and the hooks by which they adhere are often visible without the aid of a lens. During the passage down the intestinal canal they may re-attach themselves. I met with one fine example of this, where not less than eighty "bots" were attached to the mucous membrane of the upper part of the gut. On escaping from the bowels, they bury themselves in the ground, where they change into the pupal condition, and in due course they emerge from their cocoons as full blown dipterous insects (gad-flies). There is little doubt that "bots" when present in large numbers must cause trouble; but unless passed per anum it is impossible to diag- nose their presence. Steel records that a " bot " (Pharyngabolus Africanus) has been found in the pharynx of the African species. I have not heard of it in this country. (2) Ascaris lonchoptera.146 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. ber of the parasites may be expelled. It is a matter of common remark amongst mahouts that, when elephants are troubled with parasites, they resort to eating earth for the purpose of inducing purgation, in order to rid themselves of these unwelcome guests. The eating of earth may go on for a couple of days, the amount eaten being from 2 to 4 pounds at a time, until free purgation is pro- duced, after which no more earth is eaten. Steel, however, proved that this eating of earth is not the whole and sole cause of purga- tion. This habit of eating earth does not always denote the presence of parasites. It frequently points to the fact that an animal is not receiving salt, or, if a ration of salt is allowed, that it is insufficient. Wild animals, that is, deer, bison, sine, and elephants make frequent and regular visits to "licks" and eat quantities of earth, and, though in the jungles one frequently sees the droppings of wild animals, it is not often that one finds parasites. This parasitical diarrhoea often proves fatal, especially in young animals and in adults when in a low state of health. (4) Fasciola Jacksoni (liver flukes).INTERNAL PARASITES. 147 which occurred in 1867 amongst the Commissariat elephants station- ed at Rangoon is given in a letter to the Rangoon Times, dated the 16th July 1867, and signed R. B. It appears that in the short space of 15 days seven elephants died, and it was noticed that the mortality commenced as the severity of the south-west monsoon increased. The outbreak was such a remarkable one that I give some extracts from the letter148 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. stated to be in echinococcus or larva of tINTERNAL PARASITES. 149 small book by J.B. Simonds on "The Rot in Sheep," also Cobbold's works on parasites. It will be sufficient to state here that the pro- gressive changes and transformation through which this parasite passes from the egg to the mature fluke take place outside the body of the creature they ultimately inhabit. They enter the body in their penultimate form and are parasitic only in their mature state. They do not multiply in the body. It is a well established fact that the "fluke" disease or "rot" is essentially a disease of lowlying, inundated tracts, and wet seasons. There is little doubt that many of the cases, called "thut" by the Burmans and Zahirbad by the Indians, are true "rot." As is the case in most ailments due to parasites, the early symp- toms of "rot" are ill defined, and may not even lead to a suspicion of the cause. In these diseases the symptoms depend on the number of para- sites and inconvenience caused by their presence, and also to the importance in the animal economy of the particular organ invaded. A few flukes in the bile ducts may give rise to but slight irrita- tion and impairment of function; whereas, when they invade the ducts in large numbers, the pressure and persistent irritation caused may lead to such rapid and extensive structural alterations as to speedily cause death. Under certain conditions the progress of "rot" may be very rapid, such as in animals that are hard worked, ill fed, exposed to all weather ; also in cases where animals already in a debilitated state are attacked. Young animals are sometimes invaded by such large numbers of flukes that they impair the func- tion of the liver to such an extent as to rapidly destroy life. As a general rule the progress of "rot" is slow; one constant symptom is progressive wasting away, due to anaemia. This is not surprising when we know that an organ of such importance as the liver is the seat of disease. The secretion of the liver, namely, the bile, has a most important office to perform. When the ducts are crowded by these creatures, the pressure, irritation, &c, must lead to impaired secretion and consequent alteration in the quality and quantity of the bile. The gland gradually ceases to perform its office in an efficient manner, thus the blood becomes affected and impure in quality. The flukes as they become mature travel up from the main channel into its numerous ramifications in the liver, for the purpose of depositing their eggs. The result of this persis- tent irritation is increased vascular action, which leads to the coats of the ducts being considerably thickened and their calibre decreas- ed. (5) Dochmius sangeri.150 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Symptoms of the presence of parasites. (1) The Gastrophilus elephantis.CHAPTER XII. THE LIVER-JAUNDICE-HEPATITIS, OR INFLAMMATION OF THE LIVER-HYDATIDS. The liver. THE liver is the largest gland and one of the most important of the digestive organs. Its chief function is that of secreting bile which finds its way through ducts into the intestine and assists in the di- gestive process. There is no gall bladder and the organ weighs 50 to 55 pounds. Bile is a natural laxative, prevents putrefaction in the intestine, and is the colouring agent of the dung. An over secretion of bile tends therefore to create diarrhoea with deep coloured motions. Insufficient secretion on the other hand may produce light coloured and foul smelling dung, with constipation. Characters of the dung therefore give much information regarding the liver. Jaundice is a condition manifested by yellowness of the mem- branes, deep coloured greenish urine, and often light coloured dung, and is due to an absorption of bile into the blood. It is an indica- tion of liver disease, but is rarely seen in elephants. Treatment.152 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Chloride of ammonia is most useful in doses from ½ to 1 ounce twice a day, or bicarbonate of soda in ½ ounce doses, or Epsom salts in 6-ounce doses twice a day. Pain should be combated as laid down under that heading. Cause of chronic hepatitis.HYDATIDS. 153 with the adult tape-worm, a constriction separating it from the body, and a pedicle or foot which is attached at some stage to the wall of the cyst, but which frequently gives way setting the "scolex" free. The scolex cannot further develop in the elephant. The hyda- tid cyst thus affords a haven for the propagation of the species which can only develop to the stage of "scolices." In doing this it increases in size often to an enormous degree. In order to com- plete the cycle of the creature's existence the "scolices" must find their way into the stomach of a dog or kindred animal, which it usually does by this animal eating the organs or flesh of a creature infested with hydatids, the sheep perhaps being the most frequent source. The scolex having reached the canine stomach becomes endow- ed with renewed vitality and develops into a mature tape-worm. The mature worm consists of a head furnished with four suckers and two rows of hooklets, and three body segments, the last of which is provided with reproductory organs. This worm is commonly seen voided with the excreta of dogs and measures about ¾ inch in length. The adult worm produces numerous eggs, which are also voided with the dog's excreta. It will be seen from the above that, if the ova of the tape-worm gains access to the canine stomach, no tape-worm can result, since it must of a necessity pass through the system of a sheep or kind- red animal and pass through the stage of hydatid cyst. In the same way should a scolex find its way into the stomach of an elephant, no hydatid cyst will result, since the scolex must of necessity pass through the system of a canine animal before again arriving at this stage. Elephants therefore cannot directly communicate the parasite to one another but only indirectly through the media of dogs, wolves, and jackals. The dangers of hydatid cyst areCHAPTER XIII. THE EYE-OPHTHALMIA-INFLAMMATION OF THE CORNEA-ULCERATION OF THE CORNEA-OPACITY OF THE CORNEA-STAPHYLOMATHE EYE. 155 seeing that these men take their animals to good grazing grounds, that they give them their salt, flour, or grain ration, that they are washed and groomed, and not tethered in the sun or overworked, the elephants would keep in better health. In the human subject, the eyes are often affected in general bad health. In fact Nettleship remarks that "Ulcers of the cornea are " so often a sign of bad health that we ought never to neglect such " means as may be called for to improve the general condition." (Diseases of the eye, page 32). There are very many ailments also in which changes of the eye occur as part of a general disease. From what has been said it will be admitted that the treatment of eye diseases should not at any rate be entrusted to mahouts. What I particularly desire to impress on those who have charge of elephants is, the importance of not leaving the treatment of the animals in the hands of the attendants. Remember that affec- tions of the eye often depend on more than local causes; endeavour to ascertain them, and, if found to be not purely local, attention must be paid not only to treating the eyes, but to the general state of the health. So important is this subject, that Macnamara, writing of ulceration of the cornea in the human subject, says : "In " most cases, instances of ulceration (excepting traumatic cases, or " those depending on conjunctivitis), the patient's general health will " be found at fault; in no affection of the eye is it more necessary " to attack the disease by improving the assimilative and nutritive " functions of the body, and as a general rule a tonic and supporting " plan of treatment is demanded. Iron and quinine, good food, clean- " liness, and fresh air are the fundamental requisites for the cure of " almost all instances of ulceration of the cornea, whether they be of " the sthenic or asthenic type. One frequently sees cases of ulcera- " tion of the cornea which resist all treatment, but which rapidly im- " prove if the patient is sent to the sea-side, or, still better, for a " voyage to sea." (Diseases of the eye, page 209.) I have quoted this at length, as it has such a practical bearing with regard to ele- phants, except perhaps the change to the sea-side, or a voyage ; but a change to their jungles, and a free life for a time, will prove as beneficial to them as a change to the sea-side for a human being. Certain precautions are necessary in the treatment of diseases of the eye. Nitrate of silver (lunar caustic), and sulphate of copper (blue-stone) should never be employed in the solid form as irreparable damage may result from the application of such strong caustics. If it is desired to employ them, very weak solutions only should be used. Absolute cleanliness is imperative : attendants dressing eyes with filthy hands and with rags still more filthy should not be tolerated. For the purpose of wiping the eye, there is nothing better than old
156 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. soft linen, or lint, which should be cut into small pieces and used as required. After use, the soiled pieces should be buried or burned, in order that flies should not rest on them and thus, if an affection be contagious, carry it to other animals. In fact it is a sound rule never to use pieces of lint, cloth, or sponges a second time. Natives have no idea of the importance of cleanliness in these diseases, and will wipe the eyes with filthy rags, will even drop them on the ground, and use them immediately after. Elephants are often unusually nervous when their eyes are sore. When it is desired to examine the eyes, the keeper should always be present, the animal's attention diverted as much as possible by feed- ing him with some favourite food. The medicine must be made up and the mahout given careful instructions how to use it 5 a responsi- ble person should be present to see the eye dressed. Elephants with impaired vision or those whose sight is lost should be approached with great caution ; they should be spoken to and given the wind, otherwise if approached quietly and the wind be not in their favour, even a quiet creature might through sudden fear cause serious damage. It is almost useless for a stranger to try and dress an elephant's eyes ; the keeper alone is generally the only person who can do this. Elephants will not as a rule permit much handling of their eyes as on the least interference they bring the nictitating membrane into play. The best thing is to get as good a view as possible without touching. When examining an eye the attention may be attracted by some one on the opposite side. Considerable experience has proved to me that with patience and care excellent results can be obtained by treatment. During the hot season, if elephants are tethered in the glare of the sun, it is a good plan to cover the forehead and eyes with a cloth frequently wetted, or a shade. The eye in health.OPHTHALMIA, OR SORE-EYES,&C. 157 (c)haziness or opalescence of the pupil; (d)opalescence of the cornea ; (e)undue redness seen when the lids are separated; (f) blindness, partial or complete. Ophthalmia, or sore-eyes. Causes.158 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. like ground glass or be quite milky; this cloudiness is due to infiltra- tion and exudation into the substance of the cornea and is not due to the growth of a film over it as is frequently supposed; hence the futility and cruelty of blowing in such materials as powdered glass, lunar caustic, &c., for its removal. Treatment.CATARACT. 159 theless a remediable condition and the eye may regain its usual ap- pearance and function with proper care. Treatment.CHAPTER XIV. THE TEMPORAL GLANDS-CONGESTION OF THE TEMPORAL GLANDS OR "MUSTH"-IN- FLAMMATION OF TEMPORAL GLANDS. The temporal glands. THESE well-known glands called kapool by natives of India are two in number, and are situated one on each side, about midway between the eye and ear-hole. Their ducts open on the skin in this region. The glands are usually inactive. They are analogous to the glands in deer, which open into pits seen under the eyes and to the gland on the back of the head of camels. Congestion of the temporal glands or "musth." Male elephants and very rarely females, on attaining maturity, are subject to peculiar periodical paroxysms of excitement, which seem to have some connection with the sexual functions to which the name "musth" is applied by the natives of India and mon-kya-ihi ( ) by the Burmans. It is probably analogous to the "rut" in deer. Causes.INFLAMMATION OF THE TEMPORAL GLANDS. 161 over the gland, which is then called musth by the natives. When "musth" is established there is often a partial retention of urine, the water dribbling away. As soon, however, as the urine is passed freely the natives consider the dangerous stage over, irrespective of the amount of discharge from the glands. The attack may last a few days, weeks, or months. Treatment.162 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Symptoms.CHAPTER XV. THE SKIN-INFLAMMATION OF THE SKIN-ABRASIONS-WOUNDS-ULCERS AND SPECIAL SORES-CRACKED SOLE-CRACKED HEELS-ULCERATION OF FOREHEAD164 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. (4)Nerves.ABRASIONS, OR GALLS. 165 The irritation which has been sufficient to produce an abrasion is often sufficient to produce engorgement of the deeper lying parts, which will be found swollen, hot, and tender. This condition is seen usually on the back and is the result of a badly adjusted or heavy load. The abraded surface is frequently very much smaller than the underlying swelling of the tissues. If this is not immediately attend- ed to, the animal entirely rested, and the abrasion carefully dressed, there is every likelihood of the swelling increasing and becoming an abscess, or the abraded surface, which really represents superficial destruction of the skin, may die or slough so as to incorporate the whole thickness of the skin (forming the condition familiarly known in horses as "sitfast"), the slough on separating leaving a hole. Treatment: Preventive.166 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. In recently captured elephants, thongs and ropes must be tied if necessary in a new situation or discarded, and extra fetters and tethering chains put on for security. In these cases, owing to the danger of approaching the animal, the sores are neglected and maggots gain access; they must be treated as laid down under wounds. On service it is sometimes necessary to work animals with slight galls. In such cases the injured parts may be relieved by removal of stuffing from the guddee to form a hollow large enough to take in and protect the part from further injury. NOTE.WOUNDS. 167 dangerous owing to the possibility of important or- gans being injured and the difficulty in thoroughly cleansing them. Any poison which may have gained entry lurk in the wound and may set up various serious diseases. (3)Lacerated wounds, in which the tissues are torn; they do not bleed so freely as incised and punctured wounds, for the simple reason that the coats of torn vessels contract more readily than is the case when they are cut clean across. (4)Contused-lacerated, in which, in addition to a wound, there is much bruising of the surrounding parts. Such injuries do not heal very rapidly owing to the mechanical injury the tissues may have suffered, which may be so severe as to lead to their death (Slough). There is a tendency to formation of matter. Exam- pie : After a fight, as the defeated animal retires, he is often followed up by his opponent, who freely butts his hinder part; should he happen to be in possession of blunt, short tusks, a contused-lacerated wound is likely to be the result. (5) Poisoned wounds.168 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. (f) Ligature, tying the vessel. The end of the vessel is seized with forceps and a piece of silk, catgut, or fishing gut (previously disinfected) tied round it and secured. The thread is then cut off, leaving ends from ½ to ¾ of an inch in length. If the vessel be a vein, both ends must be secured. This is the me- thod most certain and can be applied to vessels of any size. Blood from an artery may be recognized by its red colour, rapid flow, and the blood spurting out in jets ; while that from a vein is darker and the flow continuous. In capillary bleeding there is a general oozing over the wounded surface. Capillary bleeding is the least serious. (b) Removal of foreign bodies.WOUNDS. 169 them for plugging wounds of the back. There is only one way of preventing this, namely, to make a point of burning all pieces of cloth, dressings, after use ; and after all, this is not much trouble. (c) Whenever a wound is found gaping, it is, where possible, de- sirable to bring the edges into contact; and the handiest method I can advise and one least calculated to be resented by the patient is to apply strips of the best resin plaster; each strip must be passed sharply backwards and forwards over hot embers to ensure perfect adhesion. Hair should be removed. To apply it cut two strips of plaster about 2 feet in length and of width according to length of wound, say, from 1 inch to 3 inches, shaped as Nos. 1 and 2 ; pass No. 1 through the window C of No. 2 and adjust before sticking down, so that the length of one piece overlies the length of the other. Having done this, stick A end of No. 1 on one side of the wound and the B end of No. 2 on the other, leaving the B end of No. 1 and the A end of No. 2 free. Exert traction on both these free ends, which will approximate the edges of the wound. Having performed this, stick the ends down. In case the above is not clearly expressed, cut strips out of paper and practice the method. This plan answers well in some wounds. Another method may be tried as follows : Suturing or sewing. This is a less easy matter in the case of elephants, owing to the thickness of the hide and the strength of the muscle beneath the skin. It is certainly worth trying in recent incised wounds. Or- dinary stitches do not as a rule hold well. I would therefore re- commend the use of some new suture buttons suggested by Mr. Pugh, and manufactured by Messrs. Arnold and Sons, West Smith- field, London. The button is to be had in various sizes and in two shapes, oval and round. It is made of aluminium and is there- fore light; there is a hole in the centre for passage of the wire, and on each side of the hole is a clip, around which the wire can be twisted in a figure of eight. The advantages claimed are : its simplicity and lightness, it prevents cutting or tearing of the edges of the wound, and lastly it is easily rendered aseptic for future use by boiling. Surgical needles, medium curve, with extra sharp edges are required ; they should also be made in order to carry stout silver or lead wire. A needle holder is also most neces- sary to facilitate-the easy passage of the needle through the thick skin. In stitching elephant wounds, separate stitches are the best. It is better to make the first stitch at the centre of the wound To make a stitch, the needle is passed through the skin on one side of the wound from without inwards ; then through the other 22
170 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS, edge from within outwards; the ends of the wire are to be taken and drawn in gently so as to bring the edges of the wound to- gether ; when this has been effected, the ends of the wire are to be twisted securely. The employment of buttons will be preferable. Stitches should not be too close: a space of at least 1¼ inches to 1½ inches should be allowed. The most dependent part of the wound must be left open in order to permit free escape of all dis- charges. The lips of large gaping wounds must not be forcibly dragged together as the stiches will cause much pain and are almost certain to give way. Again, stitches should not be made too near the edges; they should be placed far enough from them and of sufficient depth to ensure a good hold. (d) Dress the wound.ULCERS OR SORES. 171 In any wound where much pain is evinced the following may be employed to allay this172 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. (3)If the sore has no granulations, but shows a smooth shrunken surface and is pale, and discharges a thin watery fluid, apply the following treatment:ULCERS ON THE ELBOWS174 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. employed. A pad of tow should then be applied, and a gunny-bag to keep the tow in place. The foot should then be enveloped in a leather boot, or a boot with wooden sole and leather upper. If there is any tendency to proud flesh, it should be kept down with blue- stone, or some other caustic. The following dressing may also be tried :ULCERATION OF THE FOREHEAD. 175 Treatment : Preventive.176 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. are difficult to cure. If the ulcers are indolent, they may be touched with a little lunar caustic or blue-stone. If the bone be exposed, the surface should be dressed with dilute nitric acid lotion (dilute nitric acid 2 drachms to 8 ounces of water). Elephants that are much exposed to the sun should be provided with a quilted pad, especially if employed for much pushing work. If a pad is not available, a coating of pipe-clay, chalk, &c., assists in protecting the head from the effects of the sun. The daily appli- cation of oil tends to deepen the colour of the skin and the elephant accordingly feels the heat more; but oil is very useful to the atten- dant, so is indented for. The skin of the forehead of elephants under Indian mahouts is often tender and sore, owing to the brutal manner in which many of these men employ the goad. The best treatment for maltreat- ment and carelessness is to place the attendants on half pay during the period their charge is incapacitated from work. Ulceration of the ear. This may be seen on the edges of the ear, on the flaps, or in the canal which leads internally. Causes.ULCERATION OF THE TAIL178 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. only requires a little practice, but much skill is necessary to detect matter in small quantity or where it is deeply seated. As already observed, if matter be not liberated, it will burrow and increase the extent of the mischief; hence it is essential to evacuate it as soon as possible after it has formed. A swelling that has shown no sign of reducing and is attended by pain, local heat, and tenderness, and especially if there be any fever present, even if fluctuation be not obtained, a knife should be plunged deeply into it, for it is better to do this when no matter exists than to postpone doing it for some time after it may have accumulated; no harm beyond laying the animal up for a few days can arise from the first contingency, but considerable harm in the latter. Mahouts are proverbially dilatory in opening an abscess and prefer to leave it, saying that it is not ripe, or too hard, and are there- fore responsible for the loss of an animal's service for a much longer period than need be. Method of procedure in opening an abscess: first of all wash the part thoroughly with some disinfecting solution (see Appendix 114 to 120), then plunge a knife deeply into the swelling, i.e., stab it, or better still plunge a fine trocar and canula into it, withdrawing the former; if matter now escapes, make a free incision into the swelling in such a situation as to allow the readiest means of drainage, that is, if on the back incise the lowest portion of the swelling, naturally if the upper portion was opened a pocket would be left in which the dis- charges would collect. A free incision right through the length of the swelling is in my experience the shortest procedure in the long run. Mahouts if allowed to carry out their own methods will tinker about the business, fail to give free vent to the discharges, and will lay an animal up indefinitely. If in the region of the spine or bony points, the hands or fingers should after disinfecton be thrust in and the wound explored for dead pieces of bone (see Fig. 33), which may occasionally be found and should be removed, after which the cavity should be cleansed by syringing it out with disinfecting lotions and the wound dressed, and a large piece of lint steeped in some camphorated oil, dikamali ointment or some other preparation which will keep flies away (see Appendix 128, 130, and 137) should be placed between the lips of the wound, to prevent its closing too rapidly. Dressings can be kept in place by using strips of good resin plaster. The cavity will require dressing at least once daily till healed. In neglected cases when the skin has become under- mined, and this may be extensive in every direction, to pro- mote the healing process it is necessary to have recourse to caus- tic solutions. The cavities should be syringed out with tincture of iodine 1 to 2 drachms to the pint, carbolic acid (1 to 20), or sul-
ABSCESS OF THE FOOT. 179 phate of zinc or copper lotion 5 grains to the ounce (also see Appendix 98 to 102), after which as a rule healing commences; if not, the injection must be repeated every second or third day till the wound assumes a healthy aspect. Where pockets exist one or more openings should be made so that the discharges can completely drain away and to keep up the irritation pieces of tape previously disinfected may be passed from the original wound through the new openings and then knotted, or a piece of wood tied at each of the ends to keep them from slipping through; the tapes should be moved up and down once or twice a day and removed as soon as a healthy discharge issues. In old-standing cases a blister or strong liniment applied over the undermined portion but not on the wound itself often promotes healing. All incisions through the skin should, as much as possible, be made in the direction of the natural folds or wrinkles, not across them; otherwise they will gape, and when healed leave ugly scars (see Fig. 32). Abscess of the foot. Causes.180 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. this does not reduce the heat and tenderness in twenty-fours hours or thereabouts, hot fomentations should be substituted and the temperature taken every four hours or so, for, if the inflammation is of a severe character, the thermometer is sure to show a rise, in which case there should be no delay in opening the abscess. In this situation owing to the horny nature of the sole it should be pared over the seat of inflammation till quite thin before using the knife; this procedure should immediately be carried out in the case of punctured wounds in anticipation of future mischief. After this treat the abscess as above described ; should a fistulous opening ap- pear in the parts already mentioned, injection of sulphate of zinc, or copper, 2 to 5 grains to the ounce (see Appendix 98 to 102) should be tried and, if necessary, repeated, and the parts dressed. In all injuries of the feet the foot should be dressed and enveloped in gunny and placed in a leather boot. Abscess (serous). What are known as serous abscesses are occasionally met with, they may contain blood, serum, &c. Causes.DISEASE OF THE NAILS. 181 Causes.182 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. cut; moreover, owing to the effects of the cold, the amount of pain caused during operation is diminished. When nails are overgrown, the offending portion may be removed with a fret saw; but, if the foot has been placed in water for an hour or two, an ordinary strong, sharp knife will be found to answer the purpose. Moisture around and under the nails. Causes.URTICARIA. 183 Symptoms.184 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Treatment.EXTERNAL PARASITES. 185 Steel, page 53, also records that "the tsetze fly in South Africa has proved a serious enemy to the elephant, its poison giving rise to anthracoid symptoms and rapidly fatal results." In Burma in certain tracts, and at certain seasons of the year, flies and other pests are very troublesome to all animals. The elephant fly.186 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. appears doubtful. I allude to Homopus elephantis of Furstenberg, or Symbiotes elephantis of Gerlach. According to Mignin it is Nymphe adventive or hypope of a variety of Tyroglyphus siro. This acarus is abundant in old forage. Another ectozoon is Hcema- tomysus elephantis. It differs from the lice proper in many re- spects, but, according to Piaget, the reproductive organs resemble those of hTENDER FEET OR "THULLEE." 187 or at least be saturated with carbolized boiling water. This should be repeated daily for two or three days. Poultry, which are proverbially full of vermin, should not be al- lowed in elephant sheds. Ticks.188 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Treatment.INFLAMMATION OF THE FEET OR LAMINITIS. 189 Local.CHAPTER XVI. MISCELLANEOUS-SPRAINS-FRACTURE-" GUNRUSS " AND " CHOWRUNG "-CRAMPFRACTURE192 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Gilchrist and Hawkes state that the condition known as gunruss supervenes in some animals that have been allowed to take their rice during the time they were eating earth. It is manifested by stiffness and a turning outwards of the feet, but, except in severe cases, loco- motion or efficiency of the affected animal is not impaired. "Chowrung."CHAPTER XVII. WEIGHTS AND MEASURES-PREPARATION OF MEDICINES AND MODE OF ADMINIS- TRATION-INSTRUMENTS. Weights and measures. Weights. One grain, gr. One ounce, oz. = 437194 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. These men employ a multiplicity of drugs to make up their formu- læ or mussauls; they are purchased in the bazaar, and I have fre- quently seen them ; excepting the curry-stuffs, the vegetable drugs are usually old, mildewed, and inert, and the minerals impure. The expense incurred by the purchase of reliable drugs from a chemist, where purity, freshness, and uniformity in strength are guar- anteed, would at the end of a year be far less than the cost of the ordinary expensive mussauls so frequently indented for. A good many of the curry-stuffs supposed to enter into them often find their way to the mahouts' quarters. I have come to the conclusion that domestic elephants must carry a special heat generating apparatus in their interiors, as gurmi or heat seems to be the most prevalent ailment amongst them, and the amount of cooling mussauls required is truly surprising. No drug is known to have an emetic action on this animal. Gil- christ mentions that " tartar emetic has been given in two-ounce " doses morning and evening till half a pound was taken, but no " emetic or other obvious medicinal effect followed." Mahouts are strongly averse to the administration of purgatives ; in fact they never intentionally purge an animal, though such drugs as croton seeds, aloes, in small doses, enter into the composition of many of their mussauls. Doses.PREPARATION OF MEDICINES. 195 (chupatties) should occasionally be given, in which a little salt, spice, garlic, or onions, have been incorporated. An animal soon learns to appreciate these delicacies and will open his mouth when he sees the mahout bringing a packet, which he can place in the creature's mouth without trouble. By the means above mentioned animals are rendered unsuspicious, and drugs may be incorporated and often given without trouble. The usual method is first to give a couple of packets of rice or sugar, and in the following one to place rice at the bottom of the packet, then the pill which is covered over with more rice or tamarind, then secured and shoved into the mouth. Nauseous drugs are sometimes ejected. Liquid medicines are often soaked up in bread and rolled in a chuppatee or leaf and given. Tasteless drugs may be given in drinking water, especially if water has been withheld for some little time. Good mahouts are wonderfully clever in getting their animals to take medicines. For troublesome animals the following plan may be adopted. He should first of all be well fettered and have a rope tied round the neck. A wooden gag is then inserted into the mouth and secured by the ropes at the ends to the neck rope. The gag should be about 2½ feet long, 6 inches broad and 2 inches thick, the hole in the centre should be at least 4 inches in diameter, that is, large enough to permit the hand to pass through (fig. 35); the tongue offers some resistance, and care must be taken that the hand is not pushed to one side between the grinders ; once the pill is pushed to the back of the mouth the animal is forced to swallow. Liquids should be carried into the mouth in a plantain leaf or in a small joint of bamboo, the edges of which must be rounded off. Steel recommends that liquid medicines be pumped into the mouth by means of an enema syringe, such as Read's patent. The ordinary nozzle piece might be used for this purpose. Castor and linseed oil are sometimes given in the following man- ner. The oil is placed in a tin and some spice, such as cardamom or cinnamon, mixed with it. The mahout then puts his hand into the mixture and rubs the medicine into the animal's mouth till the whole is finished. Hypodermic injection.196 A TREATISE ON ELEPHANTS. Instruments. Clinical thermometers.INSTRUMENTS. 197 practice, about 10" or 11" long, may be used for administering liquid medicines through the mouth as suggested by Steel. The other for giving enemas should at least be double the length, 22" to 24" in length, slightly thicker, with a larger passage. Eight to 10 feet of good rubber tubing is requisite ; this can be fitted on to the screws of the syringe and ebony pipe. In case this pattern is not obtainable an enema funnel may be used of the pattern (see fig. 34); the length of the pipe must be 2 feet at least. Syringes.APPENDICES.
APPENDICES. 201 APPENDIX A. List of drugs employed in the treatment of elephants, with their native names, actions, uses, and doses.* USES. DOSES. Remarks. Drugs. Hindustani. Burmese. Internal. External. Steel. Slymm. Gilchrist. - Abrus precatori- ous leaves. Gunchi : ... ... Bruised leaves to swellings as a suppurative and detergent, specially indicated in blind boils.203 APPENDICES. List of drugs employed in the treatment of elephants, with their native names, actions, uses, and dosesAPPENDICES. 203 Ammonia chlo- ride. Nowsagar204 APPENDICES. List of drugs employed in the treatment of elepnants, with their native names, actions, uses, and dosesAPPENDICES. 205 Brandy ... Brandy sharab ..... See Arrak ... ... ....... ... ... 8 to 12 oz. Well diluted. Butea seed ... Palas papra, palas ka binj. Anthelmintic ... ... ....... 206 APPENDICES. List of drugs employed in the treatment of elephants, with their native names, actions, uses, and dosesAPPENDICES. 207 Condy's fluid ... ...... ...... ...... Deodorizer, antiseptic ... ... ... ... Contains four grains of permanganate of potash in each ounce. Coriander fruit Dhanya ... Aromatic, stimulant, carmi- native.208 APPENDICES. List of drugs employed in the treatment of elephants, with their native names, actions, uses and doesAPPENDICES. 209 Ginger, dry ... Sohnt Aromatic, stimulant, carmina- tive, tonic, stomachic.210 APPENDICES. List of drugs employed in the treatment of elephants, with their native names, actions, uses, and dosesAPPENDICES. 211 Liquorice root (country). Mittalukhrc.212 APPENDICES. List of drugs employed in the treatment of elephants, with their native names, actions, uses, and doessAPPENDICES. 213 Onions Peeaz ... Digestive, diuretic, has more action on kidneys than garlic; may be given to animals ex- posed to a chill ; stimulant.214 APPENDICES. List of drugs employed in the treatment of elephants, with their native names, action, uses, and dosesAPPENDICES. 215 Quinine sulph. ...... ...... Tonic, anti-periodic. In loss of appetite, weak digestion, de- bility, acute rheumatism. ...... ... ... ... 1 to 2 drachms. Raddish Mula.216 APPENDICES. List of drugs employed in the treatment of elephants, with their native namest actions, uses, and dosesAPPENDICES. 217 Sweet flag ... Bach, butch or goor butch.218 APPENDICES, List of drugs employed in the treatment of elephants, with their native names, actions, uses, and dosesINTERNAL REMEDIES AND EXTERNAL APPLICATIONS, ALSO A NUMBER OF FORMULÆ FOR MUSSAULS, &c. Internal remedies. Anodynes.220 APPENDICES. Carminatives, cordials, or digestive tonics.APPENDICES. 221 (18) Sweet spirits of nitre ... in 3-ounce doses, with water. (19) Vinegar ... ... 4 ounces, well diluted. (20) Sour milk ... ... of each 10 pounds. Boiled rice ... ... Onions ... ... Green ginger ... ... 1 pound. Give once a day if necessary for two or three days. (21) Oil of turpentine ... 2 -ounce doses, mixed with white of egg or gruel, but must not be used when the kidneys are affected. (22) Radishes have a diuretic action. Dose 6 to 24 pounds. The bark, root, and seeds of the common moringa or drumstick fruit tree may be given in doses of I to 4 pounds. Laxatives or aperients.222 APPENDICES. (29) Common or Epsom salts ... ... 1 pound. (30) Cassia pulp ... ... ... 1 to 3 ounces. (31) Cassia leaves (senna) ... ... ... 1 to 2 pounds. *(32) Croton oil ... ... ... 30 to 40 drops. Castor oil ... ... ... 8 ounces. (33) Tamarind pulp ... ... 1 pound. (34) Custard-apple leaves ... ... 100 to 250. (35) Aloes, Barbadoes ... ... 8 drachms. Calomel ... ... ... 1 drachm. (36) Colocynth ... ... ... The dried peeled fruit free from seeds, or the pulp,from 4 to 6 drachms. As it may cause severe griping, it should be combined with a drachm or two of powdered henbane. Especially use- ful when the liver is out of order. (37) Aloes ... ... ... 4½ to 6 drachms. Croton seeds ... ... ... 2½ to 4½ drachms. Jaggery ... ... ... A sufficiency. Or, nine drachms of croton seeds alone may be given, and repeated the following day if the animal refuses to take aloes.APPENDICES. 223 (42) Carbonate of iron... ... ... 2 drachms. Sulphate of quinine... ... ... 1 drachm. Extract of nux-vomica... ... ... 10 grains. Caraway seed... ... ... 2 drachms. Once or twice a day. (43) Sulphate of copper ... ... ... 1 to 1224 APPENDICES. The papaya fruit and leaves may be given. Steel and Khory state that it is a good vermifuge for round worms. External applications: Blisters.APPENDICES. 225 Strong caustics, (57) Hot iron, rarely used on elephants. (58) Nitrate of silver (lunar caustic)226 APPENDICES. (71) Solution of ammonia... ... ... Olive oil... ... ... equal parts. Oil of turpentine-... ... ... Shake the oil and ammonia together well, and then add the tur- pentine and shake again. Compound liniment of camphor. (72) Camphor ... ... ... 1 ounce. Methylated spirit ... ... ... 4 ounces. Olive or sweet oil ... ... ... 1 pint. Solution of ammonia ... ... ... 2 ounces. Dissolve the camphor in the spirit, shake the olive oil with the ammonia, and mix well. Compound soap liniment. (73) Soft soap ... ... ... 4 ounces. Camphor ... ... ... 1 ounce. Methylated spirit ... ... ... 2 pints. Solution of ammonia ... ... ... APPENDICES. 227 Instructions for their use :228 APPENDICES. (78) Turpentine up to four or five ounces beaten up with the whites of three or four eggs, and added to one pint of gruel or starch, and well mixed with warm water. (79) Powdered aloes ... ... ... 1 ounce. Bicarbonate of soda ... ... ... ½ ounce. Boiling water ... ... ... 4 quarts. When cool enough, inject. (80) Salt or Epsom salts ... ... 10 to 12 ounces. Warm water ... ... 1 gallon. Wind, as in flatulent colic. (81) AssafAPPENDICES. 229 Stimulants. As a stimulant if animal is very weak. (87) Rum, brandy or whisky, eight ounces beaten up with six eggs. Starch gruel ... ... ... ... 2 quarts. Repeat as required. or (88) Sulphuric æther ... ... ... ... 2 or 3 ounces. Water ... ... ... ... ... 2 quarts. Eye washes. (89) Sulphate of copper ... ... ... ... Water ... ... ... ... 1 grain. 1 ounce. (90) Nitrate of silver ... ... ... ... Water ... ... ... ... 1 grain. 1 ounce. (91) Sulphate of zinc ... ... ... ... Water ... ... ... ... 1 grain. 1 ounce. (92) Borax ... ... ... ... Water ... ... ... ... 10 grains. 1 ounce. (93) Alum ... ... ... ... Water ... ... ... ... 4 grains. 1 ounce. A small quantity to be syringed gently into the eye three or four times a day. Weak solutions as the above can do no harm. Pain. (94) Extract of belladonna ... ... ... ... 5 grains. Water ... ... ... ... 1 ounce. This may be added to any of the above in this strength, that is, 5 grains of extract of belladonna to the ounce. (95) Extract of belladonna ... ... ... 2 drachms. Water ... ... ... ... 1 drachm. Glycerine ... ... ... ... ½ ounce. Rub the extract down with water, then add the glycerine and mix well together. This may be applied by rubbing it into the skin around the eye. Eye ointments. (96) Yellow oxide of mercury ... ... ... 1 to 3 grains. Vaseline ... ... ... ... 1 drachm. A small quantity about the size of a split pea is inserted under the upper lid. Eye powder. (97) Calomel, a few grains on a camel's hair brush flicked into the eye once daily.
230 APPENDICES. Fomentations are local applications of hot water with the ob- ject of relieving pain. They may be employed over small areas such as the eye, or extensive areas such as the back. Several gallons of water must be kept heated and when a large surface is to be fomented such as the belly or chest a large common, or cooly, blanket furnished with six ropes, one attached to each corner and one at the centre of each short side, long enough to meet and be secured over the back, is the best method. Fomentations may be applied in two ways, either (a) by first soaking the blanket in water so hot that the hand just bears it, wringing it out thoroughly and applying to the part at once and tying it over the back, a second dry blanket or tarpaulin being placed so as to envelop it and thus retain the heat; or (b) as Hawkes recommends, by first securing the cumbly or blanket dry, with a layer of straw placed between it and the body. Hot water that the hand will just bear is poured continuously from both sides. A large quantity of water is requisite. Other parts such as limbs, may be similarly enveloped with pieces of blanket of suitable size. The success of all fomentations depends on the degree and retention of heat: if the water be too hot, the skin may be scalded, and if not hot enough it is useless in allaying pain. In order to maintain heat the blanket should be changed at least every ten minutes until the pain is allayed. Every preparation should be ready, so that the blanket may be clapped on immediately it is wrung out, and to do this satisfactorily it is desirable to have at least two blankets in use. The relief of pain locally may be supplemented by sprinkling over the first blanket two or three tablespoonfuls of turpentine; this may be repeated once or twice during the day. When the last fomentation is withdrawn it is necessary to guard against chill by covering the fomented area with a dry blanket for some hours, or by rubbing the part till thoroughly dry, after which some mild liniment may be applied. At times pain is so severe or deeply seated, or the patient so troublesome to deal with, that local efforts are of little avail and recourse must be had to internal remedies. Injections are medicines thrown by means of a syringe into cavities such as abscesses or sinuses to promote healing or for purposes of cleanliness. (98) Tincture of iodine Water ... ... ... 1 to 2 drachms. 1 pint. (99) Nitrate of silver Water ... ... ... 2 to 3 grains. 1 ounce. (100) Chloride of zinc Water ... ... ... 2 grains. 1 ounce.
APPENDICES. 231 (101) Sulphate of zinc ... ... ... ... Water ... ... ... ... 2 to 5 grains. 1 ounce. (102) Alum ... ... ... ... Water ... ... ... ... 5 grains. 1 ounce. Lotions are medicines employed in solution for various pur- poses, that is, disinfecting, reducing inflammation, cleansing, &c. Cooling. (103) Rectified or methylated spirit ... ... 1 ounce. Water ... ... ... ... 1 pint. (104) Chloride of ammonia ... ... ... ... 4 ounces each. Nitrate of potash ... ... ... ...... Water ... ... ... ... 2232 APPENDICES. (120) Thymol ... ... ... ... 10 grains. Water (boiling)... ... ... 1 pint. Oils are lubricating agents and soothing applications used in various ways. (121) Carbolic acid ... ... ... ... 1 part. Sweet oil ... ... ... ... 16 to 20 parts. [Used for lubricating the hands and instruments, and dressing wounds.] (122) Camphor ... ... ... ... 1 ounce. Methylated spirit or other spirit ... Sufficient to dissolve the camphor. Oil of turpentine ... ... ... 2 ounces. Sweet oil ... ... ... ... 4 ounces. Add the spirit to the camphor and rub down in a mortar till quite dissolved, then add the other ingredients. A dressing to sores especially useful in keeping away flies.* (123) Neem or margosa oil, also used to keep away flies and for removal of maggots. Crushed leaves of custard-apple tree also useful for this pur- pose. Carron oil. (124) Lime water ... ... ... ... Olive oil ... ... ... ... Equal parts. To be well shaken. A very soothing application to burns and scalds. Ointments are greasy preparations of soft consistency contain- ing a variety of drugs for a variety of purposes. Parts. (125) Carbolic acid ... ... ... ... 1 Vaseline APPENDICES. 233 (131) Resin ... ... ... ... 8 ounces. Beeswax ... ... ... ... 6 ounces. Olive oil ... ... ... ... 3 ounces. Lard ... ... ... ... 3 Ounces. Melt with gentle heat, strain the mixture while hot through a cloth, and stir constantly while cooling. (132) Creasote ... ... ... ... 1 part. Vaseline or lard ... ... ... ... 8 parts. (133) Common tar ... ... ... ... Equal parts. Resin ... ... ... ... Lard ... ... ... ... Melt together by gentle heat and stir till cold: a dressing for the feet. (134) Sulphate of copper ... ... ... 1 part. Alum ... ... ... ... 1 part. Tar ... ... ... ... 4 parts. Mix, stir, and heat together until the mass assumes a reddish brown colour. A dressing especially useful for cracks and fissures about the feet. (135) Iodine ... ... ... ... ½ ounce. Iodide of potash ... ... ... ... 1 ounce. Vaseline or lard ... ... ... ... 8 ounces. A good application for the dispersion of tumours, enlarged glands, &c. Paints are fluid applications usually used to promote absorp- tion of swellings or protection of raw surfaces. 136. Protective paint.234 APPENDICES. 138. Liniment of Iodine.APPENDICES. 235 (c) Opium ... ... ... ... of each 5 drachms. Assaf236 APPENDICES. APPENDIX B. List of diseases with their names in Hindustani and Burmese. No. English. Hindustani. Burmese. CHAPTER IV. 1 Fever ... ... ... Thap or tup, bokhar ... ... 2 Debility... ... ... Doobla or laghar, kumzor ... ... (a) Emaciation ... ... Sookha zahirbad ... ... (b) Dropsy ... ... Zahrbad or zahirbad ... ... (c) Ædematous swelling of the limbs... Soojun ... ... CHAPTER V. Goli ... ... ... ... 3 Anthrax fever (apoplexy of the lungs) Ghut-bhao ... ... ... 4 Elephant-pox ... Seethlah matha ... ... ... 5 Surra ... ... Surra ... ... ... 6 Foot-and-mouth disease ... Mupoung ... ... ... (Ulceration of the mucous membrane of the trunk with ulceration of the feet.) Kuthlah (a term applied to disease of the feet). 7 Blood poisoning ... ... ...... 8 Rabies ... ... ... Pagal or dewanah, kootha ka murz ...
APPENDICES. 237 9 Tetanus (locked-jaw) ... ... Dath-bundh ... ... ... 10 Epidemic pneumonia ... ... ...... 11 Rheumatism ... ... Wahee-ka-durdh ... ... CHAPTER VI. 12 Heart ... ... Dil... ... ... ... ... CHAPTER VII. ...... 13 Inflammation of the lining membrane of the bones of the skull. Ahren-bhao or bhao-ka-murz, dhud-ka- murz. 14 Congestion of brain and membranes (inflammation of the brain and sur- rounding membranes). Theruk-bhao, thurung-bhao ... ... 15 Apoplexy of the brain ... ... Jolay-ka-murz (often applied by natives to loss of power behind in anthrax). 16 Paraplegia ... ... ... 17 Paraplegia (reflex) ... ... ...... 18 Paralysis of the trunk ... ... ...... 19 Paralysis of the ear ... ... ...... 20 Sunstroke ... ... ... ...... 21 Heat-apoplexy ... ... CHAPTER VIII. 22 Catarrh ... ... ... Surdee ... ... ... 23 Mumps ... ... ... Kunthaybhao ... ... ...
238 APPENDICES. List of diseases with their names in Hindustani and BurmeseAPPENDICES. 239 35 Indigestion ...... 36 Stomatitis (inflammation of the cheek) Sozish-gallki 37 Disorders and irregularities of the teeth Koochla ... ... 38 Inflammation of the bowels Bhao 39 Dysentery Paichis or eeray-sangranee 40 Dysentery (epidemic) ......... 41 Intestinal obstruction ......... 42 Peritonitis ......... 43 Vomiting Dhaak-ka-murz ... ... ... 44 Poisoning Ze-hir ... ... ... CHAPTER XI. 45 Internal parasites (worms) ... Lungun ... ... ... CHAPTER XII. 46 Jaundice ... ... ... 47 Inflammation of liver ... ... ... Lokum-durdh ... ... ... 48 Hydatids ... ... ... ...... CHAPTER XIII. 49 Ophthalmia (sore eyes) ... ... Agin-bhao ... ... ...
240 APPENDICES. List of diseases with their names in Hindustani and BurmeseAPPENDICES. 241 (a) Above the feet ... ... ...... (b) On the elbows ... ... ..... (c) On the forehead ... ... ....... (d) Of the cartilage of the ear ... Indhree-ka-murz ... ... ... (e) F242 APPENDICES. List of diseases with their names in Hindustani and BurmeseAPPENDICES. 243 APPENDIX C. Number of miles traversable on level ground with light, medium and heavy loads. Configuration of ground. Nature of the surface. Time of the day. Shade or otherwise. Number of days' rest before and after. Degree of regularity. MILES TRAVERSABLE. Remarks. No load. Light load. Medium load. Heavy load. Good ratibs and fodder. Indifferent. Good ratibs and fodder. Indifferent. Good ratibs and fodder. Indifferent. Good ratibs and fodder. Indifferent. Level. Even and firm. Night, morn-(Of course)- ing and evening. 2 Once 40 37 36 33 32 27 25 22 Twice 37 36 33 32 27 25 22 20 Repeatedly... 33 32 27 25 22 20 18 16 1 Once 32 27 25 22 20 18 16 15 Twice 27 25 22 20 18 16 15 14 Repeatedly... 25 22 20 18 16 15 14 13 0 Once 23 21 19 17 15 14 13 12 Twice 21 19 17 15 13 12 11.5 11 Repeatedly... 19 17 15 13 12 11 10 9 Morn ing (Of course) and even- ing.{ 2 Once 30 28 27 24 23 21 20 18 Twice 28 27 24 23 21 20 18 17 Repeatedly... 24 23 21 20 18 17 16 15 1 Once 23 21 20 18 16 15 14.5 14 Twice 21 20 18 16 15 14 13.5 13 Repeatedly... 20 18.5 17 15 14 13.5 13 12 0 Once 18 17 14 13 12 11 10 11 Twice 16 16 13 12 11 10 9 10 Repeatedly... 14 13 12 11 10 9 8.5 8
244 APPENDICES. Number of miles traversable on level ground with light, medium and heavy loadsAPPENDICES. 245 Level. (Little or none in- hot wea- ther.) 2 Once ... 20 19 18 16 16 14 13 12 No other march may be made. Twice ... 19 18 16 15 14 13 12 11 Repeatedly ... 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 1 Once ... 15 14.5 14 13 12 11 10 9 Twice ... 14 13.5 13 12 11 10 9 8 Repeatedly ... 13 12 11 10.5 10 9 8 7 0 Once ... 12 11 10 9.5 9 8.5 7 6 Twice ... 10 9.5 9 8.5 8 7 6 5 Repeatedly ... 9 8.5 8 7.5 7 6.5 5 4 (Of course) 2 Once ... 25 23 22 21 20 19 18 16 Twice ... 24 22 21 20 18 17 16 15.5 Repeatedly ... 22 21 20 18 17 16 15.5 14.5 1 Once ... 21 20 18 17 16 15.5 15 14 Freshly cleared or stony road. Night, morn- ing, and evening. Morning and evening. Twice ... 20 19 17 16.5 15.5 15 14 13.5 Repeatedly ... 18 17 16.5 16 15 14 13.5 12.5 0 Once ... 17 16.5 16 15 14 13.5 13 12 Twice ... 16 15.5 15 14 13.5 13 12 11.5 Repeatedly ... 14 14.5 14 13.5 13 12 11.5 11 (Of course) 2 Once ... 20 19 17 16 15 14 13 12 Twice ... 19 18 16.5 15 14 13 12 11.5 Repeatedly ... 18 17 16 14 13 12 11.5 11 1 Once ... 17 16 15 13 12 11.5 11 10.5 Twice ... 16 15 14 12 11.5 11 10.5 10 Repeatedly ... 15 14 13 11.5 11 10.5 10 9 0 Once ... 14 13 13 11 10.5 10 9 8.5 Twice ... 13 12 11 10.5 10 9 8.5 8 Repeatedly ... 12 11 10.5 10 9 8.5 8 7
246 APPENDICES. Number of miles traversable on level ground with light, medium and heavy loadsAPPENDICES. 247 Level. Road heavy or swampy, jungle dense and pathless. Night, morn- ing and evening. (Of course) 2 Once ... 15.5 14.5 13 12 11 10 9 8.5 One-half of morning and evening march may be added. Twice ... 15 14 12 11 10 9 8.5 8 Repeatedly ... 14 13 11 10 9 8 7.5 7 1 Once ... 13.5 12.5 10 9 8.5 7.5 7 6.5 Twice ... 13 12 9.5 8.5 8 7 6 6 Repeatedly ... 12 11 9 8 7 6.5 6.5 5 0 Once ... 11.5 10 8 7 6.5 6 5 4.5 Twice ... 11 9 7 6.5 6 5 4.5 4 Repeatedly ... 10 8 6.5 6 5 4.5 4 3 Morning and evening. (Of course) 2 Once ... 13.5 12 11 10 9 8 7 6.5 Twice ... 12.5 11 10 9 8 7 6.5 6 Repeatedly ... 12 11.5 9 8 7 6.5 6 5.5 1 Once ... 11.5 10 8 7 6.5 6 5.5 5 Twice ... 11 9.5 7 6.5 6 5.5 5 4.5 Repeatedly ... 10 9 6.5 6 5.5 5 4 3.5 0 Once ... 9.5 8.5 7 5.5 5 4 3.5 3 Twice ... 9 8 6.5 4.5 4 3.5 3 2.5 Repeatedly.... 8 7 6 4 3.5 3 2.5 1.5 Heat of day (Always) 2 Once ... 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 Twice ... 11.5 10 9 8 7 6 5 4.5 Repeatedly ... 11 9 8 7 6 5 4.5 4 1 Once ... 10.5 8.5 7 6 5 4.5 4 3.5 Twice ... 10 8 6 5 4.5 4 3.5 3 Repeatedly... 9 7 5 4.5 4 3.5 3 2.5 0 Once ... 8.5 6.5 4.5 4 3.5 3 2.5 2 Twice ... 8 6 4 3.5 3 2.5 2 1.5 Repeatedly... 7 5 3.5 3 2.5 2 75 5
248 APPENDICES. Number of miles traversable on level ground with light, medium and heavy loadsAPPENDICES. 249 32 APPENDIX D. Number of miles traversable on undulating ground with light, medium and heavy loads. Configuration of ground. Nature of the surface. Time of the day. Shade or otherwise. Number of days' rest before and after. Degree of regularity. MILES TRAVERSABLE. Remarks. No load. Light load. Medium load. Heavy load. Good ratibs and fodder. Indifferent, Good ratibs and fodder. Indifferent. Good ratibs and fodder. Indifferent. Good ratibs and fodder. Indifferent. Undulating. Even and firm. Night, morn- ing and evening.{ (Of course) 2 Once 30 28 27 24 23 21 20 18 Twice ... 28 27 24 23 21 20 18 17 Repeatedly... 24 23 21 20 18 17 16 15 1 Once 23 21 20 18 16 15 14.5 14 Twice 21 20 18 16 15 14 13.5 13 Repeatedly ... 20 18.5 17 15 14 13.5 13 12 0 Once 18 16.5 14 13 12 11 10 11 Twice 16 16 13 12 11 10 9 10 Repeatedly ... 14 13 12 11 10 9 8.5 8 Morning and evening. (Of course) 2 Once 25 23 22 21 20 19 17 16 Twice 23 22 21 20 19 18 16 15 Repeatedly ... 21 20 19 18 16 14 13.5 13 1 Once 20 19 18 16 15 13.5 13 12 Twice 19 18 16 14 13 12.5 11.5 11 Repeatedly ... 18 16 14 13 12.5 12 11 10 0 Once ... 16 11.5 13 12.5 12 11 10 9 Twice ... 15 14 12.5 12 11 10 9 8 Repeatedly ... 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7
250 APPENDICES. Number of miles traversable on undulating gronnd with light, medium and heavy loads APPENDICES. 251 Undulating. (Little or none in hot wea- ther.) 2 Once 20 19 17 16 15 14 13 12 No other march may be made. Twice 19 18 16.5 15 14 13 12 11.5 Repeatedly ... 18 17 16 14 13 12 11.5 11 1 Once 17 16 15 13 12 11.5 11 10.5 Twice 16 15 14 12 11.5 11 10.5 10 Repeatedly ... 15 14 13 11.5 11 10.5 10 9 0 Once 14 13 12 11 10.5 10 9 8.5 Twice 13 12 11 10.5 10 9 8.5 8 Repeatedly... 12 11 10.5 10 9 8.5 8 7 Night, morn- ing and evening. (Of course) 2 Once 25 23 22 21 20 19 18 16 Twice 24 22 21 20 18 17 16 15.5 Repeatedly ... 22 21 20 18 17 16 15.5 14.5 Freshly cleared or stony road. 1 Once 21 20 18 17 16 15.5 15 14 Twice 20 19 17 16.5 15.5 15 14 13.5 Repeatedly ... 18 17 16.5 16 15 14 13.5 12.5 0 Once 17 16 15 13 12 11.5 11 10.5 Twice 16 15 14 12 11.5 11 10.5 10 Repeatedly ... 15 14 13 11.5 11 10.5 10 9 Morning and evening. (Of course) 2 Once 18 17 15 14 13 12 11 10 Twice 17 16 14 13 12 11 10 9 Repeatedly ... 16 15 13 12 11 10 9 8 1 Once 15 14 12 11 10 9 8 7 Twice 14 13 11 10 9 8 7 6 Repeatedly ... 13 12 10 9 8 7 6 5 0 Once 12 11 9 8 7 6 5 4 Twice 11 10 8.5 7.5 6.5 5.5 4.5 3.5 Repeatedly ... to 9 8 7 6 5 4 3
252 APPENDICES. Number of miles traversable on undulating ground with light, medium and heavy loadsAPPENDICES. 253 Undulating. Freshly cleared or stony 0 Once ... 8 7 5.5 4.5 3.5 3 2 1.5 No may Twice 7 6 5 4 3 2.5 1.5 1 Repeatedly ... 6 5 4 3 2.5 2 1 .5 Night, morning- (Of course) and evening. 2 Once 13.5 12 11 10 9 8 7 6.5 Twice 12.5 11 10 9 8 7 6.5 6 Repeatedly ... 12 11.5 9 8 7 6.5 6 55 1 Once 11.5 10 8 7 6.5 6 5.5 5 Twice 11 9.5 7 6.5 6 5.5 5 4.5 Repeatedly ... 10 9 6.5 6 5.5 5 4 3.5 0 Once 9.5 8.5 6 5.5 5 4 3.5 3 Twice 9 8 5.5 4.5 4 3.5 3 2.5 Repeatedly ... 8 7 5 4 3.5 3 2.5 1.5 M o r n i ng (Of course) and evening 2 Once 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 Twice 11.5 10 9 8 7 6 5 4.5 Repeatedly ... 11 9 8 7 6 5 4.5 4 1 Once 10.5 8.5 7 6 5 4.5 4 3.5 Twice 10 8 6 5 4.5 4 3.5 3 Repeatedly... 9 7 5 4.5 4 3.5 3 2.5 0 Once 8.5 6.5 4.5 4 3.5 3 2.5 2 Twice 8 6 4 3.5 3 2.5 2 1.5 Repeatedly ... 7 5 3.5 3 2.5 2 75 .5 One-half of morning and evening march may be added. Heat of (Always) day. 2 Once 10 9.5 8 7 6 5 4 3 Twice 9.5 9 7 6 5 4 3 2 Repeatedly ... 9 8 6.5 5 4 3 2 1.5 1 Once 8.5 7 6 4 3 2 1.5 1 Twice 8 6 5 3 2 1.5 1 .5 Repeatedly ... 7.5 5 4 2 1.5 1 .75 0 0 Once 7 4 2 1.5 1 75 .5 0 Twice 6.5 3.5 1.5 1 75 .5 0 0 Repeatedly... 6 2.5 1 75 .5 0 0 0
254 APPENDICES. Number of miles traversable on undulating ground with light, medium and heavy loadsAPPENDICES. 255 APPENDIX E. Number of miles traversable on mountainous ground with light, medium and heavy loads. Configuration of ground. Nature of the surface. Time of the day. Shade or otherwise. Number of days' rest before and after. Degree of regularity. MILES TRAVERSABLE. Remarks. No load. Light load. Medium load Heavy load. Good ratibs and fodder. Indifferent. Good ratibs and fodder. Indifferent. Good ratibs and fodder. Indifferent. Good ratibs and fodder. Indifferent. Mountainous. Firm and even. Night, morning and even- ing. (Of course) 2 Once 25 23 22 21 20 19 18 16 Twice 24 22 21 20 18 17 16 15.5 Repeatedly... 22 21 20 18 17 16 15.5 14.5 1 Once 21 20 18 17 16 15.5 15 14 Twice 20 19 17 16.5 15.5 15 14 13.5 Repeatedly ... x8 17 16.5 16 15 14 13.5 12.5 0 Once 17 16.5 16 15 14 13.5 13 12 Twice 16 15.5 15 14 13.5 13 12 11.5 Repeatedly ... 14 14.5 14 13.5 13 12 11.5 11 Morning and even- ing. (Of course) 2 Once 20 19 17 16 15 14 13 12 Twice 19 18 16.5 15 14 13 12 11.5 Repeatedly ... 18 17 16 14 13 12 11.5 11 1 Once 17 16 15 13 12 11.5 11 10.5 Twice 16 15 14 12 11.5 11 10.5 10 Repeatedly ... 15 14 13 11.5 11 10.5 10 9 0 Once 14 13 12 11 10.5 10 9 8.5 Twice 13 12 11 10.5 10 9 8.5 8 Repeatedly ... 12 11 10.5 10 9 8.5 8 7
256 APPENDICES. Number of miles traversable on mountainous ground with light, medium and heavy loadsAPPENDICES. 257 33 Mountainous. (Little or none in hot wea- then) 2 Once ... 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 No other march may be made. Twice ... 12.5 11.5 10 9 8 7 6 5 Repeatedly ... 12 10.5 9 8 7 6 5 4 1 Once ... 11 10 8 7 6 5 4 3 Twice 10 9 7 6 5 4 3 2.5 Repeatedly... 9 8 6 5 4 3.5 2.5 2 0 Once 8 7 5.5 4.5 3.5 3 2 1.5 Twice 7 6 5 4 3 2.5 1.5 1 Repeatedly ... 6 5 4 3 2.5 2 1 0 Night, morn- ing and evening. (Of course) 2 Once 15.5 14.5 13 12 11 10 9 8.5 Twice 15 14 12 11 10 9 8.5 8 Newly cleared or stony road. Repeatedly... 14 13 11 10 9 8 7.5 7 1 Once 13.5 12.5 10 9 8.5 7.5 7 6.5 Twice 13 12 9.5 8.5 8 7 6 6 Repeatedly ... 12 11 9 8 7 6.5 6 5 0 Once 11.5 10 8 7 6.5 6 5 4.5 Twice 11 9 7 6.5 6 5 4.5 4 Repeatedly ... 10 8 6.5 6 5 4.5 4 3 Morning and evening. (Of course) 2 Once 13.5 12 11 10 9 5 7 6.5 Twice 12.5 11 10 9 8 7 6.5 6 Repeatedly ... 12 11.5 9 8 7 6.5 6 5.5 1 Once 11.5 10 8 7 6.5 6 5.5 5 Twice 11 9.5 7 6.5 6 5.5 5 45 Repeatedly ... 10 9 6.5 6 5.5 5 4 3.5 0 Once 9.5 8.5 6 5.5 5 4 3.5 3 Twice 9 8 5.5 4.5 4 3.5 3 2.5 Repeatedly ... 8 7 5 4 3.5 3 2.5 1.5 One-half of morning and evening march maybe added. Heat o f day. (Always) 2 Once 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 Twice 11.5 10 9 8 7 6 5 4.5 Repeatedly ... 11 9 8 7 6 5 4.5 4 1 Once 10.5 8.5 7 6 5 4.5 4 3.5 Twice 10 8 6 5 4.5 4 3.5 3 Repeatedly ... 9 7 5 4.5 4 35 3 2.5 0 Once 2.5 6.5 4.5 4 3.5 3 2.5 2 Twice 8 6 4 3.5 3 2.5 2 1.5 Repeatedly ... 7 5 3.5 3 2.5 2 .75 .5
258 APPENDICES. Number of miles traversable on mountainous ground with light, medium and heavy loadsAPPENDICES. 259 Mountainous. Road not cleared, or ascending acclivities necessitating climbings. Night, morn- ing and evening. (Of course) 2 Once ... 6 5 3 2 1 .5 0 0 Twice ... 5.5 4 2 1 .5 0 0 0 Repeatedly ... 4.5 3 1 .5 0 0 0 0 1 Once ... 4 2 .75 0 0 0 0 0 Twice ... 3.5 1.5 .5 0 0 0 0 0 Repeatedly ... 2.5 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Once ... 2 .75 0 0 0 0 0 0 Twice ... 1.75 .5 0 0 0 0 0 0 Repeatedly ... 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Morning and even- ing. (Of course) 2 Once ... 4 3 2 1 .5 0 0 0 Twice ... 3.5 2.5 1.5 .5 0 0 0 0 Repeatedly ... 3 1.75 .75 0 0 0 0 0 1 Once ... 2.75 1.5 .5 0 0 0 0 0 Twice ... 2.5 .75 0 0 0 0 0 0 Repeatedly ... 2 .5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Once ... 1.75 .75 0 0 0 0 0 0 Twice ... 1.5 .5 0 0 0 0 0 0 Repeatedly ... .75 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 2 Once ... 3 2.5 1 .75 0 0 0 0 One-half of morning and evening march may be added. Heat of day (Always) Twice ... 2.75 2 .75 .5 0 0 0 0 Repeatedly ... 2.5 1 .5 0 0 0 0 0 1 Once ... 2 .6 .3 0 0 0 0 0 Twice ... 1.75 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 Repeatedly ... 1.5 .75 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Once ... 1 .5 0 0 0 0 0 0 Twice ... .75 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Repeatedly ... .5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
260 APPENDICES. Number of miles traversable on mountainous ground with light, medium and heavy loads-concluded. Configuration of ground. Nature of the surface. Time of the day. Shade or otherwise. Number of days' rest before and after. Degree of regularity. MILES TRAVERSABLE. Remarks. No load. Light load. Medium load. Heavy load. Good ralibs and fodder. Indifferent. Good ratibs and fodder. Indifferent. Good ratibs and fodder. Indifferent. Good ratibs and fodder Indifferent. Mountainous. Road not cleared, or ascending acclivities necessitating climbings. Heat of day. (Little or none in cool wea- ther.) 2 Once ... 2 1.5 1 5 0 0 0 0 One-quarter of morning and evening march may be added. Twice ... 1.5 1 .5 0 0 0 0 0 Repeatedly ... 1 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 Once ... 75 .5 0 0 0 0 0 0 Twice ... .5 .4 0 0 0 0 0 0 Repeatedly ... 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Once ... 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Twice ... 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Repeatedly ... 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 (Little or none in hot wea- ther.) 2 Once ... 1.5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 No other march may be made. Twice ... .75 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Repeatedly ... 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 Once ... 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Twice ... 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Repeatedly ... 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Once ... 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Twice ... 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Repeatedly ... 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
APPENDICES. 261 A list of useful drugs to be kept in Sick Elephant lines. All drugs should be kept under lock and key. lbs. oz. Acid, acetic, dilute (vinegar) ... ... 1 ... Acid, arsenious (white arsenic) ... ... ... ... ... 1 Acid, boracic ... ... ... 4 ... Acid, carbolic ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... Acid, nitric (strong) ... ... ... ? Aloes, Barb. ... ... 2 ... Alum ... ... 2 ... Ammonia, liquor (strong) ... ... 1 ... Antimonium, tart. (tartar emetic) ... ... ... 4 Arsenicalis, liquor ... ... 1 ... Belladonna (extract) ... ... ... 2 Bicarbonate, soda ... ... 1 ... Camphor ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... Cantharides ... ... ... ... 4 Catechu (cutch) ... ... 4 ... Chiretta ... ... ... 4 Cinchona bark (powdered) ... ... ... 8 Corrosive sublimate ... ... ... 1/2 Creta præparata (prepared chalk) ... ... 4 ... Cupri, sulphas (blue-stone) ... ... 1 ... Dhatura leaves... ... ... ... 2 Dhatura seeds ... ... ... 1 Epsom salts ... ... ... 10 ... Ferri, sulphas (sulphate of iron) ... ... 2 ... Galls ... ... 2 ... Gentian ... ... 4 ... Glycerine ... ... ... 8 Hyoscyamus ... ... ... ... 1 Hydrargyri iodidum rubrum (red iodide of mercury) ... ... ... 2 Iodoform ... ... ... 4 Iodine, liniment of ... ... ... 4 Iodide of potash ... ... ... 2 Indian hemp bhang ... ... ... 8 ganja 8 Nitrate of potash (nitre) ... ... ... 2 ... Nitrate of silver (lunar caustic) ... ... ... 1 Nux vomica (powdered) ... ... ... ... 2 Oil, croton ... ... ... ¼ Oil, ricini (cast or oil) ... ... 3 ... Oil, lini (linseed oil) ... ... 3 ... Oil, turpentine ... ... 4 ... Opium ... ... 1 ... Phenyle ... ... 2 ... Pix liquida (tar) ... ... 4 ... Plumbi acetas (sugar of lead) ... ... ... 8 Soap, soft ... ... 2 ... Soap, hard ... ... 1 ... Spirits, ætheris ... ... ... 8 Spirits, ætheris nitrosi (sweet spirits of nitre) ... ... 1 ... Sulphur, sublimed ... ... 1 ... Tincture of aconite ... ... ... 1 Tincture of iodine ... ... ... 4 Vaseline ... ... 2 ... Zinci, oxide ... ... ... 4 Zinci, sulphas ... ... ... ... 4
262 APPENDICES. Drugs that can be procured in a pure state from the bazaar. Ammonia, chloride. Ginger. Allspice. Gum arabic. Aniseed. Jaggery. Assafoetida. Linseed meal. Carraway. Mustard. Capsicum. Mutton fat (or lard Cardamoms. Nutmegs. Chiretta. Oil of mustard. Cinnamon. Pepper (black). Cloves. Pepper (long). Cocoanut oil. Salt, common. Coriander. Soap, bar. Cummin. Sesamum oil. Dicamali. Tamarind. Garlic. Treacle. Ghee. Turmeric. Blankets for fomentation.
PLATE A. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Photogravure Survey of India Offices, Calcutta, July 1901. An ideal specimen of a timber working elephant. Indications of enormous power in head and trunk, short thick neck, in fact well put together in every particular, stands well up at the shoulder. Gradually sloping down behind with the hind legs short indicating great dragging power, tusks and curve of back perfectPLATE B. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Photogravure. Survey of India Offices.Calcutta. July 1901. This elephant is probably one of the finest workers in the Province, he is now aged hence prominence of the spinal ridge, the tusks are also well worn, he however shows the strong points of the elephant in plate APLATE C. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Photogravure Survey of India Offices,Calcutta July 1901. A fine specimen of a Te' (dragging elephant)
PLATE D. Photogravure. Survey of India Office B. Calcutta. July 1901. Fine specimen of a female elephant.
" KYA-PAZAT." [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. KYA-PAZAT" OR ''ANDOOS."" KYA-PAZAT" "OR ANDOOS." [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 3. Hind fetter for one foot only. It consists of two bent pieces of iron joined on one side by a short strong chain or rope and fastened off on the other by a line which is tied to a tree. The bent pieces of iron have four sharp points A turned inwards, which on the elephant attempting to move enter the leg. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 4. Chain hobbles for forelegs. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 5. Fetter for forelegs made of cane or strong creepers used by the Karens and Burmese foresters.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 6. Driving; hook made entirely of iron. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 7. Driving hock with iron head and wooden shaft. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 8. Iron chain collar with sharp points,
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 9. Fettering chain about 12 feet long, used for one hind leg only. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig . 10. Common spear with which every elephant coolie should be provided, in case o£ his charge becoming unmanageable by getting musth, &c.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 11. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 12. (Crush. Employed for handling and breaking in unruly elephants, especially those not allowing men to mount them. Can also be used for operations. Fig. 11 Poles in position at A and B. Fig. 12 Poles in position above, withdrawn below A and B.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 13. Elephant dragging saddle in present use [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 14. Sanderson's pattern Guddee. Plain. Wrapped for use. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 15. Saddle for Elephants. (Sanderson )
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Sanderson's pattern Neck-rope. Fig. 16. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Sanderson's pattern Crupper-rope. Fig 17
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig l8. Iron Pipe-Crupper (Sanderson) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 19. ONE FORM OF HOWDAH USED IN TRAVELLING BY THE BURMESE AND SHANS. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 20. KAREN HOWDAH FOR CARRYING GRAIN.
Fig. 21. SKULL OF ELEPHANT. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 22. SECTION OF SKULL. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] after Owen.
BRAIN OF THE ELEPHANT, SHOWING ORIGIN OF IMPORTANT NERVES. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 23. From J. Emerson Tennent. THE CELLS SHOWN ARE MUCH EXAGGERATED,DIAGRAM FROM "SANDERSON SHOWING POSITION OF THE BRAIN WITH REFERENCE TO THE SHOOTING OF ELEPHANTS [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. Head in natural position. Frontal shot indicated by dotted line. Side shot indicated by blank space. Fig. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 4. Position of head when charging. Frontal shot indicated by dotted line. Diagram 26.
PARASITES OF THE ELEPHANT. Under view of elephant ' bot,' natural size. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Side view of same. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig . 27. Ascaris lonchoptera. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Natural size. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 28. Amphistoma Hawkesli. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] After Cobbold. About natural size. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 29. Liver fluke Faseiola Jacksoni enlarged. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] After Cobbold. Fig. 30
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 31. Case of soreback showing the healed cicatrices after the use of the knife (Sanderson). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 32. Elephant with Prominent Spinal Ridge. After Sanderson.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 33. Case of loss of some of the Spinal Processes from soreback. (Sanderson.)
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 34. Enema Funnel. WOODEN GAG FOR ADMINISTRATION OF MEDICINE. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 35. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 36. One pattern of a wooden timber cart for removal of logs from the forest.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 36 (a) Four-wheeled cart for transporting timber.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig . 36 (b). Two-wheeled cart for transporting timber.
INDEX. Abdominal cavity, 64 Abrasions or gails, 164 Abrus precatorious leaves, 201 Abscess, 177 Parasitic, 185 Of foot, 179 Serous, 180 Acacia gummi, 201 Gummi mucilage, 201 Accessory organ of reproduction, 69 Acetate of morphia, 201 Acetum, 201 Acid, arseniosum, 201 Boracic, 201 Boracic, lotion, 201 Boracic, ointment, 201 Carbolic, 201 Carbolic, lotion, 201 Carbolic, oil, 201 Carbolic, ointment, 201 Gallic, 201 Nitric. 201 Nitric, dilute, 202 Tannic, 202 Aconite leaves, 202 Tincture, 202 Act of parturition, 16 Acute indigestion, 135 Adeps, praeparata, 202 Aether, 202 Nitrous, 202 Age, 5 Indications, 6 Ahren bhao, 108 Albumen (egg), 202 Alimentary canal, 64, 128 Allspice, 202 Aloes, Barbadoes, 202 Barbadoes, enema, 202 Alum, 202 Burned, 202 Lotion, 202 Ammonia, chloride, 203 Lin., 203 Lin. comp., 203 Amylum, 203 Anatomy of the elephant, 54 Anaemia, 84 Aniseed, 26, 203 Anodynes, 219, 244 Anthrax or chatbon, 87 Diagnosis and prognosis, 89 General symptoms, 88 Antidotes for poisons, 143 Anti-dysenterica bark, 203 Seeds, 203 Antimony, 203 Tart-, 203 Anus or fundament, 81 Aorta, 112 Aperients or laxatives, 231 Apoplexy, 116, 119 Appearance of carcass, 99 Appetite, want of, 83 Areca nut, 203 Arsenic, white, 201 Argenti nitras, 203 Aromatic spice balls, 26 Arrack, 203 Arsenicalis, liq., 203 Articulations, 55 Artificial food, 25 Assafoetida, 26, 203 Enema, 204 Astringents, 219, 234 Attendants, their duties, 18 Auricles, 112 Average loads, 31, 243, 249, 255 Weight of heart, 70 Avoidance, 93 Backbone or spine, 59 Bacillus anthracis, 87 Bael fruil, 204 Baibarung berries, 204 Bamboo leaves, 204 Barbaloin, 204 Bathing and grooming, 29 Bdellium, 204 Belladonna extract, 204 Belly pain or colic, 132 Benzoin, 204 Betelnut, 204 Bhang, 204 Bhela, 204 Bismuth, subnitrate, 204 Black pepper, 26 Bladder, 67,124 Blood letting, 114 Poisoning; 107 Bloody urine, 126 Boils, 180 Bolting, 47 Bonduc (nuts), 204 Borax, 204 Brain, congestion of, 116 Branding, 9
ii. INDEX. Brandy, 205 Breastbone or sternum, 61 Breast-strap, 37 Breeding, 13 Bronchi and trachea, 70 Bronchitis, 123 Butea seed, 205 Cæcum, 66 Calotropis gigantea root, 205 Gigantea flowers, 205 Calomel, 205 Camphor, 205 Lin. comp., 205, 226 Camphorated oil, 205 Canal, alimentary, 64, 128 Cantharidis ointment, 205 Capillaries, 112 Capsicum, 205 Caraway seeds, 26, 205 Carbo ligni, 205 Carcass, appearance of, 99 Cardamoms, 26, 205 Cardiac and pyloric, 65 Care of gear, 42 Carious teeth, 137 Carminatives, 220 Carpus or knee joint, 62 Carron oil, 205 Cassia bark, 205 Leaves, 205 Pulp, 205 Castor-oil, 205 Tree stalks, 206 Castor seeds, 206 Castration, 68. Catechu, 206 Cataract, 159 Catarrh or cold, 121 Caudal vertebæ, 60 Causes and prevention of disease, 76 Of anthrax, 87 Caustics, 224 Cavities in bones of skull, 115 Cavity of the mouth, 64 Abdominal, 64 Cervical vertebræ, 59 Chains, 38 Chalk, prepared, 206 Chest or thorax, 69 Chief points of good elephants, 10 Chirretta, 206 Chloral, hydrate, 206 Chloride of lime, 206 Chowrung, 191 Chronic indigestion, 135 Chupatties, 85 Cinchona bark, 206 Cinnamon, 206 Clavicle or collar-bone, 61 Clinical thermometer, 81, 186 Clitoris, 68 Cloves, 26, 206 Coal-tar, 206 Cocoanut kernel, 206 Oil, 206 Colocynth, 206 Colic or gripes, 132 Flatulent, 134 Colon and rectum, 66 Commissariat scale of rations, 27 Compound camphor liniment, 244. Soap liniment, 244 Condy's Fluid, 207 Congestion of brain, 116 Congestion of temporal glands, 160 Constipation, 132, 227 Convalescence, 80 Coriander, 26 Fruit, 207 Cornea, opacity of, 158 Ulceration of, 158 Corrosive sublimate, 207 Cracked sole, 173 Heels, 174 Cramps, 192 Creasote, 207 Ointment, 207 Crossing rivers, 46 Croton seeds, 207 Oil, 207 Crupper, 40 Rope, 40, 42 Cubebs, 207 Cummin seeds, 207 Cupri sulphas, 207 Lotion, 207 Custard-apple leaves, 207 Cutting tusks, 137 Cystitis, 125 Daily allowance of fodder, 23, 27 Debility, 83 Causes of, 83 Definition of anthrax, 87 Destruction, 52 Deuxieme vaccin charbonneux, 95 Dhatura leaves, 207 Seeds, 207 Diabetes, 127 Diaphragm or midriff, 69 DiarrhINDEX. iii. Donovan's solution, 207 Dorsal vertebræ, 60 Doses, medicines, 194 Drink, 79 Dullness, 80 Duodenum, jejunum, and ileum, 66 Duration of pregnancy, 15 Dusting powders, 225 Dysentery, 139, 140 Ear, 73 Eczema, 182 Elephants in calf, work of, 15 As transport animals, 2 Fly, 185 Inferior points of, 11 Source of supply, 3 Pox, 102 Emaciation, 84 Embrocations or liniments, 225 Endurance, power of, 33 Enemas or clysters, 196, 226 Enteritis or inflammation of bowels, 138 Epidemic pneumonia, 110 Dysentery or murrain, 140 Epsom salts, 208 Eucalyptus oil, 208 Ointment, 208 Examination, post mortem, 99 Excretions, 79 Exercise and work, 30 Exposure, 35 External applications, 224 Parasites, 184 Extract of nux vomica, 208 Extremities, 61 Eye, 72,154 In health, 156 Fallopian tube, 68 False or asternal ribs, 61 Feeding, time of, 26 Femur or thigh bone, 62 Fennel, 208 Fenugreek, 208 Ferri carbonas saccharata, 208 Iodium, 208 Sulphas, 208 Perchloride, tincture, 208 Fetters, 48 Fever, 80 Indications of, 82 Medicines for, 82 Treatment of, 82 Fibula and tibia, 62 Flatulent colic, 134, 228 Floating ribs, 61 Flukes-Liver, 146 Fodder, daily allowance of, 21, 27 Natural, 21 Food, 79 Forceps, 196 Foot, 63 Foot-and-mouth disease, 105 Fundament or anus, 81 Fracture, 191 Friar's balsam, 208 Galls, 164 Galls, oak, 208 Ganja, 208 Garlic, 26, 208 Gear, 36 General indications of ill-health, 80 Symptoms of anthrax, 88 Treatment of sickness, 78 Uses, 1 Gentian, 208 Ghee, 208 Ginger, 26, 209 Green, 209 Girths and slings, 37, 39, 41 Glands, temporal, 160 Inflammation of, 161 Glycerine, 209 Grazing, 43 Green fodder, varieties of, 24 Grooming and bathing, 29 Guddee, 39, 41, 42 Guddela, 39, 40, 42 Gullet, 64 Gunruss, 191 Hæmaturia or bloody urine, 126 Harderian gland, 73 Haunch bone or pelvis, 62 Haw, 73 Heart, its functions, 69, 84, 112 Heat apoplexy, 119 Exhaustion, 118 Height, 7 Hellebore (black), 209 Hemp, Indian, 209 Hepatitis or inflammation of liver, 150 Honey, 209 House utensils, 193 Hoof slipper, 63 Huldee, 209 Humerus, 62 Hydatids, 152 Hydrarg, iodidum, rubrum, ointment, 209 Hyoscyamus, 209 Hypodermic injection, 195 Identification, marks of, 8 Idiosyncrasies, 11 Ileum, jejunum, and duodenum, 65 Impregnation, 68 Indications of ill-health, 80
iv. INDEX. Indigestion, 134 Acute, 134 ndisposition, signs of, 10. Inflammation of mouth, 136 Of bowels, 138 Of bladder, 125 Of cornea, 157 Of feet, 188 Of kidneys, 124 Of liver, 151 Of temporal glands, 161 Of skin, 164 Ingrowing nails, 181 Ink nuts, 209 Instructions for saddling, 41 For securing elephants, 52 Instruments, 196 Care of, 197 Post mortem, 99 Internal remedies, 237 Parasites, 144 Intestinal obstruction, 140 Iodine, 209 Liniment, 209 Ointment, 209 Tincture, 209 Iodoform, 209 Ointment, 209 Irregularities of the teeth, 136 Jaggery, 209 Jaundice, 151 Jejunum, duodenum, and ileum, 65 Jinjili leaves, 209 Oil, 210 Seeds, 210 Kaing grass, 22 Kerosine oil, 210 Kidneys, 67, 124 Knee joint or carpus, 62 Koochlie, 137 Kootkie, 210 Kumree, 117 Lachrymal apparatus, 73 Laminitis, 188 Larnyx, 70 Laxatives or aperients, 239 Lead acetate, 210 Leeches, 187 Lotion, 210 Subacetate liquor, 210 Lemon juice, 210 Lice, 185 Lime, 210 Lime water, 210 Chloride of, 206 Water, 310 Liniments or embrocations, 225 Linseed meal, 210 Oil, 210 Lips, 64 Liquor ammon., dilute, 210 Ammon. acetate, 210 Arsenicalis, 210 Liquorice root, country, 211 Liver, 66, 151 Flukes, 146 Weight of, 67 Loading, 31 Lock-jaw or tetanus, 109 Lumbar vertebræ, 60 Lungs, 70, 121 Mace, 211 Maggots, 138, 166,172, 185 Management, 21 Mango tree bark, 211 Seeds, 211 Margosa bark, 211 Fruit, 211 Fruit oil, 211 Leaves, 211 Tree, 211 Tree toddy, 211 Marks of identification, 8 Measure glasses, 196 Medicines, preparations of, 193 Administration of, 193 Mesentery, 66, 100 Metatarsals. 63 Midriff or diaphragm, 69 Milk, 17, 211 Sour, 211 Moisture around nails, 182 Mookunda, 192 Moringa bark and roots, 211 Flowers, 212 Leaves, 212 Mortar and pestle, 196 Mosquitoes, 187 Mothea beenj, 158 Mounting, 46 Mouth, cavity of, 64 Inflammation of, 136 Mucous membrane, 65, 70 Mumps or sore-throat, 122 Murrain or epidemic dysentery, 140 Muscular system, 73 Mussauls, 26, 82 Mustard, 212 Oil, 212 Musth, 68, 160 Myrrh, 212 Nails, diseases of, 181 Nasal chambers, 121
INDEX. v. Natural fodder, 21 Neck rope, 39, 42 Needles, surgical, 196 Seton, 196 Nephritis, 124 Nervous diarrhvi. INDEX. Rheumatism, 110 Symptoms and treatment,110 Rhubarb, 215 Ribs, 61 Rivers, crossing of, 46 Rot, 146,149 Runaway elephants, 42 Sacral vertebrae, 60 Saddles or ohn-dones, 37, 39, 41 Saddling, instructions for, 41 Sajhan, 174 Sales, 13 Salt, common, 215 Black, 215 Enema, 215 Rock, 215 Saw, fret, 196 Scales and weights, 196 Scalpels, 196 Scapula or shoulder-blade, 61 Scissors, 196 Scurf, 184 Secure for operations, 49 Seminal fluid, 67 SepticINDEX. vii. Ulceration of forehead, 175 Of ear, 176 Of tail, 177 Ulcers or sores, 171 Ulcers on elbows, 173 Ulna and radius, 62 Urethra, functions of, 67, 124 Ureters, 67,124 Urinary organs, 67, 84, 124 Urine, specific gravity of, 124 Retention of, 125 Bloody, 126 Uro-genital canal, 67 Urticaria, 183 Use of salt, 26 Uterus or womb, 68 Vaccination, 95 How performed, 95 Vagina, 68 Value, 9 Varieties of green fodder, 24 Ventricles, 112,113 Verdigris, 217 Vermifuges, 223 Vinegar, 201, 217 Vomiting, 141 Vulva, 68 Warbles, 185 Warty growths around nails, 181 Watering, 28 Wax, 217 Weakness, anaemia, 84 Weight of carcass, 74 Of heart, 70 Of liver, 67 Of spleen, 67 Weights and measures, 193 Used by mahouts, 193 Wheat flour, 218 White arsenic, 70, 201 Wind-pipe, 70, 121 Windstroke, 117 Womb or uterus, 68 Work and exercise, 30 Working of elephants in calf, 15 Wounds, 166, 171 Zahirbad, 85 Sukka, 85 Zinc, chloride liq., 218 Lotion, 218 Oxide, 218 Ointment, 218 Sulphate, 218 G. B. C. P. O.