RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. (Sanctioned under Government Resolution, Educational Department, No. 762, dated 10th May 1901.)
RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. (Sanctioned under Government Resolution, Educational Department, No. 762, dated 10th May 1901.)
BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. TEACHING AND CLINICAL STAFF. JAMES BRODIE-MILLS, M.R.C.V.S., V.S.H. & A. Socy. Scot., Vety. Major, A.V.D., J.P., Fellow, Bombay University, Principal and Professor of Veterinary Science. F. S. H. BALDREY, M.R.C.V.S., Veterinary Lieutenant, A.V.D., Assistant Principal. N. D. DHAKMARWALA, G.B.V.C., Asst. Prof. of Anatomy and Physiology. V. E. VAKHARIA, G.B.V.C., Asst. Prof. of Chemistry, Materia Medica, Botany and Pharmacy. A. I. SHAIKH, G.B.V.C., Instructor, Vernacular Class. M. C. JOSHI, G.B.V.C., Instructor, Vernacular Class. R. TOWN. Pensioned Sergeant Farrier, Instructor in Shoeing. H. A. FOY, G.B.V.C., Assistant Veterinary Officer No. I. P. MIRANDA, G.B.V.C., Assistant Veterinary Officer No. II. J. F. L. D'MONTE. Assistant Veterinary Officer No. III. V. B. PHATAK, Head Clerk. S. G. RANADE, Second Clerk. B 63THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. INTRODUCTORY. 1. The Government Veterinary College, Bombay, has been established on an estate at Parel (near Government House, five miles from the Fort) presented by Sir Dinshaw Manockjee Petit, Bart., and is worked in conjunction with the Bál Sákarbái Dinshaw Petit Hospital for Animals of the Bombay Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals on the same estate, the Veterinary Officers of the College being ex-officio in charge of the Hospital. 2. Thus full clinical and other facilities are afforded to meet the Veterinary educational requirements especially of the Bombay Presi- dency, but students are admitted from any part of India or elsewhere. The special objects of the College are to train competent practitioners for Veterinary service under Government, for private practice, for ser- vice in Native States, and for special, posts under Municipalities, Dis- trict Local Boards, &c. 3. The entire estate at Parel now includes the large bungalow occupied by the Veterinary College, the Sir Dinshaw Manockji Petit Patho Bacteriological Laboratory, the Chemical Laboratory, Pharmacy, two Horse Wards, five Cattle Wards, one Dog Ward, one Isolation Word, one Tetanus Ward, Post-mortem and Dissection Rooms, Forge and Shoeing Shed, Practical Examination Shed, resident students' quarters, besides the general offices, store-rooms, servants' quarters, gate-keepers' chowkis, &c. 4. In exchange for certain privileges granted to the College, the Society is entitled to the Veterinary services gratis of the teaching staff for sick animals in the Hospital, which in its turn affords clinical facilities to students of the College. Thus the Institutions derive mutual advantage. 5. The Bombay Municipality co-operates with Government in defraying the cost of working the College. 6. The Principal is the immediate administrative head of the Institution, subject to the control of the Director of Public Instruc- tion in the Educational Department of Government. 7. The diploma of qualification as " Graduate of the Bombay Veterinary College" is awarded after a full course of study at the College and passing the examination of graduation. Special certifi- cates of proficiency will be awarded to such graduates as, during their period of studentship or after, have attended supplementary courses on special subjects and passed the corresponding examinations. Amateurs B 632 may be admitted as Occasional Students to such courses as they may elect on payment of a fixed fee, but shall in no case be entitled to cer- tificates nor to compete for prizes. 8. The course of study for the diploma extends over three collegiate years. Each year comprises nine teaching months and is divided as follows:3 11. Fifteen scholarships of the value of Rs. 10 each, tenable for three years, are attached to the College. The holders of these scholar- ships are entitled to receive free instruction at the College. The scholars will be selected from the different districts of the Pre- sidency by rotation, allowing each district to have generally one student at the College at a time under this rule. Collectors will be asked to recommend men from any of the schools in their districts for the ap- proval of the Principal. The final selection of these men will rest with the latter in consultation with the Superintendent, Civil Veteri- nary Department, and the Deputy Director of Agriculture, Bombay Presidency. If possible, the candidates recommended should appear in person before the Principal for this selection. While selecting men for Government scholarships preference will be given to University Matriculates and School Final men, who are sons of land-holders, or those that are actually engaged in agricultural pursuits and are accustomed to handle cattle. Their age should not be below 18 or over 25. They must also come up to the recognised standard of chest and height measurements and be in every way physically fit for veterinary work. Any slackness in attendance at practical instruction classes will render the scholars liable to forfeiture of their scholarships and free student- ships. 12. Native State Students should be selected on the same lines as free students. Provision should be made for their proper sup- port while in Bombay and for their being able to purchase the text books (which cost, approximately, Rs. 60 per annum). Native States, Municipalites, &c., sending students to the College will be held responsible for the payment of the fees of those students. 13. All applications for admission as a student shall be made in writing to the Principal, who will acknowledge their receipt and record them. He will decide on the advisability of admission in all doubtful cases. 14. Applicants should, preferably in person, communicate with the Principal, at the Veterinary College, Parel, on any day, except Sundays, between the hours of 11 A.M. and 4 P.M. 15. Paying students may be admitted to the courses at any time on production of the necessary certificates and payment of the College fees in advance for the whole current half-year : thus pecu- niarily as well as in reference to their studies it will be to the advan- tage of such students to enter at the commencement of a Session. 16. Each student, when enrolled on the College books, shall receive a copy of the rules and regulations, and his entering the College shall imply acceptance of such rules and regulations as are in force when he enters and also such alterations as may be made in them from time to time under due authority. 17. Graduates of medicine and under-graduates who have passed the First L.M. & S. Examination at an Indian University or the
4 qualifying examination as a Hospital Assistant, or holders of a diploma or certificate of graduation at a recognised Agricultural Col- lege or School, are excused the first year's study, but examined in the subjects of both first and second year at the end of their first year of attendance at the College. 18. Men, having undergone a two years' course at a Veterinary School and having obtained a certificate qualifying themselves as Veterinary Assistants, are allowed to appear for the Third Professional (Diploma) Examination after one year's training at the College. But to make themselves eligible for this concession, those who attend- ed a two years' course in the Vernacular will have to prove that they have passed the University Matriculation or School Final Examination, or to pass the Entrance Test prescribed by the College rules, and to produce evidence of their having been in practice for five years. 19. This College recognises the terms kept, and examinations passed, by students in the Bengal Veterinary College and other Insti- tutions where the educational standard for admission and curriculum of studies are the same as at the College and where the instruction given is through the medium of English. But no student of this class will be admitted here unless he obtains written permission from the Head of the Institution he intends to leave. Curriculum. 20. The following is the curriculum of studies :5 brought up to date in the Agricultural Ledgers, Veterinary Series. Therapeutics, including Toxicology6 Table of Times and Nature of Lectures, &c. Hour. Monday. Tuesday. Wednesday. Thursday. Friday. Saturday. CLASS A.7 EXAMINATIONS. 23. The professional examinations for the Diploma of Graduate of the Bombay Veterinary College are three in number. They are termed respectively the First, Second and Third., and are conducted at the end of the corresponding years of study. These three examin- ations shall be passed in the order above mentioned, i.e, no candidate may present himself for the Second without having passed the First, nor for the Third without having passed the Second, except under such special circumstances as may be sanctioned by Government. 24. The following are the subjects for the Examinations with the maximum number of marks that will be awarded for each of them :-8 25. In the First and Second Professional Examinations 33 per cent. in each subject and 50 per cent. of the total number of marks shall suffice for a " pass.' 26. In the Third Professional Examination 33 per cent. in each subject, with the exception of the Equine and Bovine Medicine and Surgery and Operative Surgery and a general total of 50 per cent. shall be necessary for a " pass." In Equine and Bovine Medicine and Surgery and Operative Surgery it will be necessary to obtain 50 per cent. of marks in each subject for a "pass." 27. For admission to any examination by the Board, a can- didate must have studied for the prescribed time at the College, and have attended at least two-thirds of the year's lectures and practical work in each of the various classes. The Principal may, however, make special allowance in the case of illness. 28. Any student who fails at an examination must, before being allowed to re-appear for that examination, again put in a full year's course of study. But the Principal shall have the power to permit any student of the Class " C " to re-appear at the Third Professional Examination on the student satisfying the Principal that he has work- ed with a qualified Veterinary Practitioner in a dispensary, or has otherwise been in a position to keep up and improve his practical knowledge for six months in the year previous to his re-appearing. 29. No student shall be allowed to appear for any of these examin- ations without presenting a certificate from the Principal of the College for permission to present himself, and for the Diploma Exa- mination without having attained the age of 20 years. 30. The Principal shall enter in his Students' Record reasons for refusal to admit any student to examination. 31. Students must apply for permission to present themselves for Examination not later than one month before the end of the Session. 32. No student who has failed three times in the First Professional Examination will be allowed to appear again for that Examination. 33. The Professional Examinations are conducted by a Board of Examiners appointed by Government. It is constituted as follows :9 Examiners will devote to each candidate the following time in each subject:10 42. All facilities for testing candidates, either practically or otherwise, at the Veterinary College and Hospital shall be placed at the disposal of the Board of Examiners while it is sitting. Discipline and General Management. 43. The Officers of the College in accepting their posts will be considered to accept the then existing rules and regulations and also such modifications as may be made in them from time to time under due authority. Each Officer will be held responsible for exact performance of the duties of his branch of the College and Hospital work and for the results of his teaching. The Assistant Principal will be in executive charge of the Hospital and will be responsible for the treatment of cases and the clinical instruction of students during Hospital practice. He will also be in charge of all surgical instru- ments and appliances. The Lecturer on Anatomy and Physiology will be in immediate charge of the Dissecting Room and anatomical portion of the Museum. The Lecturer on Chemistry and Botany will be in immediate charge of the Chemical Laboratory, Botanical Garden, and chemical and botanical parts of the Museum. The Instructor in Practical Shoeing will be in immediate charge of the Forge building and will be held responsible for the condition of the feet of all animals in Hospital. The College records will be kept by the Head Clerk under the immediate supervision of the Principal, or the Assistant Principal, in his absence. 44. The Servants of the College, as sanctioned by Government, shall be mustered monthly in the presence of the Principal and then receive their pay. They shall hold their posts during good behaviour and satisfactory performance of their duties. Their work shall be explained thoroughly to them when they join, and they shall be constantly in attendance daily from 8 A.M. to 6 P.M.. They shall be under the immediate orders of the Head Clerk to the College, who shall report any absence without leave or imperfect performance of duty by them to the Principal or the Assistant Principal. The Hospital Servants are immediately under the manager of the Hospital, as ap- pointed by the S. P. C. A., but are always to perform any duties re- quired in the treatment of cases as directed by the Principal or the Assistant Principal. 45. All servants and officials of the College and Hospital are under the control of the Principal for discipline and due performance of their duties. 46. The various Officers will monthly report attendance of students at their classes and individual progress as shown at weekly oral, and monthly written, examinations. They will report monthly to the Principal the matter taught by them in the form of a syllabus. 47. The strictest discipline shall be maintained within the College and Hospital. Infringement of rules and regulations by students shall be punishable by fines, rustication, expulsion, or such other punishment as may be considered advisable after due enquiry. 48. All cases of serious breach of discipline shall be brought to the notice of the Principal. In the case of individuals disturbing
11 lectures or demonstrations the Instructor may at once suspend the student or students causing disturbance and refer the matter to the Principal, who shall punish by fine or suspension, or in flagrant cases be empowered to strike the student's name off the College Rolls. 49. Students are advised to take careful notes on all lectures and instruction in the class rooms. They will be required to keep records of cases treated in the Infirmary and of other practical work. 50. The College hours are from 11 a.m. to 4 p.m., but students responsible for Hospital work must attend at any hour as required, and no student will on any pretence whatsoever be exempted from practical Infirmary work and Dissection. 51. Examinations (oral, written and practical) shall be constantly carried out in the various classes throughout each Session, they being a most valuable means of instruction. A record of marks awarded shall be kept for information of parents, Native States, &c. In the case of Government scholars these examinations will afford a useful test as to whether the opportunities supplied to them by Government are being taken advantage of. The Principal shall bring to the notice of parents, Native States, &c., the cases of any students who, through constant laziness, wilful neglect, or natural inaptitude, are not likely to benefit by further studies. 52. The College Authorities will furnish a monthly report during the Sessions to each State sending students, as to regularity of attendance, progress and conduct while on the College premises. 53. Leave of absence on account of sickness or urgent private affairs will be granted (by the Principal only) to individual students after careful enquiry into the necessity. In all cases of sick leave a medical certificate may be demanded. 54. All students are required to remain until the last day of each Session and return by the first day of the new Session. 55. The holidays sanctioned for the Grant Medical College only will be admitted as such at this College. They are as follows :12 56. Lecturers' Assistants.13 at them shall be recorded, and a report of work done made monthly to the Principal for information and record. 63. The Shoeing Forge shall be used principally for teaching purposes and for special shoeing of a surgical nature. It, with the accessory rooms, shall be under the immediate control of the Instructor in Practical Shoeing, who shall be responsible for order and discipline in this part of the establishment and that all work and instruction in Shoeing is efficiently carried out. 64. Models, mounted specimens and expensive instruments not frequently used, shall be kept in the Museum. They shall there be on view for purposes of study, but in no case removed except by the teachers when required for use in the Lecture Room or Hospital. The Museum is under charge of the Curator who shall be respon- sible for order and discipline in the Museum. 65. The Bái Sákarbái Dinsha Petit Hospital for Animals is at the disposal of the College Officers for practical instruction of stu- dents, and the Trustees of the Bombay Pinjrapole have kindly permitted classes of senior students to benefit by inspections of the inmates of their valuable Institution. 66. Clinical Clerks shall be selected from among the senior and more experienced students, and each in turn placed in charge of one of the wards of the Hospital to superintend medical treatment, nursing of the patients and proper record of their cases. Satis- factory performance of the duties of Clinical Clerk shall be recog- nized by award of a Certificate on graduation. 67. Every student who is not a Clinical Clerk shall in his turn perform the duties of Dresser. He will be responsible that all instructions as to nursing and medical treatment of the animals under his charge are carried out by himself or under his immediate care. 68. Hospital Records shall be kept by the Clinical Clerks under the immediate supervision of the Assistant Principal. 69. The Pharmacy and Drug Store shall be in immediate charge of the Assistant Principal. Neither students nor attendants shall have free entry into this part of the Hospital, and the Assistant Principal shall be responsible for proper preparation of medicines, and that neither waste nor mistakes in dispensing be made. Phar- maccutical preparations shall be compounded, under the immediate supervision of the Lecturer on Chemistry, by the Practical Phar- macy class on requisition of the Assistant Principal. 70. Post-mortem examinations shall be made in the case of all animals dying in the Hospital, except when the owner has express- ed a wish to the contrary. The results shall be recorded in a book specially kept for the purpose. The Post-mortem examination room shall be under immediate charge of the Assistant Principal. 71. The Isolation Ward of the Infirmary shall, when occupied, be placed in charge of a special Clinical Clerk fully instructed as to
14 the measures necessary for protection of the attendants and preven- tion of contagion. 72. All College and Hospital publications shall be approved by the Principal before issue; in all cases where he considers them opposed to the interests entrusted to him he may stop them from being published. 73. The Class Rooms and Library of the College shall be avail- able for students' meetings at the discretion of the Principal. No students' society bearing the name of the College shall be formed without his consent. 74. Government does not in any case guarantee employment of Graduates. 75. There are quarters for only 6 students on the College pre- mises, but it is hoped that the demand for lodgings in the immediate neighbourhood will, in a short time, create a supply for the benefit of the students. Library and Reading Room. 76. Government has established at the College a Library for reference and for educational purposes. Endeavours will be made to supply it as fully as possible with veterinary works and others bearing on the management of lower animals in health and disease., by purchase of new works as published and by adding copies of other books as occasion offers. 77. The Library will also be supplied with professional periodi- cals. 78. The books will be under the care of the Librarian who will issue them at the time announced on the College Notice Board and will be responsible for order and discipline in the Library. 79. A deposit of Rs. 2 will require to be lodged with the Prin- cipal by students desirous of availing themselves of the use of books from the library. The deposit will be returned to them on their leaving the College. 80. All issues and returns will be entered in a book kept for the purpose, and the Librarian will bring to the notice of the Principal weekly all retention of books over the proper time, which will render the student retaining them liable to a fine of 2 annas per week or part of a week. The Librarian shall once a quarter examine all the books to ensure that none have been lost and to ascertain which need repair. 81. Any defacement of books, removal of illustrations, &c., shall be answered for by the student having the work in his possession on loan, and he shall be liable for fine up to the full original price of the book. In receiving a book, therefore, a student must be careful to have noted by the Librarian any defects in it at time of issue.
15 82. Books which require re-binding shall be withdrawn tempora- rily from the list of those available for issue and as often as neces- sary a packet sent off for repair. 83. Books of reference, recorded in the Catalogue as such, must not be removed from the Library. 84. Each new book on receipt shall be entered in the Catalogue and stamped with the College mark, and have a label with number, date of receipt and period for which it may be retained inserted in it. On the back shall be pasted a small label showing its number and class. New books shall remain in the Library for one month from date of arrival and then be available for issue. Students may propose new works for purchase by entering the names, publishers, and prices of the works in a book available for the purpose. 85. No periodical shall be removed by a student from the Library until it has been bound. The loose numbers will always be available for reference on the shelves in a specified situation. The periodicals shall be bound as soon as possible after completion of the volumes. The periodicals shall be mustered every evening before the Library is closed. 86. Strict silence shall be preserved in the Library. Any infringement of this rule will render a student liable to temporary deprivation of the privilege of use of the Library and Reading Room for such a length of time as the Principal may consider pro- portioned to the gravity of the offence. Reading aloud will not be permitted. 87. Any complaints students have to make as regards the Library and the Reading Room may be entered in the Complaint Book and so brought to the notice of the Principal. 88. Smoking, eating and spitting about the Library are strictly prohibited. 89. Any accidental spilling of ink on or other injury to periodi- cals or books of reference in the Reading Room should be at once reported to the Librarian who will record the details of the circum- stance for information of the Principal. 90. All writing in books, underlining and tracing over diagrams and illustrations, is strictly prohibited. It will be considered defacement and render the student who thus injures a work liable to fine. 91. But one volume at a time shall remain in possession of a student. No transfer of volumes from one student to another will be permitted, nor may books be issued or lent to persons who do not belong to the College without express permission from the Principal in each case. 92. Visitors may use the Library and Reading Room for limited periods on written permission from the Principal. BOMBAY : PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS.
