REPORT OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE AND OF THE BA'I SAKARBA'I DINSHAW PETIT HOSPITAL FOR ANIMALS, FOR THE YEAR 1886. Bombay: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1887. [PriceREPORT OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE AND OF THE BAI SAKARBAI DINSHAW PETIT HOSPITAL FOR ANIMALS, FOR THE YEAR- 1886. Bombay: "PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1887.
No. 267 OF 1887. Bombay Veterinary College and Hospital, Parel, Dated 27th April 1887. FROM J. H. STEEL, V. S., Superintendent, Bombay Veterinary College; To THE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, Revenue Department. SIR, I have the honour to submit this the First Annual Report of the Bombay Veterinary College for information of Government. A copy of the 1886 report of the Bái Sákarbái Dinshaw Petit Hospital for Animals, on which the College depends for clinical facilities, is appended, and, I trust, will be considered to indicate a satisfactory development of that important institution, which, also, is under my superintendence. 2. It will be remembered that the Hospital was opened publicly by His Excellency the Viceroy on 10th December 1884, but owing to various reasons its actual working did not commence until the 1st December 1885, when its wards were opened for patients, and for the next seven months it was managed by an agricultural graduate of Saidapet College, Mr. J. F. Lallee, with a fair amount of efficiency. Government, having decided to push on the establishing of the Vete- rinary College in the financial year 1886-87, deputed me to consult with the Executive Engineer at the Presideney concerning the conversion of an old bungalow on the Parel estate into a central building for College purposes, and the construc- tion of minor buildings on ground placed at the disposal of Government by the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, by which it was held in trust as a gift to the Society from the Pársi gentleman who is now Sir Dinshaw Maneckji Petit. Mr. K. M. Shroff, as Secretary to the Society, attended at the consultations to represent the wishes of the Society, and then, as on all other occasions, most cordially advanced the College scheme. 3. Sanction having been accorded by Government to the plans and estimates as drawn up, the Public Works Department at once took the work in hand. During its progress Government officers were appointed to the College and Hospital and arrangements were made for the opening of the College and for the working of the Hospital under the clinical control of the Veterinary Officers of Government and under the administrative supervision of the Superintendent. When, on 25th May 1886,I was gazetted Superintendent of the College and Hospital, I at once made a thorough inspection of the estate, the works in progress, and the Hospital, the result being reported to Government in my letter No. 4, dated 29thMay 1886, which shows that the Hospital presented capacities for development into a valuable addition to the public charities of Bombay and into a clinical field for practical education of students of the College, that the space and the buildings in course of construction would suffice for the primary requirements of the College, and that teaching work could be commenced in the then current year. 4. After careful study of the existing arrangements of the Hospital during the month of June, I assumed charge on 1st July, and permitted such students as had already entered their names to attend for practical study in the Hospital from that date. The Central College building was placed at my disposal on 1st August, and a certain amount of furniture got in by the 2nd idem, when the first students, with their friends and some representatives of the public press, attended for the introductory lecture and first official inspection of the Hospital. From this date the educational work of the College has been steadily carried out in accordance with the provisional scheme drawn up by me (No. 5, dated 1st June 1886) and approved by Government (Resolution of Revenue Department No. 4357 of 1886), and (subsequently) with the rules and regulations as sanctioned by Government (Resolution, Revenue Department, No 1596, dated 16th March 1887). 5. Mr. J. F. Lallee's service with the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals terminated on the appointment, as Assistant Superintendent of the Col- lege and Hospital, of Mr. S. K. Nariman, a Graduate in Science and Medicine of the B 5352 Bombay University with three years' experience as a teacher acquired at the Grant Medical College. Mr. Nariman's appointment was made probationary pending his passing examinations in veterinary science such as would render him legally qualified to practise veterinary surgery. There were numerous candidates for the post, agricultural graduates, medical practitioners, and others, but none pos- sessing all the requisite qualifications, i. e., ability to teach scientifically and prac- tical veterinary acquirements; Mr. Nariman possessed the former, and has shown aptitude in acquiring the latter and in adapting his medical information to veteri- nary requirements. His knowledge of the system of medical education in Bom- bay has been of constant use to me in organization of the College, and he has shown tact and zeal in dealing with both students and patients. I am personally and officially much indebted to him, for the past year has been an arduous one to me in educating both officials and students as to their special duties, and Mr. Nariman's suggestions and aid have been constant and valuable. The two Assistant Surgeons who have been appointed Lecturers at this College, Mr. K. S. Engineer and Mr. N. H. Sukhia, Licentiates of Medicine and Surgery, Bombay, have performed their lecturing duties satisfactorily, and shown considerable skill in adapting the knowledge of their special subjects as acquired in medical study to veterinary requirements. It is much to be desired that these officers be placed in a position to develope their subjects into specialties in each case, and I am convinced that to this end they should have their interests more closely bound up with the success of their teaching and the progress of the College than hitherto. The College Committee has under consideration this matter for report to Government. Farrier Major Stroud, Instructor in Practical Shoeing, joined for duty in November, and has proved of great assistance to me in the Hospital. His functions as instructor in practical shoeing would not have begun until some third year's students became available, but I am well assured of his ability to perform all the duties of his post, so I regret that the College has lost his services, as he found that the emoluments here are considerably below those of his army rank. 6. When notices appeared in the Government Gazettes and in the newspa- pers concerning the College applications for admission as students began to come in rapidly, and it was soon evident that the College, as opening up a new profes- sion to educated natives of India, would receive a considerable amount of public support. Very many of the applications were for the free studentships established by Government, and until these had been filled, many applicants showed reluctance to pay fees. However, the number of students ultimately willing to pay for their professional education is gratifying. The students enrolled during the first year of the College are as follows:3 The Pársi element, it will be observed, is very strong on our benches, and this affords me much gratification, for I find that the business-like habits and steadiness of purpose of the Pársi is frequently associated with considerable aptitude for the handling of animals and appreciation of their requirements in health and disease. I look forward to our being able to turn out some very good Pársi graduates. The zeal and. application of the Hindus as veterinary students deserves commendation. They show a little tendency to book-work rather than practical studies, and the Staff has endeavoured to counteract this. I should like to see more Mahomedan applicants. It will be observed that all of this caste have been sent up by the Native States, or otherwise as non-paying students. Mahomedans, as among the best horsemen in India, should make good veterinary students: some of the few students of this caste have worked very well. The one Jewish and several Portuguese students, also those of the European and Eurasian section, have made good progress, perhaps more marked in practical work than in theory. It is this section, only, of our students which has some knowledge of domesticated animals before coming to the College and, of course, it is thereby at a great advantage. If I be permitted to generalise from my teaching experience in Great Britain and India, the English student shows a de- cided practical aptitude, but a distaste for pure theory; whereas the native of India shows a decided inclination towards theory and literary work. From this it must be deduced that the studies at the Bombay Veterinary College must be essentially practical in every possible respect. There is, especially, one practical matter to which I wish to draw attention4 position to pay the College fees, to give men from outlying districts the pre- ference over Bombay applicants, and to select those with the best general educa- tion. The Agricultural Societies of Poona and Nadiád were each given the privi- lege of nomination of one of the free students: the former sent up a Hindu who is doing well; the latter a Mahomedan who never settled to his work properly, and at length tendered his resignation. The Bombay Municipility, I understand, tried to secure three suitable candidates of different castes, but, finally, had to send up three Pársis. The fact that non-matriculates are admitted at our College has attracted many students, often very excellent and suitable young men. Another inducement is the fact of our course extending over only three years, whereas the medical occupies five. Our Bombay students, especially, are drawn from the same class as those of the Grant Medical College, some of them having brothers or other immediate relations in the medical profession, and a few have studied in the Grant College, but have entered our institution induced probably by the prospect of less severe or less prolonged studies. Several medical men applied for admission, but, on finding they would have to study for two years before graduation, withdrew their names. The Central Provinces' Government is trying the interesting experiment of educating qualified hospital assistants as veterinary practitioners. Under our regulations they are excused each one year of study on account of their previous medical knowledge, they constitute the nucleus of a second year's class, and the two men sent up have as such, since Christmas last, been receiving the prescribed second year's instructions,5 ment, the teaching appliances are less numerous and complete than they will be hereafter, and (especially) they have not had the valuable influence of senior classes of students to assist them in their earlier studies. 9. Order and discipline have been satisfactorily maintained, and only one case needing severe punishment occurred. 10. The following Native States' and Provinces' students have been sent up to the College:6 for supply of information on such matters relating to domesticated animals as Government may call for from time to time. The thanks of the Committee have been conveyed to donors of books. The Instructor in practical shoeing has been officiating as Librarian. The MUSEUM contains about 60 specimens, many of much value. They are illustrative of the several branches of study at the College, and been supplied by the Superintendent, Assistant Superintendent, and members of the veterinary profession; a number of them have been obtained from fatal cases in the Hospital. Thanks of the Committee have been conveyed to the donors, and, it is gratifying that some of the best specimens have been sent from so far off as Calcutta. Under the regulations, the lecturers will, in future, be required to assist in the organization of the museum in their respective departments (but I hope on somewhat a different footing from the present unsatisfactory one, and that Gov- ernment will be pleased to adopt my suggestion of making provision for a small salary for a Joint Librarian and Museum Curator). I look forward to this the more anxiously, because I consider our museum one of the most valuable teaching means at our disposal, and I look confidently towards its considerable expansion. Accordingly, I have requested the Committee to ask Government to give us further accommodation for it, by throwing out a porch in front of the College and extending the museum above it, thereby more than doubling our present museum space. When our skeletons are mounted, we shall be much cramped for room in the small-part of the building at present devoted to specimens; and when our students begin to know a fair amount about veterinary work we may expect from them large additions to our museum, and that it will become a really good one. The FORGE and its SUBSIDIARY BUILDINGS were completed in the past year, and a portion of the grant for furniture devoted to their equipment: thus they can be got to work shortly. It is proposed to carry out only shoeing of a special nature, of infirmary patients, and for educational purposes, in order that there may be no serious competition with local firms who shoe " on European principles." The course for practical shoeing begins only in the third year of study, so no students have as yet learned shoeing. The DISSECTING ROOM has been completed and opened with sufficient furni- ture for the small second year's class, which has been under instruction since Christmas. I hope to complete its equipment by June next, when a fair-sized class will be required to commence the study of practical anatomy. I have under consideration the necessary organization of work in this department, especially as regards the minimum cost of supply of " subjects," of which our Hospital has not hitherto constituted a sufficient or reliable source. The POST-MORTEM ROOM has proved a most valuable addition to our clinical resources, especially in examination of carcases as to the nature of fatal diseases, such as rinderpest and rabies, also as to the presence or absence of poison and in enquiries tending to advance our pathological knowledge. The BOTANICAL GARDEN has had to stand over until the ground becomes avail- able. In the meanwhile the scheme for it is being elaborated by the Chemical Lecturer and myself. The want of a CHEMICAL LABORATORY for practical instruction in this branch and for analysis is much felt. A valuable equipment of surgical instruments has been provided by Govern- ment, and medicines have been liberally supplied by the Society for the Preven- tion of Cruelty to Animals. Much good teaching material has been supplied by the Hospital and utilized in practical instruction of the class. The want of a PRACTICAL EXAMINATION SHED AND OPERATING ROOM has been much felt, and is in course of representation to Government; it is most necessary for the protection of the health of the clinical officers and of the students both during the hot weather and the rains. The Trustees of the Bombay Pinjrápole have, on my request, permitted me to take small classes round their establish- ment for practical instruction; this I consider a most valuable concession. 12. PRIZES varying in value and suited to the requirements of the students have been offered, as follows:7 (b) The Text Books for Class C open to all paying students of Class B, for the best examination in practical anatomy. (c) A pocket case of veterinary instruments and a clinical thermometer for the first and second students in Class B examination. (d) A silver medal for clinical records (Class C). (e) Rs. 32 worth of professional books for the best essay on a specified pro- fessional subject; this year " The Cattle of Gujarát" (several essays have been sent in)8 17. Of extra collegiate work performed by officers of the College during the past year:9 APPENDIX A. FIRST ANNUAL REPORT OF THE BAI SAKARBAI DINSHAW PETIT HOSPITAL FOR ANIMALS. No. 103 OF 1887. Bombay Veterinary College and Hospital, Parel, Dated 10th February 1887. From J. H. STEEL, V.S., Superintendent, Bombay Veterinary College; To THE SECRETARY, Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, Bombay. SIR, I have the honour to submit, for information of the Hospital Committee of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, the following Report of the working of the Hospital for the half year ending 31st December 1886. The Hospital had been open for thirteen months on that date, but I consider it will be best to take advantage of my having been here six months in veterinary charge and to date our half-yearly reports in the future from 1st July and 1st January, and to bring this before the Society as its First Yearly Hospital Report. 2. On the officers of the College relieving Mr. J. F. Lalee of veterinary charge of your Hospital, 51 animals remained under treatment, i. e., 4 horses, 46 bullocks, and 1 cow. Mr. Lallee's returns were presented at the first meeting of the Hospital Committee in the form of a systematic report drawn up by me from them. In para. 3 of that report I state that since the Hospital was started, 286 head of cattle, 92 horses, 54 dogs, and 14 other animals have been dealt with in the Hospital; representing a total of 446 in 7 months and an average of 635/7 per mensem. The in-patients were:10 The following is a précis of the Monthly Reports :11 cases. Thus our practice is necessarily some what restricted, especially as regards horses; it is, therefore, with some satisfaction that we point to the number of in-patients as averaging 135 12 all treatment under the officers of the College and with assistance of the junior students as Dressers. Thus students become trained for the supply of practical veterinarians to the country in the future, while the Hospital is saved the expense of trained dressers. 4. The following are the principal changes which have been made in the Hospital during the last six months:13 (i) The following special servants for the Hospital:14 punctured foot, fractures of the shoulder and quarter, and various lamenesses. The most interesting cases have been recorded in the Journal of Veterinary Science in India, which is edited by the Superintendent. An enquiry into the best means of prevention of sore neck is being organ- ized by the Committee, under the professional advice of the Superintendent, who is collecting necessary information on the subject. Some curious cases of prejudice against the Hospital and misrepresentation as to its aims have been detected and are being counteracted., Among them we may enumerate 1. An idea that the Hospital is experimental. 2. Prejudice in favour of empirical treatment and charms, &c. 3. Impressions that the officers don't know their work. 4. The idea that surely all the benefits of the Hospital are not given with- out some ulterior, though not evident, object. 5. The impression that life is taken at the Hospital. 6. The impression that the Hospital is a sort of police establishment. 7. The idea that the Hospital is too grand a place for cattle and horses of poor people. But these will, it is confidently predicted, in time be thoroughly dispelled by the reputation the Hospital is getting for disinterested charity and care of its patients. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient servant, JOHN H. STEEL, V. S., Superintendent, Bombay Veterinary College and Hospital.
15 DONATIONS TO THE BAI SAKARBAI DINSHAW PETIT HOSPITAL FOR ANIMALS. 1885. Rs. a. p. Jumnadass Geegabhoy, Esq. ... ... ...10 0 0 A. K. Shepherd, Esq. ... ... ... ... ...50 0 0 Furdoonjee Byramjee Murzban, Esq. ... ... ... ...5 0 0 Pestonjee Dinshaw Sopariwalla, Esq. ... ... ... ...2 0 0 Nusserwanjee Dadabhoy, Esq. ... Pestonjee Dadabhoy Plan-maker, Esq. ... ... ...15 0 0 ... ... ...10 0 0 Ardeshir Nesserwanjee Mody, Esq., and others ... ... ...50 0 0 Framjee Hormusjee Commissariatwala, Esq. ... ... ...25 0 0 Nusserwanjee D. Mirza, Esq. Jamsetjee Dinshawjee Commissariatwala, Esq. ... ... ...5 0 0 ... ... ...10 0 0 Eduljee Bomonjee Morris, Esq. Nusserwanjee Bomanjee Tata, Esq. ... ... ...15 0 0 ... ... ...5 0 0 Jehanghir Merwanjee Vakil, Esq. ... ... ...15 0 0 Bai Motibai Pestonjee Mehta ... ... ...5 0 0 Muncherjee Ardeshir Dustoor, Esq. ... ... ...10 0 0 Bai Ruttonbai Cowasjee Bhimjibhoy ... ... ... ...50 0 0 His Highness the Ráo of Cutch ... ... ...250 0 0 Bomonjee Hormusjee General, Esq. ... ... ... ...10 0 0 Nowrojee Pestonjee Toddywala, Esq. ... ... ... ...20 0 0 Eduljee Merwanjee Dubash, Esq., and others ... ... 20 0 0 Nusserwanjee Dadabhoy Nowsariwala, Esq., and others Pestonjee Dadabhoy Nowsariwala, Esq., and others 10 0 0 10 0 0 Eduljee Framjee Albless, Esq. ... ... 15 0 0 617 0 0 1886, Rs. a. p. Nuthuram Joravurmul, Esq. ... ... ...250 0 0 F. Y. Smith, Esq..... ... ... 25 0 0 Fakirjee Maneckjee Damania, Esq. Bai Mithibai ... ... ... 10 0 0 ... ... 3 0 0 Sorabjee Shapurjee Bangalee, Esq., C.I.E. ... ... ...100 0 0 Dinshaw Nusserwanjee, Esq. ... ... 1 0 0 Messrs. Damjee Megjee & Co. ... ... 10 0 0 Bharmull Bhojraj, Esq. ... ... ... 10 0 0 Nanabhoy Bomonshaw, Esq. ... ... 10 0 0 Gokuldass Jugmohondass, Esq. ... ... 25 0 0 Dinshaw Maneckjee Bharucha, Esq. ... ... ... 5 0 0 Eduljee Pestonjee Bharucha, Esq. ... ... 5 0 0 Messrs. Mooljee Purmanand & Co. Premchand Nehalchand, Esq. ... ... 9 9 6 ... ... 3 14 0 K. S, Nariman, Esq. ... ... ... 25 0 0 Bai Hirabai ... ... ... 15 0 0 Rustomjee Bejanjee Kapudia, Esq. ... ... ... 10 0 0 Bai Dinbai ... ... 25 0 0 542 7 6
Bombay Veterinary College: Annual Report of the 2 collected, while some fees, especially those due from certain Native States, have not been paid. Mr. Steel has explained the grounds on which he considers that it would be at present premature to exact prepayment of fees on entrance. 6. The reports both on the College and on the Hospital give evidence of the warm interest which Mr. Steel takes in the institutions under his charge, and of his earnest desire to secure practical results. In his references to the aid which may be looked for from the Veterinary College in dealing with cattle- disease, he shows a sound appreciation of the most important function of such institutions in India and his suggestion that the College may prove useful to the Military Department by supplying servants trained in Veterinary Science to the Transport Service seems well worthy of consideration. 7. The value of the extra collegiate work referred to by the Superin- tendent in the 17th paragraph of his report is fully recognized by Government. Copies of his report, which should be printed, should be forwarded to the Secre- tary of State and to the Government of India, and copies should also be placed on the Editors' Table. The thanks of Government are also due to the Committee of Management for their exertions. J. DE C. ATKINS, Under Secretary to Government. To The Superintendent, Bombay Veterinary College and Hospital, The Commissioners of Divisions and in Sind, All Collectors, including the Collectors and Deputy Commissioners in Sind, The Political Department of the Secretariat, The Political Agents, Káthiáwár, Cutch, Kolhápur and Southern Marátha Country and Mahi Kántha, The Political Superintendents, Pálanpur and Sávantvádi, The Superintendent, Horse-Breeding Operations, The Municipal Commissioner for the City of Bombay, The Accountant General, The Educational Department of the Secretariat, The Military Department of the Secretariat, The Director of Public Instruction, The Director of Agriculture, The Secretary to the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, The Editors' Table, Bombay, The Editors' Table, Poona, care of the City Magistrate, Poona, The Editor and Proprietor, Dhárwár Vritt, Dhárwár, for his own use and for circulation to other editors of newspapers in Dhárwár. With copies of the report The Government of India, The Secretary of State for India. By letter. No. of 1887. Copy forwarded for information and guidance to
REPORT OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE AND OF THE BA'I SAKARBA'I DINSHAW PETIT HOSPITAL FOR ANIMALS, FOR THE YEAR 1887. Bombay: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1888. [PriceREPORT OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE AND OF THE BA'I SAKARBA'I DINSHAW PETIT HOSPITAL FOR ANIMALS, FOR THE YEAR 1887. Bombay: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1888.
No. 337 OF 1888. FROM J. H. STEEL, V.S., Superintendent, Bombay Veterinary College ; To THE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, Revenue Department. Bombay Veterinary College and Hospital, Parel, dated 25th of May 1888. SIR, I have the honour to submit this the Second Annual Report of the Bombay Veterinary College for information of Government. To it I have appended the 1887 Report of the Bái Sáker Bái Dinshaw Petit Hospital for Animals which has been submitted to the Bombay Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, and will be found to indicate a considerable and satisfactory develop- ment of that institution during the past year. 2. At the end of last official year the College consisted of a single class numbering 64, of them 43 being eligible to appear for their First Professional Examination in April. Under the College Rules and Regulations Government appointed a Board consisting of Professor Gray of the Grant Medical College and Veterinary Surgeons Meredith and O'Donel, which commenced to sit on 2nd May 1887 and passed 34 of the candidates2 be detained for their final examination until April 1889. Thus the classes will be changed only annually in future; it is not yet advisable to exclude entrance of students during the course of the year, but in time no doubt it will be neces- sary to decide that entrance shall be only in June. 3. Government has under consideration the appointment of a permanent Board of Examiners referred to in my letters No. 515, dated 5th August 1887, and No. 137, dated 9th February 1888. I am of opinion this will prove a very great advantage as facilitating working of the examination machinery so long as we have to maintain a special examining body. I trust in the not distant future the Bombay University will show the other Universities of the British Empire an example by confirming degrees in veterinary surgery and medicine to the promotion of science and the advancement of the veterinary profession. With all due respect to the examiners who have worked here during the past year, and with full thanks to them for their zeal and efficiency, I am convinced that occasionally they failed to understand expressions used by the candidates in correctly answering questions and sometimes were unfavourably impressed with behaviour which was simply due to nervousness but attributed to other causes. Some of these examiners had had much experience of natives and of examining them, but others were acting in their capacity for the first time. I in no way complain of results, which were satisfactory, but a permanent Board will, I am certain, prove much more efficient and practicable than a series of temporary ones possibly could be. There is nothing more harassing to a teacher than to see an unfavourable impression produced on an examiner by a student who knows the answer to a question but expresses himself badly. This applies to an extent to the written test but still more to the oral and practical ones, and it cer- tainly renders examination of students, mostly natives, by examiners, mostly Europeans, a matter of experience and tact as well as knowledge on the part of the latter. A further argument is that it is necessary for the Board to know the standard to which we can educate our students. Thus a Class A student has yet another year to study physiology and must not be expected to have a very profound knowledge of it at his first examination, and a Class B student, for the same reason, must not be too severely tested in medicine and surgery. I am in hopes that the average amount of knowledge conveyed to our students before they become practitioners will equal that given in the British schools but differ somewhat in adaptation to Indian practical needs, and I trust the latter fact will be duly taken into consideration at the examinations. Doubtless our best men will not equal the best European graduates, but they will not fall far short, and the discrepancy will disappear with time and the still further development of the College. There is every probability that some on graduation will proceed to England to take the diploma of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons there. I have not yet heard the result of my application to the Council of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons for recognition of our institution any further than that it is to be considered with the whole subject of Colonial registration and affiliation at a meeting to be held shortly. While I am of opinion that it will take some years to give native students the expertness in horse and cattle handling which English boys generally acquire before they come up to College, I have the pleasure to report that the senior class has made great progress in this respect and, I think, will be found by the examining Board to have much improved in smartness on going about a horse and bullock. The examination subjects and routine as fixed by the College Committee seems to me from our experience in 1887 a fair and sound test as to the efficiency of teaching in the various subjects. 4. In my last report I showed that there were 64 students attending; the number has now increased to 80, of whom some five are doubtful in regularity of attendance and seriousness in work. This number has been arrived at by prompt elimination of all non-attendants, unless some good excuse be given for absence, and by admissions amounting to 19 in all out of 27 who actually passed the Entrance Examination and were placed on the rolls. I trust Government will approve my action in not exerting pressure in any way on the candidates for graduation in veterinary science to get them to remain at the College after entering. I consider that if a man has not his heart in the work the sooner he goes to something else the better, and I further consider and impress on the
3 students the fact that in entering our College they are beginning the responsible work of life and have ceased to be school-boys ; they must know their own minds and judge for themselves, especially in the all-important matter of selecting the line of work to which they are to devote their lives. Thus, from distaste for veterinary studies, from want of energy or ability or general education and from other causes the unsuitable elements drop out of our class-rooms to an extent; a few remain, but the general result of this elimi- nation I feel to be good: the remainder can be relied on as good, or at any rate zealous, students and the classes are freed from unwieldiness and elements liable to be noisy or otherwise distracting. That in our second year we have admitted 27 men and retained 19 of them shows a gratifying evidence continued popularity. In the first year we absorbed a number of men who for some time had been awaiting the constantly deferred opening of the College, also the students of those Native States looking anxiously for veterinary education, and 15 Government and Municipal free students; this year our numbers may fairly be considered to have been increased by private and State students who have been attracted by the success of our first year's work. The table of students is as given in Appendix A. There is still a great demand for free-studentships, and some young men enter in the hope of sooner or later getting one, but this year few have been given as only few vacancies were available. One Government free student be- came a Baroda scholar, and there is a tendency noticeable on the part of the States to obtain as scholars senior students the remains of whose education will cost less than the full course for graduation. Students, naturally, gladly avail themselves of these opportunities, and the little economy thus practised is not probably in the main a disadvantage because it possibly increases the number of States sending students and will lessen the number of graduates who have to make their living in British territory and who in course of time will, like the doctors, be found numerous enough and even somewhat crowded. This latter result, how- ever, is in the very distant future; we yet remain the only College of the kind in India; Madras and Bengal have already made slight official advances with a view to obtaining some of our graduates; Burma likewise has had a suggestion brought forward to make use of our College for education of its practitioners. thus it may fairly be anticipated that the Bombay graduates will have plenty of scope. 5. The following are to be added to the list of Native States' and Provinces' students given in my last year's report:4 the College opening day anniversary. A very satisfactory indication of appre- ciation of the College staff by the students has been a decision to present to the College Library a number of books in commemoration of the satisfaction felt at Assistant Superintendent Nariman obtaining the degree of M. D. of the local University. The honour done by His Excellency the Governor in nominating the Superintendent of the College a Fellow of the University was also received with lively satisfaction. 8. Experience of the past year tends to support the view previously expressed that the Matriculation test could best be fixed on as the standard of general education before admission, and also that as yet veterinary education is not ripe for such restriction. Although the matriculate has the fairest start and can best appreciate to the full the course of instruction, there can be no doubt that a number of the students who have not passed this test have shown much aptitude for veterinary studies. A small instalment of the first half-year's fees might in future be required from each candidate for the examination; in this way those who have no intention of remaining at the College or those who leave before paying fees will be made to contribute a little to our receipts and not gratuitously subject our officers to the trouble of examining them. 9. The selection of free students has in the main proved satisfactory, the results being as in Appendix B. During the past year a few free students have been elected to fill vacancies. It would be as well in the future to carry out this object by the appointment of good students from the year of the original tenant of the free-studentship with a view to the 15 Government and Municipal studentships falling vacant in the same year. The policy of giving free-studentships is thoroughly supported by results, the men holding the best positions on our pass lists being free students in high proportion : the private paying students have held their own ; some of the State students have been hampered by deficiency in general education and, especially at first, by a want of familiar acquaintance with colloquial English. 10. One candidate for employment in the horse-breeding operations and two salutris have received practical instruction in the Hospital. In further correspondence with the Commissary General on the subject of employment of veterinary graduates in the Transport Service I have not made much ground, as no higher class of men than that at present employed can be afforded. In accordance with request, I have stated that two men at a time sent up to learn nursing of sick horses and bullocks by the Transport Branch can be permitted to pass through a Hospital course. I hope a little good will then be done, but both in peace and on active service the need of adequate veterinary attendance for Transport animals is, I am convinced, a most serious cause of considerable loss to the State. 11. Appendix C is a return of the actual lectures and instructions in the several classes by the different officers of the College. In consequence of ill-health of the Superintendent no special course of lec- tures was delivered this year. The subject selected by me for the winter session, 1888-89, is " the camel in health and disease," a course of six lectures, which will be open to the public. 12. The vacancy in the College staff created by the resignation by Farrier Major Stroud of his position as Instructor in practical shoeing has not yet been filled and has caused me much anxiety and correspondence; the difficulty lies in securing a suitable farrier without putting Government to extra expense. The only way to accomplish this is to permit the occupant of the post the privilege of private shoeing in the College Forge provided it does not interfere with his official work. This should, prove an adequate source of income, but the old soldiers from whom we must select one farrier rather fight shy of a post the guaranteed emoluments of which are but small. This is a difficulty I trust to overcome, especially if the Military Department will lend us a man for a period not exceeding one year before his retirement who can thus settle down to his work and clearly understand the advantages of the post before he is called on to permanently accept it,
5 13. The subject of the staff allowance of the Assistant Surgeons appointed to the College as Lecturers has been brought before the College Committee, which has expressed its opinion that the amount of staff allowance should increase in certain specified proportion with length of service until a maximum is attained. So long as the present system is retained this is probably the best method which could be adopted, the increase in staff allowance being dependent on these officers being favourably reported on. But I would suggest that the whole system be altered: at present the Assistant Surgeons depend for promotion on medical qualifications and status, in no way on efficient performance of their duties as Lecturers. This is unsatisfactory in the extreme as it prevents their interests being bound up with those of the College; they do their lecturing efficiently but not the supplemental duties depending thereon except when they tend to bringing personal kudos. Thus practically no specimens illustrating the work of their department have been presented to the Museum by the Lecturers on chemistry and anatomy. This is not to their credit, considering they have been two years at the College. Again there is a lack of zeal in organizing their respective branches of the College work and a tendency to minimise the amount of duty done, and this throws much work on the Superintendent which does not legiti- mately belong to him. Mr. Sukhia deserves credit for a compilation on anatomy brought out by him for the use of students. I would suggest that the present Lecturers be given every facility for veterinary graduation, but if they do not avail themselves of this within a reasonable time (say three years), they revert to their medical duties and be replaced by veterinary graduates. If they do be- come veterinary graduates I would suggest that they be seconded from the Assistant Surgeons' list and placed entirely at disposal of Veterinary Department. By securing veterinary graduates, and by this means only, it seems to me we can ensure the efficiency and the necessary zeal in the Lecturers' Department. 14. Assistant Superintendent Nariman officiated for me in clinical charge of the Hospital during one month last autumn. He efficiently investigated an outbreak of communicable disease in cattle in Bijápur District in May and June. He has added to his medical qualifications that of Doctor of Medicine (Bombay) and has proved himself zealous in performing his College and Hos- pital duties and of the greatest assistance to me. His veterinary knowledge has increased considerably, and in accordance with the decision of Government it has been arranged that he shall appear for Special Licensing Examination before the Board of Examiners in April 1888. The subjects and nature of examina- tion have been fixed at rather a higher standard than that of the ordinary graduate examinations in order that no question may arise hereafter as to the stringency of the test, on passing which Dr. Nariman will become a legally qualified veterinary practitioner. 15. The College Committee has met twice during the past year, the principal subjects dealt with at the meetings being the election of free students, remuneration of lecturers, Dr. Nariman's special examination, and routine administrative work. I regret to state that latterly considerable difficulty has been experienced in obtaining a quorum of members of the Committee, which accounts for the number of meetings being below that of last year. It is pro- posed that, in future, routine business shall be done by circulars among the Committee, actual meetings being convened only when emergent or debated questions arise. As the College is now fairly started the administrative work has become mainly of the routine nature and can, to considerable extent, be disposed of by the Superintendent without reference to the Committee; but when such reference is necessary it can in future be made either by circular or by special meeting. 16. As regards appliances for purposes of study considerable progress has been made. Especially have the practical facilities increased by considerable growth of Hospital practice. As will be seen from the Hospital report, the number both of in-patients and out-patients has increased very considerably, and there has been a proportionate increase in dispensing. It is very evident that if the Hospital pratice increases in coming years as it has done, and as the same College classes increase, the present clinical staff will be quite inadequate for its duties. B 3306 Government has sanctioned the building of a Chemical Laboratory, and the work is in progress; a number of appliances for its equipment have been received from England. Thus we shortly shall be able to give our students a course of practical chemistry which will prove most valuable to them, and I trust that testing for poisons, analysis of food stuffs, and investigation of animal fluids and tissues will in future be among the duties of chemical branch of the College. No start has yet been made with the Botanical Garden because of an unanticipated objection on the part of the Trustees of the Hospital estate to place the necessary small pieces of ground at our disposal. I hope to overcome these objections in the future, but if not successful, will propose to Government some other arrangements to secure adequate instruction in practical botany. The equipment of the Forge and Shoeing Shed, as also that of the Dissecting Room, has been considerably increased by the special grant for furniture passed by Government (ride Government Resolution, Revenue Department, No. 5929, dated 2nd September 1887). The native farriers employed hitherto in place of the European Farrier Major have not been considered competent to teach practical shoeing, so the forge has hitherto been utilized merely to meet hospital requirements. It is now ready for immediate use for the clinical and educational purposes when a competent farrier is appointed. The Operating Shed, which has this year been built under orders of Govern- ment, proved very valuable for teaching, examination, and hospital work. The Dissecting Room has been freely used by Class B, and " subjects " obtained by special arrangement with a contractor, as the supplies of fatal cases from the hospital were not sufficient to fully meet our requirements. The dissections this year have been of a fair average considering that was the first year of practical anatomy of both instructor and students. Numerous post-mortem examinations have been made7 Government having decided not to employ a joint Librarian and Curator of Museum, the work in connection with these portions of the institution has fallen to the various members of the College staff, but can hardly be considered in this way to be so thoroughly performed as it might be by means of an officer told off to the special charge of the Museum, specimens, books, diagrams, sur- gical instruments, and other such valuable Government property now deposited in the College. 17. The Public Works Department, in addition to building the Practical Examination Shed and commencing the Chemical Laboratory and porch with museum, has considerably improved the ground round the Dissecting Room and made a road leading to it, with a view to increasing its accessibility during the rains. Further, designs and estimates have been drawn out for quarters for six resident students, which designs have been submitted to Government. 18. One of the most important matters which has had to be considered during the past year is the measures best calculated to secure employment of Veterinary Graduates as soon as we have any, which will probably be in April 1889. There can be no doubt that in Bombay and in larger towns of the Presidency a fair number of graduates will be able to earn a living as private practitioners; the public will be willing enough to pay fees for the treatment of the horses, but fees which can be derived from treatment of cattle will doubtless be few. From this we infer that in the natural course of things veterinary practitioners in private practice will be found only in Bombay, Ahmedabad, Karáchi and other such places, but not without Government aid be able to obtain a living in the smaller towns and throughout the districts. I have submitted to Government suggestions as to the gradual development of a Subordinate Veterinary Service for repression of cattle disease and allied duties throughout the Presidency. I consider that the small number of graduates proposed to be annually employed by Government will suffice to absorb available men, because in addition to private practice the wants of various States and Governments, other than those of Bombay, have to be met. In these several ways the 14 or 15 men who pro- bably will pass every year will almost certainly all find employment. Bombay yet remains the only College of its kind in India. During the past year Madras has introduced a scheme for Veterinary Diplomas in its Science and Arts Depart- ment as a development of technical education, but the length of time required, the severity of the curriculum, and the absence of schools for instruction in veterinary subjects will, I have no doubt, prevent the Madras Diploma in any way competing with ours, if it ever obtains any status even in its own Presidency. I hope that the Municipalities, especially that of Bombay, will utilize their nominees to free-studentship, when the latter become graduates, for the charge of Municipal cattle, the inspection of slaughter-houses and of markets for live cattle. I have drawn attention to the fact that a graduate when available might benefitingly be attached to the staff of the Health Officer of the Port. 19. The duties of cattle-disease repression have, as last year, been carried on from the College. The health of cattle has recently been good, but in the commencement of the year the Superintendent proceeded to Ratnágiri, the Assistant Superintendent to Bijápur, and Mr. D. N. Vakil to Broach, Ahmed- abad and Panch Maháls for repression of outbreaks. Recently the experiment of deputing veterinary students to deal with cattle-disease in the Sholápur District has been tried with satisfactory results. The Superintendent has drawn out and published under sanction of Gov- ernment " Instructions on Cattle Diseases" for the use of local officers, also the Kolhápur Primer on Cattle Disease, which has been favourably mentioned by Government recently. Arrangements have been made for the annual pro- duction of a primer of this kind on some veterinary subject. 20. I have the pleasure to report that the Honourable Mr. Justice Bayley has promised a sum of Rs. 50 annually to the College Prize Fund. Sir Dinshaw Mánokji Petit has invested a sum of Rs. 500, the interest of which is to be devoted to award of prizes for the students. The prizes which were announced for competition for the last year have been repeated for the present year.
8 It is satisfactory to me to report that the essay's competition on the subject of the cattle of Gujarát was well contested and the essays supplied some interesting information concerning the Gujarát breed, which has been published in our professional periodical. The Government scholars for the year were:9 APPENDIX A. Table of Students in the Bombay Veterinary College. CLASS C. TERM I. TERM II. Paying. Free. Paying. Free. Total. Caste. Private. Native States, &c. Private free. Municipal. Private. Native States, &c. Private free. Government. Municipal. REMARKS. Hindu... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... 2 CLASS B. Pársis ... ... 12 .. 1 5 2 ... ... ... ... ... 20 Hindu ... ... 5 3 ... 1 ... 1 2 ... 1 ... 13 Mahomedan... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 2 Jew ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 Portuguese ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... 3 European and Eura- sian ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Other... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... 18 4 1 7 2 3 3 1 1 ... 40 CLASS A. Pársi... ... 4 ... ... 2 1 ... 1 ... ... ... 7 Hindu... ... 5 9 ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 16 Mahomedan... ... ... 2 ... 1 ... ... ... .. ... ... 3 Jew... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 3 ... ... ... ... ... Portuguese ... ... 5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 European and Eura- sian ... ... Other ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 3 Total ... 16 11 ... 5 1 4 1 ... ... ... 38 GRAND TOTAL ... 34 15 1 12 3 7 6 1 1 .. 80 25th May 1888. JOHN HENRY STEEL, V.S., Superintendent, Bombay Veterinary College and Hospital. APPENDIX B. Table of Free Students in the Bombay Veterinary College. Particulars. Government. Municipal. Total. Passed 1st Examination in April 1887...... 7 2 9 Passed 1st Examination in September 1887 ... 1 ... ... 1 Remaining in Class A... ... ... ... 2 ... ... 2 3 Withdrawn ... ... ... ... ... 2 1 Total ... 12 3 15 25th May 1888. JOHN HENRY STEEL, V.S., Superintendent, Bombay Veterinary College and Hospital. B 33010 APPENDIX C. Return of Lectures delivered at the Bombay Veterinary College during 1887-88. CLASS A. CLASS B. No. Subject. Officer. June 1887. July 1887 August 1887. Novem- ber 1887. Decem- ber 1887. January 1888. Febru- ary 1888. March 1888. Total. June 1887. July 1887. August 1887. Novem- ber 1887. Decem- ber 1887. January 1888. Febru- ary 1888. March 1888. Total. GRAND TOTAL. 1 Medicine and Sur- gery. Superintendent ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 14 6 ... 12 13 14 21 84 84 2 Demonstrations ... Do. 3 12 6 11 10 9 10 10 71 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 71 3 Hospital Practice... Superintendent and Assistant Super- intendent. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 15 18 33 18 22 23 19 157 157 4 Anatomy. ... Lecturer on Ana- tomy, &c. 2 10 5 13 9 9 9 11 68 4 14 10 16 11 13 14 15 97 165 5 Physiology... ... Do. 3 5 4 5 2 5 5 4 33 3 8 5 7 6 4 8 7 48 81 6 Dissection... ... Do. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 12 6 8 1 10 8 5 56 56 7 Chemistry... Lecturer on Chemis- try, &c. 7 20 11 13 9 15 15 8 98 1 5 2 5 2 5 5 3 28 126 8 Botany, Materia Do. 5 14 9 12 11 16 16 14 97 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 97 Medica, &c. Total Lectures ... 20 61 35 54 41 54 55 47 367 27 68 47 69 50 67 72 70 470 837 25th April 1888. JOHN HENRY STEEL, V.S., Superintendent, Bombay Veterinary College and Hospital.
11 APPENDIX D. Return of the Number and Nature of Books added to the Library of the Bombay Veterinary College in the year 1887-88. No. Name of Class. Purchase. Presenta- tion. Exchange. Total. Remarks. I Chemistry ......... 1 ... ... 1 II Botany ... ...... ... ... ... ... III Materia Medica, Pharmacy, &c. . 4 2 ... 6 IV Veterinary Surgery and Medicine. 17 10 ... 27 V Diseases and Management of Dogs. 2 ... ... 2 VI Anatomy and Zoology ... ... ... 2 ... 2 VII Physiology ... ... ... ... ... ... VIII Sanitary Science, &c. ... ... 2 1 ... 3 IX Animal Management ... ... 1 ... 1 X Journals and Reports ... ... 58 41 ... 99 XI Government Reports ... ... ... 8 ... 8 XII Miscellaneous ... ... ... ... 13 ... 13 Total ... 85 77 ... 162 Total previous number of Volumes ... ... Bombay Veterinary College: Annual report of the 2 examination by way of fine upon such as appear without any intention of pursuing their studies after passing. Government would be glad to receive the opinion of the College Committee on this proposal. 5. The resignation of the Farrier-Major at the commencement of the year and the delay in the appointment of his successor have been unfortunate, though unavoidable. The question of the means of supplying a suitable man to fill the post is now under consideration : and meanwhile a native farrier is employed as a temporary measure. 6. His Excellency the Governor in Council trusts that the decrease in the attendance of the Committee at their meetings is not caused by any falling off in interest in the management of the important institution under their control. No doubt their work in organization has been mainly accomplished, and much work of a purely routine nature can easily be managed by the circulation of papers, but the advantages which must result from the personal intercourse of the members of the Committee for the discussion of points connected with the welfare of the College are so obvious that Government trust that it may be found feasible to hold a greater number of meetings in future years. 7. During the year a practical examination shed was constructed, and a commencement made of a chemical laboratory: the equipment of the dissecting room and forge has been considerably improved, while numerous additions have been made to the museum and library. The grounds around the buildings have also been put in better order, and designs for quarters for resident students have been drawn up and submitted to Government. 8. Mr. Steel touches in his 18th paragraph upon "the measures best calculated to secure employment for the veterinary graduates." The subject is a large one, and cannot be satisfactorily dealt with in an annual report. It is moreover already under consideration, and comment thereupon may be con- veniently postponed until the question is ripe for disposal. 9. The duties connected with the repression of cattle-disease were again during the year carried on from the College, and visits of inspection were paid by Mr. Steel, his Assistants, and in one case by two students to Ratnágiri, Broach, Bijápur, Ahmedabad, the Panch Maháls and Sholápur. The results are said to have been satisfactory: but as they have been made the subject of special report to Government, and are under consideration in connection with the whole question of the prevention of disease among cattle, it is unnecessary to allude further to them in this place. 10. Conformably with the wishes of Government, expressed in their Reso- lution reviewing his report last year, Mr. Steel has submitted a statement of account (Appendix E) giving the receipts and expenditure (excluding building charges and examiners' fees) for the past year. The former are put down at Rs. 5,130 (Rs. 2,630 from fees and Rs. 2,500 from the municipal grant,) and the latter at Rs. 20,277. It does not appear however upon what grounds the grade pay of the two Assistant Surgeons, lent to the College as lecturers, which amounts to Rs. 3,000 per annum, has been omitted from the debit side of the account. Nor is it clear whether the fees credited were all recovered within the financial year. The financial statement has indeed not been prepared with sufficient clearness, and the Committee should be asked to prescribe a form of balance sheet which will convey the necessary information in a succinct form without obscurities. Regarding the arrears of fees, which are an unsatisfactory feature of the accounts, it is not clear whether any portion of them is due from those still under education, or whether all the defaulters have left. In the former case their recovery should admit of no difficulty and ought not to be delayed. The attention of the Managing Committee should be called to this point which is well worthy their consideration.
3 11. The connection of Government with the Animal Hospital is only indirect, and in so far as it provides material for clinical instruction to the students of the College. It is unnecessary to comment upon the report of its working for the year further than to observe that it appears to be securing increased popularity and, it may be hoped, is giving material aid to the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, by showing the advantage of proper treatment and discrediting the irrational and often inhumane methods so largely prevailing. 12. Mr. Steel's reports give evidence of sustained interest and. zeal in the conduct of his duties and the development of veterinary education and practice from which much future public benefit may be anticipated. E. LAWRENCE, Acting Under Secretary to Government. To The Superintendent, Bombay Veterinary College and Hospital, The Commissioners of Divisions and in Sind, All Collectors, including the Collectors and Deputy Commissioners in Sind, The Political Department of the Secretariat, The Political Agents, Káthiáwár, Cutch, Kolhápur and Southern Marátha Country and Mahi Kántha, The Political Superintendents, Pálanpur and Sáyantvádi, the reports. The Political Resident, Aden, The Superintendent,Horse-Breeding Operations, The Municipal Commissioner for the City of Bombay, The Accountant General, The Educational Department of the Secretariat, The Director of Public Instruction, The Director of Land Records and Agriculture. With copies of the reports. The Government of India, The Secretary of State for India. By letter No. of 1888. Copy forwarded for information and guidance to
REPORT OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE FOR THE YEAR 1888. Bombay: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS, 1889. [PriceREPORT OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE AND OF THE BAI SAKARBAI DINSHAW PETIT HOSPITAL FOR ANIMALS, FOR THE YEAR 1888. Bombay: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1889.
No. 391 OF 1889-90. FROM VETERINARY SURGEON J. H. STEEL, F. R. C. V. S., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College : To THE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, Revenue Department. Bombay Veterinary College, 25th May 1889. SIR, I have the honour to submit, for the information of Government, the Third Annual Report of the Bombay Veterinary College, dealing with transactions of the official year 1888-89. 2. Shortly after my last Annual Report was submitted, the Second Annual Professional Examinations were held at the College by a Special Board appointed by Government, consisting of Inspecting Veterinary Surgeon J. H. B. Hallen, General Superintendent Horse-breeding Operations, (as President), and Veteri- nary Surgeon (1st Class) Grainger and V. S. Pottinger with Dr. Deshmukh (as Members). The sittings of this Board extended from 23rd April to 1st May 1888, and the results were declared, as follows in Appendix A. This was practically the first time a Second Professional Examination was held at the College, and Mr. Hallen's wide experience as an examiner of Indian veterinary students, at Lahore and elsewhere, rendered his approval of the manner in which our men acquitted themselves at their practical work specially gratifying and encouraging to the staff. The system of examination for Class B, as prescribed in the College Rules and Regulations, proved satisfactory and practicable, and no difficulty was experienced by the staff in conveying the requisite instruction. As a result of this examination (together with entries and withdrawals) we commenced in June with classes as follows :2 (a).3 as a distinct loss of professional energy every graduate who fails to practise his profession. To secure to Government a satisfactory return for its expenditure on veterinary education and at the same time not repress independence of feeling and action in the new profession is a matter requiring much tact and judgment. In anticipation of the first batch of graduates obtaining their diplomas in the coming May, the question of giving a certain number of them employment under Government has been under consideration. The representations made to induce Government to open a Veterinary College, especially those of a certain section of the Native Press, might reasonably have been taken by Government to show that in supplying fully educated graduates for veterinary practice it was meeting a long-felt want, and that the urgent need for such graduates would lead to their being at once absorbed on obtaining their diplomas in private practice, as has been the case in most European countries. Expe- rience, however, with the medical and other professions led Government to anticipate that there will be a surplus of graduates in veterinary science whose services may be utilised in the performance of duties beneficial to the country at large. It might reasonably have been urged that, having supplied the veterinary practitioners called for, Government should expect the pub- lic to justify further supply by fully employing all as they become available; but in consideration of the acknowledged poverty of catle-owners in the districts where no educated scientific veterinary practitioner could expect to gain a living by private practice, and considering the known prevalence of contagious cattle diseases, Government has thought right to recognise scope for a fully organi- sed cattle-disease repression service and for establishment under local authorities of Local District Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries. While not in any way committing itself to the establishment of a Civil Veterinary Department, Govern- ment in its Resolution No. 1457, Revenue Department, dated 21st February 1889, has made an offer to local bodies with regard to the latter. It would as yet be premature to make any statement concerning these hospitals and dispensaries; the general feeling among students is that the inducements held out are not tempting enough, and presumably it will not be unsatisfactory to Government if all the earlier graduates can obtain veterinary employment in other ways sufficiently remunerative to enable them to despise the inducements offered in connection with the local hospitals. As a matter of fact, there will prob- ably be candidates for any local hospitals started; especially Hindus, (who have proved themselves very fair men with cattle), may find the pay offered sufficient. It is satisfactory to me to be able to report that several districts have considered the subject and are negotiating with a view to establishing hospitals or dispensaries, and it is gratifying that the majority of these districts are the ones in which veterinary aid has already been afforded recently from the College, as by depu- tation of cattle-disease inspectors. Native States will absorb some graduates, some will practise privately in Bom- bay and other large cities of India, some will probably enter Government service in other provinces, a few will be engaged by large horse-owning companies, muni- cipalities, and so on, and some (we must anticipate) will become the shifting un- successful element of which we find evidences more or less considerable in all pro- fessions. It is to be hoped that Government will secure absolutely the best men as a reserve to fill any vacancies which may occur on the College teaching staff'; so I have proposed that three of the graduates specially selected be appointed temporary College and Hospital Assistants ; they ought to prove valuable to the College and not expensive to Government. I hope some of our best men will go into private practice, but that a number of good men will be available for depu- tation on cattle-disease repression duties and for appointment to the Civil Vete- rinary Department when it is started. Finally, under Rule B. 17 of the College, Government is distinctly under no obligation to find employment for graduates any further than may seem to the benefit of the country and politic in relation to the idea which seems so current in India that Government having educated men is bound to employ them. I am confident the veterinary profession of Bombay will do well in the future, and that the graduates of the Bombay Veterinary College will be found to be the native skilled agency to intermediate between British veterinary officers and shrewd country cattle-owners, the want of
4 which agency has up till now made Government measures for cattle disease repression in all parts of India abortive. The College has already had a visible effect in modifying treatment of animal diseases and injuries, especially among cattle of Bombay ; it is to be hoped that each graduate sent out will act as a centre for the diffusion of knowledge on rational treat- ment of disease (particularly that of a communicable nature). Hereafter it will be found that the effect of the College, direct and through its graduates, will be even more by improvement in management of sick and healthy cattle, cessation of cruel and barbarous practices, rational measures against contagion, and so on, than by the number of cases actually treated in hospitals. This will be manifest in the course of time and from steady continuity of policy in spite of discouragement of various kinds ; the course to be taken is clear, and so far the advance along it has been satisfactory ; possibly before long a scheme for local in- struction of cattle-owners in the vernacular by graduates in charge of hospitals may be devised. I have dwelt at considerable length on the question of future employment of graduates, because I feel it to be the most pressing matter as regards the future welfare of the College. It has two urgent bearings at present. The first is the question of suitable remuneration of a graduate, for information of Local Boards and other bodies willing to start hospitals and also of Rájás and other Chiefs desirous of employing our men. The second is, what action Government ought to at once taken to organise a Civil Veterinary Service. I have roughly estimated the monthly value of a graduate's services at Rs. 100 in Bombay ; up-country, where house-rent and living are less expensive, a smaller sum may be found sufficient ; and graduates of those castes whose living is least expensive will be able to afford to work for less than will the Pársis and Europeans. While such evidence as I could bring to bear on this point (social status of present students, average income in the sister profession, &c.) has led me to the above conclusion, I trust many of our graduates will earn much more than the sum mentioned, and am fully aware that others will be content, doubtless, with less. Whether or no this estimate be correct, it has been used as a working basis for reply to applicants for services of graduates. These applicants have been (a) Municipalities, (b) Local Boards, (c) Native States, (d) Native Cavalry, (e) Transport, (f) Police, (g) Provincial Governments. We can meet the requirements of all these if they will realise that we turn out neither salutris nor farriers but veterinary graduates, who, having passed through three years of study and in many cases having 'paid for their profes- sional education, must be remunerated in pay and status accordingly. This impression we are gradually succeeding in conveying to applicants, and I think that, far from wanting employment for graduates, in due course we shall find the native veterinary profession in high demand. As regards applicants for services of graduates, we need not here enter into detail, but we may notice a few leading points :5 (a), (b) and (g).6 8. Although on the basis of those of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons of Great Britain, our examinations differ from them in embracing a written as well as an oral and a practical part and in covering more ground in some directions, less in others. Handling of animals, hygiene, State veterinary medicine, and horse-shoeing are (for example) subjects for which we have special courses, but we have as yet no distinct classes in microscopical work. This latter may in the near future demand serious consideration in consequence of its important bearings on scientific veterinary medicine; a bacteriological laboratory is especially required and will prove of much value ; I am considering how best to organise one. The absence of study with the microscope as an independent branch and the deficient veterinary strength of our teaching staff are the only grounds on which the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons can refuse to recognise our diploma as a " Colonial" one7 third Kolhápur Primer on "Breeding of Horses", and a work on Diseases of Sheep for Messrs. Longmans & Co., now in the press. 12. Assistant Superintendent Nariman was specially examined by the Board in April 1888 and passed successfully (in the First Class) a severe test, the programme of which had been drawn up by me and approved by the Committee of Management. The Board was well pleased with the knowledge of veterinary science shown by Dr. Nariman, and recommended him for a special license in Veterinary Science. This recommendation was approved by Government (Re- solution No. 4002, Revenue Department, dated 19th June 1888). Accordingly Dr. Nariman became a Licentiate of the Bombay Veterinary College, was con- firmed in his post on the staff of that College, and had the honour of being the first Indian veterinary practitioner holding a recognised high-class diploma. Government subsequently decided that he should be styled " Resident Veterin- ary Officer and Assistant Professor of Veterinary Science". He was, also, appointed (with certain graduates of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons) a Veterinary Surgeon under the Glanders Act. Dr. Nariman continues to main- tain his reputation as an efficient and painstaking teacher. 13. The Assistant Surgeons holding lectureships at the College have con- tinued to lecture very well. Their want of energy in the organization of their respective departments, of which I have elsewhere made mention, and in thoroughly identifying their interests with those of the College still exists, and will (I feel assured) continue to do so until the lecturers belong to the College Service only. The appointment of Assistant Surgeons to these posts was originally resorted to only because no veterinary applicants were available and purely as a make-shift. As soon as we have veterinary graduates I trust Gov- ernment will see the advisability of reverting to their medical duties (where they can be of much more service to the State) such of the lecturers as have not by then been seconded for service at the College and by obtaining a veterinary qualification proved their zeal and suitability for retention in their present posts. The existing arrangement is unduly expensive, not the most efficient possible, and a constant unnecessary source of worry to Government, the Committee, and the Principal. For example, the question of remuneration of College lecturers has been considered in the current year. It was represented to Government that the Assistant Surgeons who are at present occupying these posts drew less pay than other Assistant Surgeons not specially employed, but performing ordinary duty in the districts. Government decided (No. 3027, Financial Department, dated 4th October 1888,) that these Assistant Surgeons " should receive the same emoluments as they would do if serving in the ordinary line in the Medical Department," and fixed the allowance to the Lecturer on Ana- tomy, who now draws Rs. 150 per mensem, whereas the Lecturer on Chemistry, (whose duties are certainly not more laborious and important,) draws Rs. 300 per mensem. Such an arrangement can only be considered provisional. I am convinced no permanent settlement can be arrived at until we have veterinary graduates in these posts solely under the control of the College authorities, and accordingly I am encouraging the present incumbents to study veterinary science and obtain the necessary qualification. This to them, as qualified medi- cal men, cannot prove a matter of difficulty, and Assistant Surgeon Sukhia has already passed one examination and is about to appear for the final test. [Gov- ernment has decided, also, that, as a special case under certain conditions, Assistant Surgeon Engineer shall appear for his final examination at the next sitting of the Board.] As it is not necessary that the College lecturers should be Assistant Sur- geons, nor essential that they be medical graduates, and as veterinary graduates will shortly be available, and good men perfectly fitted for the duties could be obtained from among them for Rs. 1508 in these respects is not such as might reasonably have been anticipated. The work of minor organization, which should be done by the lecturers, still falls on the Principal, who at times has even been opposed by inertia or inadequate effort on the part of the lecturer. I trust ere long this whole question of lecturers will be on a more satisfactory footing. 14. On the 17th July Farrier Sergeant Stanley, R.A., joined the College as Instructor in Practical Shoeing and Farrier. -He has held the post while on furlough prior to retirement under special arrangements with the Military Department, and is reported as having done his duties well, so that the Class C men had a full course of practical shoeing this year. Unfortunately the quarters built at a cost of about Rs. 7,000 in 1887 for this official have proved most unhealthy. Mr. Stanley himself I found on my return to duty so reduced by fever as to be unfit for much work and constantly unavailable for duty, his wife had died of cholera, and all his children had been sick, so that it was necessary to send them away to sanitaria. This unfortunate state of affairs naturally renders the farrier unwilling to re-occupy quarters which have proved so ill-fated to him ; they have been inspected by the Sanitary authorities, and some improved arrangements are in hand for the disposal of refuse, and so on. Last year is said to have been exceptionally trying to the health of persons employed on the estate on which the College and Hospital are situated. After the great difficulty we have had in getting a good farrier I trust we shall be able to retain Mr. Stanley, who seems able and willing to do the work well. 15. The College Committee met three times during the year and dealt with numerous matters in addition to the routine work ; arrears of fees from students, the entrance test, lecturers' salaries questions, the appointment of a permanent examining Board, new rules as regards free students, purchase of laboratory equipment, and report of the Board of Examiners are matters which were specially dealt with. At the meeting of the 27th July it was resolved that the work of the Committee is now over, and Government should be asked to place the College under the administrative supervision of the Principal. The meet- ings were well attended and conducted according to regulation. 16. This being the first year of a senior or " C " Class, the organization of the Clinical Department for hospital work has been much improved by the use of the senior experienced students as clinical clerks and dressers. The farrier has been available to assist the clinical officers in the treatment of cases. The following is a précis of the Annual Hospital Report made by V. S. Pottinger to the Bombay Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals and dated 1st January 1889 :9 (4). The Lady Sákarbái Cattle Ward, presented by Lady Dinshaw Petit. (5). An ornamental tablet presented by Sir Dinshaw Mánekji Petit, Knight, detailing the early history of the Institution. Nos. 1, 2, and 3 were 'opened by His Excellency Lord Reay in March 1888. Nos. 4 and 5 were opened by His Excellency Lord Lansdowne in December 1888. The Hospital Paddock has been improved, building of an isolation ward has commenced, as also of an ornamental fountain and drinking trough ; swinging partitions have been fixed in the Horse Ward No. I ; whitewashing of wards and walls have been carried out thoroughly. (e). Mr. K. M. Shroff (Secretary), Dr. S. K. Narimán (Resident Veterinary Officer), and Mr. J. Bhickaji Davre (Manager) have been active in promoting the interests of the Hospital. (f). The need of trained animal attendants is insisted on ; the danger of a public watering trough propagating glanders is pointed out ; the need of a trained officer to superintend the arrangement and nursing of patients is shown; and certain recommendations of new buildings and clinical appliances are submitted. (g). The statistical records show that the practice was varied and most instructive to students. Stress is laid on the fact that the number of examinations as to soundness is greater than in previous years. The observations in this report show that during my absence in England there has been completed a revolution as regards the relations of the College with the Hospital, which is of benefit as relieving the College staff of some overwork from which it was beginning to suffer, though it certainly is not a change for the better as regards Hospital patients. In the first two years of the College work- ing the Superintendent and Assistant Superintendent were, under the Hospital regulations, responsible for the proper feeding, grooming, fastening, exercise, and general management of all patients ; also for the drainage, ventilation and other sanitation of the wards,10 The establishment of a Botanical Garden will, I hope, assume a practical form in the coming year. Some botanical expeditions to the Victoria Gardens for practical study have been made by the class. The Forge has, since Mr. Stanley joined, been fully used for Hospital and educational purposes. The Dead Stock of the College has been added to by the purchase of laboratory furniture, anatomical room fittings, and a few fresh diagrams. Three years of College work have passed, and the Anatomical Lecturer has not mounted illustrative skeletons of the horse and ox, a work which is now being done under my personal supervision. The Museum room built over the College porch was completed in the past year and is excellently adapted to the purpose required of it ; I am arranging for the display of our specimens in it. Quarters for six resident students are almost completed (Government Resolution, Financial Department, No. 201-C.W.11 20. Finally, in reviewing the progress of the College during 1888-89,I trust Government will consider that we have steadily carried out its aims for giving such students as desire to become veterinary practitioners an education likely to render them practical and useful to the country hereafter, and to be capable of dealing with cattle and horse diseases intelligently and responsibly to a degree greater than all practitioners of veterinary surgery who have hitherto been educated in India. The Board of Examiners will shortly decide which of our senior men deserve the diploma, and I feel assured there will be a fair percentage of " passes ". While the year's work has been, in the main, progres- sive there are two matters especially which demand attention12 APPENDIX A. Results of the April 1888 Examinations, Bombay Veterinary College. Examination. 1st Class. 2nd Class. Pass. TOTAL CANDIDATES. Percent- age of Passes. Remarks. Exa- mined. Passed. 1st Professional... ... ... 2 7 8 27 17 63 2nd 13 APPENDIX D. Showing Caste and Number of Students from Native States, &c., Bombay Veterinary College, 1888-89. Class. Province, Presidency, or State. Number of Hindus. Number of Mahomedans. Remarks. C... Central Provinces ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... Berárs, Nizám's State ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... Porbandar State ... ... 1 ... ... Fresh appointment. Madras Presidency ... ... 1 ... ... Do. Baroda State ... ... 1 1 ... ... B ... Baroda State ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... Sángli State ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... Berárs, Nizám's State ... ... 3 1 ... ... Kolhápur State... ... 2 ... ... ... ... Gondal State... ... 1 ... ... ... ... Jámnagar State... ... 1 ... ... ... ... Junágad State... ... 1 ... ... ... ... Sávantvádi State ... ... ... 1 ... ... A ... Berárs, Nizám's State... ... 1 ... ... ... ... Junágad State ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... Bhávnagar State ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... Wadhwán State ... ... ... ... 1 Do. 3 20 4 ... ... JOHN HENRY STEEL, V.S., Principal, Bombay erinary College. APPENDIX E. Financial Statement, 1888-89. BALANCE SHEET FOR THE YEAR 1888-89. Items of Expenditure. Items of Income. Remarks. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. 1. Cost of teaching staff... 21,480 12 1 Fees for 1886-87 (ar- See below. 2. Do. establishment... 1,306 8 5 rears). 3. Contingent expenditure. 1,226 1 1 Fees for 1887-88 (ar- Do. 4. Dead stock ... ... 747 11 3 rears). 5. Scholarships ... ... 900 0 0 Fees for 1888-89 (cur- Do. 6. Building charges ... rent). 7. Examiners' fees ... 278 2 6 [Extras (from a casual student).] 15 0 0 Do. Total amount paid by the Veterinary College. 4,585 0 0 Vide Ac- } countant General's Return. Add Municipality grant 2,500 0 0 Total ... 25,939 3 3 Total... 7,085 0 0 Cost to Government : balance of expenditure over income14 APPENDIX F. Return of Lectures, Demonstrations, &c., delivered and conducted at the Bombay Veterinary College in the year 1888-89. CLASS A CLASS B. CLASS C. No. Subject. Officer. June. July. August November. December. January. February. March. Total. June. July. August. November. December. January. February. March. Total. June. July. August. November. December. January. February. March. Total. Grand Total. 1 Medicine and Surgery (Horse) ... ... ... Principal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 10 15 15 8 15 14 15 101 ... 12 15 12 6 11 10 22 88 189 2 Clinical. and Theoretical Shoeing ... ... ... Do ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5 14 19 8 17 7 10 9 89 89 3 Demonstrations ... ... Do ... ... 1 8 8 7 6 7 6 7 50 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 50 4 Hospital Practice... ... Principal assisted by Resident Officer. ... ... ... ... 12 25 20 23 18 24 24 21 170 12 25 26 23 18 24 24 24 176 352 5 Sanitary Science ... ... Resident Veterinary Officer ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 6 6 6 2 4 8 ... 31 31 6 Therapeutics ... ... Do. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 5 4 2 4 1 ... 17 17 7 Hygiene ... ... Do. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 4 5 3 2 5 2 ... 23 23 8 Obstetrics ... ... Do. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 3 4 66 7 6 4 3 35 35 9 Medicine and Surgery (Ox). Do. ... ... ... 5 4 5 4 4 4 4 ... 30 7 8 8 7 6 7 8 ... 51 81 10 Anatomy ... ... ... Lecturer on Anatomy 7 13 11 9 11 9 12 10 85 8 11 13 18 13 10 16 14 106 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 191 11 Physiology ... ... ... Do. 2 4 5 4 2 4 4 4 29 4 7 8 7 8 8 7 7 56 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 85 12 Dissections ... ... ... Do. .... ... ... ... ... 15 APPENDIX G. Return of the Number and Nature of Books added to the Library in 1888-89. No. Name of Class. Purchased. Presented. Obtained by Exchange. Total. Remarks. I Chemistry... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 II Botany ... ... ... ... 5 3 ... 8 III Materia Medica, Pharmacy, &c. ... 6 3 ... 9 IV Veterinary Surgery and Medicine. 5 25 ... 30 V Diseases and Management of Dogs ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... 2 VI Anatomy and Zoology ... 7 5 ... 12 VII Physiology... ... ... ... .. 4 4 ... 8 VIII Sanitary Science, &6. ... ... ... ... ... IX Animal Management... ... 14 15 29 X Journals and Reports ... ... 30 ... 30 XI Government Reports... ... 17 ... 17 XII Miscellaneous... ... ... 1 15 ... 16 Total ... 44 118 ... 162 In Library last year ... 218 195 10 423 Total Books now in Library ... 262 313 10 585 25th May 1889. JOHN HENRY STEEL, V.S., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. APPENDIX H. Return of Prizes. No. Subject. Nature. Value. Successful Candidate in 1888-89. Remarks. 1* Handling of Animals ...... A Free Studentship ... ... Rs. 60 Mahomed Shamsudin Mr. Steel's prize (1). 2* Practical Anatomy B. ...... Text Books for Class C. ... 58 J. K. Batlivala ... ... Mr. Steel's prize (2). 3* First in Professional Examina- tion. Pocket Case of Veterinary Instruments. 06 J. K. Batlivala ... ... Sir D. M. Petit's prize in fu- ture. 4* Second in Professional Exami- nation. A Clinical Thermometer ... 25 Savardikar ... ... Honourable Mr. Justice Bayley's prize (1). 5* Clinical Records......... A Silver Medal ... ... 15 Aria ... ... Mr. Steel's prize (3). 6* Essay on a professional subject. Professional Books... ... 32 Dhakmarvala ... ... Mr. J. K. Grainger's prize in future. 7* Post-mortem Records ... ... A Clinical Thermometer ... A Dissection Case ... ... 25 H. S. Batlivala ... ... Honourable Mr. Justice Bayley's prize (2). 8 Consolation Essay's Prize No. I. 20 M. K. Desái ... ... Mr. Steel's prize (4). 9 Consolation Essay's Prize No. II. A Hypodermic Syringe ... 20 Maniar ... ... Mr. Steel's prize (5). 10* Practical Surgery ...... A Medal and Surgical In- struments 70 (For 1889-90) ... ... Mr. Hallen's prize. 11* Bovine Pathology ... ... Cash ... ... ... ... 25 Do. ... ... Dr. Nariman's prize (1). 12* Hygiene, Sanitation, &c, and Obstetrics. Do ... ... ... ... 25 Do ... ... Dr. Nariman's prize (2). 13* Results of Examination... ... Government Scholarships (15). 60(each) Class B.Bombay Veterinary College: Annual Report of the 2 efficiency. Mr. Steel's proposal that three selected graduates should be appoint- ed temporary College and Hospital Assistants would have received the favour- able consideration of Government had it not been that he had not made any adequate provision for his scheme in his Budget Estimates for 1889-90. The matter should be re-submitted in time for the necessary action to be taken in 1890-91. 4. Another somewhat pressing need of the College is a bacteriological laboratory so as to enable the management to institute distinct classes for microscopic work which are necessary in order to obtain the recognition by the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons of the diplomas of the Bombay College. A separate report on this subject should be submitted. 5. The question of the remuneration of veterinary graduates employed by Local Boards, Chiefs, &c., is one as to which Government are not prepared to lay down any fixed rules. Bodies employing such men however will have to recognize that their College education and their status as graduates will entitle them to a higher rate of pay than what is looked on as sufficient for those untrained persons who now perform veterinary duties. His Excellency in Council is pleased to observe that applications for the services of graduates have been received from Municipalites, Local Boards, Native States, Native Cavalry, Transport, Police, and Provincial Governments. The total number of applications received should have been stated and it should have been reported what steps have been taken to comply with them. 6. The Financial Statement submitted by Mr. Steel as Appendix E is so entirely unintelligible as to lead Government to believe that the Committee have not prescribed a form of balance sheet as they were requested to do in the Resolution reviewing last year's report. In the first place the sums received in payment of fees, both for past and current years, have been omitted from the statement though given separately below and secondly the total has been wrongly calculated, Rs. 15 (extras from a casual student) having been omitted. It is not understood what is meant by " total amount paid by the Veterinary College," as an item on the receipt side of the balance sheet unless it refers to the amount paid by the Veterinary College to the Accountant General to its own credit. Further the statement has been miscalled a balance sheet, for no balance has been struck. The special attention of the Principal should be drawn to the exceedingly inaccurate way in which these accounts have been presented. It is impossible to say from the so-called balance sheet whether the income of the College was Rs. 7,085 + Rs. 15 + Rs. 4,275 or only Rs. 7,085. The latter amount is that mentioned in the body of the report. The cost to Government is given as Rs. 18,854-3-3, but the correctness of this statement cannot be ascertained from the report, nor can a comparison be made with last year's figures. In future the figures for the year under report and those for the preceding year should be shown for purposes of comparison. It is not satisfactory to find that the arrears of fees for 1886-87 and 1887-88 still amount to Rs. 750. During the year Rs. 540 only due for those years were recovered and Rs. 660 have been realized since the close of the year on account of the fees for 1888-89. It should be reported how much of the outstanding balance is con- sidered irrecoverable and the reasons for its being regarded as such should be detailed. The orders recently issued by Government as to pre-payment of fees should in future be strictly adhered to. 7. His Excellency in Council is pleased to observe that the appointment of a permanent Board of Examiners made in July 1888 is regarded with satis- faction by the teaching authorities of the College. The rules concerning exami- nations which have been submitted for the approval of Government will be dealt with in a separate Resolution. 8. There was no change during the year in the number of free-students, but Mr. Steel has recommended that the names of two be struck off on account of non-attendance. All did fairly well in the examination. One student attended specially for practical work and two transport employes were sent for practical study in the Hospital by the Commissary General. 9. His Excellency in Council notices with much regret that the new quarters built for the Instructor in Practical Shoeing and Farriery were so in- sanitary as to cause serious injury to the health of Mr. Stanley the newly appointed Instructor and of his family. It is hoped that the arrangements now
3 in progress will result in the improvement of the sanitary condition of the quarters. The question of placing the College under the administrative super- vision of the Principal will be disposed of hereafter. His Excellency in Council is pleased to notice that the Chemical Laboratory has been completed and gives satisfaction. The quarters for resident students are approaching completion. The College is to be congratulated on the additions to its library received during the year under review. 10. The question of checking the import of diseased horses into Bombay is one of the first importance and His Excellency in Council is glad to observe that Mr. Steel fully recognizes this fact and has undertaken the responsibility of supervising the landing and transfer of stud cattle for the supreme or local Governments. It is satisfactory to note that the rules under the Glanders Act which have been availed of many times during the year have been most useful and have greatly aided the object which they were framed to assist. During the year some students were deputed to Sholápur to gain experience in cattle-disease and the result of their work was reported to the Director of Land Records and Agriculture. 11. During the year under review the connection between the Veterinary College and the Bái Sákarbái Dinsha Petit Hospital became for some un- explained reason less close than before and the Principal submits only a brief resumé of the main features of the report of the working of the latter institution. From this it appears that the number of patients continues to increase, and that several new wards were added through the liberality of various donors. 12. The fulness with which Mr. Steel has discussed the many questions of interest to the College under his charge shews that his zeal for its success has in no way diminished during the year under review. 13. The attention of the Judicial and Military Departments should be called to the suggestions made under (d) and (f) and (e) of Clause 4 of para- graph 4 of the report. J. DE C. ATKINS, Acting Under Secretary to Government. To The Principal, Bombay Veterinary College, The Commissioner, N. D., The Commissioner, C.D., The Commissioner, S. D., The Commissioner in Sind, All Collectors, including the Collectors and Deputy Com- missioners in Sind, The Director of Land Records and Agriculture, The Superintendent, Horse-Breeding Operations, The Director of Public Instruction, The Political Agent, Káthiáwár, The Political Agent, Cutch, The Political Agent, Kolhápur and Southern Máratha Country, The Political Agent, Mahi Kántha, The Political Superintendent, Pálanpur, The Political Superintendent, Sávantvádi, The Political Resident, Aden, The Municipal Commissioner for the City of Bombay, The Accountant General, The Judicial Department of the Secretariat, The Military Department of the Secretariat, The Political Department of the Secretariat, The Educational Department of the Secretariat. With copies of the re- port, The Government of India, The Secretary of State for India. By letter.
REPORT OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE AND OF THE BAI SAKARBAREPORT OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE AND OF THE BAI SAKARBAI DINSHAW PETIT HOSPITAL FOR ANIMALS, FOR THE YEAR 1889-90 Bombay : PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1890.
No. 522 OF 1890. From JOHN HENRY STEEL, F.R.C.V.S., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College ; To THE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, Revenue Department. Bombay Veterinary College, Parel, dated 25th of May 1890. SIR, I have the honour to present this the fourth Annual Report of the Bombay Veterinary College. In accordance with the precedent of last year I have given a summary of the Annual Report of the Bai Sakarbai Dinshaw Manokji Petit Hospital for Animals in one of the paragraphs under the heading "Clinical Teaching of Students. "The hospital not being under Government requires notice here only in this manner, although I furnish every year to the Committee of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals a report in the hope of keeping their hospital as systematic in its working as is compatible with its constitution. * Absolute not relative : Entries of men who remained at College. First year 69. Second year 19. Third year 6. Fourth year 11. 2. In 1888-89 there were, on 1st April, 75 students on the College rolls ; 11 fresh men entered and 37 retired or left the College for various reasons (including Mr. C. King, a senior student of much promise, who died in Septem- ber 1889). The strength in students was especially reduced by the results of the Professional Examinations in May when 25 candidates obtained the diploma of " Graduate, Bombay Veterinary College, " and one member of the College staff, Assistant Surgeon Sukhia, L.M. & S., became a " Licentiate in Veterinary Science." The results of the examinations are shown in Appendix A and the changes in number of students in Appendix B. It will be observed that there was a fall in the number of students to 49. This is due to paucity of entries,* number of Graduates, and retirements of men who thought either the tests too severe or the prospects of Graduates not tempting enough. Through the prompt action of Government in deciding not to strictly adhere to the Matriculation of the University as essential for admission (see Government Resolution, Revenue Department, No. 3854, dated 27th May 1889), we were enabled to admit some good men who would otherwise have been excluded ; but it is to be regretted that some applicants for admission had been diverted to other lines of work before the requisite action could be taken. The falling off in number of students is not to be considered altogether a disadvantage ; indeed in some respects it is for the better, as all who graduate at the College must find employment and the position they have to attain is something altogether novel, so that (as will be shown hereafter) the market must not be glutted with Graduates if this can possibly be avoided. However, it is to be hoped that a fair number of entries in the coming year will compensate for the departures which we anticipate. The examinations were conducted by the Government Board of Veterinary Examiners in accordance with the regulations of the College. At the meeting of the Board held on 7th May 1889, some suggestions were drawn up as to system of marking, sub-division of subjects, &c., and subsequently these were approved by Government (see Government Resolution, Revenue Department, No. 944, dated 4th February 1890). The appointment of a permanent Board of Examiners again answered well. 3. The Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons, at a meeting of its Council held recently, decided not to recognize as "Colonial" or "Foreign" schools B 3872 any of the institutions which had applied for recognition (ours among the number). In the absence of official notification of this fact I am compelled to draw the conclusion from the published reports of the debate on the subject that this decision has been based on the two grounds: first, a fear lest Graduates of colleges other than those of Great Britain should cut out the latter by prac- tising in Great Britain ; second, alleged insufficiency of Maticulation tests in the Colonial and Foreign institutions. As it is evident the latter could have been met by imposing on candidates a general educational test of the required severity, or by accepting, say, only those who had matriculated at a University and so passed a stiffer entrance test than that of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons, it is evident that the first ground was the main one. It evinces a narrow-mindedness and want of confidence in the efficiency of its own Graduates, which shows clearly the necessity for a thorough overhauling of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons such as a large number of its leading Graduates are now loudly crying out for. I trust our College will benefit by the anticipated reform ; unless it does, the necessity for a higher qualification in Veterinary Science than that of Graduate of the Bombay Veterinary College will in due course be felt here and have to be met locally. It is noteworthy that in the past year veterinary subjects have for the first time obtained a footing in the Bombay University as a branch of work for the new diploma of Agriculture. The Government and Municipality Free Students are dealt with in Appendix C. It will be observed that the proportion of the men originally admitted as free students who graduated was 6 out of 15, showing that some three-fifths of the number failed at one or more examinations or left the College. New rules concerning free students were brought to bear after submission to Govern- ment for approval, which was granted. They were directed specially to the prompt filling of any vacancies which may occur. The Native State and Provinces' Students are less numerous than last year. The causes of this are the same, in the main, as influenced the total number of students : thus six graduated (from the Central Provinces two, Berárs one, Baroda two, Madras one), and the Porbandar State withdrew its scholarship. There were two students admitted under this heading. It is highly gratifying that in the current year students have been admitted from Sind. This is an outcome of the action taken by Government, as shown in its Resolution, Revenue Department, No. 5607, dated 3rd August 1889. (See Appendix D. for Return of Native States' and Provinces' Students). The conditions of Sind are very special as regards veterinary matters, but the important field which it presents for horse-breeding and which has under- gone remarkable extension lately, the proposed improvement of its flocks, and . the undoubted value of its race of cattle render the veterinary development of Sind a matter of special interest at present and certainly of great importance as regards the future. 4. Progress of the College is so intimately connected with employment of Graduates that we must dwell a little on this matter. I found that there was at first much difficulty in placing these men, because many valued their services too highly ; some (especially Pársis) were hampered by family ties in Bombay and could not take appointments up-country ; others exhibited a want of enter- prize and of knowledge as to what sort of posts a veterinarian was fitted for ; again applicants frequently thought they would get a man of the Salutri stamp on Rs. 15 per mensem3 This record ought to prove encouraging enough to candidates for entry into the veterinary profession and to enable it to compete fairly well with other pro- fessions in solution of the important question of employment for the growing and energetic section of young men who cannot find a place in offices because they are unfit for occupations purely sedentary. Employment for Graduates has been to me the subject of much anxious thought in the past year. Either in consequence of the habit of thought in this country or because the veterinary profession as such is quite new here, probably as the effect of both causes, almost each of the Graduates has to be " placed " by the Principal of the College, whose duties do not, therefore, end in the case of each individual on his graduation but assume a specially grave aspect then. A little reflection will show that this is not altogether surprising. It is gratifying that about twenty-five per cent. of the Graduates have shown an inde- pendent spirit, and those of them who have gone into private practice will pro- bably, after the usual initial struggles, find themselves much better off than those who have been less independent. Yet there can be no doubt the process of veterinary education in India comprises not only the instruction of students up to the practitioner stage, but also the instruction of employers of various kinds, from rája to rayat, as to the insufficiency and harmfulness of empirical practice, whether carried on by owners or uneducated salutries, farriers, cowleaches, or any one else devoid of professional education. To add to the difficulty in this matter many of the empirics are men who, by years of experience, and as the outcome of some surface education, have much practical skill in dealing with routine cases and some dim idea of the why and wherefore of practice. At any rate they, if less sure in diagnosis, are more prompt and confident in manner than many of the Graduates fresh from College, and so inspire owners with an undue belief in them. As we cannot put old heads on young shoulders during three years at College, we must trust to time to improve our Graduates in promptitude of practice and calm confidence in results of proper treatment; in the meanwhile we must replace empirics by Graduates where we can, and exert ourselves to the utmost to make practical men out of candidates who, before they enter the College, have seldom had anything to do with either horse or ox. Out of all the Graduates placed in the past year not one has displaced a qualified Veterinary Practitioner, that is, each is a distinct gain in the professional strength of the country and in its efficiency to meet emergencies of war and disease. This throwing of light into the dark places of India must be a source of gratification to Government and the public, and of encouragement to the College officers. On every side evidences of the necessity for it constantly crop up. * He has since returned after not proving a thorough success though no fault was found with his professional abilities. As regards appointments for Graduates, we have to note with satisfaction that His Highness the Thákor Sáheb of Morvi has given the lead in securing a good man on liberal terms for his State stables, and that the Bikaneer Darbár has engaged a veterinarian for its troops who will mainly have to treat camels. There has been in some cases a little tendency of the States not to employ their own men on graduation ; but I believe they are now seeing the advisability of doing so. A good man has, under orders of the Government of India been sent to the Andamans, and one has been supplied to the Military Police of Upper Burma. Bombay, Bangalore, and Surat have engaged Graduates for municipal duties, and Ahmedabad also has under consideration the employ- ment of one. Penang, Burma, Ceylon, and other places have been in correspondence with me concerning our men. Thus the influence of the College is over a wide range. The Government Departments, either through want of funds or from other causes, are slow to employ Graduates. The late Colonel Heyland made a bid for a man for the First Lancers, but could not make the post attractive enough; the Transport Department has applied for a man but cannot offer more than Rs. 25 per mensem which will not tempt a man who can earn Rs. 40 per mensem as a clerk but who has graduated with a view to im- prove his position. The Police is willing to employ men, but has no vacancies. The Remount Department needed one for its new depôt at Ahmednagar, but, I believe, ended by placing a farrier in veterinary charge. The Horse Breeding Operations Department is inclined to make use of Graduates, and I am led to believe will shortly submit proposals to Government on the subject. Those Gradu- ates who are in charge of the local Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries are under
4 a sort of loose control by the Agricultural Department with which the College has most cordial relations. Indeed when it is fully recognized by all concerned that Veterinary Science comprises a knowledge of domesticated animals of all kinds in all their relations during health as well as during disease, the fact that the Veterinary and Agricultural Departments have common interests in much of their work will be fully appreciated. The College still maintains its position as the only one of the kind in India, and a recent Resolution of the Government of India that centres of higher veterinary education at Lahore (Vernacular) and Bombay (English) will for some time suffice for the requirements of the country promise to secure for the College its exceptional position for some time. Lahore Veterinary School and the Bombay Veterinary College have each their own sphere. The latter, however, promises to become a normal school of Veterinary Science from which instructors in minor schools will come. Thus we must make a few of our Graduates very high class men suited for special appointments considerably above the average in emoluments and can offer a good opening to a limited number of Matriculates who after gradua- tion have put in a Post-Graduate course of one year as Assistant Veterinary Officers. Such men should meet any requirements and keep up the reputation of our College. We have already, it will be noted, Graduates holding posts as Veterinary Instructors in Nágpur and Madras on good salaries and with good position. I have just received an application for a similar man for Burma. Another noteworthy feature is the fact that our College is beginning to be re- cognized as affording an opening for English young men of country education ; men who thus enter the veterinary profession are excellent material and ought, in due course, to prove valuable to Government. 5. Last year I recorded a marked falling off in the number of entries; this year there has been not much change for the better. Although this means small classes for a year or two, I do not consider it as giving grounds for serious doubt of the future welfare of the College. The causes have now been removed, so I look forward to more entries in the coming year. On enquiry I find we are going through the experience of other special colleges and have yet to inspire public confidence by proving that our education is not a drug in the market ; I believe we are doing so gradually but surely. There is a useful element in the country of men who have become empirical practitioners because they had no facilities in India for systematic veterinary studies, men who have attended the veteri- nary courses at the Agricultural and Army Veterinary Schools and have been practising with the smattering of knowledge thus obtained. It is my endeavour to attract such men to the College by giving them concessions for their previous studies and experience, and this policy has been supported by the College Com- mittee and approved by Government. We have thus drawn into the veterinary profession some men who in due course would have become formidable opponents to our Graduates. Thus I am gradually paving the way to the time when the veterinary profession can ask Government for an Act to recognize it and to protect the public against empiricism. This must come in due course, though it may as yet be in the distant future. European countries with advanced legislative systems fully recognize that a Veterinary Act is an efficient means of benefiting the public and at the same time it is an encouragement to the pro- fession. The latter has a right to legal recognition ; although it may be freely and unreservedly accepted by all that the veterinary profession is for the public not the public for the profession. In expanding its veterinary organization a country is making reproductice expenditvre. 6. The local Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries which were initiated during the past year in Ahmedabad, Dhulia, Násik, and Nadiád seem to have answered their purpose well and to have met a real want of the country. It is to be hoped they will be increased in number in the coming and future years. Reports of the efficiency of the Graduates in charge have been satisfactory, and visits which I casually made to three of them showed me the records, instru- ments, and medicines in good order and led me to believe the veterinary officers in charge did their work. Government apparently wishes all official connection with them to be through the Director of Agriculture and possibly looks on them as a means of testing the efficiency of my instruction of Graduates, but I cannot
5 help feeling that to secure the full benefit to the country from them there should be some veterinary supervision. This will be secured when, in due course, the proposed scheme for a Civil Veterinary Department is brought into force, as I presume it will be before long. Until then the hospitals remain an interesting evidence of what can be done by local effort. This effort is in most cases that of the Local Fund Board, but in Násik it is supplemented by the local branch of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals under its energetic Secretary, Sister Rosalie. In due course a large number of cases of disease in cattle, non-communicable as well as communicable, will be dealt with by these hos- pitals and much empirical barbarity be prevented. Surat, Sholápur, Belgaum, and Dhárwár some time ago made enquiries about the cost of a Graduate and possibly might be persuaded to start hospitals, or at least dispensaries, and it would be well if especially the Central and the Southern Divisions took action in this useful direction. The cost is not great and the benefit should be con- siderable, if only by the flood of light which will, in due course, be thrown on the veterinary requirements of the country. Some might be very easily started, thus it would be a simple matter to convert the College of Science Veterinary Hospital at Poona into a local Veterinary Hospital and Dispensary with a view to securing it an increased practice and a grant from Local Funds. Surat Hospital was presented with a considerable sum of money, but owing to want of promptitude in accepting and utilizing it, the donor withdrew the grant. Násik has been promised a good donation for the building fund of its hospital. These facts show that this movement has a considerable amount of interest in the public mind. It is a pleasure to me to record that His Highness the Gáikwár of Baroda has started similar hospitals at two places in his dominions6 I believe this programme is now being carried out in its entirety in the Bombay Presidency, but it might be more so in other parts of India; and those which mainly concern us are the States on the Bombay Presidency frontier7 The following extra collegiate lectures have been given by him :8 Among the new subjects introduced I would specially draw attention to the study of poisons (Toxicology), examination as to soundness, the use of the Microscope, and Bacteriology. Class A. men have, on my authority, now to attend daily for one hour's dis- pensing and compounding. Their instruction in Pharmacy and Materia Medica has hitherto been conducted by a Medical man, who was necessarily not thoroughly acquainted with the applications of these matters to Veterinary Science ; to correct this weak point I (for the coming year only) intend to myself teach these subjects not only to the students but also to the Graduate who in future will have to take charge of this branch. A Syllabus of the College course of Instruction has been prepared by me and is now being printed. The work in each subject- of each branch has been carefully mapped out not only with a view to informing examiners, students, and enquirers as to the scope of our instruction, but also for the guidance of the instructors. I had a suspicion that our lecturers- at times indulged in flights of eloquence more with a view to show their brilliancy than in the hope of converting their audience into sound veterinarians. The syllabus shows there is no time for such flights and exhibitions, but an urgent necessity that the maximum amount of instruction in each subject specified be given at each lesson, the system adopted being tutorial rather than professorial. With our young instructors, whom I am anxious to convert into sound teachers and specialists, this was the more necessary. Appendix F. shows the number of instructions given, which is approximately the same as last year, i. e., that pre- scribed by regulations9 11. As regards members of the staff, His Excellency Lord Reay was good enough to honour the Principal by appointing him a Justice of the Peace. Dr. Nariman, the Resident Veterinary Officer, has efficiently performed his duties as Assistant Professor and one of the Clinical Officers of the hospital. He has exercised administrative supervision of both College and hospital during occa- sional brief absences of the Principal. The Lecturers have, in accordance with Government Resolution, Revenue Department, No. 9422, dated 14th December 1889, reverted to their medical duties. Government decided that the teachers in a Veterinary College should be Veterinary Graduates, connected with the institution and experts in the veterinary art, rather than human doctors who are merely amateur veterinarians. The Assistant Surgeons, Engineer and Sukhia, who thus reverted, had shown themselves intelligent and able as Lecturers. Mr. Engineer this year did good service in organizing our laboratory. Two Graduates who were first and second on the pass list of 1889 have been appointed Instructors, in due course to become Lecturers, and, later on, Assistant Professors. Their promotion and increase of pay will depend on efficiency in performance of duties, on exami- nation in their special subjects, and on length of service. I look forward with confidence to these young men becoming good and efficient officers of Govern- ment and specialists in their respective spheres of work. The scheme of reorganization which Government, on the strong recommendation of the College Committee, approved also admits the appointment of two junior Graduates in temporary posts as Assistant Veterinary Officers. Good men ought to be pro- curable for these duties, which should prove a kind of Post-Graduate course for them and secure to a number of men a longer period than the ordinary of col- legiate instruction. Farrier Major and Instructor in Practical Shoeing Stanley suffered severely from disease throughout the year ; he struggled pluckily against it, but finally has been compelled to send in his resignation, as the Parel climate has proved quite incompatible with his constitution. The remarkable unhealthiness of the place we have to work in has been amply demonstrated by the prevalence of the fever among the students and staff, severe liver disorder,10 (3). The original investigation of rinderpest, malignant sore throat, and other diseases of animals, especially with a view to determining means of prevention and cure. (4). Similar investigation of glanders, tuberculosis, anthrax, and other diseases communicable from lower animals to mankind, with a view to their repression. (5). Study of the life history of disease-producing parasites, animal and vegetable. (6). Enquiries specially into the practicability and practical value of prophylactic vaccination for the several most important animal diseases in India. (7). General micro-biological research. It was at first thought the laboratory might interfere with the Pasteurian Laboratory which has recently been established at Poona. But, on my show- ing that on the contrary it would supplement the resources of that institution, Sir Dinshaw's munificent offer to build the laboratory was cordially accepted by Government. It will most materially add to the research and educational resources of the College and also increase its scientific status by keeping it fully up to the times. Hitherto pathological research at the College has had to be carried out in a rather haphazard manner, as in the case of a recent important investigation of Surra carried out by the Principal and on the results of which a volume will shortly be published. The laboratory will, I hope, be built in the coming year. The new isolation ward, also associated with Sir Dinshaw's name, is educationally a valuable supplement to the laboratory. In it cases of rinderpest, glanders, surra, and foot and mouth disease can find a home and be available for research of a non-vivisectional character. It will be noted that the laboratory removes one of the crying wants of the College mentioned in my last report, that is, facilities for microscopic investigation and for educa- tion in Microscopy. 13. Clinical Teaching of Students.11 (4). The Allbless Fountain. (5). One new road, with removal of much undergrowth. (g). A large number of wants of the hospital have yet to be supplied and are specified. (h). Owing to sickness of the Farrier, the shoeing has not been so thorough as it might have been. Fresh proposals are before Government under this heading. (i). The services to the hospital of the Manager, Mr. B. R. Tavaria, of Mr. Shroff, and of Dr. Nariman are acknowledged. Also the indebtedness of the hospital to His Excellency the ex-Grovernor for substantial support in publicly opening the isolation ward and inspecting the hospital. (j.). Much benefit is foreseen from the liberal donation of a Patho- Bacteriological Laboratory by Sir Dinshaw Manokji Petit and the consent of Government to keep it up and equip it ; also from the recent reconstitu- tion of the College clinical staff as made by Government. (k). It is calculated that each student who graduated in 1889 had the opportunity of practically studying about 7,000 cases of injury and disease in the hospital before graduation, and it is urged that, therefore, the hospital fulfils amply its aim of affording a valuable school of Practical Veterinary Surgery and Medicine. 14. Order and discipline have been satisfactorily maintained during the past year. 15. The following occasional students have attended :12 The Library has had 66 volumes added to it. These include the Nariman Testimonial of over 30 volumes purchased from subscriptions of the students. Appendix G. shows the present state of the Library. The Museum has been transferred to the new building above the College porch and a rough provisional arrangement has been adopted, but I hope to improve this in the coming year and to get out an official catalogue. A fair number of specimens have been added, many of the new and most valuable of which have been presented by the Bombay Veterinary Association. A Students' Museum and Bone Room has been formed in the small room off the Library and the sitting room for students transferred to one of the Society's buildings which used to be the Pharmacy but was inconveniently placed for such use though admirable as a students' room, being cool and secluded. The Forge has been used less than I should have liked on account of the sickness of the officer in charge. I found that to secure to the students any knowledge whatsoever of practical shoeing I had at last to myself teach them all I could. The Operating Shed is now in full use. Numerous operations were perform- ed, major and minor, and some 50 examinations as to soundness. The recent additions to this shed improved its practical value. The Pinjrapole has been used by me for practical instruction of the senior students. It always supplies ample material for demonstration. As regards physical development, our students have to come so far from their homes to College, and so much of their work is manual and their time is so fully occupied, that the Gymkhána has not hitherto flourished much. The sports were held as usual and some cricket matches played ; but the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals unfortunately would not give us any ground for a Lawn Tennis Court or Gymnasium. However I hope they will this year. A Veterinary Society was started this year, under the auspices of the Board of Examiners who in a body attended the first meeting on 7th May 1889. In- specting Veterinary Surgeon Anderson was elected President ; Dr. Nariman, Secretary. The Bombay Veterinary Association has proved a decided success. Its meetings were mainly held at the College and well attended by practitioners and students. One meeting was held at the Poona Army Veterinary School when "Description of Horses" was dealt with. Among several inquiries being carried on by the Association I may specify those on " Coloration of Indian Cattle, " which promise to put this much-debated question at rest for ever. 17. Financial.13 Officers of the Medical Department have rendered us good service by assisting in examining our students and by performing the duties of members of the Administrative Committee. The Director of Public Instruction advises Government concerning the College in its educational aspects, and the Educa- tional Inspector, Central Division, is a member of the Committee. Our inter- relations with the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals have been uniformly cordial ; and the Bombay Police have relations with us in that we examine cases of communicable disease for them, also their remounts as to soundness and fitness. The Principal advises the Municipality concerning sick- ness among the animals in its Victoria Gardens and is a member of the Gardens Committee of the Bombay Natural History Society which is working with a view to improvement of the zoological collection. The Veterinary Practitioners of all kinds and the College have given each other such mutual support as lay in their power and are in cordial relations, which are due to an extent to the Quarterly Journal of Veterinary Science in India, which, though published in Madras, is issued from the College. 20. In conclusion, I trust Government will consider that in improvement of organization, in obtaining employment for Graduates, and in supplementing the teaching means of the various branches, the College has worked efficiently during the past year. The only matter specially needing consideration is the diminution in number of the students and it will be seen from the body of the report that I consider this but temporary. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, JOHN HENRY STEEL, F.R.C.V.S., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. 18th June 1890. B 387-4
14 APPENDIX A. Results of April 1889 Examinations, Bombay Veterinary College. Examination. 1st Class. 2nd Class. Pass. TOTAL CANDIDATES. Percentage of Passes. Remarks. Examined. Passed. First Professional 4 6 2 14 12 85.71 Second 15 APPENDIX C. Distribution of Government and Municipality Free Students, 1st April 1890. Position. Present in April 1889. Joined since. Retired or passed. Remained in April 1890. Remarks. Govern- ment. Munici- pal. Govern- ment. Munici- pal. Govern- ment. Munici- pal. Govern- ment. Munici- pal. Passed 3rd Examination in April 1889... Remained in Class C ... ... ... Passed 2nd Examination in April 1889. Remained in Class B ... ... Joined Class B ... ... ... Passed 1st Examination in April 1889 . Remained in Class A ... ... Joined Class A ... ... 4 1 3 1 ... 2 2 ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 3 ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... 1 4* ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 2* ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 3 1 1 2 ... 3 ... ... ... ... 2 ... ... 1 * Graduated. Total ... 13 2 4 3 6 2 11 3 Total number of free students on 1st April 1890 was 14, there being one vacancy on the list. JOHN HENRY STEEL, F.R.C.V.S., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. 25th May 1890. APPENDIX D. Showing Caste and Number of Students from Native States, &c., Bombay Veterinary College, 1889-90. Class. Province, Presidency or State. Number of Hindus. Number of Mahomedans. Remarks. C... Berárs, Nizám's State... Baroda State ... Kolhapur State Junágad State... ... ... Sángli State ... Jámnagar State Gondal State... ... 3 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ..... B ... Berárs, Nizám's State... ... Savantvádi ... ... ... Wadhwán ... ... Bhávnagar Junágad 1 ... ... 1 1 ... 1 1 ... ... A ... District Local Board, Karáchi... Do. Shikárpur. ... 1 1 ... New appointment. Do. Total ... 15 4 JOHN HENRY STEEL, F.R.C.V.S., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. 25th May 1890.
16 APPENDIX E. Return of the Names, present Pay and Appointments of Graduates and Licentiates of the Bombay Veterinary College. No. Name. Present Pay. Present Occupation. 1 Vicaji Edulji Vakharia... ... Rs. 10017 APPENDIX F. Return of Lectures, Demonstrations, &c., delivered and conducted at the Bombay Veterinary College in the year 1889-90. No. Subject. Officer. CLASS A. CLASS B. CLASS C. June. July. August. September. November. December. January. February March. Total. June. July. August. September. November. December January. February. March. Total. June. July. August. September November. December. January. February. March. Total. Grand Total. 1 Medicine and Surgery (Horse and Ox). Principal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6 22 19 10 20 15 21 19 12 144 144 2 Clinical ... ... Do... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 11 9 4 6 5 9 12 5 69 9 22 19 8 18 15 18 20 12 141 210 3 Minor subjects ... ... Do... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 13 10 5 9 9 10 9 6 75 75 4 Demonstrations ... ... Do... ... 3 6 5 2 6 4 8 9 5 48 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .... ... ... ... .... ... .... ... ... 48 5 Hospital Practice ... ... Principal assisted by Resi- dent Veterinary Officer. ... ... ... ... .... ... ... ... ... ... 11 27 23 10 23 18 25 23 18 178 11 26 23 10 23 18 25 23 18 177 355 6 Medicine and Surgery Resident Veterinary Officer and Assistant Professor. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 14 10 5 11 9 11 15 9 88 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .... 88 7 Minor Subjects ... ... Do. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4 8 9 4 6 6 9 11 6 63 63 8 Clinical ... ... Do. 6 4 ... 2 4 3 5 5 1 30 .... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30 9 Anatomy ... ... Lecturer on Anatomy 4 13 9 4 11 9 12 7 9 78 5 18 15 5 15 12 16 13 10 109 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 187 10 Physiology... ... Do. 1 5 2 2 4 3 4 3 1 25 2 7 9 4 8 6 9 7 3 55 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 80 11 Dissections ... ... Do. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 21 12 18 10 23 9 2 105 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 105 12 Chemistry ... ... Lecturer on Chemistry ... 5 19 16 8 18 16 19 14 12 127 2 4 4 1 3 3 4 4 3 28 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 155 13 Botany, Materia Medica, &c. Do. 5 20 20 9 18 16 20 19 13 140 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 140 14 Practical Shooing... ... Instructor in Shooing ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 4 5 3 ... ... ... 21 21 Total ... 24 67 52 27 61 51 68 57 41 448 32 91 91 41 84 63 97 83 50 632 34 91 89 41 81 66 83 82 54 621 1,701 N.B.18 APPENDIX G. Return of the Number and Nature of Books added to the Library in 1889-90. Number. Name of Class. In Library added in 1886-87. In Library added in 1887-88. In Library added in 1888-89. Total number of Books in Library on 1st April 1889. Added in 1889-90. Total number of Books in Library on 1st April 1890. I Chemistry... ... 11 1 1 13 4 17 II Botany ... ... 9 ... 8 17 1 18 III Materia Medica, Pharmacy, &c. 18 6 9 33 3 36 IV Veterinary Surgery and Medicine. 88 27 30 145 12 157 V Diseases and management of Dogs. ... 2 2 4 1 5 VI Anatomy and Zoology 32 2 12 46 3 49 VII Physiology... ... 7 ... 8 15 4 19 VIII Sanitary Science, &c. ... 11 3 ... 14 5 19 IX Animal Management ... 22 1 29 52 2 54 X Journals and Reports ... 9 99 30 138 1 139 XI Government Reports ... 29 8 17 54 13 67 XII Miscellaneous ... ... 25 13 16 54 17 71 Total books in the Library. 261 162 162 585 *66 651 * This does not really represent all additions, for a number of pamphlets have been bound into volumes and replaced on the list by fresh contributions and purchases. Probably the additions have been on the whole as numerous as in previous years. JOHN HENRY STEEL, F.R.C.V.S., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. 25th May 1890.
19 APPENDIX H. Financial Statement of the Bombay Veterinary College. INCOME. EXPENDITURE. Remarks. Heads. 1888-89. 1889-90. Heads. 1888-89. 1889-90. From Government20 APPENDIX I. Return of Prizes, &c., awarded to Students of the Bombay Veterinary College. No. Subject. Nature. Value. Successful Candidate in 1889-90. Remarks. 1 Handling of Animals ... A Scholarship ... Rs. 60 H. A. Shah ... Mr. Steel's prize (1). 2 Practical Anatomy B. ... Text Books for Class C. ... 58 S. N. Savardikar ... Honourable Mr. Justice Bayley's 3 First in Professional Examination Pocket Case of Veterinary Instru- ments. 56 S. N. Savardikar ... ... prize. Sir D. M. Petit, Baronet. 4 Second do. A Clinical Thermometer... 25 F. Fernandez ... Mr. Steel's prize (2). 5 Clinical Records A Medal 15 S. N. R. Ranina Mr. Steel's prize (3). 6 Essay on professional subject ... Professional Books 32 H. S. Batlivala... Mr. J. K. Grainger's prize. 7 Post-mortem Records ... A Clinical Thermometer ... 25 No competition... ... Mr. Steel's prize (4). 8 Practical Surgery Medal and Surgical Instruments ... 70 N. R. Kothavala Mr. Hallen's prize. 9 Bovine Pathology Professional Books and Watch 25 N. F. Suleimani { N. R. Kothavala } Dr. Nariman's prize (1). 10 Hygiene, Sanitary Science, and Obstetrics . Professional Books 25 J. K. Batlivala... Dr. Nariman's prize (2). 11 Results of Examination Government Scholarships (15) 60 each Class B.Bombay Veterinary College : Annual Report of the2 made by Mr. Steel in paragraph 4 of his report as to the benefits which the country at large is likely to derive from the employment of trained cattle doctors in the place of the present unskilled agency, and it is satisfactory to notice that applications for the services of graduates have been received even from places outside India, such as Ceylon and Penang. 4. Government are glad to observe that in Mr. Steel's opinion the local Veterinary Hospitals and Dispensaries established during the year at Ahmedabad, Dhulia, Násik and Nadiád have been working satisfactorily. The number of such institutions in the Presidency will be increased to 12 when the scheme for the new Civil Veterinary Department has been brought into force. His Excellency the Governor in Council also notices with pleasure that His Highness the Gáekwár of Baroda has started two similar hospitals in charge of veterinary graduates in his own dominions, and His Excellency trusts that other Princes will follow the same enlightened policy. The Political officers attached to Native States should be requested to bring to the notice of the Princes and Chiefs concerned the suggestions on this subject made by Mr. Steel in para- graph 6 of his report. 5. The quarters built for the Farrier and Instructor in Practical Shoeing had to be abandoned for residential purposes owing to their insanitary condi- tion, and they have been utilized under the orders of Government as a Pharma- ceutical Laboratory. Government regret to notice that the quarters for resident students recently built at a cost of nearly Rs. 1,000 have been found so un- healthy as to be useless for residential purposes during part of the year and that members of the College and Hospital staff have also suffered severely owing to the general unhealthiness of the locality. The Principal should, in communication with the Secretary to the Hospital, take all possible remedial measures to improve this state of things. 6. The Governor in Council is pleased to observe that attention is being paid to the physical training of the students, and trusts that the Hospital autho- rities will be able to spare a plot of land out of the compound for a gymnasium and play-ground. 7. One of the most important buildings connected with the College, of which the foundation stone was laid during the year by His Excellency Lord Reay, is the Sir Dinsháh Mánekji Petit Patho-Bacteriological Laboratory. As remarked in paragraph 4 of Government Resolution No. 6113, dated 20th August 1889, one of the objects of the Laboratory is to furnish instruction in the use of the microscope to the students so as to obtain the recognition by the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons of the diplomas of the Bombay Veteri- nary College. His Excellency the Governor in Council, however, regrets to notice that the Council of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons has already arrived at a decision not to grant such recognition to institutions like the Bombay College. 8. The Library and the Museum attached to the College received im- portant additions during the year in the shape of books and specimens. 9. Special investigations were conducted during the year by the Principal or his Assistant regarding outbreaks of disease among sheep and goats in Khándesh and sheep and poultry at the Bombay Pinjrápole and in the island of Sálsette, and the prevalence of a serious disorder called 'Surra' (equine re- lapsing fever) among horses in the stables of the Bombay Tramway Company. 10. The receipts of the College during the year under review amounted to Rs. 5,100 and the total expenditure to Rs. 28,692-8-9. The net cost to Gov- ernment of the maintenance of the College was thus Rs. 23,592-8-9, or nearly Rs. 481-8-0 per student. The net expenditure during 1888-89 amounted to Rs. 24,436-6-11 according to the figures given in Appendix H to Mr. Steel's report. Mr. Steel's remark in paragraph 17 of his report that " the original
3 grants have been much reduced" is evidently based on a misapprehension. The provision in the contract was for an expenditure of Rs. 20,000 per annum on the College while the actual expenditure during each of the last three years has exceeded that amount. 11. The abstract of the report of the working of the Bái Sákarbái Dinsháh Petit Hospital for Animals given by the Principal in paragraph 13 of his report shows continued progress in all the branches of the institution. An Isolation ward was added to the Hospital during the year through the liberality of Sir Dinsháh Mánekji Petit. 12. The commendation of Government is due to Mr. Steel for his interest- ing and exhaustive report and for the energy, devotion and skill with which he has performed the multifarious and laborious duties devolving upon him as Principal of the Veterinary College. J. DE C. ATKINS, Acting Under Secretary to Government. To The Principal, Bombay Veterinary College, The Commissioners of Divisions and in Sind, All Collectors, including the Collectors and Deputy Commissioners in Sind, The Political Department of the Secretariat, The Political Agents, Káthiáwár, Cutch, Kolhá- pur and Southern Marátha Country and Mahi Kántha, The Political Superintendents, Pálanpur and Sávantvádi, The Political Resident, Aden, The Superintendent, Horse-Breeding Operations, The Municipal Commissioner for the City of Bombay, The Accountant General, The Educational Department of the Secretariat, The Director of Public Instruction, The Director of Land Records and Agriculture, The Principal, College of Science, Poona, The Military Department of the Secretariat. With copies of the report The Government of India, The Secretary of State for India. By letter. No of 1890. Copy forwarded for information and guidance to
REPORT OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE AND OF THE BA'I SA'KARBA'I DINSHAW PETIT HOSPITAL FOR ANIMALS, FOR THE YEAR 1890. Bombay: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1891. [PriceREPORT OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE AND OF THE BA'I SA'KARBA'I DINSHAW PETIT HOSPITAL FOR ANIMALS, FOR THE YEAR 1890. Bombay : PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1891.
No. 384 OF 1891. From THE PRINCIPAL, BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE; To THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC INSTRUCTION, Poona. Bombay Veterinary College and Hospital, Parel, dated 16th of June 1891. SIR, I have the honour to forward the annual report of this institution for the year ending 31st March 1891, compiled by Dr. Nariman, who officiated as Principal during the latter part of the period under report. 2. I respectfully beg to draw particular attention to Dr. Nariman's remarks on the insanitary state of the hospital and its surroundings, in which I fully concur. 3. I fear that without the active interference of Government nothing will be done to improve matters by the Committee or Secretary of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. 4. Dr. Nariman's report is an extremely able one, and is such as might be expected from a man of his high scientific attainments. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, G. J. R. RAYMENT, A. V. D., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. B 382From DR. S. K. NARIMAN; To THE PRINCIPAL, BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Bombay Veterinary College, Parel, 4th June 1891. SIR, Under instructions conveyed in your memorandum No. 276, dated 6th May 1891,I have the honour to submit the following report, being the fifth annual report of the Bombay Veterinary College, dealing with transactions of the official year ending 31st March 1891. One paragraph as usual under the heading of Clinical Instruction contains a brief summary of the report of the Bai Sakarbai Dinshaw Petit Hospital for Animals for the year 1890. 2. The professional examinations for the year under report were held at the College by the Government Board of Examiners consisting of Veterinary Surgeon (1st Class) J. K. Grainger, Superintendent, Horse-Breeding Department (President); Veterinary Surgeon (1st Class) S. M. Smith, Veterinary Lecturer, College of Science, Poona, Veterinary Surgeon F.W. Sharp, deputed by Inspecting Veterinary Surgeon, Bombay Army, and Dr. M. G. Deshmukh, Assistant Chemical Analyser to Government (Members). The examinations were con- tinued from 21st April to 1st May. The final meeting of the Board and members of the teaching staff was held on the latter date, when the results were declared as per Appendix A. At the same meeting certain alterations were suggested in the course of minor subjects prescribed for the diploma examination and also in the system of awarding marks in different examinations, which were submitted to Government and approved in their Resolution, Revenue Department, No. 4177, dated 14th June 1890. The new scheme thus sanctioned comprises about fifteen minor subjects, in addition to the theory and practice of veterinary medicine and surgery, for the final examination. The trial, which the scheme has already had, shows that the subjects are too numerous to be taught efficiently in one year. In fact, there are not even at present facilities for teaching some of the subjects practically, and these may have to be dispensed with for the present. The question can, however, be determined on the result of the current year's examinations and the opinion of the Board in the matter. The permanent Board of Examiners has so far answered very well, but it is with some difficulty that the Medical members find time to serve on it. They have also no inducement to do so, as under the orders of Government (Resolution, Revenue Department, No. 13, dated 3rd January 1890) the members of the Board resident in Bombay do not obtain any extra remuneration for their services like the outside members. 3. On 1st April 1890, there were 49 students on the College rolls: there were 16 fresh entries during the year, but one of the fresh students attended only during the first term: 22 students retired from the College during the year, 19 of them passing out as graduates, while the remaining three left the College, two on account of their constant failures at the examinations and one on account of ill-health. Three of the new students joined B Class, as one of them was a diplomate in Agriculture and the other two Hospital Assistants. One student, who was suspended from the last examination, was, on the recom- mendation of the Managing Committee, allowed to attend both A and B Classes. The changes in the number of students are shown in Appendix B. 4. It will be seen that while the number of entries shows an increase of 4 as compared with the preceding year, there is a fall in the total number of students, due to a larger number having passed out during the year under report. Though the number of fresh admissions or the total number on the roll cannot by itself be considered large, it is just equal to the anticipated demand for veterinary graduates in future years, as it would be difficult, if the number were B 3822 larger, to find employment for all after graduation. A reference to Appendix C will show that only 10 of the fresh students are independent, whilst the rest are nominees of Native States which bear all their College and other expenses on the understanding that the students after graduating will serve the States, if requir- ed, on fixed salaries ranging from Rs. 50 to Rs. 100 per mensem. The majority of students entering the College are quite suited for the pro- fession both from their preliminary education and physical stamina. The latter desideratum is, however, wanting in a few of them, who cannot be expected to turn out good veterinarians. Such men have to be admitted into the College owing to paucity of entries. Some of them improve greatly while at the College and turn out fairly good veterinarians, though they generally take five or six years to pass out instead of the usual three years; while others are forced to retire through constant failure, mostly in practical work. Appendix D shows the number of students of each nationality on the Col- lege rolls during 1890-91. In regard to physique the Mahomedans, Pársis and Christians are decidedly better suited for the profession than the Hindus, but, unfortunately, the prospects held out to the graduates are too poor to at- tract the better class of men in larger numbers than at present. The organisation of the Civil Veterinary Department was looked forward to by the graduates and the students as a means of bettering their prospects and improving their status, and by the teaching staff as a means of inducing a better stamp of men to join the College. But these hopes are not likely to be realised as Government have been pleased to decide in paragraph 6 of their Resolution, Revenue Department, No. 2011, dated 18th March 1891, that the graduates to be employed in the Civil Veterinary Department will not be enrolled as servants of Government entitled to the privilege of pension, &c., but will be considered as employés of the Local Boards concerned. * Average number of students in the College :3 The Mysore State, which possesses many valuable cattle and which is known for its cattle-breeding industry throughout India, has for the first time selected a student of its own, and it is understood that His Highness the Mahárája contem- plates sending students regularly every year to the College. The Limbdi State, which was hitherto not represented in the College, has also come forward with one student. The Bhávnagar State has added one more student, this time a Mahomedan gentleman. The Kolhápur State has contributed two students, one to the A Class and the other to the B Class. The Local Board of Hyderabad has followed the example of Shikárpur and Karachi by sending one student of its own. This new student, a Hindu gentleman, being an Hospital Assistant, has been admitted to the B Class, so that all the three Sindhi students are at present in the same class. The Government and Municipality free students are shown in Appendix F. It will be observed that some of the free studentships have not been availed of4 recovered under proper treatment. It is observed that even in a city like Bombay, at the time of an outbreak of foot and mouth disease among cattle, due care is not taken to isolate the affected animals. It is a common thing to see such animals working on the roads at great risk of infecting the healthy animals. Even in some cases the owners choose rather to pay fines in Magistrates' courts than to isolate the affected animals and get them treated. The adoption of more vigorous measures alone, it seems, will have the desired effect on such persons. The disease prevails widely in Bombay almost every alternate year, and is observ- ed not only among working cattle, but also among milch cattle like buffaloes and cows, and thus endangers the health of human beings, especially the children, inasmuch as the consumption of milk of the affected animals produces a severe disease of the mouth and diarrhoea. Rinderpest was rare last year. There were a few cases in the hospital wards. Tuberculosis in cattle in this part of India is common; and as the disease is communicable to man, both through milk and flesh, it requires immediate atten- tion. At present, the milk of the affected animals is freely mixed with good milk and sold in the market. Possibly the great prevalence of phthisis in Bombay is due to some extent to this cause. Anthrax fortunately is absent here : anyhow no cases of that disease have been brought to notice. Rabies is heard of every now and then, and almost every month cases of dogs suffering from this disease are brought to the hospital. Cases of glanders-farcy are becoming very common in Bombay. They generally arise in the Arab commission stables. The disease is prevalent in Bombay to a larger extent than is generally believed. Whenever a case of glanders is found by the Police Inspector on the road, or brought to the hospital by an owner, on searching the stable to which it is traced, several more cases are generally discovered. The Glanders Act in Bombay is working satisfactorily and a few successful convictions lately secured by the Police have had a very wholesome effect. * The previous orders have been modified since this was written5 (c) Deputation of a graduate to investigate and check the spread of cattle disease (rinderpest) in the Thana district. (d) Instructions as to the nature and prevention of cattle-disease (foot and mouth disease) sent to the Collector of Kolába. (e) Advice as to treatment and management of the animals in the Victoria Gardens. The College officers also performed the following extra collegiate work :6 the senior class, which are usually taken by the Principal and the Assistant Professor, had to be entrusted to the instructors owing to the absence of Dr. Nariman on leave for a part of the year and the Assistant Professorship having remained vacant for another part of the year when Dr. Nariman was acting as Principal. 13. During the year under report fittings were erected in the students' drug and bone rooms ; permanent sun and rain protectors for office doors were provided and the lecturers' room was also divided into two parts by a small parti- tion. The minor works mentioned below were sanctioned during the year, which will shortly be executed :7 14. As regards the teaching staff of the College, there were more changes during the year under report than in any previous year. The late Veterinary Surgeon Steel was Principal from 1st April to 5th Decem- ber 1890 : Dr. S. K. Nariman, Acting Principal, from 6th December 1890 to 8th January 1891, and sub. pro-tem. Principal from 9th January to 31st March 1891. In the death of Veterinary Surgeon J. H. Steel, F.R.C.V.S., F.Z.S., this College has lost its very backbone. During his career in the College he had endeared himself equally to all, his colleagues, graduates and students. He showed considerable tact and zeal in organizing the College, the first of its kind in the whole of India, and the present high status of the institution is to a great extent due to his exertions. Both as a teacher and a scientific man he displayed extra- ordinary abilities. His death is a terrible blow to the veterinary profession of which he was a promiment member and to the cause of Veterinary Science in general. He published several standard works and was the Editor of the Quarterly Journal of Veterinary Science in India. His name is also associated with many scientific researches, and had he been spared he would have distinguished himself much more. It is a matter of great satisfaction to note that the members of the staff and the graduates and students of the College have collected a decent sum of money, part of which is to be spent on a bromide bust of the deceased, to be placed in a prominent place in the College, and out of the remainder a silver medal bearing his name will be instituted, to be awarded to the student who passes the examination with the highest number of marks in handling of animals8 The year under report is the first one during which the experiment of entrusting the duties of Instructors to Veterinary graduates sanctioned by Government in Resolution, Revenue Department, No. 9422, dated 14th December 1889, has been carried out. The two Instructors, Messrs. V. E. Vakharia and N. D. Dhakmarvala, who replaced the Assistant Surgeons Engineer and Sukhia on 1st April 1890, although without any previous experience in the teaching line, worked hard throughout the year and they give fair hopes of turning out good teachers in a short time. They show great zeal and interest in their work and are assisting the Principal in his multifarious duties both at the College and hospital. Mr. Dhakmarvala has put up a skeleton, while Mr. Vakharia has made some substantial changes in the chemical laboratory. It is certainly a great advantage to the College in having these full-time workers instead of the Assist- ant Surgeons who simply lectured to the classes and did not do any work in the hospital. The Instructors were of great help in the hospital work during the vacations. As this was their first year and they had consequently considerable difficulty in getting up lectures, &c., it was thought advisable not to give them hospital duties during the sessions, but from the ensuing year it is intended to give them their full share of hospital work so that their practical knowledge may not get rusty and either of them may become competent enough to take up the post of Assistant Professor and Resident Veterinary Officer whenever it is vacant. They have also been advised to attempt to get matriculated at the University so that they may have some time a chance of being recognized as Colonial Veterniary Surgeons under the British Act, and thus obtain the diploma of M.R.C.V.S. after a short stay in Great Britain. It is hoped that at no distant date all the members of the teaching staff will also be members of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons. The post of instructor in Practical Shoeing has not yet been permanently filled up. During the first few months of the year, Rs. 40 a month were paid to a native farrier who did the practical shoeing work, while from September last one of the graduates has also been temporarily appointed to be instructor in shoeing on Rs. 40 a month. Arrangements are being made to get a graduate specially trained for Farriery, as there is no chance of attracting any more men from the Army for the post. As soon as a graduate is ready for the post, proposals will be submitted as to the way in which his services should be utilized. Mr. H. S. Batlivala, G.B.V.C., the temporary instructor in shoeing, and the native farrier, have worked satisfactorily. The two Assistant Veterinary officers sanctioned by Government have proved of great help in the hospital work, and also did good service in conducting classes during the casual absence of the teachers. Further they cheerfully per- formed the extra duties of Resident Veterinary officer when Dr. Nariman was Principal to his entire satisfaction. These post-graduate appointments, though the remuneration attached to each is only Rs. 300 a year, are already becoming attractive among the graduates as they afford them considerable facilities to extend their practical knowledge and thus make them better veterinarians. The Superintendent of Bacteriological Laboratory, Mr. G. P. Nariman, G.B.V.C., was entertained from 15th December 1890. He assisted the Prin- cipal in preparing indents and in supervising the making of furniture for the new laboratory and in conducting the practical microscopical classes which were for the first time introduced during the year. He has been of help also in the investigation of specific diseases in the hospital. The College Clerk, Mr. V. B. Phatak, performed his duties satisfactorily and was of special service in the year under report to the Acting Principal. The re-organization of the teaching staff on the plan recommended by the College Committee and approved by Government that teachers in a Veterinary College should all be veterinary graduates and full time workers has thus worked very satisfactorily. Under this system the interests of the teachers and of the College are bound together, and being themselves alumni of the same institution, the Graduate Instructors feel a natural desire to do all in their power to promote its welfare. They are also quite in touch with the wants of the students on whom they can impress what is most important and useful in their respective branches of instruction.
9 15. I now come to the several departments of the College study and notice important points connected with each. Anatomical.10 become competent to examine blood, &c., in specific disorders. There is no apparatus at present for hardening the tissues, cutting sections and mounting them, but the apparatus for the Patho-Bacteriological Laboratory which is shortly expected will remove these drawbacks. In Medicine and Surgery, several lectures were delivered on the management and diseases of other domesticated animals besides the horse and ox, and especially dog, sheep, camel and birds. Except in the case of the camel, the hospital affords ample opportunity for clinical instruction. It is found essential to impart an elementary knowledge about these animals, as several graduates are employed in districts where they have to deal with them. The Library has had an increase of books during the year (vide Appendix I). There are many useful books still wanting in the library. The deficiency will, it is hoped, be supplied during the current year. The Bombay Veterinary Associa- tion, of which most of the students are members, affords great facilities to the students for the perusal of veterinary periodicals. It has also been arranged to buy complete sets of periodicals from the Association at certain reduced rates and preserve them in the College library. The improvement in the Musuem, alluded to in the last report, has been carried out to a great extent this year. The valuable specimens which were lying on the floor and were being mostly spoiled by rats have been arranged in glass cases under different classes, such as comparative, lameness, fracture, ageing, special, &c. There is thus a good and systematic collection at present of bony and dried specimens ; there are very few specimens of organs, however, and those few presented by the Bombay Veterinary Association. Much useful material in the post-mortem room has been wasted and not utilized from want of time and funds. The Forge has been used to its full extent, the students, who cared to work practically, getting ample practice. Operative Surgery was practised on a fair scale. Besides the practice on dead bodies, each student of the senior class had turns in casting the animals, in performing castration, neurotomy, removal of tumours, &c. A special grant of Rs. 300 for the purchase of locally manufactured surgical instruments, sanctioned by Government in Resolution, Revenue Department, No. 6106, dated 20th August 1889, on the reccommendation of the Managing Committee, has supplied a long felt want of ordinary instruments. Nothing has been done as to the Physical training of students through want of a plot of ground either for gymnasium or lawn tennis, except the annual sports on the anniversary of the opening of the College. As in the previous years, so during the year under report, there were no facilities for riding, and very few of the graduates know how to ride a horse. This drawback will, however, now be removed through the generosity of His Excellency Lord Harris, the Governor of Bombay, who was pleased to announce, in his address at the gathering on the 21st March 1891, his intention of sparing a few of the Body Guard horses by turns to teach riding to the students, after consultation with the Commandant of His Excellency's Body Guard. The members of the staff and students of the College are highly thankful to His Excellency for this valuable concession, which is a mark of the great personal interest in the welfare of the College and the students which His Excellency has hitherto shown. Riding is one of the qualifications required for final examination, but had hitherto to be dispensed with from want of means of teaching it. 16. The sanitary condition of the hospital grounds, which has attracted great public attention during the year, is far from satisfactory, and is day by day getting worse, so that if proper means are not speedily taken, this extensive estate will be quite uninhabitable. The subject being of such vital importance to the welfare of the College, inasmuch as it concerns the health of the officers and students, requires more than a passing notice. The whole district of Parel is malarial towards the latter part of the rainy season and for about a couple of months after the rains, i.e., in August, Septem- ber and October. The chief causes of this prevalence of malaria are :11 (a). Absence of drainage. (b). Presence of large fields which are tilled and manured just before the rains with decomposing stuff, such as cotton refuse from mills or spoiled fish residue, for growing maize and vegetables. (c). Absence of a proper number of latrines and urinals in the Parel village, forcing the people to use public roads, lanes and fields for natural purposes. During the remainder of the year, however, the Parel district is as healthy as the other districts of Bombay. Unfortunately for the College such is not the case with the hospital grounds, which are fearfully unhealthy throughout the year. The special causes of the unhealthiness must be sought for in the compound itself, and it is not difficult to trace them for one who knows the ins and outs of the place. These are as follows :12 They are only imperfectly flushed every day13 the first signs of disease in September 1887, that is, in his second monsoon at the College. Mr. Bhikaji Tavaria, the Manager of the hospital, a man of iron constitution, broke down and at last died of dysentery and fever. The present Manager and Assistant Manager are suffering off and on from fever and dysentery. Many healthy students suffer at the College from fever, jaundice, &c. The resident students have one and all to fly away in the rains. The hospital and College menial servants are often absent from duty or are unable to do their work through sickness. I may close this by stating that during the last four months of the year, when I was Principal, I had to grant leave of absence on account of sickness to no less than 17 students out of 42 and to treat as many more for ague, cough or dysentery. 17. Clinical Instruction.14 are often sent by them either for confirmation of diagnosis or for practical instruction of students. The Bombay Pinjrápole also afforded special facilities to students for clinical study, especially as one of the graduates, Mr. Nanabhoy Narsingrao, is at present in veterinary charge of the Pinjrápole in Bombay and its branches at Chimbur and Bhiwndi. We are also indebted to the Veterinary Officer of the Bombay Municipality, Mr. S. N. Ranina, G.B.V.C., for interest- ing specimens and bullock cases. One point with reference to existing graduate practitioners requires passing notice, namely, the correspondence between a G. B. V. C. and a L. V. Sc., which appeared about the close of the year in the Times of India, where a L. V. Sc. has passed certain unneccessary and groundless strictures on the College and its graduates. Had the matter proceeded further, the Principal would have been compelled to take serious notice of it. Such controversies are likely to degrade the profession in the eyes of the public and should by all means be stopped. 19. The financial statement of the College is herewith appended (Appendix J). The examination of the College income and expenditure shows that the total net cost to Government during the year under report has been approxi- mately Rs. 17,400, including Rs. 700 spent for furnishing the new Patho-Bacterio- logical Laboratory. This cost is about Rs. 6,200 less than that of 1889-90 and Rs. 7,036 less than that of 1888-89, notwithstanding the continued expansion of the various departments of the College. 20. The prize list is given in Appendix K. Besides a Government silver medal and Professor Steel's and Dr. Nariman's prizes, the College is indebted to Sir Dinshaw Manekji Petit, Bart., for a prize of Rs. 50, to Honourable Mr. Justice Bayley for a prize of Rs. 50, and to Veterinary Surgeon (1st Class) J. K. Grainger for a prize of Rs. 32. The Honourable Mr. Justice Bayley's prize will be annual for the time he remains in Bombay ; while I have to note with pleasure that on the day of the opening of the new Patho-Bacteriological Laboratory, Sir Dinshaw Manekji Petit, Bart., handed over a sum of Rs. 1,500 to the Trustees of the Bai Sakarbai Dinshaw Petit Hospital for Animals, the in- terest of which is to be utilised in giving annually prizes or medal to the students of the College. As the donor prefers a medal to prizes and is willing even to give an additional amount if required, arrangements are being made to institute a gold medal in the College in his name. For this special gift of Sir Dinshaw with his usual generosity the teachers and students of the College have conveyed their best thanks. 21. The College is now transferred to the Educational Department and the Principal of the College, who was till now the Head of the Department, has been subordinated to the Director of Public Instruction (vide paragraph 11 of Government Resolution, Revenue Department, No. 2011, dated 18th March 1891). According to the same Resolution all veterinary questions, as well as the inspec- tion of local veterinary dispensaries, &c., have been transferred to the Director of Land Records and Agriculture. Now as the College is purely an educational institution, it is a question whether the College authorities should continue to perform extra collegiate duties. A reference on this point will shortly be sub- mitted. The Director of Public Instruction was kind enough to visit and inspect the College in the first session. The Educational Inspector, Central Division, a Member of the Committee, visited the College in November. The Director of Land Records and Agriculture, also a Member of the College Committee, as well as Mr. J. H. B. Hallen, General Superintendent, Horse-breeding Department, India, visited the institution from time to time and advised the Principal on important matters. 22. The administrative Committee of the College held two meetings during the year. The first meeting was held in the Town Hall, Bombay, on 8th July 1890, and the second meeting was held at Poona on 23rd August 1890. The principal business that was done by the Committee was :15 (c). Discussion on school for farriery. (d). Discussion on education of dressers. The Committee has now been dissolved according to Government Resolu- tion, Revenue Department, No. 2011, dated 18th March 1891, and each member was informed of the same and thanked for his services rendered to this institu- tion. 23. I trust that the record of work described in this report will be deemed satisfactory, considering the frequent changes in the personnel of the staff that took place during the year. Notwithstanding the difficulties encountered in finding employment for the graduates of the College, it is hoped that a sufficient number of students will continue to avail themselves of the benefits conferred by the institution and that, as time goes, it will prosper more and more. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, S. K. NARIMAN, M.D., Assistant Professor, Bombay Veterinary College.
16 APPENDIX A. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Results of April 1890 Examinations. Examination. 1st Class. 2nd Class. Pass. TOTAL CANDIDATES. Percentage of Passes. Examined. Passsed. First Professional... ... ... 1 4 ... 6 5 83.33 Second Professional ... ... ... 9 2 13 11 84.62 Third Professional ... ... 1 18 ... 23 19 82.61 Special Tests ... 1 1 ... 2 2 100.00 ... ...Total ... 3 32 2 44 37 84.04 S. K. NARIMAN, M.D. 4th June 1891. APPENDIX B. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Return showing changes in the number of Students in 1890-91. Classes. Number of Students on the 1st of April 1890. 1890-91. WITHDRAWALS. 1890-91. ENTRIES. Number of Students on the 1st of April 1891. Remarks. Number of Students left the College. Number of Students trans- ferred. Number of Students trans- ferred. New Entries. Class C ... 24 19* ... 13 ... 18 * Left on graduation. Class B ... 17 3 13 6 3 10 Class A ... 8 ... 6 ... 17 APPENDIX D. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Table showing Number and Nationality of Students for the year 1890-91. Caste. Paying. Native State, &c. Private, Free. Govern- ment, Free. Municipal, Free. Total on the 31st of March 1891. Remarks. Class C. Pársi... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 2 3 Hindu ... ... 1 7 ... 1 ... 9 Mahomedan ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... 2 Portuguese ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... 2 European and Eura- sian ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Jew ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 Total ... 5 9 ... 2 2 18 Class B. Pársi... ... ... .... ... .... 1 ... 1 Hindu ... ... ... 3 ... 2 ... 5 Mahomedan ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Portuguese ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 2 European and Eurasi- an ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Jew ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... 2 4 ... 3 1 10 Class A. Pársi ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Hindu ... ... 2 3 ... 4* ... 8 Mahomedan ... ... ... 1 .... 1 ... 2 Portuguese ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... European and Eurasi- an ... ... ... 318 APPENDIX E. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Return showing Caste and Number of Students from Native States, Local Boards, &c. Class. Province, Presidency or State. Number of Hindus. Number of Mahomedans. Remarks. C ... Berár, Nizam's State ... 3 ...... Junágadh State ... ... 1 ...... Jámnagar State ... ... 1 ...... Gondal State ... ... 1 ...... Sávantvádi State ... ... ... 1 Bhávnagar State ... ... 1 ...... Wadhwán State ... ... ... 1 B ... District Local Board, Karáchi... ... 1 19 APPENDIX G. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Return of the Names, present Pay and Appointments of the Graduates of 1890. Number. Names. Present Pay. Present Occupation. Rs. 1 Sadasiva Narayan Savardikar ... 5020 APPENDIX H. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Return of Lectures and Demonstrations during 1890-91. Class. Subject. Teacher. No. of Lectures. Remarks. Class C. ... Medicine and Surgery ... Principal ... *146 * 65 by Professor Steel and the remainder by Dr. Nariman. Clinical ... ... Do. ... 21 APPENDIX I. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Return of the Number and Nature of Books added to the Library in 1890-91. No. Name of Class. In Library added in 1886-87. In Library added in 1887-88. In Library added in 1888-89. In Library added in 1889-90. Total number of Books in Library on 1st April 1890. Added in 1890-91. Total number of Books in Library on 1st April 1891. I Chemistry ... ... ... 11 1 1 4 17 1 18 II Botany ... ... ... 9 ... 8 1 18 ... 18 III Materia Medica, Pharmacy, &c. 18 6 9 3 36 2 38 IV Veterinary Surgery and Medicine. 88 27 30 12 157 3 160 V Diseases and Management of Dogs. ... 2 2 1 5 ... 5 VI Anatomy and Zoology ... 32 2 12 3 49 1 50 VII Physiology ... ... ... 7 ... 8 4 19 1 20 VIII Sanitary Science, &c. ... 11 3 ... 5 19 1 20 IX Animal Management ... 22 1 29 2 54 1 55 X Journals and Reports ... 9 99 30 1 139 ... 139 XI Government Reports ... 29 8 17 13 67 ... 67 XII Miscellaneous ... ... 25 13 16 17 71 ... 71 Total books in the Library... 261 162 162 66 651 10 661 S. K. NARIMAN, M.D. 4th June 1891. B 38222 APPENDIX J. Financial Statement of the Bombay Veterinary College, 1890-91. INCOME. EXPENDITURE. REMARKS. Heads. 1889-90. 1890-91. Heads. 1889-90. 1890-91. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. From Government23 APPENDIX K. Return of Prizes, &c., awarded to Students of the Bombay Veterinary College. No. Subject. Nature. Value. Sucessful Candidate in 1890-91. Donor's Name. 1 Clinical Records ... ... ... Medal ... ... ... Rs. 15 J. D. Parakh ... ... B. V. College. 2 First in Professional Examination ... Books ... ... ... 50 A. H. Engel ... ... Sir Dinshaw Maneckji Petit, Bart. 3 Practical Anatomy, Class B. ... ... Do. ... ... ... 50 I. Vaz ... ... ... Honourable Mr. Justice Bay ley. 4 Essay on Professsional Subject ... } Microscope ... ... { 32 } B.Godinho ... ...{ Veterinary Surgeon (1st Class) J. K. Grainger. 5 Hygiene, Sanitary Science, and Obstetrics . 25 Dr. S. K. Nariman. 6 Handling of Animals ... ... A scholarship ... ... 60 A. H. Engel ... ... Late Professor J. H. Steel. 7 Post-mortem Records ... ... A small pocket case ... ... 25 G. W. Shandernikar ... ... Do. do. 8 Second in Professional Examination ... Books ... ... ... 25 S. N. Savardikar ... ... Do. do. 9 General Practical Proficiency or conjoined Professors' Prize. Microscope... ... ... 60 H. E. Browne ... ... Do. do. and Dr. Nari- man. 10 Bovine Pathology... ... ... Books ... ... ... 25 M. K. Patel ... ... Dr. S. K. Nariman. 11 Results of Examinations ... ... Government scholarships 15, each Rs. 60. 900 (1) Engel; (2) Browne ; (3) Javle ; (4) Vaz ; (5) Misquita ; (6) Haji ; (7) Shah ; (8) Mahomed Khan ; (9) C. P. Fernandez ; (10) Judah Hyam ; (11) Rathod ; (12) Pitke ; (13) Padar ; (14)Vedh ; (15)Laskari. Total ... 1,267 BOMBAY : PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. S. K. NARIMAN, M.D. 4th June 1891.
Colleges2 3. The position of the College, its course of instruction, and the provision of a competent teaching staff with suitable accessories are the three points of immediate importance. As regards the first of these subjects, the condition of affairs disclosed in paragraph 16 of Dr. Nariman's report is most serious, and the attention of the Sanitary Commissioner, of the Municipality, and of the Society for the prevention of cruelty to animals and the Bai Sakarbai Dinshaw Petit Hospital for animals should be at once called to it. This is more than an educational question, merely affecting the prospects of the Veterinary College, and a copy of the report should be transferred to the General Department for the issue of orders, and final disposal of the matter in consultation with the Sanitary officers. The facts narrated not only have a bearing on the deeply regretted loss of Veterinary Surgeon Steel, the recent sickness of the present Principal, and the list of casualties contained in the report, but they justify a very serious alarm for the health of the population of Parel. The matter, therefore, requires the very early attention of the General Department. From the educational point of view, Government are now forced to consider whether the advantages gained by the connection with the Society and the Hospital, or even by the provision of the Patho-Bacteriological Laboratory, can outweigh the dangerously unhealthy surroundings of the Veterinary College. The Principal of the College of Science has been directed to report on the possibility of transferring the College to Poona, and Government will await his report with interest. 4. Regarding the plan of education, it is observed that the revised course of instruction, prepared by the late Mr. Steel, left Class C insufficient leisure for practical work, and overloaded both teachers and students. Changes in the curriculum were therefore proposed by the last Examination Committee and sanctioned in Government Resolution No. 1487, dated 22nd July 1891. The syllabus of the College course also needs revisal. On this subject Government hope to receive at an early date the opinion of Mr. Rayment and the detailed suggestion of the Director of Public Instruction. 5. The provision of teaching staff has been rendered more difficult by the ill-repute of the College premises in a sanitary point of view. Government believe that they have secured the services of an able Principal, and the College possesses in Dr. Nariman an officer who commands deserved confidence. The instructors sanctioned by Government Resolution No. 9422, dated 14th Decem- ber 1889, are considered a great improvement on the old system. The post of instructor in practical shoeing has not yet been filled. Dr. Nariman's report shows that the re-organization scheme has worked well, and every year's practice should make the teaching more efficient. 6. Amongst matters of minor detail Government observe that a cesspool is urgently needed as stated in paragraph 15. It is presumed that a proposal for its provision will be separately submitted to Government. The proposals regarding the water-supply and gas for the Laboratory will be considered if the College remains in Bombay. The total cost to Government on account of the College was Rs. 17,400 out of a total expenditure of Rs. 21,939-2-11.
3 7. In reviewing the last report Government expressed their sense of the energy, devotion and skill with which Mr. Steel had performed his multifarious duties, and it is with deep regret that the Governor in Council must recognize that he sacrificed his health for the good of the College. It is, therefore, the impera- tive duty of Government not to subject his successor or the other officers of the College to the avoidable risks of an insanitary neighbourhood. If the efforts of the Municipal authorities and the Hospital Managers are not equal to the task of removing a nuisance that is a menace to the public health of Parel, the transfer of the College elsewhere will be necessary. Dr. Nariman has written an interesting report, and the acknowledgments of Government are due to him and the rest of the College staff for their successful discharge of their duties. W. LEE-WARNER, Secretary to Government. To The Director of Public Instruction, The Principal, Bombay Veterinary College, The Commissioners of Divisions and Sind, All Collectors, including the Collectors and Deputy Com- missioners in Sind, The Political Department of the Secretariat, The Political Agents, Káthiáwár, Cutch, Kolhápur and Southern Marátha Country, and Mahi Kántha, The Political Superintendents, Pálanpur and Sávantvádi, The Political Resident, Aden, The Superintendent, Horse-Breeding Operations, The Municipal Commissioner for the City of Bombay, The Accountant General, Bombay, The Director of Land Records and Agriculture, The Principal of the College of Science, Poona, The Military Department of the Secretariat, The General Department of the Secretariat, The Revenue Department of the Secretariat. The Sanitary Commissioner, With copies of the report The Editors' Table, Bombay, The Editors' Table, Poona (care of the City Magistrate, Poona), The Editor and Proprietor, Dhárwár Vritt (for his own use and for circulation to other Editors of News papers in Dhárwár. The President, Municipal Corporation, Bombay, The Government of India, The Secretary of State for India. By letter. The Secretary to the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (by letter).
REPORT OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE FOR THE YEAR 1891-92. Bombay : PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1892. [PriceREPORT OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE FOR THE YEAR 1891-92. Bombay : PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1892.
No. 949 OF 1892. Government Veterinary College, Parel: Bombay, 15th August 1892. FROM JAMES MILLS, M.R.C.V.S.; V.S. Higl. and Agl. Socy. Soct., Vety.-Capt., A. V. D.; Principal, Bombay Vety. College; To K. M. CHATFIELD, ESQUIRE, Director of Public Instruction, Poona. SIR, I have the honour to submit the sixth annual report of the Bombay Veteri- nary College treating of the work during the official year ending 31st March 1892. A synopsis of the work done in connection with the Bái Sákarbái Dinshaw Petit Hospital for the year ending 31st December 1891 is embodied in the report. Professional examinations. 2. The professional examinations commenced on the 20th April 1891, and terminated on the 30th of the same month. The Board consisted of the following gentlemen :2 Class C had a number of "minor subjects" to study, which undoubtedly proved injurious to their advancement in attaining practical knowledge. The Board also, at their final meeting, went thoroughly into the cause of the failures in the senior class and came to the conclusion, which appears to me to be sound, that the curriculum submitted by the College Managing Committee and sanctioned by Government in their Resolution, Revenue Department No. 4177, dated 11th June 1890, was too lengthy and complicated for the students to grapple with, and for them to attain a sufficient knowledge of each of the nume- rous subjects, within the two last sessions of their collegiate course. Consequently the Board unanimously resolved to move Government to reduce the number of " minor subjects " and to alter the number of marks according to the importance of each (vide Appendix C). Government approved of the Board's views and sanctioned the alteration being made in the curriculum in their Resolution, Educational Department, No. 1487, dated 22nd July 1891. Constitution of Board of Examiners. 3. Considerable difficulty was experienced in obtaining the services of the Military members of the Board, because their own duties do not always make it convenient that they can be spared just at the exact time, and for the number of days on which the examinations are held. It is hardly to be expect- ed that these officers will take the same interest in a purely civil institution like this college, and consequently it would be better, now that it is contemplated to form a Civil Veterinary Department, to elect the outside examiners from this source. Another difficulty in connection with the constitution of the Board is, that the Bombay members receive no remuneration for their services, and, as they are busy men, they must perform this duty with a certain amount of reluc- tance. I would, therefore, recommend that they be paid like the other examin- ers for their work, which is clearly in addition to their own. Separate proposals on this subject will be submitted in due course. Number of and changes in students. 4. On the 1st of April 1891, there were 42 students on the College rolls. Nine fresh students entered during the year, one of whom had previously passed the first professional examination and was, therefore, admitted to Class B. Twelve students left the college, 7 of whom obtained the diploma of Graduate, 1 proceeded to England to study for the diploma of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons, 2 on account of having failed to pass, and being in doubt if ever they could do so, and 2 because they were unable to pay the College fees. At the time there were no free studentships available to assist the two last named students. Two students who were plucked at the diploma examination in April 1891, were excused attendance, and the payment of fees, during the short session as special cases. Assistant Apothecary Macqueen of His Excellency the Gover- nor's Establishment and Sub-Conductor Kettle of the Commissariat Department attended as casual students. The changes in the number of students is shown in Appendix D. Paucity of students. 5. There is a slight fall in the number of fresh entries, and also in the total number of students attending in all three classes in this year as compared with the previous year. There is no lack in the number of applications for admission to the College, and many men even come and study for a short time, but when they learn that their future pro- spects are so poor from a monetary point of view, and that the professional examinations are so severe, and that so few men obtain the diploma within the prescribed time, they naturally leave to embark in some other and more profitable pursuit. Of Matriculated students very few present themselves for admission, because they find that with their educational attainments they can, in almost any other walk in life, obtain remuneration far beyond the price placed upon the services of a Graduate of the Veterinary College. Then again, after spending the best three or more years of their life at a considerable cost, they obtain so few really good and permanent and pensionable posts, that unless men enter the profession from a pure love of the work, it is only to be expected they will pause before commencing such a career. As it is palpable, as matters now stand, that however well a man may understand his work, there is but a precarious living to face when be launches forth to prosecute his calling. The present arrangements which exist between Government and local fund boards, seem to
3 me to be unsatisfactory in the interests of the graduates of the College, inas- much that the latter bodies have it in their power to employ these men at salaries, which are quite inadequate for professional labour4 are such as could not be accepted by a graduate, consequently men will have to be trained for this purpose; but as these men will be recruited from the poorer class, it cannot be expected they will be able to maintain themselves while at College, or to be in a position to pay fees ; therefore, stipends of not less than Rs. 10 per mensem, with a free education, should be given to suitable candidates, and that Government retain a lien on their services at the termination of their course, should they be required. My proposals in this direction have been submitted to Government in this Office letter No. 60, dated 22nd January 1892. If this proposal meets with the approval of Government, I shall be glad to for- ward a detailed report upon it. It may be mentioned that similar proposals were made by the Board of Examiners for 1891, while discussing the necessity for instituting a higher diploma. To quote from the report of the Board contained in this Office letter No. 346, dated 5th June 1891 :5 Employment of graduates. 9. There can be no doubt that there is a demand spriging up for good graduates and such men as take a thorough interest in their profession. That these men will prove of value, not only to their immediate employers, but to the country at large by the suppres- sion of outbreaks of fatal and contagious maladies amongst horses and cattle, is un- doubted. It is a pleasant duty, too, to record that, speaking generally, the gradu- ates have given every satisfaction to their employers in the above capacity. Some of them have also turned out to be excellent operators. Every endeavour has been made by me to impress upon those who require veterinary aid to employ graduates of the College in lieu of empirics. In this I have, in many cases, succeeded, but still there is great room for improvement in this direction. It is not, however, to be expected that we can advance rapidly, because it must be borne in mind, that the people we are dealing with are most conservative in their ideas, and it is purely a question of educating them up to what we wish them to do. The College is in its infancy and, as such, it has hardly dawned upon the minds of the stock-owning community what the value of scientific veterinary treatment means, and it must, for years yet, be a war be- tween what is rational and right, and what is empirical and wrong. It is a matter at times to me of no little anxiety to be able to find suitable employment for graduates, and to find graduates who are willing to take up some of the appointments offered, for the reason that most appointments stand upon such an insecure basis that men cannot reasonably be expected to accept them, and I can see no prospect of a change for the better taking place unless appoint- ments are put upon a sound and firm footing as recommended by me in paragraph 6. Appendix G shows how the new graduates are employed. Several of the appointments secured during the year deserve special mention. His Highness the Nizám of Hyderabad has indicated his readiness to recognize the profession by giving a graduate an appointment on a salary of Rs. 180. It is under contempla- tion to organise a regular Veterinary Department in His Highness's dominions which will give employment to a number of men. This is a step in the right direction, and one which might well be followed with advantage and profit by many other Native States. Rájpipla State Administration have engaged the services of one of our graduates on a salary of Rs. 606 Foot and mouth disease was not generally prevalent, and only a few isolated cases occurred. Anthrax.7 (g) Deputation of the Principal to examine students at the Poona Army Veterinary School. Minor buildings, &c. 12. During the year 2 latrines, 2 bath-rooms, and 2 urinals with cess-pool connections, were erected by the Public Works Depart- ment for the use of the students. The old latrines were paved and also connected with a cess-pool. Behind the post-mortem and dissecting rooms a cess-pool has been built to collect the liquid filth from those two rooms, which is removed daily. The cess-pools of the latrines, urinals, &c. are emptied as required by the Municipality. The above improvements were most essential, as the ground around these buildings was always foul from satura- tion, notwithstanding every effort being made to keep the places in a sanitary state. A copper macerating boiler with an outflow tube to the cess-pool at the back of post-mortem room, a ball-cock in the pharmacy cistern, and a cistern for the use of the resident students, were also constructed. A dark room for photography was also fitted up and water laid on. The following minor works were considered essential, but were postponed on the orders of the Director of Public Instruction, pending the question of the location of the College:8 of a Farrier Sergeant from the Royal Artillery, who has lately obtained his dis- charge, which will do away with this arrangement which does not work satis- factorily. The Assistant Veterinary Officers proved of great service both in the Hospital and College. Owing to the paucity of graduates no one could be found to fill the Third Assistant Veterinary Officer's post which had to be given to a student selected from Class C. Branches of study. 14. Anatomy.9 Physical training. 15. Riding.10 Bombay Veterinary Asso- ciation. 17. I cannot but mention the valuable aid to the students the Bombay Veterinary Association has been. They have been able to attend its meetings, which are held in the college, to gain knowledge, and to listen to discussions. When I first attended a meeting of this Association as a visitor, I was struck by the quiet and unostentatious manner in which it was diffusing useful and prac- tical Veterinary knowledge, and I look upon it as an excellent field for students to glean information from, to give expression to their ideas, and to clear up any mental difficulties they may possess of a subject. It is an Association deserving of every encouragement. Sanitation of College and Hospital. 18. The insanitary condition of the College and Hospital premises received my immediate attention on joining as Principal. The rains were then on and the place presented a most deplorable appearance, being overgrown with the cul- tivation of maize and vegetables and rank herbage of every description. This cultivation was carried on with heavy manuring composed of cotton and wool- waste and the sweepings and other debris from the neighbouring mills with an occasional admixture of fish refuse. What struck me, too, was the abominable practice in vogue, by the Hospital authorities of spreading the fæces and urine of some hundreds of animals every day over the soil of the compound under the plausible pretext of manuring and watering the fruit and toddy trees. A com- bination well calculated to make the air of the compound impure and unwhole- some, more especially was this noticeable after a shower of rain followed by sunshine. The atmosphere of the college was absolutely at times putrid, so much so that work had to be stopped and I, strong as my constitution was when I joined on the 12th August, was laid up with fever and sore-throat within a month. Thus from my personal experience and from what I learnt from Dr. Nariman and from a careful perusal of reports and the correspondence which had taken place on the subject, I looked upon the matter as an extremely serious one, and recommended that a thoroughly representative committee be formed to make a full enquiry into the existing evils and to suggest remedies for their removal, or at least, as far as local circumstances would permit, to lessen the dangers to health which they were bringing about. A committee of enquiry was sanctioned by Government in their Resolution, Educational Department, No. 2328, dated 18th November 1891, to report on the insanitary condition of the surround- ings and premises of the Bombay Veterinary College, and was composed as follows:11 three wells and also the water from the Vehár-supply-taps in the compound, and circulated to each individual member in a collected form, the matter which they were called upon to review, eventually met on the 27th February 1892. On the main points at issue the Committee were, it may be said, unanimous, and all were of the opinion that there was a very grave necessity for immediate remedial measures being adopted. The President read an introductory paper, which he had drawn up, dealing in a most able manner with the relations between the college and hospital and what had led up to the present crisis. The views he took and the way in which he handled the different points during the discussion which followed left nothing to be desired. In the first instance, there appeared to be some slight difference of opinion between the members ; but the lucid way in which the President explained details soon brought them to be of one mind. The Committee resolved as follows:12 cannot, with the information before them, say that the diseases have re- sulted from sanitary shortcomings in connection with the college premises and surroundings. 11th.13 (e) Contagious diseases.14 Financial Statement. 22. Appendix H is the financial statement of the college for the year, which shows that the cost of maintaining the institution has been, approximately speaking, Rs. 28,095, an increase of Rs. 6,156 over the previous year, and a decrease of Rs. 597 compared with the year 1889-90. The increase in this year is chiefly due to payment having to be made to the Principal and Assistant Professor of arrears of salary due for the previous year, and also on account of the reappropriation of the laboratory grant for 1890-91. Clerical work. 23. The work in connection with the office is increasing, and I find, with only one clerk, that it absorbs much of my time which ought to be legitimately devoted to my students. This is a matter which I have already represented to you, but my proposal to ask Government for additional clerical assistance did not meet with your approval. I hope, however, that you will kindly reconsider this matter. Conclusion. 24. In conclusion, I trust that Government will find that the work of the college for the year has been of a satisfactory nature, notwithstanding the insanitary state of the compound and the restrictions placed upon teaching by the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient servant, JAMES MILLS, Vety.Capt., A. V. D., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College.
15 APPENDIX A. Results of April 1891 Examinations, Bombay Veterinary College. Examination. First Class. Second Class. Pass. TOTAL CANDIDATES. Percentage of Passes. Examined. Passed. First Professional ... 5 2 14 7 50.0 Second Professional 1 5 2 10 8 80.0 Third Professional 2 5 ... 18 7 38.8 Total ... 3 15 4 42 22 52.38 JAMES MILLS, Vety.Capt., A. V. D., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. 15th August 1892.
16 APPENDIX B. Return of Prizes, &c., awarded to Students of the Bombay Veterinary College. No. Subject. Nature. Value. Successful Candidates in 1891-92. Donor's Name. 1 First in Professional Examination Medal and Books ... Rs. 60 S. G. Haji... ... Sir Dinshaw Manockji Petit, Bart 2 Second do. do. Books... ... ... 25 H.E.Browne ... Principal Rayment. 3 Handling of Animals... ... A Scholarship 60 A. W. Stephens... ... Principal Rayment. 4 Practical Anatomy... ... Books... 50 S. G. Haji... ... Honourable Mr. Justice Bayley. 5 Essay on a professional subject... ... Do. ... 32 Judah Hyam ... ... Captain J. K. Grainger, A. V. D. 6 Bovine Pathology... ... Do. ... 25 H. E. Browne ... ... Dr. S. K. Nariman, M.D. 7 Hygiene, Sanitary Science, and Obstetrics... Do. ... 25 H.E.Browne ... ... Dr. S. K. Nariman, M.D. 8 Results of Examination... ... Government Scholarships 60 each Class B.17 APPENDIX C. Statement of subjects for the Diploma Examination and the marks assigned to each. Old. New. Marks Marks Marks Marks Number of subjects examined in 1891-92, and written. practical. Alteration in the number of subjects and written. practical. REMARKS. award of marks. award of marks. Medicine and Surgery of Horse 100 100 Medicine and Surgery of Horse 100 100 Do. Ox 100 100 Do. Ox and special diseases of dog, sheep, and camel 100 100 Shoeing... ... .... 50 Hygiene... ... 25 ... Hygiene, Sanitary Science and Police 100 ... { Sanitary Science and Police... ... 25 ... Obstetrics * 25 ... Shoeing ... 50 50 Breeding and Rearing... ... * 25 ... Obstetrics and Breeding and Rearing * 50 ... Prescribing and Pharmacy organisation ... 25 ... { {Therapeutics... ... 25 ... Therapeutics 50 ... Toxicology... ... 25 ... { Examination as to soundness ... ... 50 Pathological Anatomy... ... 25 ... Method of post-mortem examination... ... 25 ... { Operative Surgery... ... 50 { Microscopy... ... 25 ... Bacteriology... ... 25 ... Surgical Anatomy ... ... ... 25 { Operative Surgery... ... ... 25 Examination as to soundness ... ... ... 25 * Oral. 15th August 1892. JAMES MILLS, Vety.-Capt., A. V. D.., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. B 685-5
18 APPENDIX D. Return showing changes in the number of students in 1891-92, Bombay Veterinary College. Number of students on the first of April 1891. WITHDRAWALS, 1891-92. ENTRIES, 1891-92. Number of students on the first of April 1892. Classes. Number of students left the College. Number of students transferred. Number of students transferred. New Entries. Remarks. Class C.......... Do. B.......... Do. A.......... 18 10 14 8 1 3 ... 8 6 8 6 ... ... 1 8 18 8 13 Total ... 42 12 14 14 9 39 JAMES MILLS, Vety.-Capt., A. V. D., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. 15th August 1892. APPENDIX E. Table showing number and nationality of students for the year 1891-92, Bombay Veterinary College. Caste. Paying. Native States, &c. Private Free. Government Free.. Municipal Free. Total. Remarks. Class C. Pársi ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 2 3 Hindu ... ... ... 1 4 ... 5 ... 10 Mahomedan ... ... .. 1 ... 1 ... 2 Portuguese ... ... 2 ... ... ... 1 3 European and Eurasian . ... ... ... ... ... Jew ... ... ... .... ... .. ... .. Total ... 3 5 ... 7 3 18 Class B. Pársi ... ... ... 1 ... ... .... ... 1 Hindu ... ... ... 1 2 1 4 Mahomedan ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... 2 Portuguese ... ... ... .... ... European and Eurasian... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 Jew ... ... ... Total ... 3 3 ... 2 ... 8 Class A. Pársi ... ... ... 3 3 1 ... 3 Hindu ... ... ... 1 ... ... 5 Mahomedan ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... Portuguese ... ... European and Eurasian . 1 2 ... ... ... ... 2 1 2 Jew ... ... ... ... ... 1 Total ... 7 3 ... 3 ... 13 Grand Total ... 13 11 ... 12 3 39 JAMES MILLS, Vety.-Capt., A. V. D., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. 15th August 1892.
19 APPENDIX F. Return showing caste and number of students from Native States, Local Boards, &c., of the Bombay Veterinary College. Province, Presidency or State. Number of Hindus. Number of Mahomedans. REMARKS. Berár-Nizám's State 1 ...... Junágad State 1 ...... District Local Board20 APPENDIX H. Financial Statement of the Bombay Veterinary College, 1891-92. INCOME. EXPENDITURE. Remarks. Heads. 1890-91. 1891-92. Heads. 1890-91. 1891-92. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. From Government21 APPENDIX I. (Copy of Appendix B. of the Sanitary Committee's Report, referred to in para. 18.) Bái Sákarbái Hospital and Bombay Veterinary College. Suggestions and opinions by Veterinary Surgeon Rayment, Principal, Bombay Veterinary College, No. 348, dated 6th June 1891. Replies by the Society, dated 9th July 1891. Rejoinder by Veterinary Surgeon Rayment, Principal Bombay Veterinary College. Opinion of the Committee appointed in G. R. No. 2328 of 10th November 1891, 1. Underground drainage Underground pipe to be Considers the total re- Steps taken by the Society in one ward stated to be cleaned and buried and moval of the pipe appear sufficient. objectionable and its re- surface drainage substi- drain necessary. moval recommended. tuted in the ward referred Surface drainage or the to. dry earth system to be substituted. 2. Flooring of both wards Recommendations agreed Assumes that broken Experiment under trial and said to be on a bad prin- to for Horse Ward No. I. stone well rammed is should be extended if found ciple and badly carried Boulders covered with to be used. satisfactory. oat. Recommends base- moorum to be used. ment of stone or brick well rammed with stiff clay and on this 4 to 6" of well rammed earth. 3. The use of cess-pool Contents of cess-pools is ...... Satisfactorily disposed of. contents for the garden now carted away to Ma- to be discontinued. hálakshmi. 4. Custom of bringing Manure is stated to be The use of cotton or wool waste manure for gardening cotton or wool waste and manure to be discontinued. purposes objected to not injurious to health. strongly. 5. Troughs in connection Animals not allowed to Considers the troughs Appears desirable. The object with fountain to be wired drink at the troughs but should be guarded by is to prevent sick animals on over to prevent animals water taken in buckets for wire netting or other their way to the Hospital from drinking from them. the animals or for garden- protection. drinking at the fountain basin ing purposes. and contaminating the water. 6. Animals in Hospital to Supply in water main in- Doubts if water from The water of two of the wells be watered from the water sufficient at times and pipes is used even (one near the Pharmacy room pipes and not from wells scarcely enough for the when there is no and the other near students' in compound. human population. scarcity. quarters) appears to be better than the Vehár water at pre- sent, buf it will be safer to insist on the use of Vehár water when available. 7. Ventilators to be pro- Ventilators will be provided Disposed of as regards Horse vided at base of walls of as suggested. Wards, but should be extended Hospital wards. to all wards. 8. All litter to be removed All litter is removed or Should be burnt daily on the daily or burnt, contents of burnt daily (for cess-pools premises. all cess-pools, &c., to be see reply to suggestion removed daily. No. 3). 9. Fruit garden in front of The garden yields a revenue The trees to be thinned and College to be abolished as of Rs. 500 per annum and lopped near ground level in it impedes free circulation cannot, the Committee order to assist free circulation of air and harbours filth. think, be done away of air. All low vegetable Ground to be made over with. matter inside the Hospital to the Principal for the premises to be removed. instruction of students in the production of Lucerne, Huriali, &c., the produce to be used for the animals in the Hospital. A few mango-trees to remain, but their lower boughs to be lopped to prevent ob structing the air. 10. Attendants in Horse Attendants increased to one Considered still insuffi- See Resolution 11 of the report. Wards to be one for two to four animals. cient. States that horses instead of one to the men are also em- five. Every ward to have ployed on work about a subordinate in charge the compound. responsible for cleanliness &c. At least one dung boy required for each ward. B 68522 Suggestions and opinions by Veterinary Surgeon Rayment, Principal, Bombay Veterinary College, No. 348, dated 6th June 1891. Replies by the Society, dated 9th July 1891. Rejoinder by Veterinary Surgeon Rayment, Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. Opinion of the Committee appointed in G. R. No. 2328 of 10th November 1891. 11. A cheap shed to be Shed to be constructed ... Agreed to. provided for spreading bedding during the day. 12. The numerous sharp Agreed to... ...... Satisfactorily disposed of. projections, hooks, nails, &c., in wards to be re- moved. 13. The right of admitting Not concurred in, and the Does not come within the re- and discharging patients present system in which ference made to the Commit- to belong to the Principal the Manager acts in con- tee. and College Officers alone, cert with the College a daily report being fur- authorities to continue. nished to the Manager. 14. Contract with tenant See reply to suggestion 9... See decision in regard to sug- of garden to be broken gestion 9. and garden to be made over to the College for the purposes before referred to. 15. Isolation ward to be Disinfection already being The use of the building as a disinfected promptly and carried out and walls to ward undesirable. effectually. Building have a coating of oil paint stated to be quite unfit as an experimental for its purpose. measure. 16. Municipality to be Municipality has been ap- Concurred in. urged to improve drain- pealed to and it is suggest- age, &c. Tick stables at ed that Government present said to be a model should also urge Munici- of what should be avoided pal action. Questions raised by Veterinary Captain Mills. Principal of the Bombay Veterinary College. Veterinary Captain Mills, Reply by the Secre- tary, S. P. C. A. Rejoinder by Veteri- nary Captain Mills. Letter from the President, S. P. C. A. Opinion of the Committee appointed in G. R. No. 2328 of 10th November 1891. 17. In No. 862 of l8th That the same quan- Post mortem exa- The Society, P. C. A., The Society agrees that November 1891 to tity of Phenyle and minations are through its President more Phenyle should the Secretary, S. P. disinfecting pow- for the benefit in a letter dated 10th be allowed for the C. A., and No. 869 der is used now as of the Society to January 1892 states wards. The opinion of 18th November formerly. Thinks give their clients that a larger quantity of the Principal of 1891 to Director of that a large quan- correct informa- of Phenyle has been the College is entitl- Public Instruction tity of disinfecting tion as to the ordered as recom- ed to weight on a objects to the limited powder may be cause of death mended by Dr. Weir, point of this nature. supply of Phenyle, 20 used in the Dis- and that conse- but objects to sup- If the Society asks ounces per day, for section Room and quently the So- plying disinfectants for Post Mortem Exa- 2 large wards con- considers that Go- ciety should pro- for the use of the minations, it should taining 17 horses and vernment should vide the required Dissection and Post provide the disinfec- 148 head of cattle, supply the re- disinfectants. Mortem Rooms and tants for the Post and requests that the quirements for this requests that the Mortems required. horse and cattle wards room. supplies required for For others carried may be thoroughly these may be obtain- out for the instruc- disinfected daily. ed from Government tion of the students Government should, it is considered, pro- vide the disinfectants. 18. Veterinary Cap- The Secretary, S. P. Experiment under trial tain Mills in his No. C. A., replies that and will it is hoped be 862 of 17th Novem- an experiment is to found successful and ber 1891 gives his be tried with the be extended to other opinion in favour of dry earth system wards. the dry earth system in Horse Ward in preference to any No. 1 and that system of drainage. future action will depend on the re- sult of the experi- ment.
23 Dr. Narimán, Assistant Professor and for some time Acting Principal, in the College Report for 1890 raised a number of points, some of which are included in the foregoing suggestions, while others not so included, are given below:Administration Reports. Report of the Bombay Veterinary College for 1891-92. No 2680. EDUCATIONAL DEPARTMENT. Bombay Castle, 12th December 1892. Letter from the Director of Public Instruction, No. 4233, dated the 25th October 18922 does not seem unreasonable when amongst the patrons of the College and the donors of the prizes Government observe the names of the President and other patrons of the Society. 3. The College rendered assistance in the case of an outbreak of rinder- pest in Thána, in the administration of the Glanders and Farcy Act in Bombay, and in other directions. The institution of the riding school, owing to the facilities placed at the disposal of the College by the loan of horses from the Gov- ernor's body guard, and the lessons given in grooming and stable management de- serve special mention. But in many respects the utility of the College is cramped by its position, its want of a botanical garden, and other deficiencies. Govern- ment, however, are satisfied that Veterinary-Captain Mills has done the best with the means at his disposal, and that the expenditure of Rs. 28,095 on the institution has not been wasted. It is, however, unfortunate that the report has been drawn up in disregard of standing orders. The Principal should remember in future that an annual report is intended to be a review of the proceedings of the year dealt with, which may be made public. W. LEE-WARNER, Secretary to Government. To The Director of Public Instruction, The Principal, Bombay Veterinary College, The Commissioners of Divisions and in Sind, All Collectors, including the Collectors and Deputy Commissioners in Sind, The Political Department of the Secretariat, The Political Agent, Káthiáwár, The Political Agent, Cutch, The Political Agent, Kolhápur and Southern Marátha Country, The Political Agent, Mahi Kántha, The Political Superintendent, Pálanpur, The Political Superintendent, Sávantvádi, The Political Resident, Aden, The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, The Accountant General, Bombay, The Director of Land Records and Agriculture, The Principal, College of Science, Poona, The Military Department of the Secretariat, The General Department of the Secretariat, The Revenue Department of the Secretariat, The Sanitary Commissioner, Bombay. With copies of the Report which should be treated as confidential. The Editors' Table, Bombay, The Editors' Table, Poona (care of City Magistrate, Poona), The Editor and Proprietor, Dhárwár Vritta (for his own use and for circulation to other Editors of newspapers in Dhárwár), The Municipal Commissioner for the City of Bom- bay, The President, Municipal Corporation, Bombay, The Secretary to the Society for Preven- tion of Cruelty to Animals. By letter. With copies of ap- pendices to the report. The Government of India, The Secretary of State for India. By letter. The Compiler of the General Administration Report.
REPORT OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE FOR THE YEAR 1892-93. Bombay: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1893. [PriceREPORT OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE FOR THE YEAR 1892-93. Bombay PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1893.
No. 398 OF 1893. Government Veterinary College, Parel: Bombay, 23rd June 1893. FROM JAMES MILLS, M.R.C.V.S., J.P., F.B.U., Vety.-Capt., A.V.D., Principal, Bombay Vety. College; To R. G. OXENHAM, ESQUIRE, M.A., Acting Director of Public Instruction, Poona. SIR, I have the honour to submit the seventh annual report of the Bombay Veterinary College, treating of the work during the official year ending 31st March 1893. A synopsis of the work done in connection with the Bái Sákarbái Dinshaw Petit Hospital for Animals for the year ending 31st December 1892 is embodied in the report. 2. The professional examinations commenced on the 25th April 1892, and terminated on the 4th May. The Board consisted of the following gentlemen:2 as there was a great disparity in the standard of marks required by the College Rules and Regulations for a pass in the final as compared with the first and second professional examinations, unless the standard for the final be reduced, better results cannot be expected." The Board, therefore, beg to strongly recom- mend that Rule 13 section "C", of the College Rules and Regulations, which reads as follows:3 compelled to resign, but fortunately I obtained for him a situation at Belgaum as Itinerating Veterinary officer. Applications have been received for two suitable graduates for employ- ment at the Calcutta Veterinary Institute, for three at the. Ajmere Veterinary School, and two for the Khándesh Collectorate, but none will be available until the termination of this collegiate year. Appendix F will give particulars how all graduates are employed. Contagious diseases. 7. Mr. C. F. Fernandez, G.B.V.C., was appointed Itinerating Veterinary Inspector for the City and Port, Government Resolu- tion, Judicial Department, No. 3126 of 11th June 1892, and Mr. I. V. Vaz, G.B.V.C., was appointed Harbour Veterinary Surgeon, Government Resolution, Judicial Department, No. 5531 of 7th October 1892. Both have done excellent work. Foot and mouth disease has not prevailed to any serious extent during the year; a few isolated cases took place from time to time which were treated at the Government lazaretto at Sewri. Glanders and Farcy.4 The appointments of Messrs. Stephens and Sons, of Dr. Narimán, and Messrs. Narsing Rao and Bharucha as Veterinary Surgeons under Act XX of 1879, have been cancelled, and H. Rogers, Esq., M.R.C.V.S., of Messrs. Scott and Co., and F. Stephens, Esq., M.R.C.V.S., of Messrs. Stephens and Sons, have been appointed Veterinary Surgeons for the City and Island of Bombay includ- ing the Port. Rabies and Hydrophobia.5 10. Anatomy.-Twenty-one subjects were dissected during the year, an Branches of study. increase of four over the previous year. Physiology and Chemistry.6 The annual prize of Rs. 60 presented by Sir Dinshaw Maneckjee Petit, Bart., was not available for award. The Honourable Mr. Justice Bayley signi- fied his intention to discontinue giving his annual prize of Rs. 50. Veterinary- Captain J. W. A. Morgan kindly continued the prize awarded by his predecessor in the Horse-Breeding Department, Veterinary-Major Grainger. Visitors. 14. His Excellency the Most Honourable the Marquis of Lansdowne, Viceroy and Governor General, accompanied by His Excellency the Right Honourable Lord Harris, visited the College and Hospital on the 3rd April. Veterinary-Colonel J. H. B. Hallen, C.I.E., Inspector General, Civil Veterinary Department, kindly delivered a lecture at the College on the 21st November on Laminitis. His Highness the Thákor Sáhib Mansingji of Pálitána and suite paid a visit on the 26th December. Mr. K. M. Chatfield, Director of Public Instruction, paid an official visit on the 13th January. Honours. 15. His Excellency the Governor in Council was pleased to honour the Principal by nominating him a Fellow of the Bombay University, and a Justice of the Peace. Minor buildings. 16. A cistern was erected in the dark-room for photography, and a cess-pit built outside the pharmacy. Bombay Veterinary Asso- ciation. 17. This Association still continues to afford valuable aid to the students of the College, and many interesting papers were read during the year. Hospital. 18. The records of the hospital give the following information relative to patients:7 Financial statement. 19. Appepdix G is the financial statement of the College, including Sewri Lazaretto and the Harbour Veterinary-Sur- geon, for the year. From it, it will be seen that the amount of Rs. 28,548 was spent for the College proper, an increase of Rs. 453 over the previous year, and of Rs. 6,609 over the year 1890-91. Deducting the actual receipts, the cost to Government of maintaining the College was Rs. 24,733. The increase in the expenditure is due to the increments on the salaries of officers, and expending fully the grants of house-rent to the Farrier, and the Sir Dinshaw Maneckji Petit Patho-Bacteriological Laboratory, Amal- gamation of the latter grant with similar heads in the College Budget has been effected with the consent of the Accountant General. The Government per- mitted to enter permanently the grant of Rs. 200 for chemicals, &c, in the Annual Budget, also a grant of Rs. 300 as fees for the use of the horses of His Excellency the Governor's Body Guard for instructing the students of the College in riding. The total expenditure incurred on account of the Sewri Lazaretto and the Harbour Veterinary-Surgeon was Rs. 4,015. This includes the initial expendi- ture on buildings, &c., of Rs. 2,962. Clerical work. 20. The general clerical work of the office continues to increase and is too much for one clerk, with the result that a deal of my time is taken up with writing letters which might more profitably be employed in another direction. Mr. V. B. Phatak, my clerk, has worked very hard, and is a most trustworthy and reliable servant. Literary and Inventions. 21. I have contributed two papers to the Anthropological Society, one a translation from a very old work on the treatment of cattle diseases, written in Támil by a Rishi (a Hindu sage) on the leaf of the Palmyra, Borassus flabelliformis, and another on Two Idiots. My work9 APPENDIX A. Results of April 1892 Examinations, Bombay Veterinary College. Examination. First Class. Second Class. Pass. TOTAL CANDIDATES. Percentage of Passes. Examined. Passed. First Professional 1 4 2 12 7 58.5 Second Professional 2 3 1 8 6 75.0 Third Professional 1 4 ... 18 5 27.7 Total ... 4 11 3 38 18 47.4 JAMES MILLS, Vety. Capt., A. V. D., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. 23rd June 1893. B 21410 APPENDIX B. Return of Prizes, &c., awarded to Students of the Bombay Veterinary College for 1892-93. No. Subject. Nature. Value. Successful Candidate. Donor's Name. 1 First in Professional Examination Second do. do. Rs. 25 S. G. Haji D. G. Kulkarni ... Not available for award. 2 Books... Honourable Mr. Justice Bayley 3 Handling of Animals Silver Medal 15 W. S. Buckel ... Steel Memorial Committee. 4 Practical Anatomy ... Books... 25 C. J. Nathani ... Honourable Mr. Justice Bayley 5 Best Practical Student, Class C Do. ... 50 S. G. Haji Vety. Capt. Morgan and Vety Capt. Mills. 6 Hygiene, Sanitary Science and Obstetrics.. Do. ... 25 J. R. Padar S. K. Nariman, M.D. 7 Best in Practical Shoeing Do. ... 25 A. B. Idnani and J. R. Padar S. K. Nariman, M.D. 8 Results of Examination Government Scholarships 60 each Class B.11 APPENDIX C. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Return showing changes in the number of students in 1892-93. Number of students on 1st April 1892. WITHDRAWALS, 1892-93. ENTRIES, 1892-93. Number of students on 1st April 1893. Class. Number of students left the College. Number of students transferred. Number of students transferred, New entries. Remarks. Class C. ... ... ... 18 9 ... 6 ... 15 Do. B. ... ... ... 8 2 6 7 1 8 Do. A. ... ... ... 13 4 7 ... 13 15 Total ... 39 15 13 13 14 38 JAMES MILLS, Vety. Capt., A. V. D., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. 23rd June 1893. APPENDIX D. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Table showing number and nationality of students for the year 1892-93. Caste. Paying. Native States, &c. Government Free. Total. Remarks. Class C. Pársi 1 2 3 Hindu ... ... 1 4 3 8 Mahomedan ... ... 1 2 3 Portuguese ... ... ... 1 1 Total ... 2 5 8 15 Class B. Pársi 1 1 Hindu 1 2 ... 3 Portuguese ... ... ... 1 1 European and Eurasian ... 1 ... ... 1 Jew ... ... ... 1 1 Budhist ... 1 ... 1 Total ... 3 3 2 8 Class A. Pársi ... ... ... 2 2 Hindu 2 2 3 7 Portuguese ... ... ... 1 1 European and Eurasian ... 3 ... 2 5 Total ... 8 2 5 15 Grand Total ... 13 10 15 38 JAMES MILLS, Vety. Capt., A. V. D., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College 23rd June 1893.
12 APPENDIX E. Return showing caste and number of students from Native States, Local Boards, &c., of the Bombay Veterinary College. Province, Presidency or State. Number of Hindus. Number of Mahomedans. Number of Budhists. Remarks. Berárs13 No. Names. Present pay. Present occupation. 18 Dhunjibhai Nowroji Patel... ... Rs. Private Practitioner, Bombay. 19 Chithumbrum Pillay... ... 60 Veterinary Lecturer, Agricultural School, Nágpur. 20 Dorabji Sorabji Panthaki ... ... 75 Veterinary Officer, Bhávnagar. 21 Sorab Nanabhai Ranina... ... 60 Assistant Veterinary Officer, Bom- bay Municipality. 22 Sorabji Cowasji Doctor ... ... 60 Veterinary Officer, Mounted Police, Mymgyam, Burma. 23 Dhunjibhai Framji Dubash... ... 80 Veterinary Officer, Rámpur State, N.-W. P. 24 Rahamim Ruben ... ... 50 Veterinary Officer, D. L. B., Násik. 25 Krishnaji Purshotam Devsthale 60 Veterinary Officer, Central Pro- vinces. 26 Govind Dattatraya Khandkar 60 Veterinary Officer, Hyderabad Assigned Districts. 27 Jamsetji Ratanji Daruvala... ... ... Unknown. 28 Sadashiv Narayan Savardikar 80 Superintendent, State Paddock, Kolhápur. 29 Caetaninho F. Albuquerque... ... ... Veterinary Practitioner, Zanzibar. 30 Arthur Doyad Bingham ... ... ... Student, R. V. College, London. 31 Maneckji Cowasji Patel ... ... ... Unknown. 32 Bernard Cajetan Godinho... ... ... Student, Grant Medical College, Bombay. 33 Sakharam Baji Kulkarni ... ... 70 Veterinary Officer, Kolhápur. 34 Mulchand Keshavlal Desai ... 85 Superintendent, State Paddock, Junágad. 35 Karunashankar D. Joshi ... ... Unknown. 36 Francis Fernandez... ... 50 Veterinary Officer, D. L. B. D., Belgaum. 37 Nanabhai Narsingrao ... ... ... Veterinary Practitioner, Bombay. 38 Jahangir Dhunjishaw Parakh 150 Veterinary Officer, Nizám's Domi- 39 Dhondo Sharaji Modak ... ... 50 + 15 nions. Itinerating Veterinary Officer, D. L. B., Belgaum. 40 Dinkar Hanmant Sirke... ... 85 Veterinary Officer, Imperial Caval- ry, Gwálior. 41 Hari Ramchandra Kshirsagar 60 Veterinary Officer, Hyderabad Assigned Districts. 42 Dadabhai Hari Somnay ... ... 50 Veterinary Officer, D. L. B., Khán- desh. 43 Arthur Francis DeQuadros... ... 75 Veterinary Officer, Cambay State. 44 Maneck Sheshia Naidu ... ... 100 APPENDIX G. Financial Statement of the Bombay Veterinary College, 1892-93. INCOME. EXPENDITURE. REMARKS. Heads. 1891-92. 1892-93. Heads. 1891-92. 1892-93. From GovernmentAdministration Reports. Bombay Veterinary College. Report of the 2 6. The Riding School instituted in 1891 owing to the facilities afforded by the loan of horses from His Excellency the Governor's Body Guard continues to thrive; the want of a botanical garden noticed in the last report has to a certain extent been met by utilizing for the purpose a portion of the compound of the Sewri Lazaretto; and the forge has been placed in charge of a Farrier Sergeant, who besides giving practical lessons in shoeing gave a course of instruction in grooming, clipping, &c. Under the head " Buildings" the cattle- shed which was erected at the expense of Bai Dinbai, widow of the late Mr. Nasarwanji Manekji Petit, and which will serve as a model of what a cattle shed should be, deserves special mention. It is reported that the clerical establishment is not sufficient for the increasing office work, and the Principal may submit proposals for strengthening it through the Director of Public Instruction. 7. The Governor in Council is pleased to learn that many of the sugges- tions made by the Committee appointed to inquire into the sanitary condition of the College premises and surroundings have been adopted by the Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. The College, however, is much hampered in giving practical instruction. The Society prohibits operations being per- formed in its Hospital, and Professors and pupils have in consequence to walk to Sewri Lazaretto. This arrangement is highly inconvenient and conducive to the interests neither of the pupils in the College nor of the patients in the Hospital. The animals to be operated upon have to be taken to the Lazaretto and brought back to the Hospital,3 The Military Department of the Secretariat, The General Department of the Secretariat, The Revenue Department of the Secretariat, The Judicial Department of the Secretariat, The Sanitary Commissioner, Bombay, The Editors' Table, Bombay, The Editors' Table, Poona (care of City Magistrate, Poona), The Editor and Proprietor, Dhárwár Vritta (for his own use and for circulation to other Editors of newspapers in Dhárwár), The Municipal Commissioner for the City of Bom- bay, With copies of Report. The Superintendent, Government Central Press (with a request that the copies of the Report required by this Department may be sent as soon as possible). The President, Municipal Corporation, Bombay, The Secretary to the Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, The Government of India, The Secretary of State for India, The Director of Records to the Government of India, Imperial Secretariat Buildings, Calcutta, The Reporter on Economic Products to the Govern- ment of India. By letter.
REPORT OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE FOR THE YEAR 1893-94. Bombay: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1894. [PriceREPORT OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE FOR THE YEAR 1893-94. Bombay: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1894.
No. 526 OF 1894. FROM JAMES MILLS, M.R.C.V.S., J. P., F.B.U., Vety.-Capt. A. V. D., Principal, Bombay Vety. College; To K. M. CHATFIELD, ESQ., M.A., Director of Public Instruction, Poona. Bombay Veterinary College: Parel, 2nd July 1894. SIR, I have the honour to submit the eighth annual report of the Bombay Veterinary College, dealing with the work of the official year ending 31st March 1894. Embodied in the report will be found a brief outline of the duties performed in connection with the Bái Sákerbái Dinshaw Petit Hospital for Animals, for the year ending 31st December 1893. 2. The professional examinations commenced on the 17th April 1893, and terminated on the 28th of the same month. The Board consisted of the follow- ing gentlemen:2 Information relating to students. 4. Appendix D gives the number of students of each nationality on the College rolls during the year under report. In the new admissions all the nationalities have been fairly represented, there being 3 Europeans, 4 Pársis, 1 Eurasian, 13 Hindus, 1 Jew, and 4 Mahomedans. Appendix E shows the number of students attending supported by Local Fund Boards and Native States. There is an increase of one over that of the last year. Of these 11 men, 8 are Hindus, 1 a Mahomedan, 1 a Budhist and 1 a Jew. Employment of Graduates. 5. The demand for the services of Graduates was much the same as last All the men who obtained the diploma in April 1893 got employment. One, on a salary of Rs. 100 at the Remount Depôt at Ahmednagar; one, on a salary of Rs. 105, including allowances, under the Bombay Municipality, as Superintendent of the Zoological Collection at the Victoria Gardens; one, on a salary of Rs. 100, under the District Local Board, Shikárpur; one, as an Itinerating Veterinary Graduate, on a salary of Rs. 50 rising to Rs. 100, at Bhadgaon in the Khán- desh District; one, as a Veterinary Graduate in charge of the Veterinary Dispensary, Jalgaon, on a salary of Rs. 50 rising to Rs. 100; four, under the Native States of Bhávnagar, Junágad, Mysore, and Gwalior, on a starting salary of Rs. 50 each, and the remaining two, as Assistant Veterinary Officers at the College. 6. Applications have been received for men for the appointments of Itinerating Veterinary Graduates in the Shikárpur, Hyderabad, and Násik districts, and also for Veterinary Graduates for dispensaries at Dhárwár, Surat, and Sholápur, and there are still vacancies for two Graduates as Lecturers at the Calcutta Veterinary Institute, and the Ajmere Veterinary School, but, owing to the paucity of men, these appointments could not be filled up. Applications were also received for the services of Graduates for Zanzibar, and the Native State of Pratápgad. Contagious diseases. 7. Mr. D. F. Dubash, G.B.V.C., was appointed Acting Harbour Veterinary Surgeon, on 20th June 1893, vice Mr. I. V. Vaz, G.B.V.C., who obtained the appointment of Veterinary Overseer, Babugarh Stud Farm. Mr. Ralph St. J. Walley, M.R.C.V.S., was appointed, on the 4th Septem- ber 1893, an additional Veterinary Surgeon under Section 7 of the Glanders and Farcy Act, for the City and Island of Bombay including the Port. Foot and Mouth Disease and Rinderpest were generally prevalent through- out the year, more especially from November 1893 to March 1894, when a somewhat serious outbreak of both these diseases was reported in the Karjat Táluka and in the City and Island of Bombay. Two graduates, Messrs. B. S. Shroff and A. P. Laskari, the former to Karjat and the latter to Bombay, were appointed to deal with the cases and to advise owners as to the treatment and care of their cattle. I regret there was no means of obtaining reliable figures as regards the numbers attacked and died, because of the fact that owners in very many cases afforded the Graduates little or no assistance, and treated the outbreaks more as a visitation from God than as due, in a great measure, to their own stolid apathy and carelessness. Foot and Mouth Disease also made its appearance amongst the cattle of the Commissariat Department in Bombay. This outbreak I personally investi- gated, and my orders having been carefully carried out it was speedily arrested. Glanders and Farcy. 3 Various suggestions were made to Government with the view of improving the condition of the stables in Bombay and for amending Act XX of 1879, but action in this direction has been deferred pending further report. They in- cluded :4 Extra duties. 10. The following extra duties were performed by the Principal :5 insight into the working of a dairy and the management of milch cows. I felt so convinced that excursions of this description would prove of benefit to the students in gaining knowledge, which it is impossible to impart in a practical manner at the College, that I asked for a grant to enable me to make such excursions a recognised institution, and Government were pleased to allot an annual grant of Rs. 500 for this purpose. I now intend that the students of the senior class shall visit horse and cattle shows, remount and horse-breeding depôts, &c. Excursions to the Victoria Gardens, Bombay, were conducted under the supervision of the Lecturer on Botany for the purpose of practical demonstra- tions. Physical training. 14. The riding class was conducted on the same lines as last year. Indian clubs, dumb-bells, and boxing-gloves have been added to the physical training kit. The annual sports were held on the anniversary of the College, viz. the 2nd August. Museum and Library. 15. The Museum has been thoroughly overhauled and printed labels put on each specimen. Many valuable additions have been made to it. Several new works have been pur- chased for the Library, and periodicals bound. Donors of prizes. 16. I beg to thank the undermentioned gentlemen for their kindness in contributing to the College prize list:6 (a) In-patients.7 APPENDIX A. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Results of Examinations, April 1893. First Class. Second Class. Pass. TOTAL OF CANDIDATES. Percentage of Passes. Examined. Passed. First Professional ... ... 4 5 2 15 11 73.33 Second Professional... ... 2 2 2 7 6 85.71 Third Professional ... ... 2 9 ... 15 11 73.33 Total ... 8 16 4 37 28 75.67 JAMES MILLS, Veterinary Captain, A. V. D., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. 2nd July 1894.
8 APPENDIX B. Return of Prizes, &c., awarded to Students of the Bombay Veterinary College for 1893-94. Number. Subject. Nature. Value. Successful Candidate. Donor's Name. 1 Best practical man, Class C ... ... Money... Rs. 100 Mahomed Khan ... ... Lieutenant-Colonel J. H. B. Hallen, C.I.E. 2 Best man in Shoeing ... ... Shoeing Tool Case ... ... 25 J. M. Doctor ... ... ... Veterinary Captain James Mills. 3 Best man in Examinations as to Soundness. Silver Medal ... ... ... 15 16 N. N. Aiyangar ... ... ... Mahomed Khan ... ... ... Government. 4 Obstetrics and Breeding... ... ... Books... ... ... ... { 16 L. K.Vedh ... ... ... } Veterinary Captain Morgan. 5 Medicine and Surgery, Class C... ... Books and Instruments 50 Mahomed Khan ... ... ... Veterinary Captain James Mills. 6 Best man in Class B ... ... ... Do. do. 40 W. A. De Silva ... ... ... Sir Dinshaw Manokji Petit, Bart. 7 Best man in Anatomy and Physiology, Class B. Do. do. 20 Do. ... ... ... Mr. N. D. Dhakmarwala. 8 Handling of Animals ... ... ... "Steel" Silver Medal... ... 15 C. Engel ... ... ... Steel Memorial Committee. 9 Best man in Class A ... ... ... Books ... 20 R. J. Ghosla ... ... ... ... Sir Dinshaw Manokji Petit, Bart. 10 Best man in Anatomy and Physiology, Class A. Instruments ... ... ... 10 G. D'Silva ... ... ... ... Mr. N. D. Dhakmarwala. 11 Results of Examinations... ... ... Government Scholarships 60 each ... Class B.9 APPENDIX C. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Return showing Changes in the Number of Students in 1893-94. Class. Number of Students on 1st April 1893. WITHDRAWALS, 1893-94. ENTRIES, 1893-94. Number of Students on 1st April 1894. REMARKS. 1893 Number of Number of Students transferred. New entries. Class C ... ... 15 12 ... 6 1 10 Class B ... ... 8 1 6 11 ... 12 Class A ... ... 15 3 11 ... 25 26 Total ... 38 16 17 17 26 48 APPENDIX D. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Table showing the Number and Nationality of Students for the year 1893-94. Caste. Paying. Native States. Goverment, Free. Municipal, Free. Total. REMARKS. CLASS C. Pársis ... Hindus ... Mahomedans Portuguese and Native Christians. Jews ... ... ... Budhists 2 1 1 2 1 1 1 1 ... 2 4 1 1 1 1 Total ... 4 3 3 ... 10 CLASS B. Hindus ... Portuguese and Native Christians. Europeans and Eurasians 1 1 2 2 ... 4 2 ... 7 1 4 Total ... 4 2 6 ... 12 CLASS A. Pársis ... Hindus ... Mahomedans Europeans and Eurasians Jews 3 5 2 4 ... 4 1 ... 1 1 2 ... ... ... 1 1 1 ... ... 5 12 4 4 1 Total ... 14 6 3 3 26 Grand Total ... 22 11 12 3 48 JAMES MILLS, Veterinary Captain, A. V. D., 2nd July 1894. Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. B 54710 APPENDIX E. Return showing Caste and number of Students from Native States, Local Boards, &c., attending the Bombay Veterinary College during the year 1893-94. Province, Presidency or State. Number of Hindus. Number of Maho- medans. Number of Budhists. Number of Jews. Berárs, Nizám's State 1 ... ... ... Junágad State... 1 1 ... ... District Local Board, Shikárpur ... ... ... 1 Kolhápur State ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... Bhávnagar State ... ... 1 ... ... ... Dhrángadhra State ... ... 1 ... ... ... Ceylon Government ... ... ... ... 1 ... Rájpipla State ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... Mángrol State ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... Pálitána State ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... Total ... 8 1 1 1 JAMES MILLS, Veterinary Captain, A. V. D., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. 2nd July 1894.
APPENDIX F. Financial Statement of the Bombay Veterinary College, 1893-94. INCOME. EXPENDITURE. Heads. 1892-93. 1893-94. Heads. 1892-93. 1893-94. REMARKS. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. From Government salariesAdministration Reports. Bombay Veterinary College. Report of the Principal of the 2 The Political Department of the Secretariat, The Political Agent, Káthiáwár, The Political Agent, Cutch, The Political Agent, Kolhápur and Southern Marátha Country, The Political Agent, Mahi Kántha, The Political Agent, Rewa Kántha, The Political Superintendent, Pálanpur, The Political Superintendent, Sávantvádi, The Political Resident, Aden, The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, The Survey Commissioner and Director of Land Records and Agriculture, The Principal, College of Science, Poona, The Compiler of the General Administration Report, The Military Department of the Secretariat, The General Department of the Secretariat, The Revenue Department of the Secretariat, The Judicial Department of the Secretariat, The Sanitary Commissioner for the Government of Bombay, The Editors' Table, Bombay, The Editors' Table, Poona (care of City Magistrate, Poona), The Editor and Proprietor, Dhárwár Vritta (for his own use and for circulation to other Editors of newspapers in Dhárwár), The Municipal Commissioner for the City of Bom- bay, With copies of the Report. The Superintendent, Government Central Press (with a request that the copies of the Report required by this Department may be sent as soon as possible). The President, Municipal Corporation, Bombay, The Secretary to the Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, The Government of India, The Secretary of State for India, The Director of Records to the Government of India, Imperial Secretariat Buildings, Calcutta, The Reporter on Economic Products to the Govern- ment of India. By letter.
REPORT OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE FOR THE YEAR 1894-95. Bombay:PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1895. [PriceREPORT OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE FOR THE YEAR 1894-95. Bombay: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1895.
No. 342 OF 1895. FROM JAMES MILLS, M.R.C.V.S., J.P., F.B.U., Vety. Capt., A. V. D., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College; To K. M. CHATFIELD, ESQ., M.A., Director of Public Instruction, Poona. Bombay Veterinary College, Parel, 15th May 1895. SIR, I have the honour to submit the ninth Annual Report of the Bombay Veterinary College dealing with the work of the official year ending 31st March 1895. Embodied in the report will be found a brief outline of the duties per- formed in connection with the Bái Sákarbái Dinshaw Petit Hospital for Animals for the year ending 31st December 1894. 2. The professional examinations commenced on 16th April 1894 and terminated on 26th of the same month. The Board Professional Examinations. consisted of the following gentlemen :2 Information relating to Students. 4. Appendix D shows the number of students of different nationalities on the College rolls during the year under report. In the new admissions there were 3 Europeans, 3 Por- tuguese or Native Christians, 1 Pársi, 2 Mahomedans and 12 Hindus. Appendix E shows the number of students attending sup- ported by Local Boards, Native States, &c. The number of students that attended under this heading was 16, which shows an increase of 5 over that of the pre- vious year. Of these 16 men, 9 were Hindus, 4 Mahomedans, 1 European, 1 Native Christian, and 1 Jew. Employment of Graduates. 5. Out of the four men that obtained the diploma this year, one established himself as a private practitioner at Madras. The remaining three got employment3 Veterinary Officer of the Civil Veterinary Department to fill the post of Resident Veterinary Officer, and Assistant Professor, Veterinary Lieut. E. W. Larnder, A. V. D., took charge of the appointment on 9th August last from Mr. Dhákmárwála, who reverted to his former appointment and relieved Mr. Serájudin Khán. The designation of Resident Veterinary Officer and Assistant Professor has been changed to that of Assistant Principal. Mr. Dhákmárwála continued to discharge the duties of Resident Veterinary Officer throughout the year. A competent Native Farrier, Máruti Náráyan Sarvade, who is able to teach, has been engaged as Farrier and Instructor in Shoeing on a monthly salary of Rs. 60, rising to Rs. 80. The College staff performed their duties to my satisfaction. Branches of Study. 9. Anatomy and Surgery.4 Sir Dinshaw Maneckji Petit Patho-Bacteriological Laboratory.5 (d). Buildings.6 APPENDIX A. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE Results of Examinations, April 1894. TOTAL OF CANDIDATES. Examination. First Class. Second Class. Pass. Percentage of Passes. Examined Passed. First Professional ... 1 5 1 13 7 53.84 Second Professional 1 6 2 12 9 75 Third Professional ... ... 4 ... 10 4 40 Total ... 2 15 3 35 20 57.14 JAMES MILLS, Vety. Capt., A. V. D., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. 15th May 1895.
7 APPENDIX B. Return of Prizes, &c., awarded to Students of the Bombay Veterinary College for 1894-95. No. Subject. Nature. Value. Successful Candidates. Donor's Name. 1 Best Practical man, Class C. ... Money ... Rs. 100 Serájudin Khan Veterinary Lieutenant-Colonel J. H. B. Hallen, C.I.E. M. R. Ry. Sah Man-Mull. 2 Best Hindu, Class C. ... Silver Medal ... 15 R. N. Sáne... 3 Best Operator, Class C. ... Books and Instruments ... 30 Serájudin Khan Veterinary Captain J. Mills. 4 Best man in Soundness, Class C. Silver Medal ... 15 W. A. DéSilva Government. 5 Best Student in Breeding and Obstetrics, Class C. Books and Instruments 32 W. Robertson Veterinary Captain J .W. A. Morgan 6 Best Student in Shoeing, Class C. Instruments 25 W.Robertson Veterinary Captain J. Mills. 7 Best Student, Class B. Books and Instruments 40 G. D'Silva Sir D. M. Petit, Bart. 8 Best Student in Medicine and Surgery, Class B. Best Student in Anatomy and Physiology, 8 APPENDIX C. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Return showing changes in the number of Students in 1894-95. Class. Number of Students on lst April 1894. WITHDRAWALS. ENTRIES. Number of Students on 1st April 1895. Remarks. Number of Students left the College. Number of Students transferred. Number of Students transferred. New Entries. Class C. ... ... ... 10 6 ... 9 2 15 Do. B. ... ... ... 12 ... 9 7 1 11 Do. A. ... ... ... 26 5 7 ... 18 32 Total ... 48 11 16 16 21 58 JAMES MILLS, Vety.-Capt., A. V. D., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. 15th May 1895. APPENDIX D. BOMBAY : VETERINARY COLLEGE. Table showing the Number and Nationality of Students for the year 1894-95. Caste. Paying. Native States Government Free. Municipal Free. Total. Remarks. Class C. European and Eurasians . 1 ... 3 ... 4 Muhamadens ... ... 1 1 ... ... 1 1 Pársis ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Jews ... ... ... Hindus ... ... ... 1 ... 3 ... 8 Total ... 4 5 6 ... 15 Class B. Europeans and Eurasians . 2 ... ... ... 2 Portuguese and Native Christians. 1 1 ... ... 2 Muhamadens ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Pársis ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Jews ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Hindus ... ... ... ... 2 1 1 4 Total ... 4 5 1 1 11 Class A. Europeans and Eurasians . Portuguese and Native 1 1 3 ... 5 Christians. 2 ... ... ... 2 Muhamadens ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 Pársis ... ... ... 1 3 1 ... 2 Hindus ... ... ... 15 ... 1 1 20 Total ... 19 6 5 2 32 Grand Total ... 27 16 12 3 58 JAMES MILLS, Vety.-Capt., A. V. D., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. 15th May 1895.
9 APPENDIX E. Return showing Caste and Number of Students from Native States, Local Boards, &c., attending the Bombay Veterinary College during the year 1894-95. Province, Presidency or State. Number of Hindus. Number of Mahome- dans. Number of Europeans. Number of Native Christians. Number of Jews. Berárs, Nizam's State ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... Junágadh State ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... District Local Board, Shikárpur ... ... ... ... ... 1 District Local Board, Hyderabad... ... ... 1 ... ... ... District Local Board, Thar and Párkar ... ... 1 ... ... ... Kolhápur State ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... Bhávnagar State ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... Dhrángadhra State... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... Ceylon Government ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... Rájpipla State ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... Mángrol State ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... Pálitána State ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... Madras Government ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... Total ... 9 4 1 1 1 JAMES MILLS, Vety. Capt., A. V. D., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. 15th May 1895. B 315-3
10 APPENDIX F. Financial Statement of the Bombay Veterinary College for 1894-95. INCOME. EXPENDITURE. Heads. 1893-94. 1894-95. Heads. 1893-94. 1894-95. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. From Government Salaries11 Administration Reports.- Bombay Veterinary College. Report of the Principal of the 12 The Political Agent, Mahi Kántha, The Political Agent, Rewa Kántha, The Political Superintendent, Pálanpur, The Political Superintendent, Sávantvádi, The Political Resident, Aden, The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, The Survey Commissioner and Director of Land Re- cords and Agriculture, The Principal, College of Science, Poona, The Compiler of the General Administration Report, The General Department of the Secretariat, The Revenue Department of the Secretariat, The Judicial Department of the Secretariat, The Sanitary Commissioner for the Government of Bombay, The Editors' Table, Bombay, The Editors' Table, Poona (care of the City Magistrate, Poona), The Editor and Proprietor, Dhárwar Vritta (for his own use and for circulation to other Editors of newspapers in Dhárwár), The Editors' Table, Belgaum, care of the Secretary to the Belgaum Municipality, The Municipal Commissioner for the City of Bombay. The Superintendent, Government Central Press (with a request that the copies of the Report required by this Department may be sent as soon as possible), With copies of the Report. The President, Municipal Corporation, Bombay, The Secretary to the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, The Government of India, The Secretary of State for India, The Officer in charge, Imperial Library, Secretariat Buildings, Calcutta, The Reporter on Economic Products to the Govern- ment of India. By letter.
REPORT OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE FOR THE YEAR 1895-96. Bombay: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1896. [PriceREPORT OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE FOR THE YEAR 1895-96. Bombay: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1896.
No. 410 OF 1896. FROM JAMES MILLS, M.R.C.V.S., J.P., F.B.U., Vety. Major, A. V. D., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College ; To K. M. CHATFIELD, Esq., M.A., Director of Public Instruction, Poona. Bombay Veterinary College, Parel, 8th May 1896. SIR, I have the honour to submit the tenth Annual Report of the Bombay Veterinary College, dealing with the work of the official year ending 31st March 1896. Embodied in the report will be found a brief outline of the duties per- formed in connection with the Bái Sákarbái Dinshaw Petit Hospital for Animals for the year ending 31st December 1895. 2. The professional examinations commenced on the 19th April 1895 and terminated on the 29th of the same month. The Professional Examinations. Board consisted of the following gentlemen :- President. Veterinary-Captain J. W. A. Morgan, A. V. D., Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bombay Presidency. Members. Veterinary-Captain H. M. Maxwell, A. V. D., Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Beluchistan. Veterinary-Captain H. T. Pease, F.Z.S., A. V. D., Assistant to the Inspector General, C. V. D. M. G. Deshmukh, Esq., M.D., B.A., B.Sc. Veterinary-Lieutenant E. W. Larnder, A. V. D., Assistant Principal, B. V. C. N. D. Dhákmárvála, Esq., G.B.V.C., Lecturer on Anatomy, B. V. C. V. E. Vakhária, Esq., G .B.V.C., Lecturer on Chemistry, B. V. C. Secretary. Veterinary-Major J. Mills, A. V. D., Principal, B. V. C. The final meeting of the Board took place on the 29th April, when the results were declared, which will be found in Appendix A. The prizes were at the same time awarded2 B, and 1 from Class A, discontinued their studies on account of their frequent failures; 1 from Class A and 1 from Class B, in order to seek some other avocation; 1 in Class A owing to his inability to maintain himself, while at the College; and 1, a Hindu, in Class A died from cholera. The changes in the number of students are shown in Appendix C. Out of 21 students that joined during the year, 3 belonged to other presidencies, 2 from Madras, and 1 from Mangalore. Out of the remaining 18, 5 are the subjects of Native States, and 1 belongs to Sind. Information relating to students. 4. Appendix D shows the number of students of different nationalities on the College rolls during the year under report. In the new admissions, there were 2 Europeans or Eurasians, 5 Portuguese or Native Christians, 3 Pársis, 2 Maho- medans, and 9 Hindus. Appendix E shows the number of students attending supported by Local Boards, Native States, &c. The number of students that attended under this head was 13, a decrease of 3 as compared with last year. Of these 13 men, 7 were Hindus, 3 Mahomedans, 1 European, 1 Jew, and 1 Native Christian. Employment of Graduates. 5. Out of the nine men that obtained the diploma this year, one got employment under the Government of the Straits Settlements at Singapore, but returned as the appoint- ment did not suit him ; two are serving as Stock Inspectors in Madras; one as Veterinary Assistant, Berárs, C. P. ; one at Morvi; one at Gwálior; one as Assistant Veterinary Officer at the College for some time and then as Itinerat- ing Veterinary Inspector under Act XX of 1879 (Glanders and Farcy); one as an Assistant at Messrs. Stephens and Sons, Veterinary Surgeons; and one as a probationer in the Civil Veterinary Department, at Babugarh, North-West Pro- vinces. The appointment of Veterinary Officer, Janjira State was for a time filled during the year by a graduate of this College, but he had to return as the terms given to him by the State were not sufficiently liberal. The Junágad State has opened a Veterinary Dispensary at Verával, and placed a graduate in charge of it. The Dhárwá Local Board also employed one graduate to take charge of their dispensary. One graduate obtained an appointment at Baroda on a salary of Rs. 150. Applications for graduates have been received from the Local Boards of Kolába, Ratnágiri and Belgaum Districts, and also from the Native States of Bánsda and Cochin, and for the slaughter-houses at Poona, Surat and Ahmedabad, and the Bhágalpur Municipality. Government having sanctioned an increase in the staff under the Glanders and Farcy Act in Bombay, there will be an opening for four more graduates. Cattle disease repression. 6. Mr. I. G. Joshi, G.B.V.C., was deputed to Shápur Táluka in Thána District and Dápoli Táluka of Ratnágiri District, where rinderpest and foot and mouth disease broke out. Mr. B. A. Jávle, G.B.V.C., was deputed to Anklesvar Táluka in Broach Dis- trict in the month of February last, and continues on duty there. On seeing the advantages of skilled veterinary aid, the District Local Board of Ratnágiri at once sanctioned the permanent appointment of a graduate, and I learn that the District Local Board of Broach is also contemplating to do the same. Extra duties. 7. The following extra duties were performed:3 (f). Deputed by Government to attend as a Judge at the Chinchli Horse Show in the Kolhápur State. (g). The Government of India having delegated to this Department the duties of receiving and despatching stallions imported for the Civil Veterinary Department, 24 horse and 19 donkey stallions were recieved during the year. Eighteen of the horse stallions were located at Govern- ment house stables at Parel, as there were some cases of " Surra" standing in the Hospital at the time. The landing, despatching, feeding, care and treatment of these stallions has entailed a considerable amount of extra labour, not only upon me, but on the whole College staff, and has caused a deal of extra correspondence with the Inspector-General, Civil Veterinary Department, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bombay Presidency, and other officers and private bodies. On most occasions, I attended personally at the time of landing and despatching the animals. Teaching Staff. 8. Having completed 20 years' service on the 23rd June 1895, I was promoted to the rank of Veterinary Major. Veterinary- Lieut. E. W. Larnder, A. V. D., Assistant Principal, was appointed Acting Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bombay Presidency, in addition to his own duties from the 1st June 1895, but at the request of the Government of India, he was relieved of his College duties from the 22nd June 1895, and Mr. N. D. Dhákmárvála, G.B.V.C., Lecturer on Anatomy, was appointed sub. pro-tem., Assistant Principal from the same date. Mr. C. F. Fernandez, G.B.V.C., Itinerating Veterinary Inspector, acted as Lec- turer on Anatomy. Veterinary Lieut. Larnder took charge of his duties at the College on the 3rd September 1895, but having been transferred to the South Punjab as Acting Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, on the same day he handed over charge of Assistant Principal to Mr. Dhákmárvála. On the 3rd of January 1896, Veterinary-Lieut. Larnder was confirmed in his ap- pointment in the South Punjáb, so Mr. Dhákmárvála continued to act as Assistant Principal up to 22nd February 1896, on which date he was relieved by Veterinary-Lieut. F. S. H. Baldrey, A. V. D. Mr. Dhákmárvála then re- verted to his former appointment and relieved Mr. Fernandez. Government in their Resolution, Educational Department, No. 2242, dated 18th November 1896, have, for the time being, abandoned the idea of building quarters for the Assistant Principal. As far as I can judge, Veterinary-Lieut. Baldrey is likely to make a good teacher. Mr. Dhákmárvála has performed his duties with zeal and care, and has given me every support. Messrs. Vakhária and Fernandez performed their duties to my entire satis- faction. The whole College staff deserve every praise for the manner in which they have assisted me in the extra duties in connection with the importation of the Government stallions. Branches of Study,. 9. Anatomy and Surgery.4 The Management of Diary, Work Cattle, &c.5 General W. Gatacre, C.B., D.S.O. Colonel Deane, Director General, Remount Operations. R. H. Vincent, Esquire, C.I.E. Dr. MacGregor, M. P. Anton Schuh, V. S., in charge, Emperor of Austria's Stud. Lieutenant Robert Clemm, Field Artillery, German Army. Hospital. 16. The records of the Hospital give the fol- lowing information relative to patients, &c:6 Buildings. 17. The sum of Rs. 5,461-10-11 was spent on buildings and repairs during the year. The north-east corner of the main College building was converted into a pharmacy, it being more convenient and more under the direct supervision of the officer on duty, and the farriers' quarters were utilized by the native farrier. Rain and wind protectors were fixed to the practical examination shed. A dissecting and post-mortem room has been built at the Sewri Lazaretto at a cost of Rs. 4,949-11-0. A box for conveying horses by sea has been purchased during the year at a cost of Rs. 40, for the purpose of teaching the students how to box horses and arrange their gear when on board. It is under contemplation to build an operating theatre at the expense of a private donor. Financial Statement. 18. Appendix F is the financial statement for the year under report. It will be seen from it that the total expenditure incurred on account of the College during the year was Rs. 40,176 as against Rs. 37,326 and Rs. 28,677 in the year 1894-95 and 1893-94 respect- ively. Deducting Rs. 4,950, cost of building a post-mortem and dissection room at Sewri, from the total expenditure of Rs. 40,176, the net expenditure incurred was Rs. 2,100 less than the previous year. Government in the Judicial Depart- ment have sanctioned a carriage allowance of Rs. 35 per mensem, for the Assist- ant Principal for the duties in connection with the Glanders and Farcy Act. The financial statement has been prepared as indicated by Government in paragraph 3 of their Resolution, Educational Department, No. 1,523, dated 9th August 1895, and under the instructions received from the Director of Public Instruction. Office. 19. Mr. V. B. Phatak, the Head Clerk, continues to give every satisfaction in the performance of his duties, and Mr. L. Cardoz, Second Clerk, is likely to make a useful servant. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, JAMES MILLS, Vety.-Major, A. V. D., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College.
7 APPENDIX A. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Results of Examinations, April 1895. TOTAL OF CANDIDATES. Examination. First Class. Second Class. Pass. Percentage of Passes. Examined. Passed. First Professional ... ... ... 14 5 26 19 73.07 Second Professional ... ... 4 5 ... 11 9 82.5 Third Professional ... ... 4 5 ... 14 9 64.4 Total ... 8 24 5 51 37 72.54 JAMES MILLS, Vety.-Major, A. V. D., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. 8th May 1896.
8 APPENDIX B. Return of Prizes, &c., awarded to Students of the Bombay Veterinary College for 1895-96. No. Subject. Nature. Value. Successful Candidates. Donor's Name. Third Professional. Rs. 1 Best Student ... ... Books and Instruments 50 G.D'Silva... Sir Justice Bayley. 2 Best Hindu Student ... ... Silver Medal 15 S. Mudliar... M. R. Ry. Man-Mull. 3 Operative Surgery ... ... Books and Instruments 30 G. D'Silva... Vety.-Major J. Mills. 4 Soundness ... ... Silver Medal 15 F. D'Silva... Government. 5 Breeding and Obstetrics ... ... Books and Instruments 32 S. Mudliar... Vety.-Capt. J. Morgan. 6 Shoeing ... ... Do. do. 25 G. D'Silva and Mudliar Vety.-Major J. Mills. 7 Hygiene and Sanitary Science ... ... Second Professional. Do. do. 25 S. Mudliar... J. Mollison, Esq. 8 Best Student ... ... Books and Instruments 40 H. Foy ... Sir D. M. Petit, Bart. 9 Anatomy and Physiology ... ... First Professional. Do. do. 20 H. Foy ... Sir D. M. Petit, Bart. 10 Best Student ... ... Books and Instruments 25 A. J. Ansari J. M. Doctor, Esq., G.B.V.C. 11 Handling of Animals ... ... "Steel" Silver Medal 15 R. W. Simpson Steel Memorial Committee. 12 Anatomy and Physiology ... ... Books and Instruments 20 A. J. Ansari N. D. Dhákmárvála, Esq., G.B.V.C. 13 Chemistry and Botany ... ... Do. do. 15 A. K. Duberia Class B9 APPENDIX C. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Return showing changes in the number of Students in 1895-96. Class. Number of Students on 1st April 1895. WITHDRAWALS. ENTRIES. Number of Students on 31st March 1896. Number of Students left the College. Number of Students transferred. Number of Students transferred. New entries. Remarks. Class C Do. B Do. A ... ... ... 15 11 32 10 2 4 ... 9 19 9 19 ... 1 1 19 15 20 23 Total 58 16 28 28 21 63 JAMES MILLS, Vety.-Major, A. V. D., 8th May 1896. Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. APPENDIX D. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Table showing the Number and Nationality of Students for the year 1895-96. Caste. Paying. Native States. Government, free. Municipal, free. Total. Remarks. Class C. Europeans and Eurasians . Mahomedans ... ... Pársis ... ... Jews ... ... Hindus ... ... Native Christians ... ... 1 ... ... ... 4 ... ... 1 ... 1 3 1 1 ... ... ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 2 1 ... 1 10 1 Total ... 5 6 3 1 15 Class B. Europeans and Eurasians... Portuguese and Native Christians ... ... Mahomedans ... ... Pársis ... ... Hindus ... ... 1 1 ... 1 7 1 ... 2 ... 3 2 ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 ... ... 4 1 3 2 10 Total 10 6 3 1 20 Class A. Europeans and Eurasians... Portuguese and Native Christians ... ... Mahomedans ... ... Pársis ... ... Hindus ... ... 2 6 2 2 8 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 5 ... ... ... ... 1 2 6 2 3 15 Total ... 20 1 6 1 28 Grand Total 35 13 12 3 63 JAMES MILLS, Vety.-Major, A. V. D., 8th May 1896. Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. B 271-3
10 APPENDIX E. Return showing Caste and Number of Students from Native States, Local Boards, &c., attending the Bombay Veterinary College during the year 1895-96. NUMBER OF Province, Presidency, or State. Hindus. Mahome- dans. Europeans. Jews. Native Christians. Junágadh State ... ... 1 1 ... ... ... Kolhápur do. ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... Bhávnagar do. ... ... 1 ... 1 ... ... Rájpipla do. ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... Mángrol do. ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... Wadhwán do. ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... Gondal do. ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... District Local Board, Shikárpur ... ... ... 1 ... Do. Hyderabad ... 1 ... ... ... Do. Thar and Párkar ... ... 1 ... ... ... Ceylon Government ... ... ... ... 1 Total ... 7 3 1 1 1 JAMES MILLS, Vety.-Major, A. V. D., 8th May 1896. Principal, Bombay Veterinary College.
11 APPENDIX F. Financial Statement of the Bombay Veterinary College for 1895-96. BUDGET SANCTION. ACTUAL EXPENDITURE. Heads. 1894-95. 1895-96. Heads. 1894-95. 1895-96. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. From Government SalariesAdministration Reports.2 The Political Superintendent, Sávantvádi, The Political Resident, Aden, The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, The Survey Commissioner and Director of Land Re- cords and Agriculture, The Principal, College of Science, Poona, The Compiler of the General Administration Report, The General Department of the Secretariat, The Revenue Department of the Secretariat, The Judicial Department of the Secretariat, The Sanitary Commissioner for the Government of Bombay, The Editors' Table, Bombay, The Editors' Table, Poona (care of the City Magistrate, Poona), The Editor and Proprietor, Dhárwár Vritta (for his own use and for circulation to other Editors of newspapers in Dhárwár), The Editors' Table, Belgaum, care of the Secretary to the Belgaum Municipality, The Municipal Commissioner for the City of Bombay. With copies of Report. The Superintendent, Government Central Press (with a request that the copies of the Report required by this Department may be sent as soon as possible), The President, Municipal Corporation, Bombay, The Secretary to the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, The Government of India, The Secretary of State for India, The Officer in charge, Imperial Library, Secretariat Buildings, Calcutta, The Reporter on Economic Products to the Govern- ment of India. By letter.
REPORT OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE FOR THE YEAR 1896-97. Bombay : PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1897. [PriceREPORT OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE FOR THE YEAR 1896-97. Bombay: PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1897.
No. 349 OF 1897. FROM JAMES MILLS, M.R.C.V.S., J.P., Veterinary-Major, A.V.D., Fellow and Examiner, Bombay University; Principal, Bombay Veterinary College; To E. GILES, Esq., M.A., Director of Public Instruction, Poona. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE, Parel, 28th April 1897. SIR, I have the honour to submit the eleventh Annual Report of the Bombay Veterinary College dealing with its administration during the official year 1896-97. The report includes a brief outline of the duties performed in con- nection with the Bái Sákarbái Dinshaw Petit Hospital for Animals for the year ending 31st December 1896. Professional Examinations. 2. The professional examinations commenced on the 20th April 1896 and terminated on the 30th April 1896. The Board of Examiners consisted of the following gentlemen :2 the examinations and inability to continue their studies. Two from Class B died of the plague, and 9 from Class C graduated. Thus altogether 19 students left the College. The changes in the number of students are shown in Appendix C. Out of the 25 students that joined during the year, 3 are the subjects of Native States3 Cattle Disease Repression. 5. Mr. R. J. Ghosla, G.B.V.C., was deputed to Porebundar State, where Rinderpest and Foot and Mouth Disease broke out. Mr. S. E. Benjamin, G.B.V.C., was deputed for a similar purpose in the Pandharpur Táluka of the Sholápur District. Advice was also asked for in regard to the treatment of cattle disease in the Broach District. Extra Duties. 6. The following extra duties were performed by me :4 On Veterinary-Lieutenant Baldrey's return from sick leave on 16th October, Mr. Dhákmárvála returned to his former appointment. Mr. Foy was given the post of Instructor in Shoeing, and Mr. Buckel joined the firm of Messrs. Stephens and Sons, Veterinary Surgeons, Girgaum, as Assistant. On the 4th January 1897 Mr. Dhákmárvála went on three months' privilege leave and Mr. Foy again acted for him. Veterinary-Lieutenant Baldrey volunteered for plague duty and was appointed a Special Constable, and has been working at house-to-house visitation in his spare time in the Máhim, Dádar and Worli Districts of Bombay. Veterinary-Lieutenant Baldrey has proved an excellent and painstaking teacher, and has performed his duties with zeal. The other teachers have also given satisfaction. Mr. Dhákmárvála assisted Professor Haffkine, after his work at College was over, for two months who, I believe, was satisfied with what he had done for him. Mr. Foy worked also under Professor Haffkine in the evenings at the Lazaretto. Branches of Study. 8. Anatomy.5 I have also continued my two prizes. Visitors. 13. The following gentlemen visited the College and Hospital:6 APPENDIX A. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Results of Examinations, April 1896. Examinations. First Class. Second Class. Pass. TOTAL OF CANDIDATES. Percentage of Passes. Examined Passed. First Professional ... ... 1 11 2 19 14 73.68 Second Professional ... ... 1 6 2 20 9 45. Third Professional ... ... 3 6 ... 15 9 60. Total ... 5 23 4 54 32 59.25 JAMES MILLS, Vety.-Major, A. V. D., 28th April 1897. Principal, Bombay Veterinary College.
7 APPENDIX B. Return of Prizes, &c., awarded to Students of the Bombay Veterinary College for 1896-97. No. Subject. Nature. Value. Successful Candidates. Donor's Name. Third Professional. 1 Equine Medicine and Surgery ... Books and Instruments ... 20 A. J. Shaikh ... ... Vety.-Lieut.-Colonel Adams. 2 Best Hindu Student ... ... Silver Medal ... ... 15 W. R. Mudliar ... ... M. R. Ry. Sah Man Mull. 3 Operative Surgery ... ... Books and Instruments ... 30 A. J. Shaikh ... ... Vety.-Major Mills. 4 Soundness ... ... ... Silver Medal ... ... 15 C. Buckel ... ... ... Government. 5 Breeding and Obstetrics ... ... Books and Instruments ... 32 H. A. Poy ... ... Vety.-Capt. Morgan. 6 Shoeing ... ... ... Do. do. ... 25 S. E. Benjamin ... ... Vety.-Major Mills. Second Professional. 7 Medicine and Surgery ... ... Books and Instruments ... 20 A. L. Patadia ... ... Sir D. M. Petit, Bart. 8 Anatomy and Physiology ... ... Do. do. ... 20 A. L. Patadia ... ... Sir D. M. Petit, Bart. First Professional. ... 9 Handling of Animals (1st Prize) ... "Steel" Silver Medal ... 15 T. Walke ... ... ... Steel Memorial Committee. 10 Do. do. (2nd 8 APPENDIX C. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Return showing Changes in the Number of Students in 1896-97. WITHDRAWALS. EXTRIES. Class. Number of Students on April 1896. Number of Students left the College. Number of Students transferred. Number of Students transferred. New entries. Number of Students on 31st March 1897. REMARKS. Class C ... ... ... 15 10 ... 9 ... 14 Do. B ... ... ... 20 2 9 14 2 25 Do. A ... ... ... 28 7 14 ... 23 30 Total ... 63 19 23 23 25 69 JAMES MILLS, Vety.-Major, A. V. D., 28th April 1897. Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. APPENDIX D. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Table showing the Number and Nationality of Students for the year 1896-97. Caste. Paying. Native States. Government Free. Municipal Free. Total. REMARKS. Class C. Europeans and Eurasians ... ... 1 1 1 ... 3 Mahomedans ... ... ... ... ... 2 ... 1 3 Parsis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Jews ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Hindus ... ... ... ... ... 4 3 1 ... 8 Native Christians ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Total ... 5 6 2 1 14 Class B. Europeans and Eurasians ... .... 1 ... 1 ... 2 Portuguese and Native Christians ... 4 1 ... ... 5 Mahomedans ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Pársis ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 2 ... 3 Hindus ... ... ... ... ... 5 4 5 1 15 Total ... 11 5 8 1 25 Class A. Europeans and Eurasians ... ... 2 ... ... ... 2 Portuguese and Native Christians ... 8 1 ... ... 9 Mahomedans ... ... ... ... 1 1 1 ... 3 Pársis ... ... ... ... ... 5 ... ... ... 5 Hindus ... ... ... ... 10 1 ... ... 11 Total ... 26 3 1 ... 30 Grand Total ... 42 14 11 2 69 Note.9 APPENDIX E. Return showing Caste and Number of Students from Native States, Local Boards, &c., attending the Bombay Veterinary College during the year 1896-97. NUMBER OF Province, Presidency or State. Hindus. Mahome- dans. Europeans. Native Christians. REMARKS. Junágadh State ... ... ... 1 ... ... Kolhápur. do. ... ... 1 ... ... ... Bhávnagar do. ... ... 1 ... 1 ... R á jpipla do. ... ... 1 ... ..... ... M á ngrol do. ... ... 1 ... ... ... Wadhw á n do. ... ... 1 ... ... ... Cochin do. ... ... ... ... ... 1 Gwalior do. ... ... 1 ... ... ... Mysore do. ... ... 1 ... ... ... District Local Board, Shik á rpur ... ... 1 ... ... Do. Hyderabad ... ... 1 ... ... Ceylon Government ... ... 1 ... ... ... Shol á pur Municipality ... ... ... ... ... 1 JAMES MILLS, Vety.-Major, A.V.D., 28th April 1897. Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. B 271-3
10 APPENDIX F. Financial Statement of the Bombay Veterinary College for 1896-97. Budget sanction. Actual Expenditure. Heads. 1895-96. 1896-97. Heads. 1895-96. 1896-97. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. P. Rs. a. p. From Government Salaries:Administration Reports.The Political Superintendent, Sávantvádi, The Political Resident, Aden, The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, The Survey Commissioner and Director of Land Re- cords and Agriculture, The Principal, College of Science, Poona, The Compiler of the General Administration Report, The General Department of the Secretariat, The Revenue Department of the Secretariat, The Sanitary Commissioner for the Government of Bombay, The Editors' Table, Bombay, The Editors' Table, Poona (care of the City Magistrate, Poona), The Editor and Proprietor, Dhárwár Vritta (for his own use and for circulation to other Editors of newspapers in Dhárwár), The Editors' Table, Belgaum, care of the Secretary to the Belgaum Municipality, The Municipal Commissioner for the City of Bombay. With the copy of Report The Superintendent, Government Central Press (with a request that the copies of the Report required by this Department may be sent as soon as possible), The President, Municipal Corporation, Bombay, The Secretary to the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, The Government of India, The Secretary of State for India, The Officer in charge, Imperial Library, Secretariat Buildings, Calcutta, The Reporter on Economic Products to the Govern- ment of India. By letter.
REPORT OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE FOR THE YEAR 1897-98. Bombay : PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1898. [PriceREPORT OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE FOR THE YEAR 1897-98. Bombay : PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1898.
No. 488 OF 1898. Bombay Veterinary College, dated 18th May 1898. FROM JAMES MILLS, Veterinary Major, A. V. D., J. P., Fellow and Examiner, Bombay University; Principal, Bombay Veterinary College ; To THE HONOURABLE MR. E. GILES, M.A., Director of Public Instruction, Poona. SIR, I have the honour to submit the twelfth Annual Report of the Bombay Veterinary College dealing with its administration during the official year 1897-98. A brief outline of the duties performed in connection with the Bái Sákarbai Dinshaw Petit Hospital for Animals for the year ending 31st December 1897, is embodied in the report. Professional Examinations. 2. As previously resolved, the time of holding the professional examina- tions was changed from April to September, and they were accordingly conducted from 29 th August to 4th September. The following gentlemen formed the Board of Examiners :2 (a) In Operative Surgery the marks should be altered from 50 to 100. (b) Vacation.3 The scale of pay for the two lecturers at the Bengal Veterinary Institute having been revised and fixed at Rs. 150 rising to Rs. 200, two good men from this College were selected for the appointments. The appointment of Superin- tendent of Slaughter-houses, Mandalay, Burma, was given to a graduate with a salary of Rs. 175 rising to Rs. 200. An application from the Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Bengal, asking for the services of three graduates for temporary employment in the Bengal Presidency under the Glanders Act was received. A similar application was received for the Superintendentship of the State Paddock at Rájkot, but up to the end of the year no settlement regarding these appointments had been arrived at. Applications for men from the Jodhpur State, for the Ahmedabad Market Inspectorship, and for temporary itinerating duty in the Karáchi District were received. Of these three appointments, Jodhpur is still in abeyance ; for Karáchi the itinerating graduate was transferred from Shikárpur, and the Ahmedabad Municipality employed a man who was not a graduate, although one was recom- mended. I am, however, of the opinion that appointments of this description should always be held by men with special veterinary qualifications. Owing to the Frontier wars there was a great demand for salutris, and inquiries were made by the Commissariat Transport Department whether such men were available at the College. I had to reply that there were none. Our present men refuse such appointments, not only for want of sufficient remunera- tion, but because of the nature of the work they would have to perform. In my report on the two years' course I have brought to the notice of Government that for such work, and also for continuous travelling duty, men from the labouring classes should only be trained and that such training should be given in Hindustáni, a language more or less understood by every community in India, as it is rare to find men of this class with even a rudimentary knowledge of English. Besides, they must be men able to stand hard work. These men too, it has been pointed out, will be useful for employment as municipal market inspectors and veterinarians to petty Native States who are unable to employ graduates. Cattle-disease repression. 5. Rinderpest broke out in almost all the districts in the Presidency, but, except Karáchi, no district asked for the services of a graduate. In Bombay there was a severe outbreak of foot and mouth disease and a mild one of rinderpest in June 1897, when, at my recommendation, the Bombay Municipality appointed Mr. H. Foy, G.B.V.C., as an Inspector to inspect all milch cattle in the town. He did this work for a month only. These diseases having again broken out, the services of Mr. Mahomedkhan Bowakhan, G.B.V.C., were at once entertained in December last, and he continues to serve. Extra duties. 6. The following extra duties were performed by me :4 (h) Assisted Professor Haffkine in his experiments in regard to the Bubonic Plague. (i ) Assistance was also given by me to Dr. Koch, Dr. Gaffkie and Professor Pfieffer of Germany, Dr. Lustig of Italy, and Surgeon-Major Deane of Bangalore, who had come here to study the plague. (j) Inspected the chargers of officers proceeding to the Front. (k) Advised the Commissioner of Police regarding the purchase of horses for the Mounted Police. (l) Had translated and published, by sanction of Government, Dr. Koch's reports on Rinderpest for general distribution. The following extra duties were performed by Veterinary-Lieutenant Baldrey :5 Physical Training. 10. The Riding Class was held this year at the Light Horse Menage at Chaupáti, only once a week instead of thrice as usual, from January to March. A few cricket matches were played by the students. The students were practised in the use of dumb-bells, Indian clubs, boxing gloves, &c. Museum and Library. 11. Pathological, anatomical and physiological specimens have been added and many replaced in the museum. Periodicals and new books continued to be purchased. The work of binding periodicals and rebinding books was carried out as far as funds would permit. Donors of Prizes. 12. The following gentlemen should be thanked for their liberality in contributing to the College Prize Fund :6 (g) Management.7 APPENDIX A. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Results of Professional Examinations, September 1897. Examinations. First Class. Second Class. Pass. TOTAL CANDIDTES. Percentage of Passes. Examined. Passed. First Professional ... ... 8 4 19 12 63.01 Second Professional ... ... 6 3 23 9 39.01 Third Professional ... ... 7 ... 14 7 50.00 Total ... ... 21 7 56 28 50.00 JAMES MILLS, Vety.-Major, A. V. D., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. 18th May 1898.
8 APPENDIX B. Return of Prizes, &c., awarded to the Students of the Bombay Veterinary College for 1897-98. No. Subject. Nature. Value. Successful Candidates. Donor's Name. Third Professional. Rs. 1 Best Student ... ... ... Books and Instruments ... 40 A. L. Patadia ... ... Sir D. M. Petit, Bart. 2 Best Hindu Student ... ... Silver Medal ... ... 15 A. L. Patadia ... ... M. R. Ry. Man Mull. 3 Operative Surgery ... ... Books and Instruments ... 30 R. W. Simpson ... ... Veterinary-Major J. Mills. 4 Soundness ... ... ... Silver Medal ... 15 R. W. Simpson ... ... Government. 5 Breeding and Obstetrics ... ... Books and Instruments ... 32 A. L. Patadia ... ... Veterinary-Captain J. W. A. Morgan. 6 Shoeing ... ... ... Do. do. ... 15 A. L. Patadia ... ... Veterinary-Major J. Mills. Second Professional. 7 Best Student ... ... ... Books and Instruments ... 30 B. Basu ... ... ... Hon. Mr. Justice Fulton. 8 Anatomy and Physiology ... ... Do. do. ... 20 N. K. Malandkar ... ... Sir D. M. Petit, Bart. 9 Medicine and Surgery ... ... Do. do. ... 20 M. A. Montant ... ... Veterinary-Lieutenant F. S. H. Baldrey. First Professional. 10 Best Student ... ... ... Books and Instruments ... 20 J. F. L. DeMonte ... ... Hon. Mr. Justice Fulton. 11 Handling of Animals ... ... Silver Medal ... ... 15 J. F. L. DeMonte ... ... Steel Memorial Committee. 12 Anatomy and Physiology ... ... Books and Instruments ... 10 J. DeCosta ... ... N. D. Dhákmárvála, Esq. 13 Results of Examinations ... ... Government Scholarships ... Each 60 Class B.9 APPENDIX C. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Return showing Changes in the Number of Students in 1897-98. Class. Number of Students on 1st April 1897. WITHDRAWN. ENTRIES. Number of Students on 31st March 1893. REMARKS. Number of Students left the College. Number of Students transferred. Number of Students transferred. New entries. Class C ... ... ... 14 9 ... 9 ... 14 Do. B ... ... ... 25 5 9 12 ... 23 Do. A ... ... ... 30 9 12 ... 7 16 Total ... 69 23 21 21 7 53 JAMES MILLS, Vety.-Major, A. V. D., 18th May 1898. Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. APPENDIX D. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Table showing the Number and Nationality of Students for the year 1897-98. Caste. Paying. Native States. Government Free. Municipal Free. Total. REMARKS. Class C. Mohamedans ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Hindus ... ... ... ... ... 3 1 3 1 8 Portuguese and Native Christians ... 2 2 ... 1 5 Total ... 5 3 3 3 14 Class B. Europeans and Eurasians ... ... 2 ... ... ... 2 Portuguese and Native Christians ... 5 1 2 ... 8 Mohamedans ... ... ... ... 1 1 ... ... 2 Pársis ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 2 ... 3 Hindus ... ... ... ... ... 3 1 4 ... 8 Total ... 12 3 8 ... 23 Class A. Europeans and Eurasians ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Mohamedans ... ... ... ... 1 1 1 ... 3 Pársis ... ... ... ... ... 6 ... ... ... 6 Hindus ... ... ... ... ... 5 1 ... ... 6 Total ... 13 2 1 ... 16 Grand Total ... 30 8 12 3 53 JAMES MILLS, Vety.-Major, A. V. D., 18th May 1898. Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. B 25710 APPENDIX E. Return showing Caste and Number of Students from Native States, Local Boards, &c., attending the Bombay Veterinary College during the year 1897-98. Province, Presidency or State. NUMBER OF REMARKS. Hindus. Mohame- dans. Native Christians. Kolhápur State ... ... 1 ... ... Cochin do. ... ... ... ... 1 Gwalior do. ... ... 1 ... ... Mysore do. ... ... 1 ... ... District Local Board, Shikárpur ... ... 1 ... District Local Board, Thar and Pár- kar ... ... ... ... 1 ... Ceylon Government ... ... 1 ... ... Sholápur Municipality ... ... ... ... 1 JAMES MILLS, Vety.-Major, A.V.D., 18th May 1898. Principal, Bombay Veterinary College.
APPENDIX F. Financial Statement of the Bombay Veterinary College for 1897-98. Budget Sanction. Actual Expenditure. Heads. 1896-97. 1897-98. Heads. 1896-97. 1897-98. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. From Government Salaries:Administration Reports.2 The Political Agent, Kolhápur and Southern Marátha Country, The Political Agent, Mahi Kántha, The Political Agent, Rewa Kántha, The Political Superintendent, Pálanpur, The Political Superintendent, Sávantvádi, The Political Resident, Aden, The Superindendent, Civil Veterinary Department, The Survey Commissioner and Director of Land Records and Agriculture, The Principal, College of Science, Poona, The Compiler of the General Administration Report, The General Department of the Secretariat, The Revenue Department of the Secretariat, The Sanitary Commissioner for the Government of Bombay, The Editors' Table, Bombay, The Editors' Table, Poona, (care of the City Magis- trate, Poona), The Editor and Proprietor, Dhárwár Vritta (for his own use and for circulation to other Editors of newspapers in Dhárwár), The Editors' Table, Belgaum, care of the Secretary to Belgaum Municipality. The Municipal Commissioner for the City of Bombay. With copies of Report. The Superintendent, Government Central Press (with a request that the copies of the Report required by this Department may be sent as soon as possible), The President, Municipal Corporation, Bombay, The Secretary to the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, The Government of India, The Secretary of State for India, The Officer in charge, Imperial Library, Secretariat Buildings, Calcutta, The Reporter on Economic Products to the Govern- ment of India. By letter
REPORT OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE FOR THE YEAR 1898-99. Bombay : PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1899. [Indian PriceOFFICIAL AGENTS FOR THE SALE OF INDIAN OFFICIAL PUBLICATIONS. In London. E. A. ARNOLD, 37, Bedford Street, Strand, W. C. CONSTABLE & Co., 2, Whitehall Gardens, S. W. SAMPSON LOW, MARSTON, & Co., St. Dunstan's House, Fetter Lane, E. C. P. S. KING & SON, 9, Bridge Street, Westminster, S. W. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, W. C. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER, & Co., Charing Cross Road, W. C. B. QUARITCH, 15, Piccadilly, W. On the Continent. FRIEDLÄNDER & SOHN, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague. In India. MESSRS. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras. MESSRS. THACKER, SPINK & Co., and W. NEWMAN &Co., Calcutta. MESSRS. THACKER & Co., LD., A. J. COMBRIDGE & Co., MR. SEYMOUR HALE, and CURATOR, GOVERNMENT CENTRAL BOOK DEPÔT, Bombay.
REPORT OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE FOR THE YEAR 1898-99. Bombay : PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1899.
No. 488 OF 1899. Bombay Veterinary College, Parel, 15th May 1899. FROM JAMES BRODIE-MILLS, Veterinary-Major, A. V. D., J. P., Fellow and Examiner, Bombay University ; Principal, Bombay Veterinary College ; To THE HONOURABLE MR. E. GILES, M.A., Director of Public Instruction, Poona. SIR, I have the honour to submit the thirteenth Annual Report of the Bombay Veterinary College dealing with its administration during the official year 1898-99. A brief outline of the duties performed in connection with the Bái Sákarbái Dinshaw Petit Hospital for Animals for the year ending 31st December 1898, is embodied in the report. Professional Examinations. 2. The time of holding the professional examinations was again changed from September to December. Therefore, under the College Rules and Regulations, supplementary exami- nations were proposed and recommended to be held in September, but the pro- posal did not come into effect, the recommendation having been withdrawn on the advice of Veterinary-Major Morgan. They were accordingly conducted from 10th to 19th December. The following gentlemen formed the Board of Examiners :2 Professional, as they deemed it unnecessary to have written examinations in these subjects. Information relating to students. 3. On the 1st April 1898 there were 53 students on the College rolls. There were 8 fresh entries during the year as against 7 and 25 in 1897-98 and 1896-97, respectively. All the fresh entries were in Class A, no students having joined under concession. 22 students left the College during the year3 is unable to supply men for active service, connecting this inability with the small number turned out. With reference to this contention, it is hardly necessary for me to point out that constant endeavours are being made to turn out the students as practical men as possible; but the task is an extremely hard one, because of the fact that they are not, in the majority of instances, recruited from the class of people who are brought up amongst animals, and it is hardly to be expected that many students will come from this class, as their educational capabi- lities are not sufficiently advanced to enable them to study here. The students of this College cannot be compared with those of other Veterinary Institutions in India, because they are quite a different class and undergo a different training and different tests. In regard to the professional value of the alumni of the College I cannot refrain from quoting a few words from a speech delivered here by His Excellency Lord Harris:4 (b) Whether the teaching should be in English or the vernacular, it being remembered that Hindustáni is not a vernacular in any portion of the Presidency ? (b) That the instruction should not be in English. The class of men requir- ed for the work to be done is not found among those who have learnt English. The instruction should, therefore, be given in the two principal vernaculars of the Presidency, Maráthi and Gujaráti. (c) Whether the two years' course should be complete in itself or be a part of the longer course for the di- ploma ? (c) The two years' course should not form part of that for the diploma, which is conducted in English and which includes throughout subjects unneces- sary for purely practical purposes, but should be separate. It is intended to teach a different class of men whose instruction will be almost entirely practical and who will be under the supervision of the diplomates. It is hoped that this question will be favourably dealt with, both by the Local Government and the Government of India, and sanction for the establishment of this class accorded. As represented from time to time in my reports on this subject it is, in my opinion, very necessary to have such a class of men trained for service in this Presidency and the outlying Provinces and Native States. They will stand the hard work of itinerating, be a cheaper agency and will in time assist to fulfil the wishes of the Government of India in as much that every táluka will have a Veterinary Assistant. I am given to understand that for district Veterinary work in the Central Provinces men are recruited from Lahore or Calcutta. This is also done in some of the Native States in proximity to this Presidency. Had Bombay such men, they no doubt would have been given the preference in these instances. It is, however, equally incontrovertible to retain the class of men we are at present turning out, without whom the Veterinary Service would be incomplete, as their superior knowledge is requisite to fill the immediate supervising appointments in the districts in relation to horse and cattle breeding, cattle diseases and to be in charge of Veterinary dispensaries. Vacation 6. Hitherto the College broke up for six weeks, twice in the year, but it has now been resolved, on the recommendation of a conference appointed by Government, that the College should have a continuous vacation of three months from 1st April to 30th June. This change came into force, for the first time, in this year, and will no doubt be of great benefit both to teachers and students. Deputations for cattle disease repression. 7. An outbreak of anthrax was reported to have broken out amongst the horses belonging to the Mounted Police of Sholápur, and Mr. E. Brand, G.B.V.C., was deputed to inspect the animals, but the disease had disappeared before he reached the place. Mr. S. V. Soman, G.B.V.C., was deputed to Máhim in the Thána District, with a view to ascertain whether rinderpest existed there and to procure hides from such cases. Mr. A. K. Duberia, G.B.V.C., was deputed to inspect tonga ponies suffering from Surra at Bassein. I also visited the place. Extra duties. 8. The following extra duties were performed by me:5 (f) Performed the duties of receiving and despatching stallions imported for the Civil Veterinary Department. Thirteen horses and 62 donkeys were landed and despatched. Besides this, 25 horses and 4 donkeys, purchased in. Bombay, were received and despatched. In this work I was assisted by Veterinary-Lieutenant Farmer and Mr. Dhakmarwala. (g) Inspected and certified as to the fitness of cattle belonging to the Transport Department for field service. (h) Advised the Commissioner of Police regarding the purchase of horses for the Mounted Police. (i) Conducted Rinderpest experiments at the Sewri Lazaretto with a view to determine whether hides prepared according to the native method for export are capable of conveying the disease to other animals. (j) Conducted Rinderpest bile experiments. (k) Acted as a member of the Committee appointed by Government to draw up the draft rules regulating the inspection of animals, &c., under the Live Stock Importation Act. (l) Acted as a member of the Committee appointed to report on the necessity of a Two Years' Course of Instruction. Teaching Staff. 9. On my return from three months' privilege leave on the 16th May, Veterinary-Lieutenant Baldrey and Mr. Dhakmarwala reverted to their former appointments. When Veteri- nary-Lieutenant Baldrey was on the 15th November transferred to act as Superin- tendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Mr. Dhakmarwala acted as Assistant Prin- cipal, and Veterinary Inspector Shaikh as Lecturer on Anatomy and Physiology, in addition to his own duties, until the arrival of Veterinary-Lieutenant Farmer on the 26th November. Mr. V. E. Vakharia, Assistant Professor of Chemistry, obtained one month's privilege leave from 5th January and Mr. J. F. Valladares, G.B.V.C., acted for him. Mr. E. H. Brand, G.B.V.C., sub. pro-tem. Instructor in Shoeing, having obtained an appointment as Lecturer at the Bengal Veterinary Institute, was succeeded by Mr. S. V. Soman, G.B.V.C. Mr. Soman subsequently resigned and Mr. Valladares was given the appointment. The Assistant Principal having arranged his place of residence so as to be at all times available when required for the work, both ordinary and emergent, connected with the hospital, and having taken upon himself the full responsi- bility relating thereto, Mr. Dhakmarwala was relieved of the duties of Resident Veterinary Officer and ceased to reside on the college premises from 1st August. The question regarding the performance of the duties of Resident Veterinary Officer by the Assistant Principal having been satisfactorily settled, final sanc- tion for the payment of Rs. 60 per mensem as house-rent to that officer was accorded. The college staff in general have performed their duties to my satisfaction. Branches of Study. 10. Anatomy.6 the students. The students were practised in the use of dumb-bells, Indian clubs, boxing-gloves, &c. Museum and Library. 13. Many pathological, anatomical and physiological specimens have been added and many replaced in the Museum. Periodicals and new books were purchased. The work of binding periodicals and rebinding books was carried out as far as funds would permit. Donors of Prizes. 14. The following gentlemen should be thanked for their liberality in contributing to the College Prize Fund :7 (g) The ambulance for animals has been a great boon to the public and was frequently requisitioned during the year. (h) Management.8 APPENDIX A. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Results of Professional Examinations, December 1898. Examinations. First Class. Second Class. Pass. TOTAL CANDIDATES. Percentage of Passes. Examined. Passed. First Professional ... 1 4 1 12 6 50.00 Second Professional... 1 13 2 20 16 80.00 Third Professional ... 1 7 ... 15 8 53.33 Total ... 3 24 3 47 30 63.82 J. BRODIE-MILLS, Vety.-Major, A. V. D., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College, 15th May 1899.
9 APPENDIX B. Return of Prizes, &c., awarded to the Students of the Bombay Veterinary College for 1898. No. Subjects. Nature. Value. Successful Candidates. Donor's Name. Third Professional. Rs. 1 Best Student ... ... ... Books and Instruments 40 A. Chinniah ... ... Sir D. M. Petit, Bart. 2 Best Hindu Student... ... Silver Medal ... 15 Y. B. Bhagwat M. R. Ry.Man Mull. 3 Operative Surgery... ... Books and Instruments 30 A. Chinniah ... ... Veterinary-Major J. Brodie-Mills. 4 Soundness ... ... Silver Medal 15 A. Chinniah Government. 5 Breeding and Obstetrics Books and Instruments 32 T. K.Desai Veterinary-Lieutenant P. S. H.Baldrey. 6 Shoeing ... ... Second Professional. Do. do. 20 D. H. Chitnis Veterinary-Major J. Brodie-Mills. 7 Best Student ... ... Books and Instruments 30 T. E. Rodrigues ... Honourable Mr. Justice Fulton. 8 Anatomy and Physiology... ... Do. do. 20 T. E. Rodrigues Sir D. M. Petit, Bart. 9 Medicine and Surgery... ... First Professional. Do. do. 20 D. S. Purohit and Rodrigues Veterinary-Lieu tenant J. Farmer. 10 Best Student... ... Books and Instruments 20 J. K. Shroff Honourable Mr. Justice Fulton. 11 Handling of Animals... ... Silver Medal ... 15 J. K. Shroff Steel Memorial Medal. 12 Anatomy and Physiology... ... Books and Instruments 10 J. K. Shroff N. D. Dhákmárvála, Esq. 13 Results of Examinations ... ... Government Scholarships ... Each 60 Class B.10 APPENDIX C. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Return showing Changes in the Number of Students in 1898-99. Class. Number of Students on 1st April 1898. WITHDRAWN. ENTRIES. Number of Students on 31st March 1899. REMARKS. Number of Students left the College. Number of Students transferred. Number of Students transferred. New entries. Class C ... ... .... 14 11 ... 16 ... 19 Do. B ... ... ... 23 4 16 6 ... 9 Do. A 16 7 6 ... 8 11 Total ... 53 22 22 22 8 39 J. BRODIE-MILLS, Vety.-Major, A. V. D., 15th May 1899. Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. APPENDIX D. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Showing the Number and Nationality of Students for the year 1898-99. Caste. Paying. Native States. Government Free. Municipal Free. Total. REMARKS. Class C. Europeans and Eurasians ... ... Portuguese and Native Christians Mahomedans ... ... ... ... Pársis ... ... ... ... Hindus ... ... ... ... 2 5 1 ... 2 ... ... ... ... 1 ... 3 ... 2 2 ... 1 ... ... ... 2 9 1 2 5 Total ... 10 1 7 1 19 Class B. Europeans and Eurasians ... ... Portuguese and Native Christians Mahomedans ... ... ... ... Pársis ... ... ... ... Hindus ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 3 1 ... 1 2 ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 4 3 1 Total ... 5 3 1 ... 9 Class A. Europeans and Eurasians ... ... Portuguese and Native Christians Mahomedans ... ... Parsis ... ... ... ... Hindus ... ... ... ... 1 1 2 2 ... 1 ... 2 ... 1 ... 1 ... ... ... ... 1 3 2 5 Total ... 6 3 2 ... 11 Grand Total ... 21 7 30 1 39 N.B.11 APPENDIX E. Return showing Caste and number of Students from Native States, Local Boards, &c., attending the Bombay Veterinary College during the year 1898-1899. Province, Presidency or State. NUMBER OF REMARKS. Hindus. Mahomedans. Native Christians. Mysore State ... ... ... 1 ... ... District Local Board, Shikárpur ... 1 ... District Local Board, Thar and Párkar ... ... 1 ... Sholápur Municipality ... ... ... 1 Gwaliar State ... ... 1 ... ... Gondal State ... ... 1 ... ... Morvi State ... ... ... 1 ... Total ... 3 3 1 J. BRODIE-MILLS, Vety.-Major, A. V. D., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. 15th May 1899.
12 APPENDIX F. Statement showing the number of operations in the Bái Sákarbái Dinshaw Petit Hospital for Animals during 1898. Number. Operations. Horses. Cattle. Dogs. Sheep and Goats. Total. 1 Amputation, tail 2 6 1 ... 9 2 13 APPENDIX G. Financial Statement of the Bombay Veterinary College for 1898-99. Budget Sanction. Actual Expenditure. Heads. 1897-98. 1898-99. Heads. 1897-98. 1898-99. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. From Government salariesAdministration Reports.2 The Political Agent, Kolhápur and Southern Marátha Country, The Political Agent, Mahi Kántha, The Political Agent, Rewa Kántha, The Political Superintendent, Pálanpur, The Political Superintendent, Sávantvádi, The Political Resident, Aden, The Superindendent, Civil Veterinary Department, The Survey Commissioner and Director of Land Records and Agriculture, The Principal, College of Science, Poona, The Compiler of the General Administration Report, The General Department of the Secretariat, The Revenue Department of the Secretariat, The Sanitary Commissioner for the Government of Bombay. The Editors' Table, Bombay, The Editors' Table, Poona, The Editor and Proprietor, Dhárwár Vritta (for his own use and for circulation to other Editors of newspapers in Dhárwár), The Editors' Table, Belgaum, The Municipal Commissioner for the City of Bombay. With copies of the Report. The Superintendent, Government Central Press (with a request that the copies of the Report required by this Department may be sent as soon as possible), The President, Municipal Corporation, Bombay, The Secretary to the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, The Government of India, The Secretary of State for India, The Officer in charge, Imperial Library, Secretariat Buildings, Calcutta, The Reporter on Economic Products to the Govern- ment of India. By letter.
REPORT OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE FOR THE YEAR 1899-1900. Bombay : PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1900. [Indian PriceOFFICIAL AGENTS FOR THE SALE OF INDIAN OFFICIAL PUBLICATIONS. In England. E. A. ARNOLD, 37, Bedford Street, Strand, W.C., London. CONSTABLE & Co., 2, Whitehall Gardens, S.W., London. SAMPSON, Low, MARSTON & Co., St. Dunstan's House, Fetter Lane, E.C., London. P. S.KING & SON, 9, Bridge Street, Westminster, S.W., London. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, W.C., London. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., Charing Cross Road, W.C., London. B. QUARITCH, 15, Piccadilly, W., London. WILLIAMS AND NORGATE, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & Co., Cambridge. On the Continent. FRIEDLÄNDER & SOHN, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague. In India. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras. THACKER, SPINK & Co., and W. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., LD., A. J. COMBRIDGE & Co., MR. SEYMOUR HALE, and CURATOR, GOVERNMENT CENTRAL BOOK DEPÔT, Bombay.
REPORT OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE FOR THE YEAR 1899-1900. bombay. PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1900.
No. 556 OF 1900. Bombay Veterinary College, Parel, 16th April 1900. From JAMES BRODIE-MILLS, Veterinary-Major, A. V. D., J.P., Fellow and. Examiner, Bombay University, Principal, Bombay Veterinary College; To E. GILES, ESQ., M.A., Director of Public Instruction, Poona. SIR, I have the honour to submit the fourteenth Annual Report of the Bombay Veterinary College, dealing with its administration during the official year 1899-1900. A brief outline of the duties performed, in connection with the Bai Sakarbai Dinshaw Petit Hospital for Animals for the year ending 31st December 1899, is embodied in the report. Professional Examinations. 2. The Professional Examinations commenced on the 10th December and lasted up to the 19th. The following gentlemen formed the Board of Examiners : 2 non-attendance. From Class A, 1 was removed from the rolls, in accordance with Rule 14a, Section "C" of the College Rules and Regulations, having been plucked three times in this class, and 4 left as they found the work unsuited to them. The number of students on the College rolls, at the end of the year under report, was 333 Principal was requested to consult the following officers in reference there- to :4 (j) Veterinary-Lieutenant F. S. H. Baldrey, Assistant Principal, was de- puted to inspect horses proceeding on service to South Africa at Deoláli and Ahmedabad. Teaching Staff. 9. Veterinary-Lieutenant J. Farmer having been transferred on the 1st July 1899 to Ajmere, Mr. N. D. Dhakmarvala acted as Assistant Principal until the return of Veterinary- Lieutenant F. S. H. Baldrey on the 8th November 1899. Mr. J. F. Valladares, G.B.V.C., sub. pro-tem Instructor in Shoeing, acted as Lecturer on Anatomy, vice Mr. Dhakmarvala, promoted. Mr. M. C. Joshi, G.B.V.C., acted as Instructor in Shoeing. Pensioned Staff Sergeant Farrier R. Town, late Royal Horse Artil- lery, has been appointed Instructor in Shoeing. The College staff performed their duties satisfactorily. Branches of Study. 10. Anatomy.5 (e) The supply of Medicines and Pharmacy Requisites.6 APPENDIX A. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Results of Professional Examinations, December 1899. Examinations. First Class. Second Class. Pass. TOTAL CANDIDATES. Percentage of Passes. Examined. Passed. First Professional ... 2 3 1 13 6 46.15 Second Professional 1 2 ... 7 3 42.85 Third Professional ... ... 9 ... 19 9 47.36 Total ... 3 14 1 39 18 46.15 J. BRODIE-MILLS, Vety.-Major, A. V. D., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. 16th April 1900.
7 APPENDIX B. Return of Prizes, &c., awarded to the Students of the Bombay Veterinary College for 1899. No. Subjects. Nature. Value. Successful Candidate. Donor's Name. Third Professional. Rs. 1 Best Student ... ... Books and Instruments 40 T. E. Rodrigues Sir D. M. Petit, Bart. 2 Soundness ... ... Silver Medal 15 W. Pereyera Government. 3 Breeding and Obstetrics ... ... Second Professional. Books and Instruments 32 J. M. C. Rebello Veterinary-Major J. W. A. Morgan. 4 Best Student ... ... Books and Instruments 30 J. K. Shroff Sir George Cotton. 5 Anatomy and Physiology ... ... First Professional. Do. do. 20 J. K. Shroff Sir D. M. Petit, Bart. 6 Best Student ... ... Books and Instruments ... 20 H. S. Aiyenger Sir George Cotton. 7 Handling of Animals ... ... Silver Medal ... 15 H. S. Aiyenger Steel Memorial Committee. 8 Anatomy and Physiology ... ... Books and Instruments ... 10 H. S. Aiyenger N. D. Dhákmárvála, Esq. J. BRODIE-MILLS, Vety.-Major, A. V. D., 16th April 1900. Principal, Bombay Veterinary College.
8 APPENDIX C. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Return showing Changes in the Number of Students in 1899-1900. Class. Number of Students on 1st April 1899. WITHDRAWN. ENTRIES. Number of Students on 31st March 1900. REMARKS. Number of Students left the College. Number of Students transferred. New entries. Number of Students transferred. Class C 19 16 ... ... 3 6 Do. B ... ......... 9 3 3 1 6 10 Do. A ... 11 5 6 17 ... 17 Total ... 39 24 9 18 9 33 J. BRODIE-MILLS, Vety.-Major, A. V. D., 16th April 1900. Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. APPENDIX D. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE Return showing the Number and Nationality of Students for the year 1899-1900. Casts. Paying. Native States, Local Boards and Munici- palities. Government, free. Municipal, free. Total. REMARKS. Class C. Portuguese and Native Christians ...... ... 1 1 ... 2 Pársis ... ... 2 ... ... ... 2 Hindus ... ... ... ... 2 ... 2 Total ... ... 2 1 3 ... 6 Class B. Portuguese and Native Christians ... ... ... 1 1 ... 2 Mahomedans ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ... 1 Pársis ... ... ... ... ... ... 3 ... ... ... 3 Hindus ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 3 ... 4 Total ... 3 3 4 ... 10 Class A. Europeans and Eurasians ... ... 2 ... ... ... 2 Portuguese and Native Christians ... ... 1 ... ... ... 1 Mahomedans ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... 1 2 Hindus... ... ... ... ... ... 8 2 ... 2 12 Total ... 11 3 ... 3 17 Grand Total ... 16 7 7 3 33 J. BRODIE-MILLS, Vety.-Major, A. V. D., 16th April 1900. Principal, Bombay Veterinary College.
9 APPENDIX E. Return showing Caste and number of Students from Native States, Local Boards, &c., attending the Bombay Veterinary College during the year 1899-1900. Province, Presidency or State. NUMBER OF REMARKS. Hindus. Mahomedans. Native Christians. District Local Board, Thar and Párkar ... 1 ... Sholápur Municipality ... ... 1 Gwalior State 1 ... ... Gondal State 1 ... ... Morvi State ... 1 ... Ceylon Government ... ... 1 I'dar State 1 ... ... Total ... 3 2 2 J. BRODIE-MILLS, Vety.-Major, A. V. D., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. 16th April 1900. B 9210 APPENDIX F. Statement showing the Number of Operations performed in the Bai Sakarbai Dinshaw Petit Hospital for Animals during 1899. Number. Operations. Horses. Cattle. Dogs. Sheep and Goats. Total. 1 Amputation on tail ... ... 1 5 ... 6 2 11 APPENDIX G. Financial Statement of the Bombay Veterinary College for 1899-1900. Heads. Actual Expenditure. 1898-99. 1899-1900. Heads. 1898-99. 1899-1900. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. From Government Salaries : Administration Reports.2 All Collectors, including the Collectors and Deputy Commissioners in Sind, The Political Department of the Secretariat, The Political Agent, Káthiáwár, The Political Agent, Cutch, The Political Agent, Kolhápur and Southern Marátha Country, The Political Agent, Mahi Kántha, The Political Agent, Rewa Kántha, The Political Superintendent, Pálanpur, The Political Superintendent, Sávantvádi, The Political Resident, Aden, The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, The Survey Commissioner and Director of Land Records and Agriculture, The Principal, College of Science, Poona, The Compiler of the General Administration Report, The General Department of the Secretariat, The Revenue Department of the Secretariat, The Sanitary Commissioner for the Government of Bombay, The Deputy Adjutant General, Bombay Command, Poona, The Editors' Table, Bombay, The Editors' Table, Poona, The Editor and Proprietor, Dhárwár Vritta (for his own use and for circulation to other Editors of newspapers in Dhárwár), The Editors' Table, Belgaum, The Municipal Commissioner for the City of Bombay, With copies of the Report. The Superintendent, Government Central Press, (With a request that the copies of the Report required by this Department may be sent as soon as possible.) The President, Municipal Corporation, Bombay, The Secretary to the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, The Secretary of State for India, The Government of India, The Officer in charge Imperial Library, Secretariat Buildings, Calcutta, The Reporter on Economic Products to the Govern- ment of India. By letter.
REPORT OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE FOR THE YEAR 1900-1901. Bombay : PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1901. [Indian PriceOFFICIAL AGENTS FOR THE SALE OF INDIAN OFFICIAL PUBLICATIONS. In England. E. A. ARNOLD, 37, Bedford Street, Strand, W.C., London. CONSTABLE & Co., 2, Whitehall Gardens, S.W., London. SAMPSON, LOW, MARSTON & Co., St. Dunstan's House, Fetter Lane, E.C. London. P. S. KING & SON, 9, Bridge Street, Westminster, S.W., London. LUZAC & Co., 46, Great Russell Street, W.C., London. KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & Co., Charing Cross Road, W.C., London. B. QUARITCH, 15, Piccadilly, W., London. WILLIAMS AND NORGATE, Oxford. DEIGHTON BELL & Co., Cambridge. On the Continent. FRIEDLÄNDER & SOHN, 11, Carlstrasse, Berlin. OTTO HARRASSOWITZ, Leipzig. KARL W. HIERSEMANN, Leipzig. ERNEST LEROUX, 28, Rue Bonaparte, Paris. MARTINUS NIJHOFF, The Hague. In India. HIGGINBOTHAM & Co., Madras. THACKER, SPINK & Co., and W. NEWMAN & Co., Calcutta. THACKER & Co., LD., A. J. COMBRIDGE & Co., MR. SEYMOUR HALE, and CURATOR, GOVERNMENT CENTRAL BOOK DEPÔT, Bombay.
REPORT OF THE BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE FOR THE YEAR 1900-1901. Bombay : PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS. 1901.
No. 457 OF 1901. Bombay Veterinary College, 13th May 1901. From JAMES BRODIE-MILLS, Veterinary Major, A. V. D., J.P., Fellow and Examiner, Bombay University, Principal, Bombay Veterinary College; To The Honourable Mr. E. GILES, M.A., Director of Public Instruction, Poona. SIR, I have the honour to submit the fifteenth Annual Report of the Bombay Veterinary College, dealing with its administration during the official year 1900-1901. A brief outline of the duties performed in connection with the Bai Sakarbai Dinshaw Petit Hospital for Animals for the year ending 31st December 1900 is embodied in the report. 2. The Professional Examinations for the Diploma Course commenced on the 10th December and terminated on the 20th idem. The following gentlemen formed the Board of Examiners :2 Particulars relating to Students. 3. On the 1st April 1900 there were 33 students on the rolls of the Diploma Course. There were 15 fresh entries during the year as against 18 and 8 in 1899-1900 and 1898-99 respectively. Fifteen students left the College. Out of these, 5 were from Class C, 4 of whom graduated. From Class B 4 students left 3 On the formation of the Senior Class, i.e., Class B in January last, Gov- ernment sanctioned the entertainment of a Second Instructor for the course. The recrudescence of plague in Bombay in rather a severe type, which more especially affected the vicinity of the College, and the fact that one of the clerks died from the disease, was the cause of what might well be termed a panic amongst the students, and no persuasion would prevent them from leaving en masse for their homes. Employment of Graduates. 4. Of the six students who graduated this year, one obtained employment in the Janjira State, and one, as an Assistant Veteri- nary Officer, at the College. Three graduates from previous batches obtained employment4 Excursions have been abolished as it was found that they did not afford instruction commensurate with the time they took up and the monetary outlay involved. The alterations in the curriculum as recommended by the Umballa Confer- ence, and approved of by Government, were brought into force in full from the commencement of the Collegiate year. Physical Training. 8. The Riding Class was held as usual at His Excellency the Governor's Body Guard Menage. Many of the students did not take very kindly to it. Museum and Library. 9. Many additions to the Museum and Library continue to be made. The Journal of Pathology and Bacteriology has been added to the list of periodicals supplied to the College and the American Agriculturist has been removed. Donors of Prizes. 10. The following Gentlemen should be thanked for their liberality in contributing to the Prize Fund:5 Buildings. 13. An expenditure of Rs. 5,239 was incurred on account of laying down a system of drainage in the compound, laying on gas and water to the laboratories, and repairs to buildings. With the sanction of Government the Chemical Laboratory was removed to the Farrier's Quarters, the College Quarters were handed over to the Farrier as a residence, and the Chemical Laboratory was converted into a lecture room for the vernacular class. Office. 14. Mr. S. M. Vaidya, second clerk, was transferred to an appointment in the new printing press established at Yerauda Central Prison, and Mr. S. G. Ranade, clerk in the Glanders and Farcy Department, was promoted in his place. A recommenda- tion was made with the view of increasing the emoluments of the Head Clerk, so as to make them commensurate with the work he is performing ; but it was not sanctioned on account of the present financial conditions. Financial Statement. 15. Appendix "G" is the financial statement for the year under report. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your most obedient servant, JAMES BRODIE-MILLS, Veterinary-Major, A. V. D., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. B 2556 APPENDIX A. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Results of Professional Examinations, December 1900. Examinations. First Class. Pass. TOTAL CANDIDATES Percentage of Passes. Examined. Passed. Diploma Course. First Professional ...... ... 8 12 8 66.66 Second Professional ... ... 3 2 9 5 55.55 Third Professional ... 3 3 10 6 60.00 Total ... 6 13 31 19 61.29 Vernacular " Salutri " Certificate Course. First Professional ... ... 14 9 28 23 82.14 JAMES BRODIE-MILLS, Veterinary-Major, A. V. D., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. APPENDIX B. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Return of Prizes, &c., awarded to Students for 1900. No. Subject. Nature. Value. Successful Candidate. Donor's Name. Diploma Course. Third Professional. Rs. 1 Best Student ...... Books and Instruments. 70 J. K. Shroff...... Bayley Memorial. 2 Operative Surgery...... Do. do. 30 R. M. Moodliar Do. 3 Soundness......... Silver Medal ... 15 R. M. Moodliar Government. 4 Breeding and Obstetrics ... Second Professional. Books and Instruments. 32 J. K. Shroff...... Veterinary-Major J. W. A Morgan. 5 Best Student ... Do. do. ... 40 J. E. Fernando ... Sir D. M. Petit, Bart. 6 Medicine and Surgery Do. do. 30 H. S. Aiyengar ... Bayley Memorial. 7 Materia Medica and Phar- macy ......... First Professional. Do. do. 20 H. S. Aiyengar Do. 8 Best Student ...... Do. do. 25 Yakub Shah...... Do. 9 Handling of Animals Silver Medal ...... 15 J. E. Fernando ... Steel Memorial. 10 Chemistry and Botany Books and Instruments. 20 Jaya Sing Raj Sir D. M. Petit, Bart. Vernacular " Salutri " Certificate Course. 11 Best student at the First Professional. Books and Instruments. 25 Babu Hulas ... Bayley Memorial. JAMES BRODIE-MILLS, Veterinary-Major, A. V. D., 13th May 1901. Principal, Bombay Veterinary College.
7 APPENDIX C. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Return showing Changes in the Number of Students in 1900-1901. Class. Number of Students on 1st April 1900. WITHDRAWN. ENTRIES. Number of Students on 31st March 1901. Number of Students left the College. Number of Students transferred. New entries. Number of Students transferred. REMARKS. Diploma Course. Class C ... ... 6 5 ... ... 5 6 Do. B ... ... 10 4 5 ... 8 9 Do. A ... ... 17 6 8 15 ... 18 Diploma Course, Total . 33 15 13 15 13 33 Vernacular " Salutri " Certificate Course. Class B...... ... ... ... ... 23 23 Do. A...... 39 15 23 37 ... 38 Sálutri Course, Total... 39 15 23 37 23 61 Diploma and Salutri Courses, Grand Total. 72 30 36 52 36 94 JAMES BRODIE-MILLS, Veterinary-Major, A. V. D., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. 13th May 1901.
8 APPENDIX D. BOMBAY VETERINARY COLLEGE. Return showing the Number and Nationality of Students for the year 1900-1901. Castes. Paying. Native States, Local Boards and Munici- palities. Government Scholars. Government free. Total. REMARKS. DIPLOMA COURSE. Class C. Portuguese and Native Christians ...... 1 1 ... 1 3 Pársis .................. 1 ... ... ... 1 Hindus.................. ... ... ... 2 2 Total ... 2 1 ... 3 6 Class B. Europeans and Eurasians ......... 1 ... ... ... 1 Portuguese and Native Christians ...... 1 ... ... ... 1 Mahomedans............... ... 1 ... 1 2 Hindus .................. 2 2 ... 1 5 Total ... 4 3 ... 2 9 Class A. Portuguese and Native Christians ...... 2 ... ... ... 2 Pársis .................. 2 ... ... ... 2 Hindus.................. 4 2 7 1 14 Total ... 8 2 7 1 18 Diploma Course, Total ... 14 6 7 6 33 VERNACULAR "SALUTRI" CERTIFICATE COURSE, Class B. Portuguese and Native Christians ... ... ... ... ... 1 1 Mahomedans............... ... 3 ... ... 3 Hindus.................. ... 3 ... 16 19 Total ... ... 6 ... 17 23 Class A. Mahomedans ............... ... ... ... 2 2 Hindus .................. ... 1 ... 35 36 Total ... ... 1 ... 37 38 Salutri Course, Total ... ... 7 ... 54 61 Diploma and Salutri Courses, Grand Total ... 14 13 7 60 94 JAMES BRODIE-MILLS, Veterinary-Major, A. V. D., 13th May 1901. Principal, Bombay Veterinary College.
APPENDIX E. Return showing Castes and Number of Students supported by Native States, Local Boards, &c., attending the Bombay Veterinary College during the year 1900-1901. DIPLOMA COURSE. VERNACULAR " SALUTRI " CERTIFCATE COURSE. Province, Presidency or State. Number of Number of Hindus. Mahomedans. Native Christians. Hindus. Mahomedans. District Local Board, Thar and Párkar ... 1 .... ... ... Gondal State 1 ... ... ... ... Ceylon Government ... ... 1 ... Junágad State ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... Bhávnagar State ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... Kurundvád State ... ... 1 ... ... ... ... Remount Depôt, Ahmednagar ... ... ... ... 1 1 Akalkot State ... ... ... ... 1 .... Bánsda State ... ... ... ... 1 Kolhápur State ... ... ... ... 1 1 District Local Board, Khándesh. ... ... ... 1 ... Total ... 4 1 1 4 3 JAMES BRODIE-MILLS, Veterinary-Major, A. V. D., Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. 13th May 1901. B 25510 APPENDIX F. Statement showing the number of operations performed in the Bai Sakerbai Dinshaus Petit Hospital for Animals during 1900. Number. Operations. Horses. Cattle. Dogs. Sheep and Goats. Total. 1 Amputation of tail ... ... ... 5 2 ... 7 2 11 APPENDIX G. Financial Statement of the Bombay Veterinary College for 1900-1901. Budget Sanction. Actual Expenditure. Heads. 1899-1900. 1900-1901 Heads. 1899-1900. 1900-1901. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a p. From Government Salaries- Teaching Staff......... 26,940 4 0 30,078 5 10 Teaching Staff......... 27,425 0 0 30,150 0 0 Establishment......... 2,400 0 0 2,389 0 0 Establishment......... 2,400 0 0 2,400 0 0 Contingent Expenditure 1,197 12 6 1,430 5 10 Contingent expenditure 1,228 0 0 1,228 0 0 Scholarships ......... 750 0 0 420 0 0 Scholarships ......... 900 0 0 900 0 0 Chemicals, &c. ... ...... 218 7 2 52 3 10 Chemicals ... ..... 200 0 0 200 0 0 Riding Fees ......... 288 0 0 288 0 0 Examiners' Fees ..... 300 0 0 300 0 0 House Rent Allowance...... 268 9 10 1,308 12 5 Riding Fees ......... 300 0 0 300 0 0 Travelling Allowance to officers. 1,054 3 0 38 12 0 House Rent Allowance 1,440 0 0 1,440 0 0 Furniture and Appartus 213 2 6 339 15 2 Books, Periodicals &c....... 438 0 0 438 0 0 Buildings and Repairs...... 881 4 10 5,239 1 1 Travelling allowance to officers. 200 0 0 200 0 0 Books and periodicals...... 381 0 0 333 13 6 Furniture and apparatus ... 394 0 0 394 0 0 Excursion Charges ...... 75 0 0 Buildings and Repairs...... 848 0 0 5,317 0 0 Honorarium to three Assistant Veterinary Officers ...... 900 0 0 900 0 0 Excursion Charges ...... Honorarium to three Assistant 500 0 0 500 0 0 Charges for instruction in Dairy, Work Cattle, &c....... 500 0 0 Veterinary Officers...... 900 0 0 900 0 0 Rates and Taxes. ...... 89 11 10 74 4 11 Charges for instruction in Dairy, Work Cattle, &c. 500 0 0 500 0 0 Conveyance Allowance to Rates and Taxes ...... 82 0 0 82 0 0 Assistant Professor of Anat- omy ............ 180 0 0 180 0 0 Conveyance allowance to Assistant Professor of Anat- omy ............ 180 0 0 180 0 0 Travelling Allowance to Estab- lishment ......... 186 12 0 Grain Compensation Allowance. 99 0 0 198 0 0 Total ... 38,235 0 0 45,429 0 0 Total ... 36,623 3 8 43,270 10 7 N. B.Administration Reports.2 4. Copies of the Report should be distributed as usual. H. O. QUIN, Secretary to Government. To The Director of Public Instruction, The Accountant General, Bombay, The Commissioners of Divisions and in Sind, The Principal, Bombay Veterinary College, All Collectors, including the Collectors and Deputy Commissioners in Sind, The Political Department of the Secretariat, The Political Agent, Káthiáwár, The Political Agent, Cutch, The Political Agent, Kolhápur and Southern Marátha Country, The Political Agent, Mahi Kántha, The Political Agent, Rewa Kántha, The Political Superintendent, Savantvádi, The Political Superintendent, Pálanpur, The Political Resident, Aden, The Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, The Director of Land Records and Agriculture, The Principal, College of Science, Poona, The Compiler of the General Administration Report, The General Department of the Secretariat, The Revenue Department of the Secretariat, The Sanitary Commissioner for the Government of Bombay, The Deputy Adjutant General, Bombay Command, Poona The Editors' Table, Bombay, The Editors' Table, Poona, The Editor and Proprietor, Dhárwár Vritta (for his own use and for circulation to other Editors of newspapers in Dhárwár), The Editors' Table, Belgaum, The Editors' Table, Karáchi, The Municipal Commissioner for the City of Bombay, With copies of the Report The Superintendent, Government Central Press, (With a request that the copies of the Report required by this Department may be sent as soon as possible.) The President, Municipal Corporation, Bombay, The Secretary to the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, The Secretary of State for India, The Government of India, The Officer in charge Imperial Library, Secretariat Buildings, Calcutta, The Reporter on Economic Products to the Government of India. By letter.
