Vol. I 1931 THE Indian Journal of Veterinary Science AND Animal Husbandry Issued under the authority of The Imperial Council of Agricultural Research [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Published for The Imperial Council of Agricultural Research Delhi: Manager of Publications 1933 Price As. 2 or 3d.
CONTENTS PART I (March 1931). PAGE. PREFATORY NOTE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .i Original Articles. DIRECTIONS FOR THE SERUM-SIMULTANEOUS ANTI- Hugh Cooper, M.R.C.V.S.. RINDERPEST INOCULATION OF CATTLE (WITH I.V.S. . 1 PLATE I AND 14 CHARTS) THREE-DAY SICKNESS OF CATTLE. (A RÉSUMÉ OF S. K. Sen, M.Sc., F.E.S.. 14 THE LITERATURE). NOTES ON THE BIONOMICS AND ANATOMY OF S. K. Sen, M.Sc., F.E.S. 24 Corizoneura longirostris, HARDWICKE (WITH PLATES IIii CONTENTS TO VOL. I PAGE. RANIKHET DISEASE : A NEW DISEASE OF FOWLS Hugh Cooper, M.R.C.V.S., IN INDIA DUE TO A FILTER-PASSING VIRUS (WITH I.V.S. . 107 10 CHARTS). PRACTICAL FEEDING TABLES FOR DAIRY CATTLE Capt. C. E. Macguckin, IN INDIA. M.B.E., H.D.A. 124 EQUINE MICROFILARIAS: A SHORT REVIEW OF S. K. Sen, M.Sc., F.E.S.. 143 THE LITERATURE. Selected Articles. INTERIM REPORT ON THE IMMUNIZATION OF DRAFT D. T. Mitchell, M.R.C.V.S. 150 ANIMALS IN BURMA AGAINST ANTHRAX. Clinical Notes. AN INTERESTING CASE OF CYSTIC CALCULI (PLATE L. S. Joseph, G.B.V.C.. 164 VI). THE FIRST CASE OF SIMPLE MONSTROSITY IN THE L. S. Joseph, G.B.V.C. . 165 PUSA DAIRY HERD, DURING ITS EXISTENCE OF OVER 20 YEARS IN PUSA (PLATES VII AND VIII). Abstracts ....... .... 167 PART III (September 1931). Original Articles. SOME DIGESTIBILITY TRIALS ON INDIAN FEEDING- P. E. Lander, M.A., STUFFS, PART VIII. KANGRA RICE STRAW D.Sc., A.I.G., I.A.S., (WITH 2 FIGURES). and Pandit Lal Chand Dharmani, L.Ag., B.Sc. (Agric.) . 177 A VETERINARY ENTOMOLOGY FOR INDIA, PART T. Bainbrigge Fletcher, XIV (WITH PLATE IX). R.N., F.L.S., F.E.S., F.Z.S., and S. K. Sen, M.Sc.,F.E.S. . 192 INVESTIGATIONS INTO THE FLUCTUATIONS OF MILK L. S. Joseph, G.B.V.C., YIELD WITH THE ADVANCEMENT OF LACTATION and C. N. Dave, B.Ag. (WITH 3 FIGURES). (Bombay) . 200 EFFECT OF SEASON OF CALVING ON MILK YIELD L. S. Joseph, G.B.V.C., AND CALVING PERIOD OF MONTGOMERY COWS. and C. N. Dave, B.Ag. (Bombay) . 212
CONTENTS TO VOL. I iii PAGE. THE DIAGNOSIS OF JOHNE'S DISEASE.iv CONTENTS TO VOL. I PAGE. Selected Articles. ANTI-RABIES IMMUNIZATION : VALUE OF KILLED G. Stuart, O.B.E., M.A., CARBOLISED VIRUS IN CASES OF WOLF-BITE. M.D., D.P.H., and K. S. Krikorian, M.D. 323 BOVINE NASAL GRANULOMA .... Major G. E. Oxspring, R.A.V.C. . 332 ARTIFICIALLY INDUCED HYPOGLYCEMIA AND HY- William E. Peterson, E. POCALCEMIA IN THE COW AND THE RELATION- A. Hewitt, W. L. Boyd SHIP TO PARTURIENT PARESIS OR MILK FEVER and W. R. Brown 337 (WITH ONE FIGURE). THE INFLUENCE OF DIET UPON THE COURSE OF 347 COCCIDIOSIS INFECTION IN CHICKENS. Clinical Notes. TWO CASES OF COMPOUND CYSTS G. Krishnaswami Muda- liar .... 352 A CASE OF PARASITIC CYST .... G. Krishnaswami Muda- liar .... 352 A CASE OF Nerium oleander POISONING IN A BUL- G. Krishnaswami Muda- LOCK. liar . 352 Abstracts . . . . . . . . . . . . 354 Review . . . . . . . . . . . . 357 Notes . . . . . . . . . . . . 358 Books . . . . . . . . . . . . 360
PREFATORY NOTE. This is the first number of a Journal which, it is hoped, in the interests of good animal husbandry in India, will grow and prosper. That there is need for such a journal there is no doubt, and all will agree that there is no lack of material if workers will realize the importance of preparing and submitting suitable original matter for publication whenever an opportunity arises. The aim of the journal should be to encourage practical investigation of economic value. Abstruse articles on research, which may or may not prove to be of practical importance, are not what is most required. Short notes of actual experiences and clinical observations of outbreaks of disease met with in field work are often most valuable, and the habit of recording and publishing their expe- riences in a precise form, accompanied where possible by photographs or drawings, is a most important one for all professional men to cultivate, so that their work may not be lost. May we hope that the lack of sustained support, which has caused the eventual disappearance from publication of former attempts to produce similar journals in India, will not be our experience in this case ? The " Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry " is to appear quarterly on the 1st of March, June, September and December each year. Matter for publication should be received at the office of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research not less than three months previous to the date of publication. If there are illustrations to be published with an article, these should be received two weeks earlier still if uncoloured, and at least a month earlier if coloured. The object of the Journal is to serve as a medium for the dissemination of scientific knowledge and for the interchange of ideas between workers engaged in research and those employed in the field, and the co-operation of every officer engaged in Veterinary or Animal husbandry work throughout India, towards this end, is earnestly solicited. A
ORIGINAL ARTICLES DIRECTIONS FOR THE SERUM-SIMULTANEOUS ANTI-RINDER- PEST INOCULATION OF CATTLE. BY HUGH COOPER, M.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., Veterinary Research Officer, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar-Kumaun. CONTENTS. PAGE 1. THE SERUM-SIMULTANEOUS METHOD. 2 2. SELECTION OF ANIMALS FOR INOCULATION 2 3. SEASON FOR INOCULATION 3 4. SEGREGATION AND DISINFECTION MEASURES 3 5. SERUM FOR THE ACTIVE IMMUNIZATION OF CATTLE AGAINST RINDERPEST 4 6. RECOMMENDED DOSE RATES OF SERUM 4 7. VIRUS OR VIRULENT BLOOD 5 8. THE RINDERPEST REACTION IN GOATS .... 6 9. PREPARATION OF GOAT VIRUS FOR INJECTION .... 6 10. VIRUS INOCULATION 6 11. SECOND INJECTION OF VIRUS 7 12. CONTAMINATED VIRUS 7 13. COMPARATIVE VALUE OF OX AND GOAT VIRUS .... 8 14. HYPODERMIC SYRINGES 9 15. THE RINDERPEST REACTION IN CATTLE . . .... 9 16. PIROPLASMOSIS 10 17. COCCIDIOSIS 12 18. SUMMARY 13 19. REFERENCES 13 In order that the principles of the serum-simultaneous method of active immunisation of cattle against rinderpest should be readily available to veterinary workers and stock-owners in India, the circular instructions upon the method in use at that time were published in 1925 from the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, in the Agricultural Journal of India as one of a series of articles contributed to the journal under the title " Some Recent Advances in the Protection of Cattle and Other Animals against Disease ". [ Edwards, 1925.] A 2
2 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, I Since that date the instructions have been considerably modified, and the greatest change occurred upon the introduction by Dr. J. T. Edwards, D.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., the late Director of the Institute, of virulent blood obtained from goats after " fixation " of the ox rinderpest virus by intra-uterine injection into pregnant goats [Edwards, 1927]. An addendum to the instructions dealing with the use of this new form of virus was also published in the Agricultural Journal of India in 1928 [Edwards], but the issue of this first number of a journal devoted to the interests of veterinarians engaged upon work in connection with animal husbandry in India appears to be a suitable occasion for the publication again of the most recent edition of the same directions since they now incorporate a description of the use of both forms of virus. The opportunity has been taken to publish with the directions a number of charts Illustrating the several kinds of reactions that may occur in the course of virus production and immunisation by this method of inoculation, whilst a plate has been added illustrating the microscopical appearances of the three common species of parasitic organisms that may be responsible for complicating diseases described. The directions have been drawn up with especial reference to the practical needs of the veterinary worker in the field, and no attempt has been made to discuss their theoretical implications or their bearing on the general principles of immunology. DIRECTIONS.* 1. THE SERUM-SIMULTANEOUS METHOD. The operation is very simply carried out in practice. Cattle that are suscep- tible to rinderpest are inoculated subcutaneously with a certain dose of anti- rinderpest serum, estimated to be more than adequate to protect them against the development of an attack of the clinical disease, and, simultaneously, they are also injected with a small dose of virus, that is, virulent blood withdrawn from an animal at the height of an attack of rinderpest. 2. SELECTION OF ANIMALS FOR INOCULATION. Animals that are very weak or debilitated from any cause, and cows in a very advanced state of pregnancy should not be inoculated. *NOTE 1.ANTI-RINDERPEST INOCULATION OF CATTLE 3 Cattle of any age may be inoculated including calves as young as a few weeks old, provided they are in strong condition. It is recommended that the operation should be carried out upon cattle as early as practicable after purchase, and in calves, as soon as they are six months old. Cattle of two teeth and over usually require no further inoculation during their life-time, but animals immunised at less than this age should be submitted to a second immunisation after reaching it. 3. SEASON FOR INOCULATION. Serum-simultaneous inoculation can safely be carried out at any season of the year. Ordinarily, however, it is preferable to select a cool dry season when animals are likely to be in the best possible condition. During a natural outbreak of rinderpest in unprotected animals at any season of the year, it is sound practice and strongly to be recommended that this form of inoculation be used in preference to the serum-alone method. All in contacts, not exhibiting fever or other visible signs of the disease, should then be inoculated. It has been the practice hitherto in many places to brand each animal given serum-simultaneous inoculation. A large letter " O" has been branded with a hot iron upon one quarter. This practice is to be recommended as it provides a distinguishing mark between immunised and unprotected animals in a herd. 4. SEGREGATION AND DISINFECTION MEASURES. In natural circumstances rinderpest spreads to susceptible animals by direct contact with affected cattle in the early stages of the disease. Since animals undergoing serum-simultaneous inoculation must be considered infective for about a fortnight, the main precaution to adopt is to restrict movement of the in- oculated animals. If a segregation camp is well fenced, or if the inoculated animals remain constantly tied up and the camp is situated at least half a mile from sheds contain- ing unprotected animals or a public highway, then precautions, other than the ordinary rules of disinfection, are unnecessary. Inoculated animals should be under the care of special attendants who must not be allowed to come into contact with uninoculated animals. It is a good practice to keep a sufficient number of smocks at the entrance of all sheds or enclo- sures where the inoculated animals have been accommodated. These smocks are used by the attendants while they are at work with the animals, and are taken off and left at the entrance when they leave their work.
4 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [I, I Shallow pails of disinfectant fluid should be placed at all entrances and in them all persons should dip their boots (or feet) both while entering or leaving. Arrangements should be made before immunisation is started for a sufficient supply of grain and fodder to be within the camp. Excreta and soiled bedding must be considered infective, and measures should be taken for their disposal within the segregation camp. 5. SERUM FOR THE ACTIVE IMMUNISATION OF CATTLE AGAINST RINDERPEST. Serum required for inoculation by this method must be specially indented for from the laboratory a short time before the anticipated date of the inoculation and the request for the serum must be made in the above precise terms. Old stocks of serum that have remained over from a previous season must not be used. The serum for serum-simultaneous inoculation is issued in bottles with special white labels in two grades:ANTI-RINDERPEST INOCULATION OF CATTLE 5 The dose rate of serum indicated above for Indian breed cattle refers to " plains " animals in areas where rinderpest is indigenous. Cattle bred in hill districts require from 15 to 25 c. c. per 100 pounds. No animal, however, small and of whatever breed, should be given less than 30 c. c. of serum. In the event of any uncertainty concerning the dosage of serum to be employed, this Institute will always be prepared to submit advice on the subject. In order to avoid any risk of an animal receiving only a dose of virus it is a good practice not to inject virus until the individual animal has been injected with serum. 7. VIRUS OR VIRULENT BLOOD. Two forms of virus for use in the serum simultaneous inoculation of cattle are prepared and issued from the laboratory:6 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [I, I Mix the contents of all the three ampoules and inject the mixed sample subcu- taneously into the two selected goats. 8. THE RINDERPEST REACTION IN GOATS. A distinct rise in temperature occurs on the third, fourth or fifth day after injection of the virus. The temperature reaction lasts for about five or six days and a good virus is produced even if the goat shows no other signs of ill-health at all and eventually lives its normal life. (Chart 2). Often, however, the goats will show signs of malaise and inappetence and some may die. (Chart 1). In a large proportion of animals, a secondary rise of temperature occurs with marked symptoms of pneumonia and in such cases death usually supervenes. (Chart 4). The rise in temperature due to rinderpest may be only from 2 to 3 degrees above the normal, whereas in the later stages, that is, after the fifth day the temperature may reach 106 or 107°F. due to the complicating pneumonia, and at this late stage the goats must not be bled for virus. (Chart 3). The optimum day of bleeding is the fourth day after the injection of virus, but if a suitable reaction occurs, goats may be bled on the fifth day. 9. PREPARATION OF GOAT VIRUS FOR INJECTION. The blood is run out of the jugular vein by means of a suitable bleeding needle or canula into a clean glass vessel that has been sterilised by boiling beforehand. To prevent clotting of the blood, some strands of metallic wire or glass beads are placed in the vessel to defibrinate the blood by vigorous shaking for some minutes after it has been let into the flask. Clotting can also be prevented by running the blood into about one-tenth its volume of a 4 per cent. solution of potassium or sodium citrate. Inoculation of the cattle with serum should not be commenced until the virus has been prepared ready for injection. A dose of goat virus used for immunising cattle should be injected also into two more goats which will serve both as controls and virus producers for a second inoculation into the cattle in the same way as in the case of ox virus. 10. VIRUS INOCULATION. Whichever form of virus is used, it is important to remember that it is extreme- ly fragile and is liable to deteriorate in potency rapidly. A high temperature affects it adversely, and on exposure to the air it will become completely inert probably within two days. Neither form of virus can be considered fit for use after eight days from the date given upon the label or packing slip. Arrangements hould be completed beforehand so that inoculation of the virus is carried out
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
ANTI-RINDERPEST INOCULATION OF CATTLE 7 immediately on receipt from the laboratory. If this is not possible, the virus may be stored for one or two days upon ice, provided only that the containers remain unopened. It should be taken as an invariable rule that once the sealed container has been opened, its contents must be used that very day or else it must be dis- carded and a new consignment sent for. The dose of virus to be injected into cattle undergoing immunisation need not be gauged with any pretence at accuracy since a minute quantity only of virulent blood is necessary to infect. The usual dose is from ½ c. c. to 1 c. c. of blood. Larger doses up to 5 c. c. or more are usually employed for controls, but the degree of reaction is not influenced by the dose of virus administered. 11. SECOND INJECTION OF VIRUS. Provided that an animal receives a dose of certainly virulent virus at the first injection, no further injection is theoretically necessary. In practice, however, it is strongly recommended that a second injection of virus be given to all animals except those in which a definite temperature reaction has occurred between the third and fifth days after the first injection. The dose of virus usually employed for the second injection is 5 c. c. and can conveniently be obtained from cattle or goats used as controls during the first injection. If it is desired to make certain that virulent blood will be available for the second injection then arrangements should be made beforehand for a second consignment of virus to arrive from the laboratory within eight days after the first injection. Since the protective effect of anti-rinderpest serum lasts only for nine days it is imperative that the second injection be given well within this period. It has already been pointed out that the locally produced virulent blood from the controls to the first injection will be avail- able either on the fourth or fifth day, and this arrangement is therefore a very convenient one. Since second injections of virus are intended to "catch" the animal that has escaped receiving a dose of virulent blood at the first injection the second injection must be given while the serum is still conveying a passive immunity to the animal, that is, within the nine day period after serum inoculation. 12. CONTAMINATED VIRUS. A sample of every consignment of virus is submitted to bacteriological examination before despatch from the laboratory, but the results of the examina- tion are not known until 2 days later. If the sample is found contaminated with extraneous organisms a telegram is sent immediately to the customer advising withholding use of the virus. When bacteria are detected they are nearly always in themselves harmless in their effects when injected into an animal, but their
8 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [I, I apresence causes the blood to decompose and may render the virus inert within a short period of time. Any sample of virus having a disagreeable odour or having become obviously contaminated or putrid must be discarded. The last remark applies also to serum that has a disagreeable odour or is markedly altered in appearance or consistency. 13. COMPARATIVE VALUE OF OX AND GOAT VIRUS. (a) Virulence. Virus produced from susceptible cattle is highly virulent and there is therefore always a risk of producing severe rinderpest reactions in the inoculated cattle if the serum has been used in too small a dosage. On the other hand, if a proportion of the inoculated cattle show evidence of a rinderpest reaction then great confidence can be placed in the value of the protection set up. Goat virus has a somewhat " fixed " or steady virulence usually considerably lower than that of virus taken direct from cattle, and is therefore generally safer to use. (Chart 7.) (b) Intercurrent infection. Ox virus may contain piroplasms which are poten- tially infective organisms for cattle. Indian bred cattle are, however, usually already "premunised" against these parasites, that is, they have already been naturally infected as calves and are " carriers " of them during the rest of their lives, and therefore have a degree of immunity. Imported European and sometimes even Indian bred cattle have no immunity to these piroplasms and therefore may show severe reactions, as described below. The reaction to the "redwater" parasites (B. bigemina) can, however, be controlled by trypanblue, and if cattle pass safely through an inoculation with ox virus containing piroplasms they can be considered to have been " premunised" against the diseases produced by the parasites as well as protected against rinderpest. Goat virus, on the other hand, is " cleansed " of the cattle piroplasms since these parasites cannot infect goats. There is no risk, therefore, of injecting pathogenic piroplasms into cattle. (c) Local virus production. It cannot be ascertained if the ox virus used for inoculation is certainly virulent until rinderpest reactions have been exhibited in the controls and/or some of the inoculated animals. If no reactions at all are exhibited in any of the animals injected with the virus, then the value of the protec- tion conferred upon the cattle remains unknown. It will be too late at this stage to obtain a further supply of virus, unless arrangements for it have already been made beforehand, and the serum and virus injections must then both be repeated if it is desired to make certain that the cattle have been protected.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
ANTI-RINDERPEST INOCULATION OF CATTLE 9 By observing the reactions in the goats used for virus production, however, the operator can make himself reasonably assured that he is actually inoculating living virus into the cattle to be immunised, and an almost unlimited supply of fresh and reliable virus for immediate use from cheap and easily procurable animals is also available when the goat virus method is adopted. 14. HYPODERMIC SYRINGES. At least two syringes are necessary, namely, a small syringe for the inoculation of virulent blood and a large syringe for the inoculation of serum. The " Record " type of syringe is recommended since it has a glass barrel and the contents can thus easily be seen at the time of injection. When a syringe having a metal barrel is used, care must be taken to make sure that it is working properly, and contains the full quantity of fluid before an injection is made. Syringes of one c. c. capacity for virus, and 50 or 60 c. c. capacity for serum are convenient sizes to use. Another type of large syringe is the so-called " Stockman " syringe in which the barrel can be refilled without withdrawing the needle from the seat of inoculation or detaching its nozzle. All syringes must be cleansed and sterilised by boiling for at least 10 minutes before use. It is necessary to detach the component parts of glass barrel syringes and place them separately in water for boiling, otherwise the glass barrel is likely to crack. 15. THE RINDERPEST REACTION IN CATTLE. A typical rinderpest reaction following the injection of virus into a highly susceptible animal starts by a sharp rise in temperature at the earliest on the 3rd day and usually not later than the fifth day after inoculation. Fever may last for from 3 to 6 days and towards the end of this period in severe reactions other specific symptoms may occur, namely, the appearance of vesicles and ulcers in the mouth, and diarrh10 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [I, I 16. PIROPLASMOSIS. The " piroplasmoses " are diseases caused by invasion of red blood cells with numerous minute animal parasites (piroplasms). In natural circumstances they are transmitted to animals by the bites of ticks, but they can also be transmitted artificially from an infected animal or a " carrier " of the piroplasms, to a suscepti- ble healthy animal. In this manner they may be injected inadvertently into the inoculated cattle with the virulent blood. In many localities all the cattle become infected naturally while they are young, by the bites of ticks. Young cattle possess a high degree of resistance and recover readily, but they always harbour small numbers of the parasites in a dormant state in their systems afterwards throughout life. During even a mild attack of rinderpest the parasites may be roused again from their dormant state owing to the depressed condition of the animal's body and invade the system once more in large numbers. This awakening of the parasites may take place at any time after inoculation of rinderpest virus and the disease then seen is not due to any piroplasms that may have been present in the virulent blood. This so-called " resuscitation " may therefore occur when the goat virus method is used although that virus has been cleansed of piroplasms. (Chart 11). There are two main diseases of cattle due to " piroplasms ". (a) Redwater. The parasites which produce this disease are known as Babesia bigemina, which are relatively large bodies found within the red cells, often resem- bling two-pears meeting towards their narrow ends, or else appearing in large round forms resembling a signet ring. (Plate I, fig. 1). The reaction due to redwater or ganisms often occurs on the sixth evening (charts 8 and 9). It may, however, occur until about the tenth day, or sometimes a day or two later. The reaction consists of a sharp rise in temperature usually much higher than that observed in rinderpest. The two reactions may be superimposed, thus fever due to rinderpest may be exhibited from the 3rd, 4th or 5th days and a further rise perhaps to 106 or 107°F., due to redwater may be seen on the 6th evening or later (charts 8 and 9). The complicating disease is frequently associated with the characteristic clinical symptoms of redwater, namely, the passing of urine coloured red or dark-brown from the presence of destroyed blood excreted by the kindneys; sometimes, however, the animal may die suddenly without exhibiting any such symptom. (Chart 10). The resuscitated disease is similar except that it may occur either earlier or later than when due to inoculation. A form of specific treatment is available for this disease, namely, the use of the drug Trypanblue (Chart 8). Dissolve the powdered drug to form a one per cent. solution in boiled water, and preferably filter the solution before use. It is highly advantageous to inject the drug intravenously since its action is then more rapid
PLATE I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] The plate consists of four composite pictures each made from camera lucida drawings taken from several representative smears. The figures illustrating the "piroplasms" represent the parasites as they are seen under a high power (1/12th inch oil immersion lens) of the microscope, whereas the coccidia are magnified only about one-third the size of the "piroplasms", and represent them as seen under a low power (1/6th inch dry lens).
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Illustrating a redwater temperature reaction following upon a mild rinderpest reaction in a bull and ending in recovery under treatment with trypanblue ; Hill-bull No. 3124 (Muktesar) serum and 05s virus injected on 17th January 1925.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Illustrating a " redwater " temperature reaction superimposed upon a severe rinderpest reaction in a bull and ending in death ; Hill-bull No. 1348 (Muktesar) injected serum and ox virus on 16th January 1925.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Illustrating sudden death from redwater in a calf without symptoms other than fever, following upon a mild rinderpest reaction ; Control to serum-simultaneous anti-rinderpest inoculations 7/8 bred calf No. 524 (Bangalore) ox virus injected on 10th February 1924.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Illustrating a blocked out rinderpest reaction and mild resuscitation of redwater following goat virus injection in a calf, ending in recovery ; Cross-bred calf No. 177 (Muktesar) injected with serum and goat virus on 10th June 1929.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Illustrating acute theileriasis In a bull following upon a mild rinderpest reaction, and ending in recovery ; Imported Holstein bull (Allahabad) serum-simultaneous anti-rinderpest inoculation given on 27th January 1927.
ANTI-RINDERPEST INOCULATION OF CATTLE 11 and occasionally severe swellings may be caused if it is injected subcutaneously. It is advisable to use not less than 50 c.c. of the solution for calves and up to 150 c.c. or more for large animals. In carrying out serum-simultaneous inoculations it is strongly recommended that an ample supply of Trypanblue should be available. It is not necessary to wait for confirmation of the diagnosis of piroplasmosis by blood smear examina- tion, but it is advisable to inject the drug without delay when a fever reaction occurs on the evening of the 6th day or later, or when hyperpyrexia is exhibited. If the complication is due to B. bigemina, then a rapid drop in the temperature occurs. If high fever continues, it is probably not due to these parasites, but the injection of Trypanblue will have done no harm. (b) Theileriasis. This infection is probably more widespread than that with B. bigemina. The parasites most commonly responsible for this disease in India are known as Theileria mutans which are much smaller than B. bigemina ; usually seen inside the red blood corpuscles as minute rod-shaped organisms or as very small " rings ". (Plate I, fig. 2). The most usual form of the disease is a very chronic or " carrier" infection in which ill effects are not recognisable. It is possible that although the parasites may increase slightly in number during a rinderpest reaction they seldom cause serious disease due to resuscitation in the same way as occurs with the Redwater parasite. When, however, inoculated with rinderpest blood, the organisms may set up an acute and severe disease in suscep- tible animals, particularly in imported stock and sometimes in cross-breds, (Chart 12). The reaction consists in very high fever (106°F. or more) occurring not as suddenly as in Redwater, but it is continued steadily for a number of days. During this stage of high fever parasites may not be very frequent in the blood stream. Subsequently the temperature fluctuates and parasites then become very numerous in the red blood corpuscles. A common symptom is lachrymation and watery discharge from the nostrils. Treatment with Trypanblue usually has no appreciable effect. (Chart 12). In animals that succumb, the structures known as " Blue bodies " identical with those seen in East Coast fever of Africa may be detected in the spleen and other lymphoid tissue, and these bodies may also be seen in lymphatic gland puncture smears made during life at the height of the disease. (Plate I, fig. 3). These bodies may also occasionally be found in blood smears. Unfortunately at the present time no specific treatment is known for the acute severe form of Theileriasis in cattle. The drug " Plasmoquine " is under trial at the present time, and in some cases it appears to have a beneficial effect in reducing the fever. It is given by intramuscular injection in doses up to 30 c.c. of
12 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [I, I a one per cent. solution for the largest type of imported animal, such as a full grown Holstein bull. The injection is repeated daily up to four or five days. Very careful attention should be paid to general nursing and hygiene of all affected animals. 17. COCCIDIOSIS. This is a disease condition caused by minute egg-shaped protozoan parasites (known as coccidia) which inhabit, as dormant parasites, the intestine of a consider- able proportion of all breeds of Indian cattle. It is not possible, of course, for these organisms to be transmitted with virulent blood used in serum-simultaneous inoculation, but the parasites already present in the intestine may quite frequently be resuscitated from their state of dormancy, if the animal harbouring them develops a rinderpest reaction sufficient to cause diarrh[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Illustrating clinical coccidiosis in a bull following upon a severe rinderpest reaction and ending in death ; Hill bull No. 156 (Muktesar) serum and ox virus injected on 1st May 1924.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Ilustrating clinical coccidiosis in a bull following upon a severe rinderpest reaction and ending in recovery ; Hill bull No. 123 (Muktesar) ox virus injected on 1st May 1924.
ANTI-RINDERPEST INOCULATION OF CATTLE 13 but it is to be remembered that they occur comparatively infrequently and the loss due to them is extremely small when it is calculated among the very large number of cattle inoculated properly by this method. Complicating infections due to inoculation with the virus cannot be avoided, but by the application of prompt treatment the possibility of serious consequences can be reduced to a minimum. Complications due to resuscitation of dormant parasites usually indicates an insuffi- cient quantity of serum used against a potent virus. SUMMARY. 1. All cattle and buffaloes may be inoculated except:THREE-DAY SICKNESS OF CATTLE. (A RÉSUMÉ OF THE LITERATURE.) BY S. K. SEN, M. Sc., F. E. S., Protozoologist, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar-Kumaun. CONTENTS PAGE DISTRIBUTION..... . . . . . . . . . 15 INCIDENCE AND SEASONAL OCCURRENCE . . . . . . . . . 16 SYMPTOMS . . . . . . . . . 17 REPRODUCTION OF THE DISEASE . . . . . . . . . 19 POST-MORTEM APPEARANCES . . . . . . . . . 19 ÆTIOLOGY . . . . . . . . . 20 MORTALITY . . . . . . . . . 21 DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS . . . . . . . . . 21 TREATMENT . . . . . . . . . 21 REFERENCES . . . . . . . . . 22 Leaving aside the numerous vernacular names under which the above disease is known in localities where it is prevalent, the three common appellations under which it has been described in veterinary literature are " Ephemeral Fever ", " Three-day Fever" and " Stiff-sickness ". As has been pointed out by Theiler [1909-10], however, the term " Stiff-sickness " or " Stijfziekte " (also sometimes called " Lam- ziekte ") in cattle also applies to another condition that had been known in South Africa long before the so-called " Three-day Fever " came to be regarded as a disease of any importance in that country and these two diseases are in no way connected with each other, for while " Three-day sickness " has all the character of an epizootic, " Stiff-sickness " proper (now definitely ascribed to the eating of the species of plant, Crotalaria burkeana) is generally restricted to certain farms where it occurs in an endemic form. To avoid confusion, some authors [e.g., Bevan, 1923] have advised the avoidance of the term "Stiff-sickness" as a synonym for "Three-day sickness", although the term is doubtless more expressive of the condition than " Ephemeral Fever ", for, as will be seen from what is to be stated later, it is the " stiffness " that constitutes by far the chief characteristic of the disease. As a matter of fact, to designate the condition as a form of " fever " is calculated to subordinate its main characteristic to one much less diagnostic, so ( 14 )
THREE-DAY SICKNESS OF CATTLE 15 that the term " Three-Day Sickness " (" Dreitage-Krankheit "), as has been given to it by Bevan [1907], Hutyra and Marek [1922] and others, would seem to possess in this respect a greater measure of precision by the very reason of its being clini- cally less definite. As to the term " Bovine Influenza ", for which some authors [e.g., Venkatachala Iyer, 1924] have expressed a preference, Rabagliati [1924] points out that this term also " does not meet the case, as in influenza some of the most striking features are the resulting debility, prolonged period of convalescence and the complications; whereas in ' stiff-sickness ', prostration, though often marked at first, is rarely prolonged, and complications do not appear to follow ". The disease has also been called by some authors as a form of " dengue ". DISTRIBUTION. The earliest reference to what is regarded as being probably identical with three-day sickness occurs in a book entitled " The Heart of Africa ", written by Dr. George Schweinfurth and published in 1867, and what would appear to be the same disease was described by Piot Bey, in Egypt, in 1895, under the name " dengue fever ". The disease was, however, first actually studied, in South Africa, by Edmonds [1906] and later by Bevan [1907], Theiler [1907], Freer [1910] and others, the account published by Bevan, in particular, being based on what would appear to be a very considerable amount of first-hand observations. Rabagliati [1924], in Egypt, has also contributed a note which is of especial interest in view of the discussion it contains illustrating certain points of difference between the Egyptian and Indian forms of the disease. The disease does not appear to have been recorded in Europe, America, or other countries, except India and probably Japan, but in Nederl.-Ind. Blad. v. Dierengeneesk. en Dierent, J. Merkens [1919] describes what he calls " a disease of milch cows", and it is stated in an editorial foot-note to his article that the disease is probably identical with three-day sickness. Futamura [1922], in Japan, describes a form of " bovine influenza " characterized by an elevated temperature falling after the third day and other symptoms strongly suggestive of three-day sickness, but the article has only been seen in abstract and definite opinion upon the identity of this affection must be reserved until the original paper has been available for reference. The earliest mention of the occurrence of the disease in India is made by Wallis Hoare [1913], whose information in this respect had, however, been derived from French sources where the word " L ' Inde " might mean either India or the Indies. The first authentic account of the disease in India is given by Meadows [1919], who states that three-day sickness occurs in the North-West Frontier B
16 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [I, I Province and the North Punjab and probably all over North-West India, and he regards the disease as being "probably quite common", occurring as it does up to an altitude of 6,000 feet. In Madras and the adjoining countries, the disease has been recorded from the Ceded and Northern Districts [Pantulu, 1920]; Negapatam [Parameswaran, 1920]; Coorg [Shastry, 1920]; Kistna District [Venkatesa Ayyar, 1920]; Kuppam [Ramachandra Ayyar, 1923]; Kamalapuram [Ramanathan, 1923]; and Gudalur and an adjacent estate [Venkatachala Ayyar, 1924]. The disease has also been described from various localities in the Central Provinces, by Misra [1927] and Gopal Krishnan [1928], whilst the records at the Muktesar Institute contain reference to suspected outbreaks in Bettiah Raj (Bihar) in 1917-18 and at Sitapur (U. P.) in 1927. INCIDENCE AND SEASONAL OCCURRENCE. Cattle of all kinds are susceptible to the disease, irrespective of their age, breed, condition or their having previously suffered from one or more attacks of the same disease, and as many as four successive attacks have been observed to occur in the same animal [Freer, 1910], although there is an immunity of at least six weeks after each recovery. Swaminatha Ayyar [1920], in Madras, found that suckling calves were " practically immune." According to Freer [1910] and Edmonds and Walker [1929], calves are more resistant to the disease than older animals and fat animals suffer more than those in low condition, but Bevan [1907] states that " experience has proved this idea to be a fallacy; cattle in poor condition have proved equally susceptible." Occasional cases of natural infection in sheep have also been observed [Bevan, 1907 ; Edmonds and Walker, 1929]. The disease makes its appearance in a sudden manner and quite a number of animals may become affected within the first day or two, whilst intervals of many miles have sometimes been found to occur between the various infected areas [Bevan, 1907, 1923]. As remarked by Edmonds and Walker [1929], it would be more appropriate to speak of the disease as having] " jumped " rather than having " spread." In regard to the percentage of incidence of the disease, Edmonds and Walker [1929] roundly place it at about 50 per cent. and Futamura [1922], in Japan, also gives the same percentage for what he designates " bovine influenza ", whilst, according to Gray [1915-16], in South Africa 40 to 50 animals in a herd may be affected. Rabagliati [1924] states that in 1909 there were 389 cases in Egypt, the affection being eventually carried to the Egyptian Serum Institute, where 54 out of 120 animals became affected. Curiously, between 1909 and 1924, there
THREE-DAY SICKNESS OF CATTLE 17 were only a few isolated outbreaks in Egypt, except for 215 cases in 1915 and 346 in 1919-20. Very little exact information is obtainable concerning the percentage of incidence of the disease in India, but Meadows [1919] states that usually only a small proportion18 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, I comes down to normal on the fourth day [Meadows]. The muzzle is generally quite moist, sometimes with a ropy saliva hanging from the lips and a copious flow of fluid from the nostril. There is complete suspension of rumination and feeding on the first day, but these are usually resumed on the second day. " A very constant and noticeable feature is a swelling around the eyes, which gives the animal a dull, heavy appearance; in many cases this swelling and severe lachrymation is the earliest clinical symptom, and with redness of the conjunctiva and glaring appearance of the eye is most diagnostic" [Bevan]. Constipation is usually present but not invariable, and there may even be diarrhTHREE-DAY SICKNESS OF CATTLE 19 Egyptian form of the disease were essentially the same as those mentioned by Iyer, " except that in Egypt the breathing was altered at onset in a characteristic way, being rapid and abdominal, while expiration was accompanied by a sort of ' double lift '." He further observes that in Iyer's account " the lameness is not described as occurring as early " as in Egypt, " nor does it appear to have been so severe." A perusal of the available literature shows, however, that the occurrence of lameness in a relatively early phase of the disease, although perhaps usual, is not invariable in India, and according to Gopal Krishnan [1928], " occasionally no lameness could be detected at all." Although called " three-day sickness", complicated cases may show the symptoms for three weeks or more, whilst, on the other hand, acute cases may recover in 24 hours [Bevan]. REPRODUCTION OF THE DISEASE. Beven [1907] failed to reproduce the disease, by injection of citrated infected blood, in donkeys, rabbits and chicken, but obtained positive results in the case of sheep, without, however, the " stiffness " characteristic of the disease. Robertson (cited by Hutyra and Marek, 1922) was successful in reproducing the disease by inoculating virulent blood in the jugular veins of oxen, the incubation period in all such cases of artificial infection being 2 to 3 days. Rabagliati [1924] carried out inoculation experiments, with both filtered and unfiltered infected blood, upon twenty-six bulls, six sheep, a camel and a horse, and from the results he was led to conclude that " the disease cannot be communicated by direct inoculation of blood of infected animals", although, in view of the successful results recorded by other workers, " confirmatory tests remain still to be esta- blished". In the case of the so-called "bovine influenza" of Japan, Futamura [1922] found that it was " inoculable" to mice, rabbits [Cf., however, Bevan's observations as given above], sheep and cattle, but not to guinea-pigs and pigeons. Theiler [1906-07] failed to reproduce the disease by rubbing on to the gums of healthy animals the saliva derived from infected animals. POST-MORTEM APPEARANCES. Owing to the extremely low mortality, little exact information is available as to the lesions that may be regarded as definitely diagnostic of the disease. The chief pathological changes, as observed by Bevan [1907], have been summarized by him as follows:20 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [I, I (2) A quantity of blood-stained fluid in the pericardial sac. (3) A violent inflammation of the lining of the abomasum. Freer [1910] noted an enlargement of almost all the lymphatic glands of the body, particularly those in front of the sternum. In the case of an animal that "died suddenly without treatment, " Venka- tachala Iyer [1924] found the pleura to be congested; the lungs with a diffuse venous congestion ; bronchi and alveoli with signs of hæmorrhage; heart pale and flabby and containing clotted blood. These findings led him to regard the cause of death as "acute congestive broncho-pneumonia ". In the case of " bovine in- fluenza " of Japan, Futamura [1923] describes the principal lesions as gelatinous THREE-DAY SICKNESS OF CATTLE 21 refers to the belief prevalent amongst peasants in India that the disease is caused " by eating caterpillars and pupae which are found surrounded by froth attached to grass stalks ". MORTALITY. Recovery is usual and the mortality rate hardly exceeds 2 to 3 per cent. in complicated cases. Aghion [1910], in Egypt, states that he did not lose a single case in 135 bulls affected at one time. The mortality figures given by Venkatachala Iyer [1924], however, would appear to be relatively high, for, in one instance, he records three deaths out of thirteen animals affected, two of the animals dying after a brief period of illness lasting for 2 to 4 hours at night. In the midland districts of South Africa, the disease is reported to have led indirectly to the death of considerable numbers of cattle, which had become reduced in condition owing to drought [Borthwick, 1921]. Bevan observes that death is frequently due to injudicious treatment and that mortality chiefly occurs among animals suffering from stiffness of the neck, this being probably due to drenching, since in such cases drugs are liable to "go down the wrong way and cause pneumonia " [Edwards, 1928]. DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS. The disease may be confounded with blackquarter, both by reason of the symptoms and its occurrence usually during the rains, but in three-day sickness there is no external local lesion so characteristic of blackquarter. It differs from rheumatic fever by the absence of any local swelling. It is, however, very difficult to differentiate the disease from anthrax except by microscopical examination [Venkatachala Iyer, 1924] " though when the epizootic is once established, diagnosis should be easy and the rarity of deaths is especially suggestive" [Rabagliati, 1924]. TREATMENT. Several workers have claimed to have obtained beneficial results with Epsom Salt (in doses of ½ to 1 lb.) when given at the onset of the disease. Venkatachala Iyer [1924] records having obtained " a decidedly good curative effect " with a single hypodermic injection of one drachm of carbolic acid in half an ounce of distilled water for adult animals and with half this dosage in the case of those under two years of age. Edmonds and Walker [1929] recommend frequent massaging of the muscles with a cheap stimulating liniment, this being accompanied with the ad- ministration of drachm doses of powdered nux vomica twice daily. Swaminatha Ayyar [1919] treats the disease " by administering cresol-saponified in doses of one or two drachms well diluted in water ". Pantulu [1920] found that patients usually
22 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [I, recovered in 1 to 2 days when treated with sodium salicylate and nitre. Swami- natha Ayyar [1920] recommends drenching with one ounce of ammonium carbonate and half an ounce of pulv. nux vomica dissolved in a pint of water and given in three doses along with conjee. Ramanathan [1923] recommends the administration of a single dose consisting of the following : magnesium sulphate, 4 oz.; potassium nitrate, 2 drachms ; spirits ammonium aromaticus, 1½ oz.; liq. ammon. acetatis, 1½ oz.; water, 1 pint. Of the fifteen animals treated by him by this method, only one succumbed. Misra [1927] records having obtained satisfactory results with a single dose of a mixture consisting of sodium salicylate and spirits ammonium aroma- ticus (quantities not stated), the mixture being particularly indicated in cases of "restlessness ". Gopal Krishnan [1928] obtained " very effective and encouraging results " with sodium salicylate ; 30 grains of this drug are dissolved in cold water that has been previously boiled, the solution is filtered, and the filtrate injected intravenously, the injection being repeated after 18 to 24 hours. Bevan [1907], however, found that animals recovered equally quickly if no medicine were administered at all, and he points to the danger of disturbing com- plications being set up as a result of attempting to drug animals that are unable to swallow. Meadows [1919] considers it safer to give drugs subcutaneously or per anum, instead of by the mouth. Affected animals should be protected from extremes of temperature and rain and offered water and soft food [Meadows, 1919], whilst sweating should be en- couraged by means of blankets and rugs [Bevan, 1923]. Aghion [1910] recommends a liberal supply of cold water in which may be dissolved " moderate doses of mag. sulph. and pot. nit.". REFERENCES. Aghion (1910). Amer. Vet. Rev. 37, 363-364. Allen (1909). Annual Rep., Dept. Pub. Health, Cairo, p. 111. [Cited by Rabagliati in Vet. Rec. 4, N. S., p. 505.] Ananthayya Shastry (1920). Madras Vet. Journ., p. 15. Bevan (1907). Journ. Comp. Path. & Therap. 20, 104-113 (with illustrations). THREE-DAY SICKNESS OF CATTLE 23 Futamura (1922). Journ. Jap. Soc. Vet. Sci. 1, 133-140. [Abstr. in Trop. Vet. Bull. 11, 26 ; 1923.] Futamura (1923). Journ. Jap. Soc. Vet. Sci. 2, 200-202. [Abstr. in Trop Vet. Bull. 11, 142 ; 1923.] Gopal Krishnan (1928). Proc. Fifth Annual Conference, C. P. and Berar Vet. Assoc., pp. 30-32. Gray (1917). Rep. Vet. Div. Union S. Africa 1915-16. Hoare (1913). A System of Veterinary Medicine 1, 941. Hutyra and Marek (1922). Spezielle Path. u. Therap. der Haust. 1, 239-240. [Also its English trans- lation, which, however, does not cite the references contained in the German edition.] Meadows (1919). Vet. Journ. 75, 138-140; October. [Also in Madras Vet. Journ. Dec. 1919, pp. 24-26.] Merkens (1919). Ncderl. Ind. Blad. V. Dierengeneesk. en Dierent. 31, 48-50. [Cited in Trop. Vet. Bull. 7, 120; 1919.] Misra (1927). Proc. Fourth Annual Conference, C. P. and Berar Vet. Assoc., pp. 23-26. Pantulu (1920). Madras Vet. Journ., pp. 23-24. Parameswaran (1920). Madras Vet. Journ., pp. 12-14. Piot Bey (1895). Bull. de L'Institute Egyptien, p. 101. [Cited by Rabagliati in Vet. Rec. 4, N. S., 505.] Rabagliati (1924). Vet. Rec. 4, N. S., 503-505. Ramachandra Ayyar (1923). Madras Vet. Journ. pp. 16-17. Ramanathan (1923). Madras Vet. Journ., pp. 12-13. Swaminatha Ayyar (1920). Madras Vet Journ. pp. 14-15. Theiler (1906-07). Rep. Govt. Bact. Transvaal Dept. Agric., pp. 22-23. NOTES ON THE BIONOMICS AND ANATOMY OF CORIZONEURA LONGI- ROSTRIS, HARDWICKE. (DIPTERA: FAMILY TABANIDAE ; SUB-FAMILY PANGONINAE.)* BY S. K. SEN, M.Sc., F.E.S., Protozoologist, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar-Kumaun. CONTENTS. . . . . . . . . . PAGE NOTES ON IN THE BIONOMICS OF C. longirostris . . . . . . . . . 25 NOTES ON THE ANATOMY OF C. longirostris . . . . . . . . . 26 (a) THE MOUTH-PARTS . . . . . . . . . 26 (b) THE REPRODUCTIVE TRACT . . . . . . . . . 27 REFERENCES . . . . . . . . . 28 Corizoneura, originally treated as a subgenus under Dialomineura (sub-family Pangoninæ), was raised by Austen to generic rank in 1921, the genus Dialomineura, Rond. (1864) itself having been shown by Brèthes (1914) to be a synonym of Osca, Walk. (1850). In much of the earlier literature, flies of this class (characterized by their conspicuously long proboscis) have been collectively referred to the genus Pangonia, so that Hardwicke (1823), who founded the species which forms the subject of this paper, described it as Pangonia longirostris. Only two species of Corizoneura (including one variety) have been recorded from the Indian Region. Senior-White [1927] gives the following synopsis for the differential diagnosis of these :PLATE II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1(a). C. longirostris PLATE III. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 3a. Paired labellum of C. longirostris NOTES ON CORIZONEURA LONGIROSTRIS 25 and internal anatomy, whilst their life-history is as yet entirely unknown. During the past two years, the present writer has had occasion to make a search for the early stages of C. longirostris, and although he has not been successful in his attempts, he has nevertheless been enabled to record a few original observations, which are likely to be useful to those interested in this group of flies. NOTES ON THE BIONOMICS OF C. LONGIROSTRIS. At Muktesar (Kumaun ; altitude 7,500 ft.), C. longirostris [P1. II, figs. 1(a) and 1(b)] has been observed to make its first appearance towards the latter part of July and to disappear, in a remarkably sudden manner, towards the first week of Sep- tember. This would appear to be, in the main, in accord with the experience of Imms, who, as stated by Tetley [1917], found the flies 26 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [I, I been summarized both by Tetley [1917] and Mitter [1917-18]. Although the writer of the present paper has not had occasion to notice these flies in the actual act of sucking blood, nevertheless he has observed the presence of fairly large quantities of blood in the midgut of at least two female specimens, in the course of the numerous dissections performed by him.PLATE IV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 5. C. longirostris : An ovum dissected out from the ovaries (magnified). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 6a. Proximal region of the mouth-parts of PLATE V. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Corizoneura longirostris NOTES ON CORIZONEURA LONGIROSTRIS 27 examined by him. Tetley was doubtless led to hold the view indicated above on account of his inability to procure fresh specimens for study, for his description was based upon only two pairs of specimens collected by Dr. Imms in 1912. In such specimens the labium28 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [I, I REFERENCES. Drake-Brockman (1910). Bull. Entom. Res. 1, 55-56. Fletcher and Sen (1929). J. Central Bur. Anim. Husb. & Dairying, 3, 17-24. Meinert (1881), Fluernes Munddele (Trophi Dipterorum). [Cited by Tetley (1917) in Bull. Entom. Res. 4, 267.] Mitter (1917-18). Indian J. Medical Res. 4, 365-366. Röder (1881). Stettin. Ent. Zeit. 42. [Cited by Senior-White (1927) in Catalogue of Indian Insects, Pt. 12SELECTED ARTICLES. A REVIEW OF UNDULANT FEVER. BY J. MILLS, M.D., CH.B., Pathological Laboratory, Royal Berkshire Hospital, Reading. (Reprinted from the Journal of Dairy Research (London), Vol. I, No. 2, May 1930.) The story of our knowledge concerning the causes of undulant fever depends upon a study of three separate diseases, namely, Malta fever, abortion in cattle and undulant fever itself, which were not supposed to be related one to another. As time has passed, however, a very close relationship between these diseases has been found to exist. Undulant fever (synonyms30 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [I, I Infection of man occurs most probably in the great majority of cases by ingestion of infected milk, chiefly goats' milk, though other modes of infection have been frequently proved. Prophylactic measures directed to the milk supply resulted in the reduction of the number of cases of this disease amongst the British troops in Malta from 643 in 1905 to 1 in 1910 (4). The next advance in our knowledge was made in 1914, when Kennedy (5) reported that the milk and serum of certain cows in London agglutinated the Br. melitensis. At this time the relationship of this organism to Br. abortus was not known, and Kennedy did not suspect that the true explanation of his findings was that the cows were infected with the latter organism. Br. abortus was first described by Bang in 1897 (6), and is the organism responsible for contagious abortion in cattle. In 1911, Schroeder and Cotton (7) demonstrated by guinea-pig inoculation that 14 per cent. of samples of cows' milk were infected with this germ, and in the same year Mohler and Eichhorn (8) reported that abortion was frequent in goats that were infected with Br. melitensis. These investigations suggested that there was some relationship between the organism discovered by Bruce in 1887 and that first described by Bang ten years later, though hitherto they had been considered to be entirely distinct. This suspected relationship was confirmed by Evans (9) in Washington who, in 1918, showed that on morphological and serological grounds the two were practically indistinguishable. This work was confirmed by Meyer and Shaw (10) and by Khaled (11). Several cases of undulant fever due to Br. abortus have been reported in Great Britain and in America, in which the risk of infection from goats' milk could be excluded. Diagnosis in the earlier reported cases rested mainly on clinical and serological evidence only, efforts to isolate the organism from the blood and urine of the patients having failed in the majority of the reported cases. Such cases, though extremely suggestive and urging the necessity for further investigation, did not offer conclusive evidence that the disease occurs in man following the ingestion of infected cows' milk, and for that reason are not referred to in detail in this review. When we turn to the clinical picture presented by abortus infection in man, we find some explanation why its identity with melitensis infection was not readily detected. Harrison and Wilson (12) have pointed out that, in most of the reported cases, the type of disease is somewhat different from that caused by melitensis infection, and the illness is milder. Theobald Smith (13) carried out some experi- ments on guinea-pigs which have a bearing on this point. By injecting minimum lethal doses of abortus and melitensis he produced lesions which were superficially distinct, but closer examination showed a fundamental relation between the
REVIEW OF UNDULANT FEVER 31 histological characters of the two. The results suggested similar diseases, one of which, melitensis infection, was much more severe than the other. More recently, however, Kristensen has reported a series of cases in which the evidence of abortus infection of man appears to be complete (14). Kristensen tested the sera of 1171 patients against a standard suspension of Br. abortus, which was supplied by a veterinary college where it had been employed in the routine diagnosis of contagious abortion in cattle. The sera of 89 of these patients agglutinated this standard suspension in a dilution of 1/100 or higher. This dilution (1/100) is well above the level which most workers consider necessary to indicate a positive diagnosis. The results were confirmed by the complement fixation test. Blood cultures were made from 20 of these patients and 13 yielded an organism indis- tinguishable from Br. abortus. Serum, obtained from a rabbit immunised against the standard abortus suspension, agglutinated the strains isolated from these 13 patients. Further, cross agglutination and absorption tests proved that they were serologically identical with five abortus cultures derived from cattle suffering from contagious abortion. Guinea-pigs, inoculated with the strains isolated from the patients, developed typical signs and symptoms of abortus infection and the organism was recovered from them. Pregnant cows which were inoculated with these cultures aborted, and the organism could be isolated from the uterine discharge and from the foetus. In this series of cases, all of which showed clinical symptoms of undulant fever, and in the majority of which infection by goats' milk could be definitely excluded, the infecting organism was isolated and proved to be Br. abortus of bovine origin, since this organism was constantly present in the infected individuals, was isolated in pure culture and, when inoculated into animals, produced the disease and could be recovered from the infected animals. If we accept it as proved that a disease clinically identical with undulant fever may be produced in man by ingestion of cows' milk which is infected with Br. abortus, it is rather surprising that undulant fever has in the past been regarded as having such a limited geographical range. If Br. abortus and Br. melitensis are one and the same micro-organism, one would expect the disease to follow the drinking of cows' milk much more frequently than it appears to do, since contagious abortion in cattle leading to infection of milk is by no means infrequent. It is possible that this apparent discrepancy is only due to a lack of accumulation of accurately ascertained data. Among these data a consideration of the extent of infection of our milk supply, cream, butter and cheese is of importance. Reports regarding the frequency of milk infection vary widely. The earliest were those of Schroeder and Cotton (7) and of Kennedy (5) mentioned above. C
32 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, I More recently Schroeder and Cotton (15) have found that 83.3 per cent. of samples of serum from 30 cows gave a positive agglutination reaction. Other workers have obtained similar results as, for example, Carpenter (16) 66.6 per cent.; Pfenninger (17) 34.8 per cent., Sheather (18) 34 per cent. and Fitch and Lubbehusen (19) 29.9 per cent. Much of this variation in the reported frequency of infection is dependent on the technique employed to detect it, as is shown by the results of Carpenter and Boak (20) who, in a study of milk from 378 cows from three certified dairies, observed only 6.08 per cent. of infection when tested by guinea-pig inoculation, whilst approximately 20 per cent. of. the cows showed the presence of specific agglutinins in their sera. The extent of true infection of milk cannot, therefore, be based on the presence of agglutinins alone in the milk of serum. Another factor must also be taken into consideration when dealing with reports on cows from certified dairies. In such dairies, cows that are poor producers are soon eliminated from the herd, and cows that show Br. abortus infection are usually poor producers. One would expect, therefore, to find a smaller percentage of infection amongst the cows in certified dairies than amongst those in other dairies. Cream appears to be a greater infective agent than milk, due to the fact that when the fat globules rise to the surface they carry the organism up with them. Carpenter and Boak (20) examined 17 samples of butter purchased in the open market. They injected 2 c. c. of melted butter from each sample into guinea-pigs, but failed to demonstrate the presence of Br. abortus in any of the samples examined. The same authors examined 82 samples of cheese, many of them imported into America from the Mediterranean district and manufactured from goats' milk, but did not find any evidence of the presence of either abortus or melitensis infection. It seems, therefore, that infection may be present in milk and cream but is absent from butter and cheese, even though it is highly probable that these products have been manufactured from infected milk or cream. Experiments were carried out in order to find the reason for these differences. Carpenter and Boak have studied the viability of Br. abortus in cream and cheese, and have demonstrated that it could retain its viability for a period of 10 days in cream and 142 days in butter. It appears, therefore, that the organism may remain alive in cream and butter for a sufficiently long period to be a danger to the consumer. The possibility of infection from cream and butter may, however, be governed by other factors than the viability of the organism. Thus Carpenter and Boak, for example, state that the artificially infected cream failed to infect guinea-pigs when the pH reached 5. Thus the change in the pH of cream before using it for the manufacture of butter possibly accounts for the absence of the infecting
REVIEW OF UNDULANT FEVER 33 agent from market samples of butter, and the various processes in the manufacture of cheese may have a like effect. The number of samples of market butter and cheese examined by Carpenter and Boak was not very large, but the technique appears to have been sound and the results conclusive. Up to the present time, therefore, butter and cheese have not been proved to be likely sources of infection. There remain, then, only milk and fresh cream as probable sources of infection, and proper pasteurisation would appear to be sufficient to render these non- infective. It has been stated above that various workers, when searching especially for Br. abortus infection in milk, have found upwards of 5 per cent. of samples infected. If these findings are true, it appears very strange that the presence of the infection has not been discovered much more frequently and at an earlier date. During the past 30 years there has been an increasing number of milk samples examined by guinea-pig inoculation for the presence of the tubercle bacillus. If Br. abortus is so frequently present in milk samples as the literature on the subject would lead one to believe, surely it should have been detected in these routine examinations for the presence of tubercle bacillus, especially in view of the small number of abortus organisms which are capable of producing the disease in the guinea-pigs. The author has failed to find any reports of such infection cropping up in routine tests for tuberculosis. Again, Br. abortus produces in guinea-pigs lesions which have some resemblance to tubercle, and such lesions, if present, would naturally have been suspected and subjected to careful examination. There would seem then to be a risk of abortus infection from ingestion of cows' milk, but in view of the relatively small number of cases reported and of the failure to find the organism in milk unless specially sought for, one is inclined to the view that the risk is not great. Since, however, it is undoubtedly present, efforts should be made to exclude infected animals from producing herds, and the practice of immunising cattle with living abortus cultures should be discontinued, since such animals have been shown to excrete living abortus organisms in their milk for a considerable period after inoculation. REFERENCES. (1) Bruce, D. (1887). Practitioner, London, 39, 161, 188 ; 40, 241. 34 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, I (5) Kennedy, J. C. (1914). J. Roy. Army Med. Corps, 22, 9. (6) Bang, B. (1897). Z. f. Thiermed. 1, 241 (7) Schroeder, E. C., and Cotton, W. E. (1911). Ann. Report Bur. Animal Industry U. S. Dept. Agric. 28, 139. (8) Mohler, J. R., and Eichhorn, A. (1911). Ibid. 28, 119. (9) Evans, A. C. (1918). J. Inf. Dis. 22, 580. (10) Meyer, K. F., and Shaw, E. B. (1920). Ibid. 27, 173. (11) Khaled, Z. (1921). J. Hygiene, 20, 319. THE USE OF DRUGS IN THE TREATMENT OF DISEASES CAUSED BY WORMS. BY MAURICE C. HALL, PH.D., D.Sc., D.V.M., Chief, Zoological Division, Bureau of Animal Industry, U. S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D. C. (Reprinted from the Journal of Comparative Pathology and Therapeutics, Vol. XLIII, part 2, June 1930.) Since 1915 the writer's principal scientific interest has been in the field of anthelmintic medication. In the fifteen years from 1915 to 1930 the investigation of anthelmintics has progressed to the point where it may now be admitted to be actually scientific in approach, method, and technic and the number of investigators in this field has increased in proportion to an immense increase in interest in the subject. From 1881, the year in which several important treatments for human anchylostomiasis were proposed, following the recognition of the fact that hook- worms were serious pathogens responsible for Egyptian chlorosis, tropical anæmia, and the St. Gothard Tunnel disease, to 1915, there had been an increasing interest in the development of anthelmintic medication, but for the most part the studies of this period were along the lines of critical empiricism and increasingly close clinical observation. Previous to 1881 anthelmintic medication was mostly a matter of uncritical empiricism. In 1915 it was practically impossible to give an intelligent answer to a question in regard to anthelmintic medication in the field of veterinary medicine. Books and journals contained endless formulæ incorporating scores of drugs for the re- moval of worms from domesticated animals, but there was no critical evidence on which to judge the value of these drugs. The most that was offered was clinical experience, and as clinicians are a mixed lot, comprising good observers and sound thinkers on one hand, and poor observers and un-sound thinkers on the other, the recommendations of innumerable John Does and Richard Roes, unknown to the reader, could not be sorted to distinguish the good from the bad. This situation was extremely uncomfortable for the Zoological Division of the Bureau of Animal Industry, United States Department of Agriculture. A con- stant stream of questions in correspondence called for answers in keeping with the standing and reputation of the Bureau of Animal Industry. It was only possible ( 35 )
36 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, I to say in reply that John Doe recommended so much ferrous sulphate given thus and so, and Richard Roe recommended so much tartar emetic given this way or that, for the removal of this or that parasite from such and such a host, and this was obviously an unsatisfactory answer. To remedy this situation, the late Dr. B. H. Ransom, a capable and sound scientist, who was then Chief of the Zoological Division, inaugurated a project on anthelmintic medication. The results obtained from that project have paid large returns to agriculture and the veterinary and medical profession, and have done much to stimulate interest in the subject of anthelmintics. The present writer was detailed in charge of this work, and was associated from time to time with Foster, Shillinger, Gram and Wigdor. The writer's administrative work of the past five years has prohibited any considerable active participation in these investigations, and the actual investigations at present are being carried out by Dr. W. H. Wright. This paper, therefore, represents the observations of an old campaigner no longer on active duty, and might appropriately be tinged with regret at the necessity for confinement to paper work at a time when the subject of anthelmintics is entering the stage of basic scientific investigation, and when there is active warfare on all fronts and " lovely fighting along the whole line ". Characteristically, the scientist who is no longer a youngster actively engaged in research turns to philosophic speculations, the summarising of knowledge, the correlation of other men's findings, and the formulation of principles. Conforming to this habit, the writer proposes to discuss certain principles of anthelmintic medication. This subject he has discussed in several previous papers, but our principles may be regarded as tentative to the extent that they are subject to modification in the light of additional knowledge, and they need occasional revision. They may be taken as representing ideas which have grown out of an experience that is extensive by comparison with that of other workers in this field, and out of a rapidly increasing fund of available knowledge, and they are of value as back- ground in the consideration of the individual cases the veterinarian will have to consider in practice or research. PRINCIPLES OF ANTHELMINTIC MEDICATION. I. Factors in Anthelmintic Medication. Elsewhere the writer has noted that the important factors in anthelmintic medication may be stated alliteratively as : (1) The practitioner ; (2) the patient ; (3) the parasite ; (4) the parasiticide ; (5) the purgative ; and (6) prophylaxis. These may be discussed very briefly as follows :TREATMENT OF DISEASES CAUSED BY WORMS 37 judgment if he is to be trusted with the more or less poisonous drugs which constitute our present armamentarium of anthelmintics. He can be taught, or could be if we had suitable teachers, a sound know- ledge of the other factors involved in anthelmintic medication. He cannot be taught to be a person of sound judgment, if he is intrinsically a person of unsound judgment ; the poor thinker will continue to be a dangerous performer with potent drugs, and will continue to dis- credit excellent drugs by obtaining bad results as a result of bad judgment. (2) The patient must always be considered as to status praesens in connection with the other factors, and especially in regard to conditions constitut- ing contraindications for treatment. Failure to consider contraindica- tions is altogether too common, and is a prolific source of fatalities. (3) The parasite must be known definitely and its habits, location, and life history taken into consideration. A knowledge of these facts leads to sound procedures, and affords an intelligent explanation for certain failures. (4) The parasiticide (the anthelmintic) must be selected not only with reference to its known action on the worms to be removed, but also with reference to its effects on the patient. These drugs are potent and poisonous, they exert a certain amount of unfavourable effect on the patient and the practitioner must select his drug and his dosage with reference to both of these things. (5) The purgative is usually the most important factor in connection with the procedure of safety: It must be selected with reference to its known action in connection with any anthelmintic, since some purgatives are unsuitable with certain anthelmintics, and either afford inadequate protection to the patient or diminish the efficacy of the anthelmintic. Purgatives should be given in adequate amounts, as small amounts are as bad as, or worse than, none. The time and mode of adminis- tering the purgative are also important. (6) Prophylaxis rounds out the job of treatment. The practitioner has not fulfilled his duty to his client until he has not only aided him in his trouble, but also told him why he was in trouble, and how to avoid similar trouble in the future if the state of our knowledge affords such information. The veterinarian who treats a herd of swine in a hot lot, and leaves the swine to pick up millions of ascarid eggs from the ascarids removed and left there, has an inadequate idea as to his duty to his client.
38 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, I II. The Patient as a Factor. The important thing in connection with the patient is the matter of contraindications (1) for anthelmintic treatment, (2) for certain drugs, or (3) for full doses. These may be briefly stated as follows :TREATMENT OF DISEASES CAUSED BY WORMS 39 condition during this critical time, and allow them and the f40 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, I known to be absorbed to a large extent. Most of the thymol administered and practically all of the carbon tetrachloride in a therapeutic dose are absorbed, although both are relatively insoluble, and carbon tetrachloride is more insoluble in water than is thymol. In general, anthelmintics are rather selective in their action. One may remove ascarids, but not hookworms or tapeworms ; another may remove tapeworms but not nematodes ; another may remove hookworms but not ascarids. This fact probably follows in part from the habits, physiology, and structure of the worms. Some anthelmintics have a more restricted range of action than others, but we have as yet no one dependable anthelmintic for all sorts of worms. Such worms as whipworms, situated in the cæcum, and probably rarely subjected to the in- jurious effects of substances taken by mouth, appear to be highly susceptible to numerous anthelmintics if the drugs come in contact with the worms, and the difficulty here appears to be to find anthelmintics which for one reason or another will get to the cæcum in amounts sufficient to kill these worms. The form in which an anthelmintic is administered will often affect the result. Thus, fluid extracts may contain active anthelmintics, but the alcohol present may lead to rapid absorption of the anthelmintic in the stomach and upper intestine with the production of systemic effects and the lessening of the anthelmintic effect. IV. Procedures in Anthelmintic Medication. The procedure in anthelmintic medication may be as important as the selection of the drug. Thus, santonin develops its action against ascarids much more effectively when it is given in small doses repeated daily for a period of time than when it is given in one large dose. Whipworms require the administration of bulky doses of a suitable drug, part of which is likely to enter the cæcum, or else the repeated administration of small doses of a suitable, non-irritant drug over a period of time in order to increase the likelihood that some part of these doses will enter the cæcum. Preliminary purgation, preferably with salts, appears to be important in treatments for the removal of tapeworms, presumably because it is necessary to clear the mucus away from the head of the worm if complete removal is to be obtained. The use of the doudenal tube has been recommended for the administration of anthel- mintics for the removal of tapeworms in order to avoid gastric absorption of the drug, a point which deserves further study. Fasting is a matter of importance. It is not true, as was at one time supposed, that fasting starves the worms and leads them to ingest an anthelmin- tic carried in a tempting vehicle, such as milk, as we know that ascarids may be kept alive for 26 days in such an innutritious medium as Kronecker's solution. However, tasting is important in preventing the dilution of the drug in food
TREATMENT OF DISEASES CAUSED BY WORMS 41 masses, in preventing the escape of worms protected from the anthelmintic by food masses, and in preventing the bad effects often noted when anthelmintics are administered on a full stomach with the digestive processes active. Our reasons for fasting are largely theoretical, but practice supports the general contention, and experimental evidence shows definitely that anthelmintics administered in food are usually infective or require administration over long periods to compare in efficacy with drugs given in therapeutic doses to fasting animals. The length of the preliminary fast necessary for effective anthelmintic action varies with different animals. In the cases of man and the dog and cat, fasting overnight appears to be sufficient and better than a longer period. In these animals the simple stomach empties rather promptly, and prolonged fasting puts the patient in an abnormal condition in which the patient's discomfort and other bad effects of the anthelmintic are increased. Swine should be fasted at least 24 hours. Horses should be fasted 12 to 24 hours before treatments for stomach worms, bots and ascarids, but fasted 36 hours before treatments for strongyles in the large intestine. It is hopeless to try to empty the rumen of ruminants, and the treatments which have been found effective against worms in these animals are usually effective after an overnight fast or regardless of fasting. An interesting development in this connection is the finding of Minot and Culter that carbon tetrachloride may induce guanidine retention, and as a practical point it might be noted that quite generally deaths in sheep from the small amount of carbon tetrachloride, 1 c. c., used in treatments for liver flukes, have followed in the United States only in cases where sheep were on feed other than pasture grass alone, and not where they were on pasture. As a practical measure for avoiding these deaths, Dr. Robert Jay, of the Zoological Division, who is in charge of liver- fluke-control work in California, has advocated putting sheep back on a low- maintenance diet on pasture for a few days before treating with carbon tetra- chloride. After treatment, in the cases of man, dogs and cats, food should be withheld for three or four hours, or until the bowels move. Swine should not be fed until after a longer period, perhaps six hours. Information appears to be lacking as to the correct procedure for horses and ruminants, but at this time we are inclined to think that feed should be withheld for three or four hours after treatment. This may not be necessary with ruminants. With most animals the drug should be given time to leave the stomach before food is allowed. V. Purgation. Purgation is protective ; in fact it is the most important of the routine procedures in connection with the safety and comfort of the patient.
42 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, I In the treatment of human patients, from whom we can best obtain information as to certain symptoms caused by anthelmintic medication practically all the anthelmintics administered by mouth produce, in a large proportion of cases, headache, dizziness, or nausea, or any two or all of these symptoms, the nausea being associated both with the anthelmintic and the purgative. These symptoms quite generally abate or disappear when the bowels move. In human medicine it appears to be advisable to follow this procedure : The patient should report to the physician or nurse four hours after treatment, and if the bowels have not moved, another dose of a fast-acting purgative, such as salts, should be given, and the patient told to report again in four hours ; if the bowels have not moved eight hours after treatment, purgatives, enemas, and other measures should be used to obtain purgation. Failure to obtain purgation may lead to serious consequences. In veterinary medicine no standardised procedures have been developed in connection with ensuring purgation, but the veterinarian should keep in mind that purgation is highly important, and take the necessary steps to ensure it. Such drugs as arecoline hydrobromide hypodermically may be of value in cases of delayed purgation. In this connection, it may be noted that ordinarily it is unnecessary to resort to preliminary purgation before anthelmintic treatment. There are, however, certain exceptions. Patients which are constipated should be given a purgative the night before treatment ; otherwise, it may be difficult to secure purgation promptly after treatment. Preliminary purgation is also necessary or desirable in connection with treatments for tapeworm infestations, as the use of such drugs as salts apparently serves to clear the mucus away from the tapeworm head and thus expose it to the action of the anthelmintic. The choice of a purgative and the procedure in administering it must be based on the ascertained action of a given purgative in connection with a given anthel- mintic. Experimental evidence indicates that castor oil is very satisfactory when given simultaneously with chenopodium in ascariasis, the chenopodium displaying a high efficacy and the castor oil being highly protective. Critical evidence indicates that castor oil apparently does not increase the absorption of such drugs as chenopodium and male fern, and that in adequate doses it will protect patients against the effects of even lethal doses of these drugs. On the other hand, castor oil lowers the efficacy of carbon tetrachloride against hookworms. Why purgatives protect the patient as much as they do is not clear. It does not appear to be true that they sweep from the digestive tract any considerable amount of un- absorbed drug. Theoretically, what they do is to distribute the insult of the anthelmintic over a larger area of mucosa and over a longer time period by carry- ing the anthelmintic farther along the digestive tract and retarding absorption.
TREATMENT OF DISEASES CAUSED BY WORMS 43 Castor oil should be used, as a rule, only in those cases in which it can be given with the anthelmintic. If the purgative is to be given an hour or two after the anthelmintic, it is advisable to use the fast-acting purgatives, such as salts. Macht has shown that salts, by virtue of the well-known salt action, lessen or inhibit the absorption of drugs given with them. They are, therefore, contra- indicated for use with drugs from which a systemic effect is desired. On the other hand, the salt action is of value in connection with anthelmintics for removing worms from the digestive tract proper, since systemic action is not desired from these drugs, and it is desired to confine their action to one exerted within the lumen of the digestive canal. In using salts, the present tendency is to substitute sodium sulphate for magnesium sulphate on the ground that sodium is less toxic than magnesium, and does not have the same antagonistic action with the blood calcium. Experience in human medicine shows that saturated solutions of salts produce more nausea and other bad effects than do weaker solutions, and it is advisable to make a saturated solution and dilute it with twice its bulk of water for use. Salts are most readily used in veterinary medicine in patients which do not vomit, or vomit with difficulty, such as ruminants and solipeds. Dogs show a disposition to vomit after salts, although this tendency can be overcome, and salts can be used in dog practice. Liquid petrolatum in some form is often used in connection with anthelmintics, and may be satisfactory in the treatment of such animals as the horse. Tests show that it is unsatisfactory in combination with chenopodium in the treatment of dogs, as it lowers the anthelmintic efficacy and gives inadequate protection against the effects of the drug on the dog. A more extended study should be made as to the effect of varying the amount of petrolatum, as this may be a factor in determining the results. Olive oil is sometimes used in connection with anthel- mintics, but experience indicates that this is usually bad practice. Olive oil is one of the substances which remain longest in the stomach, and in combination with chenopodium there results a decided inflammation of the stomach from the prolonged irritant action of the chenopodium at this point. There is also a resultant fall in efficacy due to the absorption of the drug in the stomach. In veterinary medicine the value of our anthelmintics must be ascertained by critical testing if we are to have dependable information. In critical testing, animals are given measured doses of the drugs to be tested, all worms passed for a suitable period are collected, identified, and counted, and the animals are then killed, and all worms present post-mortem are collected, identified, and counted. These two sets of figures give the total numbers of worms of each kind present at the beginning of the experiment, and one can compute rather accurately the percentage
44 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, I of efficacy of the drug, provided a sufficiently large number of experiment animals is used. This method of ascertaining efficacy by critical testing has its limitations. Worms destroyed in the stomach usually undergo complete digestion, or are partially digested before passing to the intestine. Further, this method cannot be depended on to ascertain contraindications for the use of anthelmintics owing to the limitation in the number of animals which can be used. One may ascertain much as to toxicity of the drug by using high doses, and one can find some test animals with such general contraindications as febrile conditions, extreme youth, etc., but it requires the larger test of clinical experience in various places and at various times to ascertain possible contraindications of all sorts. Here is a field of observation to which insufficient attention is paid by the veterinarian in practice. He keeps too few clinical records, and spends too little time in their analysis, to furnish the information he might furnish along this line. For this reason the pharmocologist would have to be depended on for the most part, to ascertain the effect of a drug on an animal in order to give us a general basis on which to predi- cate contraindications. The alternative to critical testing is investigation by the egg-count method, and this method has decided limitations. Egg-counts do not show male worms, larval or immature worms, sterile females, or females, in which egg production has been inhibited temporarily by drug action. Their value is also limited by our limited knowledge or ignorance of egg ratios for many worms, our inability to distinguish the eggs of many of the various worm species, variations in egg production and in character and amount of the fæces, and errors in technic. In clinical experience combined with laboratory procedures for checking anthelmintic treatments there are certain things which may be kept in mind in connection with the appearance of eggs in the fæces after treatment. These eggs may indicate what they seem to indicateTREATMENT OF DISEASES CAUSED BY WORMS 45 days or longer to pass all of the bots destroyed by a drug, as the bots may wander around in the cæcum for a long time before leaving it. Our failure to remove worms may be explained in various ways, and there are some failures for which we have no explanation. In some cases we have no known anthelmintic with the selective action necessary for the removal of the worms. In general, the larger worms in the digestive tract are more readily removable than the smaller, a thing which Railliet and the writer have both noted previously, The writer would be inclined to think that the greater size is actually a reason why larger worms are more readily removed, since a worm with a diameter relatively large in comparison with the size of the lumen of the tube in which it lives is more certain to have at least part of the body projecting out of the mucus and other contents of the tube, and hence accessible to anthelmintic attack. The difficulty in removing the smaller worms appears to be associated with the fact that their small diameter permits them to lie in contact with the mucosa with a layer of mucus and other material above them which mechanically prevents anthelmintics from coming in contact with them ; or. these small worms may be actually embedded in the mucosa, or buried in nodules out of reach of drugs passing through the lumen of the digestive canal. Similarly, larger worms, such as ascarids, may be inaccessible to anthelmintics if they are in the bile ducts or pancreatic ducts. Partial failures follow in part from the fact that we have no known drugs and developed methods of procedure which result in 100 per cent. removal of worms. in 100 per cent. of animals treated, for any species of worm or host animal. Drugs which remove on an average over large series of cases from 90 to 100 per cent. of any kind of worms may be regarded as excellent. In default of such drugs we must use the best we have until we can develop better drugs.
COCCIDIOSIS.* BY W. R. KERR, M.R.C.V.S., D.V.S.M., Lecturer in Veterinary Science, Harper Adams College. (Reprinted from the Harper Adams Utility Poultry Journal, Volume XV, No. 11.) Coccidiosis, as a disease of poultry, is becoming a menace to the industry, a disease which may cause serious losses in chicken rearing. Second only in import- ance to B. W. D., though it is not so readily disseminated, there is not the same possibility of elimination as in the latter disease. The seriousness of the problem has to be realized, and reasonable means of control and treatment instituted to safeguard poultry husbandry. CAUSE. This is primarily a disease affecting the young of members of the bird family, and also many of the animalsCOCCIDIOSIS 47 swallowed by susceptible birds, and on reaching the intestine is acted upon by the digestive juices which set free the elements, now eight in number. These attack the cells lining the walls of the intestines and then grow and multiply, and by doing so destroy these cells. This method of multiplication is known as asexual, but later male and female forms appear and another division takes place48 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, I Sanitary. The phase in the life cycle where 48 hours are required for the sporulation of the oöcyst, and the fact that moisture is essential, forms the im- portant basis of our control measures, because the unsporulated oöcyst, if swa- llowed, will not produce coccidiosis. The statement of Johnson is supported, that the severity of the disease depends to a certain extent upon the number of sporulated oöcysts present. This fact is of utmost importance, as reduction in the number acts as a control measure, and this can be accomplished byCOCCIDIOSIS 49 It is realised that drugs used for this purpose are limited in their action, and that results hitherto have been poor and inconclusive. Most of them are supplied to the affected birds through the drinking water, and when such bodies as mercuric perchloride, carbolic acid, potassium permanganate, hydrochloric acid, free iodine, etc., are used, they enter into organic combination with the ingesta and mucous of the crop and gizzard, and are therefore inert bodies on reaching the intestine and cæca. Others have no direct action on the parasite but depend on symptomatic treatment, such agents as astringents, for example. Certain results have been claimed for the use of dried milk, and similar products which affect a change of pH in the intestine. The oöcyst is impervious, but digestive experiments here show that the ele- ment forms are easily destroyed by certain chemicals. To achieve this, it is essential for the agent to be in a free state, at the lower portion of the intes- tines. The possibility of iodine in this connection seemed impressive, and experi- ments were carried out to find the most convenient form in which it could be effectively administered. It was decided to use the power of casein to absorb iodine for this purpose. Casein in milk can absorb large doses of iodine by the application of heat, and it was found by experiment that this combination did not affect the hydrolysis of protein and its ultimate absorption as amino acids, and also that iodine was set free to combine with other organic matter to be passed out in the excreta. This preparation seemed to fulfil the desired conditions and its use was ex- tended to field work. The combination is as follows :ABSTRACTS Large-scale Treatment of Lands infested with Parasites. (For the purpose of this note, the term " Treatment" has been taken to include, in addition to dressing of lands, such operations as drainage, desiccation, clearing of bushes and rotation of crops and grazing animals.) The bulk of the work carried out under this head has been directed to the destruction of the different species of snails known or suspected to be the intermediate hosts of certain trematodes known to be pathogenic to man and animals. Some work has also been done upon the ridding of pastures of certain common species of nematodes, e.g., the stomach worms of sheep (HABSTRACTS 51 in their germination stage even when the drug was used in a concentration of 10 parts per 1,000,000. Khalil also experimented with sodium chloride, lime and ammonium sulphate, and the results obtained by him were as follows :52 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, I on fluke-infested farms during the dry season (as the products of burnt rushes are detrimental to the growth of those snails which live in shallow water) ; complete drying up of pools for short periods ; and the use of lime and sulphate of copper for the destruction of the snails. Hornby (1921) has noted the susceptibility of snails and their eggs to desiccation, whilst Melek (1927) regards the draining of " all swampy places " as the first essential in combating the snail popu- lation in a locality. Melek also records having found both salt and lime as being capable of destroying snails, but he advises the use of copper sulphate (in a solution of one in a million) as being "more effective, cheaper, and more easily applied". (c) Work in Wales. Walton (1923) tested the relative killing power of ammonium sulphate and copper sulphate, under field conditions, for the two common species of snails in Wales, namely, Limnæa truncatula and L.peregra, and as the result of his investigations he recommended the latter chemical as being, on the whole, more effective, provided the "usual precautions" were taken " as to avoidance of stocking treated ground until after heavy rain, and the exercise of care in treating flowing streams that may be used for watering stock, or may affect fishing water, etc." Walton cites an instance in which several ditches cleared of snails by the use of bluestone dusts 18 to 24 months previously were re-examined and found free of snails. He also quotes an example in which complete eradication of snails was effected by ploughing and putting under oats several large damp grass fields which had previously swarmed with L. truncatula (and had caused very heavy losses in 1920-21), thus indicating a method of treatment of value for such land. Daubney (1924) too refers to valuable results having been obtained from the use of copper sulphate in combating L. truncatula. The plan adopted by him for application under field condi- tions was to spray infested pastures with a one per cent. solution of copper sulphate and to dress ditches with powdered copper sulphate. In illustration of the benefit derived from this method of treatment Daubney observes : " Such treatment has been efficacious in removing snails from heavily infested lands, and after two years one farmer reports the complete absence of fluke in the sheep killed for food. It was stated that in 40 years' experience on this particular farm never before had a whole season elapsed without the occurrence of some flukes in the sheep killed." The effect of one appli- cation of copper sulphate was observed to last for at least two and a half years. Daubney, however, emphasizes the fact that the application of copper sulphate per se is not calculated to confer lasting benefit unless it is accompanied by efficient drainage of the land, " including the prevention of inundations and the improvement of ditches ", and he cites instructive examples of the permanent value of drainage works in this respect in badly infected localities. Perhaps the most extensive work yet conducted, under field conditions, upon the use of copper sulphate in destroying the molluscan hosts of trematodes was that carried out by Walton, in Wales, in 1925. His conclusions are of sufficient practical importance to bear quotation at some length. Three methods of employment of the salt were adopted by him, depending upon the nature of the land which it was sought to rid of snails :ABSTRACTS 53 2. Dust. Copper sulphate, one part by weight and kaolin (china clay), four parts by weight, proved successful. Kaolin is used as a " carrier ", and also marks out the area treated. The method has been found very useful for small areas, narrow ditches and margins of ponds, but re- quires a dusting or dry spraying apparatus of the type employed by gardeners. Dusts are particu- larly useful, where clean water is difficult of access. The toxic action is generally slower, depending to a considerable extent on rain (especially if there is much vegetation) and stock should be excluded from treated areas until sufficient rain has fallen to wash the grass clean. In one plot (22 sq. yds.), the amount used worked out at 27½ lbs. copper sulphate and 110 lbs. kaolin, roughly 1¼ cwt. per acre. 3. Broadcast. One part copper sulphate to four, and one to eight of fine dry sand proved suitable for treating large areas of swampy land, etc., which are often too soft for spray or dusting machines to be used. The distribution must be as even as possible and the sand quite dry. The treatment is best applied on wet land or before rain, and stock should be excluded until the grass has been washed clean by rain. In two plots (110 sq. yds. and 44 sq. yds. respectively), the amount used worked out at 27½ lbs. copper sulphate and 220 lbs. sand, roughly, 2¼ cwt. per acre. Baker (1922), however, protests against the unrestricted use of copper sulphate, as, according to him, it is highly toxic for fish, although it may be employed in small bodies of water not directly connected with running streams or lakes. It may not be quite irrelevant to mention here that the introduction of domestic ducks has been advocated by a number of workers (e.g., Lane, Khalil, Daubney, Cawston) as a very effective means of keeping down the snail population in a locality, whilst the periodical administration of distol by the mouth has been claimed by some workers as a very good preventive for fluke disease in animals exposed to infestation by these parasites. In a recent paper (" Die Bekampfung der Leberegel- krankheit", Deutsche Tierärzt. Wochen. December 1928, pp. 838-839), Hildebrandt reports having obtained phenomenal success from the use of this preventive drug in certain badly infested localities in Germany. While it is recognized that the recommended use of distol has little bearing upon the " treatment of lands infested by parasites ", nevertheless it may prove to be more advan- tageous to resort to some form of prophylactic drug (such as distol) in localities where for various reasons the adequate treatment of land may not be found feasible. B. MEASURES AGAINST NEMATODES. There is very little information on record upon the dressing of lands as a preventive for nema- tode infestation in animals. In a paper published as early as in 1907, Ransom, in United States of America, referred to the high degree of resistance to freezing exhibited by the embryos of wireworm of sheep (Haemonchus contortus), so that the cold of the winter could not be depended upon to free a pasture from the parasites. On the other hand, he regarded it safe to conclude that thorough burning of a pasture, the value of which as a preventive measure had been " repeatedly demonstrated by practical experience ", would serve as an adequate means of disinfection, since the tendency of the embryos, according to him, was to migrate upwards, so that it was certain that, under ordinary conditions, few of them would be present at a sufficient depth below the surface of the soil to escape death. In a paper published by him about the same time, Ransom referred to the possiblity of ridding pastures of H. contortus by frequently removing the manure and keeping the surface sprinkled with lime and salt. In still later papers, Ransom (1919, 1920, 1921) recommended for the control of H. contortus, rotation of the pasturage ; the avoidance of low-lying ground ; and the grazing of horses, pigs and ruminants in rotation.
54 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, I For the control of stomach worms, Curtice (1922) advocates the keeping of land free from cattle and sheep for at least a year. Referring to the control of Strongyles of sheep (Ostertagia, Trichostrongylus, Hæmonchus and Dictyocaulus), Daubney (1924) recommends good drainage as the only method calculated to confer lasting benefit, for it " ensures the destruction by desiccation of large numbers of the larvae during normally dry weather ", and reduces the chances of survival of the developing stages to a considerable degree. In discussing the question of control of the nodular worm of sheep, de Kock (1928), in South Africa, recommends the placing of lambs and ewes in camps where no grazing was allowed the pre- vious summer. Speaking of stomach worms of sheep (Hæmonchus and Ostertagia), Taylor (April 1929), in England, states that the young worms on the ground are very resistant to lime, salt, poisonous chemical substances (as bluestone or green vitriol) and adverse weather conditions (cf., however, Ransom's remarks, as cited earlier in this note), but that the great majority will have died in a field kept free from sheep for 12 months. According to Taylor, under English conditions stomach worms in sheep could be controlled " with certainty " by some such crop-rotation as the follow- ing :ABSTRACTS 55 For the control of tape-worms (Tænia expansa) in sheep, Wing (cited by Harper, loc. cit.) recommends a liberal feeding of pumpkins, the seeds of these fruits being well known vermifuges. By the frequent use of sown pastures and the feeding of pumpkins almost every autumn, he reports having succeeded in keeping sheep entirely free from this disease. According to Harper, hogs having free access to wood ashes, charcoal, slaked lime and coal cinders are not likely to be troubled, as the alkali in the wood ashes, together with grit in cinders, has a tendency to destroy the worms. A limitation of protein diet is said to be inimical to the parasites, whilst mechanical irritants such as fibrous vegetables, seeds of figs, strawberries, etc., and husks of grain, are also said to exert a deleterious effect on them (Chopra and Chandler, 1928). Hall, Shillinger and Cram (1925) and Chopra and Chandler (1928) mention a number of other substances having the reputation of possessing anthelmintic properties, e.g., mustard, pepper, onions, garlic and various spices, fresh blueberries (for Oxyuris) and sugar. It should be observed, however, that the claims made in regard to the anthelmintic properties of these substances are catirely unsupported by experimental evidence. On the contrary, the experience of Hall and his co-workers upon the efficacy of raw onions for worms in dogs led them to conclude that the use of this material was "of no value in removing hookworms or tapeworms". In a recent paper, Wright (July 1929), in United States of America, has published the results of invesigations carried out by him upon the anthelmintic value of mustard for stomach worms (H. contortus) and hookworms (Monodontus trigonocephalus) of sheep, and he states that " mustard alone exhibited very little efficacy ". It would, however, appear to be held by some workers (e.g., Branford, 1920, in India) that the addition of mustard to copper sulphate enhances the value of the latter drug, in some manner not so far demonstrated, as a remedy for stomach worms in sheep. The recent work of Triffitt (Journal of Helminthology, Vol. VII, No. 2 ; June 1929) upon the inhibitory effect of mustard plants on cyst formation in the eelworm, Hèterodera schachtii, would seem to lend some support to the view that mustard is toxic for, at any rate, certain species of nematodes. [S. K. S.] Pullorum Disease (Bacillary White Diarrhoea of Chickens).56 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [I, I 7. Pullorum disease in adult fowls can result from their continuing to harbor infection acquired when they were chicks. Infection may also be acquired by mature fowls from consumption of contaminated food, such as infected eggs, or from association with infected adult fowls. 8. Drugs and chemicals have not been demonstrated to have any curative value for chicks actually infected with pullorum disease. Some chemicals, however, particularly the hypochlorite solutions, are of value as disinfectants in the drinking water for chicks to prevent the spread of infection through this route. 9. The systematic application of the serum-agglutination test to breeding fowls and the prompt removal of reactors, combined with proper management and sanitation on the farms and in the hatcheries, provides the most effective and practical means for the prevention of pullorum disease in adult fowls and chicks. The slow or tube method and the rapid method for performing the agglutination are equally reliable. 10. Repeated agglutination tests at intervals of from 1 to 2 months offer a reasonably certain means of eradicating pullorum disease from a flock in one season. It is believed that owners of infected breeding flocks would find this system of testing more worth while than annual testing. 11. Any testing procedure to be successful must be accompanied by strict adherence to sanitary measures. 12. The agglutination test made with whole fresh blood was not found to be a satisfactory substitute for the slow or rapid agglutination tests made with blood serum. 13. The intradermal or 'pullorin' test in its present status is not a satisfactory means of detecting adult fowls with pullorum disease. Tanning of Goat Skins. The following is extracted from the List of Official Investigations and Enquiries from India dealt with by the Imperial Institute, London, during 1928, 1929 and JanuaryIMPERIAL BUREAUX OF ANIMAL NUTRITION AND ANIMAL GENETICS. The following publications on Animal Nutrition and Genetics have been received by the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research from the Imperial Bureau of Animal Nutrition and the Imperial Bureau of Animal Genetics. Research workers who have not received copies of communications dealing with their special subject are invited to communicate with the Council :58 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [I, I Quarterly Journal of Experimental Physiology. 1. Some remote effects of deficient diets on the rhythmical movements of the isolated intestine, by H. E. Magee, Wm. Anderson, and Miss J. M'Callum. (Vol. XIX, No. 2.) 2. The influence of bicarbonate and phosphate on the movements of surviving intestine, by Miss J. W. M'Callum and H. E. Magee. (Vol. XX, No. 1.) Journal of Physiology. 1. Changes in parathyroid and adrenal glands and in blood calcium in relation- ship to egg formation in fowls, by T.P. Sun and Marion M. MacOwan. (Vol. LXX.) 2. Influence of intestinal movements of electrolytes in the lumen of isolated segments, by H. E. Magee and B. A. Southgate. (Vol. LXVIII, No. I.) 3. Studies on diffusion through surviving isolated intestine, by D. W. Auchinachie, J. J. R. Macleod and H. E. Magee. (Vol. LXIX, No. 2, April 14, 1930.) The Pig Breeders' Annual, 1930-31. Observations on the nutrition of breeding pigs, by J. B. Orr and H. R. David- son. The Journal of Hygiene. 1. The influence of certain dietary supplements on the nutrition of the African native, I, by Francis Charles Kelly and John McAskill Henderson. (Vol. XXIX, No. 4, February 1930.) 2. The influence of certain dietary supplements in relation to the calcium requirements of growing African natives, II, by John McAskill Henderson and Francis Charles Kelly. 3. A note of the influence of the addition of certain supplements to the diets of African natives, III, by John McAskill Henderson and Francis Charles Kelly. (Vol. XXIX, No. 4, 15th February 1930.) The Analyst. 1. Phenols in sterilised milk, by A. T. R. Mattick. 2. Notes on the Thiocyanate method of estimating iron. Influence of different classes of phosphates, by Geoffrey Winthrop Leeper.
ANIMAL NUTRITION AND GENETICS 59 The Journal of Agricultural Science. 1. Investigation on the mineral content of pasture grass and its effect on herbivora, by Walter Elliot, J. B. Orr and T. B. Wood. (Vol. XVI, Part I.) I. General report, by Walter Elliot. II. Report on the effect of the addition of mineral salts to the ration of sheep, by Walter Illiot and Arthur Crichton. (Vol. XVI, Part I.) III. Report on the chemical analyses of pasture from various areas in the British Isles, by William Godden. (Vol. XVI. Part I.) IV. Report on the seasonal variations in the mineral content of pastures, by Ethel M. Cruickshank. V. Report on the effect of fertilisers on the mineral content of pastures, by William Godden. 2. Factors affecting the iron and manganese content of plants with special reference to herbage causing " Pining " and " Bush-sickness", by W. Godden and R. E. R. Grimmett. (Vol. XVIII, Part III). The Scottish Journal of Agriculture. 1. Surplus potatoes. The use of potatoes and oats as feeding stuffs. (Vol. XIII, No. 1, January 1930.) 2. The nutritive requirements of poultry. The mineral requirements : Pre- liminary communication. (Vol. VIII, No. 1, January 1925.) 3. The nutritive requirements of poultry. The effect of adding vitamin rich substances to normal rations. II. Vitamin B or the water soluble Vitamin of Yeast. 4. Milk substitutes in the rearing of calves, by J. B. Orr and A. Crichton and others. (Vol. XII, No. 2, April 1929). 5. The nutritive requirements of poultry. VII. Growth in Chickens60 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, I The Lancet. 1. Milk consumption and the growth of school-children, by J. B. Orr. (Vol. I, No. 5448, January 1928.) 2. Milk consumption and the growth of school-children, by Gerald Leighton and Mabel L. Clark. (Vol. I, No. 5497, Jan. 1929.) 3. Diet and peptic ulcers in cavies, by H. E. Magee, W. Anderson and J. McCallum. 4. Milk consumption and the growth of school-children, by M. L. Clark. (Vol. I, No. 5520). Transactions of the Highland and Agricultural Society of Scotland, 1929. 1. The relation of chemical composition of pasture to its feeding value, by J. B. Orr. 2. The influence on nutrition of sunlight and artificially produced ultra-violet rays, by J. B. Orr and others. Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine, 1928 (Vol. XXI.) A further contribution to the subject of aplastic anæmia, by J. P. McGowan. West African Medical Journal. Notes on certain edible and native salts from Nigeria, by William Godden. The Biochemical Journal. Insulin and increase in weight of young animals, by John James Richard Macleod, Hugh Edward Magee and William Middleton. (Vol. XXIV, No. 3.) The Milk Industry. The action of strong sunlight on milk, by W. L. Davies. (July 1930.) IMPERIAL BUREAU OF ANIMAL GENETICS. Bulletins. Quarterly Bulletin, Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4.
ANIMAL NUTRITION AND GENETICS 61 REPRINTS. The Pig Breeders' Annual. Pig testing and recording for the purposes of advanced registry, by H. R. Davidson and A. D. Buchanan Smith. Scottish Journal of Agriculture. 1. Dual-purpose cattle. (Vol. X, No. 2.) 2. Pig Testing. The results of preliminary work on bacon type, by Alexander Calder and A. D. Buchanan Smith. (Vol. XI, No. 3.) 3. Live-stock improvement and the scrub bull, by A. D. Buchanan. (Vol. XI, No. 4.) Quarterly Review of Biology. Abnormal sexuality in animals, III sex reversal, by F. A. E. Crew. Harper Adams Utilily Poultry Journal. The influence of confinement on the production of white wyandotte pullets, by Dorothy Macfadzean. (Vol. XIV, No. 12.) Commercial methods of artificial brooding and rearing, by Raymond T. Parkhurst. (Vol. XV, No. 5.) A summer range shelter, by R. T. Parkhurst, assisted by E. W. Fogden and Miss Mary McMurray. (Vol. XV, No. 8.) Berkshire Milk Recording Society's Handbook (1928-29). Milk secretion and milking, by Stephen Bartlett. Journal of Genetics. A case of lateral asymmetry in the domestic fowl, by F. A. E. Crew. (Vol. XX, No. 2, November 1928.) Farming News. Prolificacy in beef cattle, by A. D. Buchanan Smith. (27th July 1927.) Veterinary Journal. Three cases of developmental intersexuality in the pig, by F. A. E. Crew, (Vol. 79, No. 9.)
62 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, I Developmental intersexuality in the domesticated goat, by F. A. E. Crew and Adair Dighton. (Vol. 79, No. 4.) The " Bull-Dog " calf of the dexter breed of cattle, by F. A. E. Crew. Journal of Heredity (Organ of the American Genetic Association). Inheritance of color, beard, tassels and horns in the goat, by S. A. Asdell and A. D. Buchanan Smith. (Vol. 19, No. 9, September 1928). Age and quality of offspring. The effect of age of parents on the quality of offspring in cattle, by A. C. Choudhuri. (Vol. XVII, No. 10, October 1926 and Vol. XIX, No. 9, September 1928.) British Medical Journal. The Mechanism of inheritance, lecture, by F. A. E. Crew. (August 14, 1926.) The British Research Association for the woollen and worsted industries. (Extracts from Publication No. 59, June 1926.) 1. Kemp in the fleece of the Welsh mountain sheep, by J. A. Fraser Roberts. 2. Kemp fibres in fleeces of British breeds of sheep, by Janet. S. S. Blyth. 3. Studies of the fleeces fibres of British breeds of sheep, by Janet. S. S. Blyth. The Journal of the University College of Wales. The science of genetics and its application to stock breeding, by F. A. E. Crew. Live-stock breeding research. Practical points, by A. D. Buchanan Smith. The Journal of Anatomy. A case of superfORIGINAL ARTICLES STATISTICAL STUDIES OF RECORDS OF INDIAN DAIRY CATTLE. 1. STANDARDISATION OF LACTATION PERIOD MILK RECORDS. BY LALL CHAND SIKKA, B.Sc. (AGRI.), Punjab Government Research Scholar, Imperial Institute of Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Bangalore. (Received for publication on 12th March 1931.) (With 5 charts.) FOREWORD. The above article may be classed as the first serious study on modern lines of available statistics concerning Indian dairy cattle. The investigations which en- abled the author to compile this article were made whilst he was a post-graduate student at the Imperial Institute of Animal Husbandry and Dairying and the greater part of his post-graduate study period at the Institute was taken up with this important research work. Mr. Lall Chand has carried out this work so thoroughly that it would be superfluous to attempt to describe what he has done in this fore- word. His figures and deductions speak for themselves and indicate the spirit of patient investigation and careful research so necessary in this class of research. [WM. SMITH, Imperial Dairy Expert.] INTRODUCTION. The problems of Indian dairy cattle are highly complex and their solution bristles with difficulties. A statistical study of India shows that India has far too many cattle to successfully maintain them either for the work needs of the country or for her food supply, and that there is a considerable economic loss owing to the indiscriminate slaughter of cattle in cities. Besides, a comparison of the Indian with foreign cattle as regards their efficiency to supply either of the above mentioned needs reveals the fact that the majority of Indian cattle, judged by European standards, are quite inefficient, and are only fit to be destroyed. This deplorable state of affairs is mainly due to the actual cattle-breeding conditions existing in ( 63 ) A
64 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II India, for a very large number of cattle here have been bred from the maimed, the undersized, the unfit and the starved parents, and are bound to be unfit and useless animals according to the basic law of breedingSTATISTICAL STUDIES, INDIAN DAIRY CATTLE 65 TABLE I. Standardising corrections. 1. Month of calving Standard66 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II MATERIAL AND METHODS. On all the Government dairy farms in India, two classes of animals have been maintained, pure Indian and cross-breds. Of the pure Indian stock, the best and most well managed herds and which consequently give the most reliable data for such a study as this are the pure-bred Sahiwal herds at the Military Dairy Farms, Lahore and Ferozepur, and at the Imperial Institute of Agricultural Research, Pusa. Hence for the study of Indian cattle the milk records of the animals from these herds only have been utilized. But by far the greatest number of animals bred and kept on these farms is of cross-breds. The milk records of the Military Dairy Farms' cross-breds, however, suffer from a very serious defect, for most of these animals go on moving from place to place along with troops, and consequently the milk-records produced by them are affected by another very potent factor hard to allow for, i.e., change of locality and therefore climate, etc. None of these is therefore used in studying the effect of variation of these factors. The records of the Pusa cross-bred animals (1/2 Ayrshire-Sahiwal) which are free from this defect have been separately used in studying the effect of age on lactation milk yield in that breed. Only normal lactation milk records were utilized, all lactations being considered abnormal and therefore excluded in which :67 Ordinary statistical methods as are necessary for the quantitative study of any variable like milk yield have been used. To gauge the significance of a difference probable error rather than the standard error has been used, a difference of less than four times the probable error being taken in general as having arisen from fluctuations of random sampling. This gives sufficiently high odds68 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Service period in days. Fig. 1. Distribution of service period.
STATISTICAL STUDIES, INDIAN DAIRY CATTLE 69 Figure 1 shows the frequency curve for the distribution of S. P. The mean S. P. for these 1496 lactations is 123.870 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Dry period in days. Fig. 2. Distribution of dry period.
STATISTICAL STUDIES, INDIAN DAIRY CATTLE 71 The mean length of preceding D. P. for these 1178 lactations is 119.74 72 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II The D. P. is above the normal for the months June to OctoberSTATISTICAL STUDIES, INDIAN DAIRY CATTLE 73 + .0688 74 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II has been the same as employed by Sanders, i.e., study a factor first, get its elimina- tion factors, apply them to the data and then study the next factor. Season of the year was studied first, the idea being to see the extent of milk yield variation as caused by it, in order to decide if the data from the two different herdsSTATISTICAL STUDIES, INDIAN DAIRY CATTLE 75 for the months September and November, when it well nigh reaches 2,000 lbs. The co-efficients of variation which vary from 32 to 50 per cent. with an average of about 40 per cent. are rather high when compared with those for other biological data as given by Gowen [ 1924 ] where the highest reported is only 38.2 per cent. although the majority of them fluctuate between 3 and 25 per cent. Table VII gives what might be called the effect of the season of the year on lactation milk yield in our data, as compared with the same as obtained by other workers, for it gives the differences of the means of different calving months from the mean milk yield of 12 months. TABLE VII. Effect of the Season of year on milk yield. Differences in mean milk yield from mean of 12 months. Month of calving For present data Sanders' [ 1923 ] Penrith Sanders' [ 1927 ] Norfolk (uncorrected) Sanders' [1923] N. Somerset January . 76 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II TABLE VIII. Significance of the differences between the monthly means. STATISTICAL STUDIES, INDIAN DAIRY CATTLE 77 Since with the same means the same figures though with opposite sign would be obtained in the lower left half portion of Table VIII as are given in its upper right half, these are omitted. It will be seen that the only significant differences78 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II gets older and therefore deteriorates in its nutritive value ; furthermore that this seasonal variation is much more pronounced in Penrith than in Norfolk because of the feeding of roots and other succulent foods to Norfolk cows as compared with Penrith ones during the hot months when pastures parch and dry off and therefore there is scarcity of succulent food and whatever grass there is, it is very fibrous and low in nutritive value. A consideration of the above results as reported by Sanders together with a study of the actual conditions under which the animals of our data have made their records further supports the claim that these differences in milk yield means for different calving months cannot be very significant, for the system of herd manage- ment at these Military Dairy Farms is more or less perfect as an attempt is always made to keep the feeding and management conditions quite uniform throughout the year by stall feeding. Adequate protection from inclemencies of weather is always provided by way of proper housing. Supply of succulent fodder is ensured all the year round, either in the form of green fodderSTATISTICAL STUDIES, INDIAN DAIRY CATTLE 79 TABLE IX. Correlation of milk yield with S. P. Mean milk yield . . . . . . 4069 80 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Length of service period in days. Fig. 3. Effect of the length of service period on total lactation milk yield.
STATISTICAL STUDIES, INDIAN DAIRY CATTLE 81 According to this curve the lactation yield of an average cow would be 3,033 lbs. only if conception occurred at once after calving and 5,960 lbs. as a limit if breed- ing were indefinitely postponed. From this equation a set of correction factors as given in Table X, has been derived by using standard S. P. of 85 days, for making allowance for varying lengths of S. P. TABLE X. Corrections to total yield for S. P. (standard S. P.=85 days, mean yield for 85 days S. P.=3,832 lbs.). Service period Corresponding mean total yield from smooth curve 3832 Per cent. correction to apply Per cent. correc- tion from Pen- rith data (1) Value from 2 (correct factor) lbs. 9.5 3,045 1.258 +25.8 + 26.0 29.5 3,278 1.169 16.9 17.0 49.5 3,493 1.097 9.7 9.7 69.5 3,690 1.038 3.8 3.9 89.5 3,872 0.989 82 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II 85 days S. P. has been selected as the standard, as with this S. P. and a nor- mal gestation period of 280 days the cow will calve at yearly intervals. Since a long S. P. increases the lactation milk yield and a short one depresses it, a per- centage as given in Table X for corresponding S. P. must be added to lactation yield for all S. Ps. below 85 days, and a percentage subtracted from it for all periods higher than 85 days. For the sake of comparison, the elimination corrections for Penrith as obtaired by Sanders [1923] and recalculated to a standard of 85 days S. P. are also included in Table X. It will be seen that the two sets of figures agree admira- bly well though our corrections are a trifle lower for the S. Ps. below 85 days and a trifle higher for the S. Ps. above 85 days. The correction factors given for varying lengths of S. P. shew very clearly the very great potency of S. P. in influencing the total lactation yields for a reference to Table X will show that milk yielded by a cow in a lactation must be raised by 26 per cent. if she is served 9.5 days after calving, and lowered by 28.5 per cent. if she is left empty for 409.5 days after calving, in order to see what she would have produced with a S. P. of 85 days. It must, of course, be mentioned that these correction factors for different S. Ps. are strictly true for the mid-value of the intervals. But since the variation of milk yield with S. P. is a continuous one, more accurate results would be obtained if the corrections for the S. Ps. lying in the intervals, the means of which are only given in Table X, be interpolated by ordinary linear interpolation ; especially will this be necessary for very low S. Ps. when the mean lactation yields are rising very rapidly with successive S. Ps. CAUSES OF VARIATION OF MILK YIELD WITH S. P. It is generally realized that the length of lactation is determined to a very great extent by the length of its S. P. The problem has been the subject of study at different places all over the world with more or less similar results regarding the extent of correlation existing between these two variables. Ellinger [1910?], for instance, dealing with Red Danish breed got a very high value of correlation co- efficient between these two variables r = +.943 STATISTICAL STUDIES, INDIAN DAIRY CATTLE 83 this fact in his work, for according to him " there always are some very long S. Ps. being associated with only moderately long lactations and these are often excluded automatically from the data by the farmers selling the cow before she conceived." There seemed little evidence, however, of this defect in our data, and it was, therefore, thought that the value of r obtained from it would approximate more nearly the true physiological relationship than the same of Sanders' or Ellinger's. A correlation surface was therefore drawn between these two variables, a close study of which revealed that whereas there appeared to be quite a high value of r bet- ween the two variables, i.e., a high value of S. P. seemed to be generally asso- ciated with a long lactation, there were good many cases where the S. P. had been longer than the lactation length accompanying it, this being especially true for very long S. Ps. This led the author to the belief that the length of lactation, though generally governed by S. P., tended to a limit even though the length of the S. P. be infinitely increased, and therefore the true relation between the two variables is not linear in nature as given by Sanders, for on the basis of Sanders' linear equations a cow once in milk will milk infinitely provided she is kept away from the bull, and that the lactation length increases regularly at the rate of 10.5 weeks for every 100 days the date of service is deferred in first calvers. All these beliefs are quite substantiated by the statistical constants given in Table XI and as derived from the said correlation surface. TABLE XI. Correlation of S. P. with lactation length. Mean S. P........ . 123.8 84 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II variables is not quite linear, their degree of correlation is quite high, i.e., a high S. P. will go with a long lactation period. Again though no similar statistical constants for the relationship existing between the lactation length and total milk yielded in it are known to the author to have been determined as between S. P. and lactation length, yet it is common knowledge that the total amount of milk produced during any lactation, i.e., from parturition to the end of lactation or until recurrence of parturition, is greatly influenced by the length of time over which the lactation extends. From the correlation surface drawn for these two variables for our data the statistical cons- tants given in Table XII were obtained:STATISTICAL STUDIES, INDIAN DAIRY CATTLE 85 S. P. affects the lactation yield, for modern researches [Sanders, 1927, 2] have gone on to show that S. P. also affects the shape of lactation curve, the curve being long flat in nature86 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II In the present study all the three methods as described above have been used, though the final corrections have been worked out by the last method only, i.e., by eliminating selection and the effect of the variation of S. P. with age. " Raw lumped lactations ". The mean yields for different ages as derived from the distribution surface drawn between ageSTATISTICAL STUDIES, INDIAN DAIRY CATTLE 87 In this data there were 310 cows whose first two lactations were known and the mean yields for the first and 2nd lactations were 3,767 and 4,067 lbs. respectively, or putting the 1st lactation yield at 100.0 that for the 2nd came to 108.05. Similarly there were 263 cows with 2nd and 3rd lactation known giving means of 4,095 and 4,103 lbs. respectively; if the 2nd lactation yield is taken at 108.05, that for 3rd becomes 108.26 the comparative yields for the 1st, 2nd and 3rd lactations being 100.0, 108.05 and 108.26. The same process was continued for all other ages and the comparative yields got for different ages are given in Table XIV. TABLE XIV. Age in lactations Comparative yield 1 . . . 100.00 2 . . . 108.05 3 . . . 108.26 4 . . . 108.91 5 . . . 104.23 6 . . . 102.67 7 . . . 100.00 8 . . . 89.50 9 . . . 83.68 10 . . . 82.34 A study of these comparative yields shows that these means increase till 4th lactation, though the extent of increase between the lactations 3rd and 4th is very small, and then decrease continuously. These means have not been smoothened in any way, for it is thought that even these do not represent the true relationship of the variation of milk yield with age, for in the first section of this paper it was shown that age is slightly related with both S. P. and D. P. It was not possible to allow for the 2nd, but the effect of the 1st was eliminated by standardizing all lactation yields first to 85 days S. P., and from the corrected lactation yields, a composite curve was built again just in the same way as described above. The actual distribution of these corrected lactation yields according to age is given in Table XV, the means for the different ages being given at the foot of the same Table.
88 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II TABLE Variation of lactation yield with ageSTATISTICAL STUDIES, INDIAN DAIRY CATTLE 89 XV. Individual cows, corrected yields. number 5 5 6 6 7 7 8 8 9 9 10 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 2 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 2 .. 1 1 .. .. .. 5 2 1 1 2 2 1 1 2 .. 1 5 2 1 2 2 3 1 2 .. 5 3 4 4 1 1 2 .. 1 1 2 5 2 5 3 2 1 3 2 2 .. 2 1 7 3 3 2 2 1 2 .. 8 8 9 4 5 3 1 1 2 .. 13 11 5 2 3 .. 2 2 .. .. .. 10 4 4 3 4 2 3 2 .. .. .. 10 8 4 3 2 2 3 2 2 2 .. 9 6 4 3 5 4 .. .. ., 1 6 3 7 6 5 2 3 1 ,. .. 12 6 4 4 2 1 1 1 2 .. 7 2 7 4 2 1 2 2 1 .. 1 13 6 5 4 3 2 1 1 1 1 .. 5 4 3 3 4 3 3 .. 2 2 2 6 6 3 2 2 1 .. .. 2 2 6 4 3 2 2 2 3 1 .. .. .. 2 2 90 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II The comparative means for the different ages as given in Table XV agree very well with those given in Table XIV, supporting thereby our first conclusion that there is not much of variation in S. P. with age. A close study of the actual means and the comparison of a succeeding mean with its preceding one for the same age also reveals the extent of selection on the basis of producing ability that has been going on in these herds. The means are quite regular, there being an increase in their value till the 4th lactation followed by a continuous decline, and the only thing required to be done is to smoothen down these means. To do this the precedence of Maine workers [Gowen, 1924] has been taken and a logarithmic curve of the form y = a + bx + cx2 + d / log x has been fitted by the method of moments [Miner, 1914-15]. The equation for the fitted cruve is y = 100.551 + .911 x STATISTICAL STUDIES, INDIAN DAIRY CATTLE 91 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Age in lactations. Chart 4. Variation of total lactation milk yield with age. (Pure breds).
92 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II It might be mentioned that the above results are absolutely in line with those of Maine workers, according to whom the milk yield rises at an ever decreasing rate as the age of the cow advances, until the age of maximum productivity is reached, from which age it declines at an ever increasing rate as age increases STATISTICAL STUDIES, INDIAN DAIRY CATTLE 93 quickly, but that the total extent of increase in their milk yield as measured by the difference between the 1st lactation yields and the yield for the lactation of maxi- mum productivity is very low. Roughly our average cow does her best perform- ance at her 3rd lactation, and maintains this yield during the 4th lactation, whereas in no other case the maximum is reached before the 6th lactation ; further- more whereas our cows increase to the extent of only about 10 per cent. of their 1st lactation yield till their maximum production ages the foreign cows increase by as much as 30 to 60 per cent. the variation depending upon the data used, i.e., short period milk records, or lactation period milk records. All this goes on to prove the very poor quality of our Indian cows as milkers, for a good cow is a persistent milker not only in every lactation but throughout her life so that her average yield per lactation for whole life be high. This fact becomes all the more striking when it is borne in mind that the results as have been given above as representing the behaviour of Indian cattle are for the best Indian milch cattle, cows whose lactation yields are as high as 4,000 lbs. on the average and that much worse results would be got with the average Indian cows. Of course, the peculiarity about the attainment of maximum production at a comparatively earlier age (as measured in lactations) in Indian cattle can be explained away by the fact that Indian cows calve about a year later than foreign ones, and the total period as covered by their 4 lactation periods is equal in length to that of 5 lactations of foreign cows, so that the actual age of maximum produc- tion (about 7-8 years for both) is more or less the same for both classes of animals ; but the other peculiarity, i.e., the very low increase of yield of the lactation of maximum production over that of the 1st lactation, seems to the author to merit further consideration. However, it is not desired just at present to enter into the cause of this queer phenomenon. This, therefore, is left off for the present to be taken up in detail some other time though to check these results and to see if they truly represented the behaviour of all the cows of our data, the records as used above were divided into separate classes according to the number of lactations for which a cow was maintained in these herds, and the mean variation of milk yield was worked out separately for every class. No peculiarity however was observed in the behaviour of these various age classes as compared with the average results given above for all cows, except that the cows that were maintained for more than 8 lactations in these herds showed a higher increase till the age of their maximum productivity over the 1st lactation yield although they too increased till their 4th lactation only. This slight peculiarity, however, can be explained away by the fact that the animals included in these higher age classes are only selected ones ; and therefore the results already given in Table XVI seem quite correct and truly re- presenting the underlying physiological relationships of the variations of milk yield
94 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II with age in our average pure-bred Indian milch cattle. That they are further con- firmed by the experience of practical cattle breeders in India is seen from the Punjabee sayings " Gán tije, mul na lije " (never purchase a cow that is in her 3rd lactation) and Gan Chauthe, Cham Othe " (cow in her 4th lactation is merely a hide). CROSS-BRED INDIAN CATTLE. To compare the behaviour of Indian cross-bred cows in this respect with that of pure-bred native stock, the variation of milk yield with age as exhibited in the cross-breds was worked out from the Pusa cross-bred stock. As mentioned before only 348 normal complete lactation milk records were available, and therefore the number of records included in different age classes, especially the older ones, was rather small. But since the results obtained are highly interesting and quite sug- gestive due to great regularity in their trend in spite of the very great paucity of data, they are given here, for they bring out very clearly the extraordinary milking capabilities of Indian cross-breds. The procedure employed for study has been the same as used for the Sahiwals. Composite curve method was employed though only uncorrected records were used. The actual distributions are not given, but the fit of the theoretical curve to the observational means is shown in Figure 5, which as will be seen is quite fair. The equation of the fitted curve is y=79.876+19.748xSTATISTICAL STUDIES, INDIAN DAIRY CATTLE 95 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Age in lactations. Fig. 5. Variation of total lactation milk yield with age. (Cross-breds).
96 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II A comparison of the comparative yields as given above for cross-breds with those of similar yields for other breeds as given in Table XVII shows that our Indian cross-breds are in no way inferior in their milking capabilities to any other breed. In fact the figures tend to show that if anything they are a bit superior to all others. This is perhaps due to the hybrid vigour. Since the results for the later ages are based on very few lactations, much reliance cannot be placed in their absolute value, but still the conclusion seems quite justifiable that the Indian cross-breds maintain their yields throughout their lives as nicely as any other dairy breed of the world. By this it is not meant to convey that as dairy animals cross-breds are as efficient producers of milk as any other dairy breed of the world. This can hardly be true, for their mean lactation yield is much lower than many a foreign breed. The only point stressed here is that they maintain their milk yields throughout their whole lives as nicely as any other foreign breed, and much better than pure-bred Indian stock and therefore are far superior to pure-bred Indians as milk producers. Whether they shall efficiently serve the work needs of the country it is not the purpose of this paper to discuss, but that they can play a very import- ant role in solving Indian urban milk supply problem quickly is beyond doubt and is the purpose of this paper to emphasise. Perhaps it is the recognition of this fact that has made the Military Dairy Farm authorities in the North to alter their plan of cattle breeding from one of selective breeding of pure-bred Sahiwals to that of grading them up with imported Friesian sires. SUMMARY. A statistical study of the lactation period milk yields of the cows of Sahiwal breed of India has been conducted with a view to study the variation as caused in them by and to standardize them against the effect of the season of year, S. P. and age, and it has been shown that :STATISTICAL STUDIES, INDIAN DAIRY CATTLE 97 different lengths of S. P. after calving, 85 days S. P. being chosen as the standard. These corrections agree very well with those of Sanders and Hammond [ 1923 ] for Penrith. 4. S. P. affects the total lactation yield by affecting the length of the lacta- tion period. 5. The curve describing the function of variation of milk yield with age is logarithmic in nature, meaning thereby that lactation milk yield at first increases at an ever decreasing rate with increase of age till the age of maximum production, and from there it decreases at an increas- ing rate with advance in age. 6. The actual age of maximum productivity is roughly 3rd-4th lactation for pure-bred Sahiwals as against about the 6th for foreign ones, and approximately 8th for Pusa cross-breds. This earlier maturity of Indian cows is due to their age at 1st calving being a year higher and their lactation period being about two months longer on the average as compared with the foreign ones. 7. Separate correction tables are given for Sahiwals and cross-breds to standardize their milk records for age to mature standard basis, and a comparison made between these results with those for foreign cows. It has been shown that whereas foreign cows and Pusa cross-breds increase to the extent of 30 to 40 per cent. of their 1st lactation yield till their age of maturity, and then begin to decline, the best average pure-bred Indians increase by approximately 10 per cent. only. This is very important, for it proves the extremely poor milking qualities of Indian cows and the highly efficient nature of cross-breds as milk producers. It further emphasises how indispensable cross-breds are for the quick solution of the Indian urban milk supply problem. Acknowledgments. I am highly thankful to Mr. W. Smith, Imperial Dairy Expert, Bangalore, who arranged for the supply of all data and gave valuable guidance throughout the progress of the work. But for the interest he evinced in this investigation it could never have been so satisfactorily concluded. I am also very much indebted to Bhai Balmukand, M.A., M.Sc., of the Department of Agri- culture, Punjab, who gave much help in the mathematical part of the work, and to S. Labh Singh, B.Sc. (Agri.), L.Ag., and S. Kartar Singh, B.Sc. (Agri.), L.Ag., N.D.D., of the Department of Agriculture, Punjab, and Mr. Z. R. Kothawala, B.Ag., B.Sc. (Edin.), N.D.D., Assistant to the Imperial Dairy Expert, Bangalore, for much valuable help and criticism in the preparation of this paper. C 2
98 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II REFERENCES. Brody, Ragsdale and Turner (1923). (Cited from Ill. Agri. Expt. Sta. Bull. 272.) Ellinger (1910?). (Cited from Ill. Agri. Expt. Sta. Bull. 272.) Gavin (1913). Jour. Agri. Sci. 5. Gowen (1920). Genetics 5, 111-188. Gowen (1924). Milk Secretion, 36-37. Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore. Hammond (1927). Reproduction in the Cow. Cambridge University Press. Hammond and Sanders (1923). Jour. Agri. Sci. 13. Kay and M'Candlish (1929). Jour. Agri. Sci. 19 (2). McCandlish (1922). Re. Bull. No. 73 I. Ag. Expt. Stat. Miner (1914-15). Jour. Agri. Res. 3. Sanders (1927, 1). Jour. Agri. Sci. 17. Sanders (1927, 2). Do. 17 (4). Sanders (1928, 1). Do. 18 (1). Sanders (1928, 2). Do. 18 (2).
THE EXISTENCE OF FOWL TYPHOID IN INDIA * BY HUGH COOPER, M.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., Veterinary Research Officer, AND R. N. NAIK, G.B.V.C., Assistant Veterinary Research Officer, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar-Kumaun. (Received for publication on 11th April, 1931.) An outbreak of disease in a flock of poultry at Bhowali in the Kumaun hills was reported to this Institute in August 1930 when a dead fowl was forwarded for examination. Deaths took place in this outbreak mainly among adult birds and as single cases occurring over a period of about two months as shown in Table I. TABLE I. Date No. of deaths in adult fowls No. of deaths in chicks Remarks 19th July 1930 . .. 1 .. 21st July 1930 . .. 1 .. 22nd July 1930 . .. 1 1 30th July 1930 . .. 1 .. 3rd August 1930 . .. 1 1 5th August 1930 . .. 1 1 7th August 1930 . .. 1 1 9th August 1930 . .. 1 .. S. gallinarum isolated in culture. 16th August 1930 . .. 1 .. 17th August 1930 . .. 1 .. 20th August 1930 . .. 1 .. 23rd August 1930 . .. 1 .. Total 12 4 * Paper read at the 18th Session of the Indian Science Congress, Nagpur, 1931. ( 99 )
100 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II From the clinical history reported the disease was at first suspected to be fowl cholera and the use of serum and vaccine against this disease was advised. Bac- teriological examination, however, subsequently showed that the outbreak was due to Salmonella gallinarum, Klein. It is believed that the disease fowl typhoid due to this organism has not before been reported in India, and a further point of interest lies in the fact that outbreaks of disease in fowls may be wrongly diagnosed and thus account for failures from the application of serum and vaccine prepared for use against Fowl Cholera. The disease was transmitted artificially at the laboratory to healthy fowls by the injection of culture of the organism isolated, and the course of the disease was then studied. Symptoms occurred from 2 to 10 days after injection (average 4.1 days) with one case later, on 18th day. They consisted of fever, ruffled feathers and impaired appetite with diarrhTABLE II. ( 101 ) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
102 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II TABLE Cultural characteristics Biochemical reactions Organism Morphology Indol forma- tion Plain agar slant Plain broth Potato Gelatin Litmus milk Bhowali Non-motile rods 0.8 Gray, Turbid Grayish Not Very Not organism. to 1.8 microns long, moist, with yellow lique- slight form- occurring singly or glisten- sedi- growth fied. acidity ed. in short chains, ing ment. slightly followed sometimes showing peripheral but not bipolar staining. Gram negative. colonies. dry. by alka- linity. S. galli- Ditto . Do. Do Do. Do. Do. Do. narum "type" English strain. S. Pullorum Non-motile rods 1.0 Discrete Do. Moist, Do. Do. "type" to 2.5 microns long trans- deep English mostly occurring lucent, grayish strain. singly. moist, glisten- yellow, glisten- Gram negative. ing ing. colonies.
FOWL TYPHOID IN INDIA 103 II. Carbohydrate fermentation Dextrose Lactose Identification Saccharose Mannitol Levulose Galactose Rhamnose Arabinose Maltose Dulcite Dextrin Xylose Inositol Sorbitol A 104 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II Samples of serum obtained from fowls both naturally and artificially infected with the Indian strain of Salmonella gallinarum behaved in an identical manner when tested by the agglutination test against strains of Salmonella gallinarum, English and Indian, Salmonella pullorum and B. typhosus. Details are given in Table III. TABLE III. History Result of agglutination test against the antigen of Serum from S. Galli- narum Bhowali strain S. Galli- narum English strain S. Pullorum B. Typhosus Rabbit No. 53 . Injected with broth culture of virulent S. Gallinarum, Bhowali and bled after 10 days. + + + + Rabbit No. 54 . + + + + Fowl No. 97 Infected with broth culture of S. Gallinarum, Bhowali and bled after 13 days. + + + + Fowl No. 90 . Recovered after artificial infection with Fowl Typhoid 15 days after infection. + + + + Fowl No. 143 . Reported to have suffered from Fowl Typhoid and recovered in the out- break. + + + + Fowl No. 142 . FOWL TYPHOID IN INDIA 105 It is thus not possible, as has already been reported by a number of workers, to distinguish by the agglutination test between fowl typhoid caused by S. gallinarum and bacillary white diarrh106 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II Since, however, three fowls which were reported to have been affected and recovered from the natural disease in the Bhowali flock and one fowl which had recovered from artificial infection also succumbed to an injection of the same living culture, as detailed in Table V, it appears that the organism used for test purposes was so highly virulent as to break down both natural and artificial immunity. It is probable that vccination might prove still to be of use, however, against natural infection. TABLE V. Fowl No. History Agglutination titre prior to the test Infection with S. gallinarum living culture Result Date Dose 90 Survived artificial infec- tion and tested on the 14th day. + 5-9-30 0. 5 c. c. Died 15th day. 143 Said to have recovered from the natural disease at Bhowali. + Died 11th day. 142 RANIKHET DISEASE : A NEW DISEASE OF FOWLS IN INDIA DUE TO A FILTER-PASSING VIRUS.* BY HUGH COOPER, M.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., Veterinary Research Officer, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar-Kumaun. (With 10 charts.) The earliest mention of the disease described in this paper occurs in the Annual Report of the Muktesar Institute for 1927-28, where, under the heading " A New Fowl Disease," Dr. Edwards refers to an exceptionally heavy outbreak of disease in July, 1927, which accounted for about 400 highly bred fowls, within the brief space of two months, out of a flock of about 600 on a farm at Ranikhet, a neigh- bouring station to this Institute situated in the Kumaun foot-hills of the Himalayas. The two characteristic features of the disease stressed by Dr. Edwards were " the almost entire absence of lesions" and the non-inoculability of the virus with the blood of infected birds, although it was " readily conveyed with filterates of mouth- washings ". Towards the latter part of 1928, the disease was diagnosed in a number of sick fowls forwarded to this Institute by a private poultry-owner in the Carhwal district of the United Provinces. Again, in January and April of last year, 1929, the disease occurred in two separate outbreaks on the farm of the United Provinces Poultry Association at Lucknow, and the identity of the disease in one at least of these outbreaks with " Ranikhet Disease " was confirmed from examination of infected fowls at the Muktesar Laboratory. Infective material thus became available at this Institute from each of the three outbreaks referred to above, and advantage was taken of the opportunities thus afforded to carry out a study of the disease under laboratory conditions. A brief reference to this work was included by the writer in the Annual Report of the Muktesar Institute, 1928-29, and the present paper includes results obtained since 1927 from the study, which is still in progress. Outbreaks of what would appear to be the same disease108 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II A fact of some considerable interest in connection with these natural outbreaks of the disease is that in many of the reports it is stated that crows were noticed to be dying in very large numbers in the vicinity of poultry farms when the disease was raging at the time among poultry upon the farms. ISOLATION OF INFECTIVE MATERIAL. Trials with mouth-washings, emulsions of internal organs and with blood from infected birds soon showed that whilst the first two proved infective when injected under the skin of healthy fowls, the inoculation of blood in this manner some- times failed to produce infection. Also, the virus proved capable of passing easily through fine bacterial filters ( " L 3 " candles fitted to Martin's filtering apparatus). In the earlier experiments, the infective material used in the artificial production of the disease consisted entirely of mouth-washings, but latterly it was supplanted by organ emulsion on account of the ease with which the latter could be kept alive under laboratory conditions. The preservation of the organ emulsion was carried out on the lines indicated by Doyle [1927] in his report upon the so-called " New- castle Disease," use being made for the purpose of a mixture of the main cellular organs of the body, liver, spleen and kidneys. The organs were removed with strictly sterile precautions from fowls destroyed at the commencement of the disease, subjected to a process of desiccation, and stored, without the addition of any preservative, in a refrigerator at a temperature below 4 degrees Centigrade. As would appear from the following Table, when stored in this manner the material proved definitely infective for 125 days, and probably until 169 days, in spite of the fact that in a few instances it was noticed to have developed contaminating growths of mould. Age of virus days No. of fowls tested Fowls died "Ranikhet disease'' Fowls died un- diagnosed Fowls lived Survivors re-tested with virus 87 2 2 A NEW DISEASE OF FOWLS IN INDIA 109 The virus contained in this material has been maintained for over a year at the laboratory by passage occasionally through fowls, and the reactions exhibited in fowls injected with it have been identical in every respect with those provoked by mouth-washings. REPRODUCTION OF THE DISEASE. A very large number of healthy fowls has been utilized during the course of the work undertaken at this Institute, but examination of 113 records of birds used in a series of 56 direct passages, where virus in the form of filtered mouth-washings was employed, will serve as an indication as to the extent to which country-bred fowls are susceptible to this affection. The number of fowls actually used in this series was greater than 113, but all records of fowls which were destroyed in the course of the experiments for various reasons, and where complications interfered with the normal progress of the disease, have been excluded from the present note. The results of experimental observation upon these 113 fowls may be summarised as follows:110 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II Death occurred in most cases almost immediately the first symptoms were shown, that is, on the same day or only one day later. Two birds thus died on the second day, and the largest number died on the 3rd and 4th day after injection. The periods of recognisable illness before death occurred are given in the follow- ing table, which shows that death occurred on the day the first symptoms were exhibited in nearly one-third of the fowls; in over one-third it occurred only one day later, and the maximum duration was 10 days. The average duration of recognisable illness in the 96 fowls therefore amounted to only just over one-and a-half days. Death Number of fowls Total days On day of first symptoms . . 30 0 1 day later ..... . 35 35 2 days later ..... . 12 24 3 A NEW DISEASE OF FOWLS IN INDIA 111 SYMPTOMS OF THE DISEASE. The nature of the reaction exhibited after artificial infection is illustrated in charts Nos. 1 to 8. From these it will be seen that the birds remain apparently unaffected until suddenly the temperature drops to a marked degree; the fowls then become very dull, go off their feed and die often before any further symptoms are exhibited. The fall in temperature was the most striking and characteristic symptom of the disease, although in a few instances this was immediately preceded by an elevation in the temperature, as illustrated in charts Nos. 6 and 7. Occasionally birds died suddenly before any apparent disturbance in the tempera- ture curve was exhibited, as illustrated in chart No. 4. Chart No. 9 is that of a fowl which contracted the disease naturally while under observation at Muktesar, and is included for comparison. It will be seen from this chart that the symptoms of the naturally contracted disease are very similar in all essential details to those observed in the artificially induced infection. Symptoms which were exhibited inconstantly, and which are seen usually, it is understood, in the disease as it occurs under natural conditions, are marked respira- tory distress, without, as is noted below, any post-mortem pathological lesion in the lungs; a profuse discharge from the beak and nares associated with a very offensive odour arising from decomposition of the contents of the crop; diarrh112 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II rapidly fatal cases the carcase upon post-mortem examination often appears indistinguishable from that of a healthy fowl. The most striking fact is the complete absence of any recognisable lesion in the lungs of birds which have exhibited perhaps extreme respiratory distress during life. CONTROL MEASURES. Research work undertaken at this Institute under the above head has been confined almost entirely to the laboratory, and the application of control measures in natural outbreaks of the disease has not yet been attempted on any large scale by us. In view of the tenacious nature of the viability of the virus, it is remarkable that the disease was controlled with both speed and effectiveness in the two outbreaks which occurred last year upon the farm of the United Provinces Poultry Association at Lucknow, referred to earlier in this paper. The flock on this farm comprised as many as 1,300 valuable pedigree birds, and were it not for the prompt and energetic measures adopted by Mrs. Fawkes-Ansell, the Secretary of the Associa- tion, in combating the outbreaks, the percentage of mortality amongst the birds exposed to infection would doubtless have run to a high figure. Yet the measures consisted only in destruction of the fowls exhibiting symptoms, addition of permanganate of potash or iodine to the drinking water and food of all non-affected birds, and the liberal use of phenyle compounds in the houses and pens. Upon both occasions the disease was stamped out immediately, with the loss only of the affected birds sacrificed. Experiments have recently been carried out in this Institute upon the possibility of controlling the disease by the application of (1) serum derived from fowls that had recently recovered from the artificially induced disease ; (2) serum prepared from donkeys injected with "Ranikhet disease virus" and (3) vaccine prepared from organs of diseased fowls. (1) The results of a preliminary test with the fowl serum are shown in the following table:A NEW DISEASE OF FOWLS IN INDIA 113 A further test upon the immunizing effect of serum derived from recovered fowls has just been completed at the moment of writing this paper (January 1930), and the results of this test are summarized in the table below. In all cases the birds were injected with virus 24 hours after the injection of serum. Dose of serum Fowl No. Reaction Day of death Result 10 c.c. , 508 509 5 c.c. 510 511 512 513 Just appreciable fall in temperature on 2nd day only. All survived, Immun. 2.5 c c. . 514 515 516 517 Nil (controls) . 520 521 519 518 3rd day 4th day 5th day 5th day 4th night 5th day 5th night 7th night All fully susceptible. The records of the ten fowls used in the above test are represented in the com- posite chart No. 10, which shows that a slight but distinct fall in temperature114 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II rinderpest or cattle plague, but this proved to be equally valueless upon trial in " Ranikhet disease ". It is of interest to note that in one experiment the virus definitely survived the treatment with chloroform although this is held to be capa- ble of rendering the virus of cattle plague inert. IDENTITY OF " RANIKHET DISEASE ". Since 1927, a not inconsiderable number of articles upon what would at any rate appear to be closely related to " Ranikhet disease " have appeared in scientific publications from many parts of the world. Of these mention may be made of "Newcastle Disease" in England [Doyle, 1927]; "Avian Pseudopest" in Java [Picard, 1928]; " Avian Pest " in the Philippine [Rodier, 1929]; " A New Malady of Fowls due to a Filter-passing Virus " in Egypt [Lagrange, 1929]; and " A New Poultry Disease " (" Geflugelseuche ") in Korea [Ochi and Hashimoto, 1929]. The results of early work which was in progress at this laboratory at the time of the publication of Doyle's article [1927] had already suggested to Major R. F. Stirling, then Officiating Pathologist at this Institute, the very considerable similar- ity that appeared to exist between " Ranikhet disease " and " Newcastle disease." The results of experiments carried out subsequently by the present writer have now furnished him with definite confirmatory evidence indicating a very close similarity between the two forms of affection, as noticeable in their contagious nature; the high rate of mortality amongst affected birds (in the case of " Newcastle disease," Doyle estimates a mortality rate of about 100 per cent.); the infectivity of the in- ternal organs and mouth exudate of diseased birds ; filterability of the virus ; the not infrequent non-inoculability of the virus with blood; the respiratory symp- toms ; and in the post-mortem findings, e.g., the occurrence of localized catarrhal enteritis in the duodenum, caecum or cloaca. On the other hand, the almost con- sistent absence of febrile symptoms in " Ranikhet disease " constitutes a notable point of difference between this and " Newcastle disease," whilst the average in- cubation period in the latter affection, as given by Doyle, is also slightly longer than that observed in " Ranikhet disease." A striking proof that " Ranikhet disease " is, at any rate, immologically identical with " Newcastle disease " of England and also with " Avian pest " in the Philippine Islands has been afforded by a comparative test of the three viruses at Muktesar.* It will be observed from the results summarized in the table * The writer desires to express his sincere gratitude to Dr. Rodier, Pathologist, Veterinary Re- search Laboratories, Minala, for providing him with samples of the viruses of both " Newcastle disease " and " Avian pest," the former having been previously obtained by Dr. Rodier from England from Mr. Doyle. These samples were despatched to the writer in India in cold storage all the way from Manila, and the courtesy with which Dr. Rodier has attended to the writer's requests in this connection is eloquent of the spirit of co-operation existing amongst veterinary workers overseas.
A NEW DISEASE OF FOWLS IN INDIA 115 below that, while fowls that had recovered from an attack of " Ranikhet disease" were solidly immune to each of the other two viruses, healthy fowls were fully susceptible to them. Conversely, fowls that had recovered from an artificially induced attack of "Newcastle disease" proved fully resistant to the virus of "Ranikhet disease". SUSCEPTIBILITY OF BIRDS OTHER THAN FOWLS TO INDIAN, ENGLISH AND PHILIP- PINE VIRUSES. At the time of completing the writing of this paper, the results of inoculating pigeons with the three viruses referred to above are becoming apparent. The reaction exhibited is similar to that occurring in fowls, except that in the pigeons now under observation paralysis of the legs and wings is an extremely well marked symptom. It is hoped that it will be possible to submit an addendum to this paper detailing the final results of injection of the viruses into pigeons as well as into some other birds. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS. 1. The disease described in this paper was first recognised in India in 1927. 2. It is an acute, usually non-febrile, contagious and highly infective disease of fowls, caused by a filter-passing virus and characterised by respiratory distress and high mortality. 3. Reports have frequently been received of heavy mortality occurring amongst the crow population of infected localities. 4. The incubation period in the artificially produced disease is ordinarily from 3 to 5 days, but may be as short as 2 days or delayed until the 6th or 7th, and exceptionally even the 14th day. 5. The duration of recognisable illness in the artificially produced disease is usually extremely short, averaging only 1½ days, but the period may extend to ten days. 6. Ninety-five per cent. of Indian country bred fowls used in transmission experiments proved to be susceptible to the virus and only ten per cent. of the affected animals survived. 7 Except for the occurrence of petechiae in the submucosa of the proventiculus, post-mortem lesions of diagnostic value are almost entirely absent. 8. Emulsion of internal organs stored unpreserved in a refrigerator have been proved to retain their infectivity for periods extending to 169 days.
116 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II 9. Serum obtained from recovered fowls is protective against the disease, but serum produced from donkeys proved to have no protective value. 10. A few attempts were made to prepare a vaccine suitable for employment against the disease, but they were unsuccessful. 11. The disease had been shown to be immunologically identical by cross- immunity tests with both " Newcastle disease " in England and " Avian pest " in the Philippine Islands. REFERENCES. Cooper (1927). Proc. World's Poultry Congress, Ottawa, Canada, 1927, pp. 321A NEW DISEASE OF FOWLS IN INDIA 117 TABLE. Results of a comparative virus test carried out on 9th September, 1929. Virus Fowls Test Retest with Indian Virus Result Source No. Date History No. Reaction Day of Death Reaction Day of Death English Newcastle disease 1 1-8-29 Healthy . 247 248 Nil Nil Lived Lived 4th day 3rd day 4th 7th Virus dead. Recovered from Ranikhet disease 96 109 Nil Lived 118 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II PASSAGE OF RANIKHET DISEASE VIRUS. Fowl No. 81. Injected Virus 15-4-29. Fowl No. 34. Injected Virus 8-12-28. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
A NEW DISEASE OF FOWLS IN INDIA 119 PASSAGE OF RANIKHET DISEASE VIRUS. Fowl No. 74. Injected Virus 22-12-28. Fowl No. 25. Injected Virus 20-11-28. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
120 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II PASSAGE OF RANIKHET DISEASE VIRUS. Fowl No. 6. Injected Virus, 5-1-29. Fowl No. 56. Injected Virus, 15-3-29. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
A NEW DISEASE OF FOWLS IN INDIA 121 PASSAGE OF RANIKHET DISEASE VIRUS. Fowl No. 39. Injected Virus 16-11-28. Fowl No. 56. Injected Virus 8-12-28. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
122 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II NATURAL CASE IN HEALTHY FOWL UNDER OBSERVATION. Fowl No. 24. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
A NEW DISEASE OP FOWLS IN INDIA 123 Composite Chart of Ten Fowls given Serum drawn from Recovered Fowls on 7-1-30, and Ranikhet Disease Virus on 8-1-30. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
PRACTICAL FEEDING TABLES FOR DAIRY CATTLE IN INDIA. BY CAPTAIN C. E. MACGUCKIN, M.B.E., H.D.A., Assistant Controller, Military Dairy Farms, Northern Circle. (Received for publication on 29th January 1931.) It is essential, in these days, when science and business working together have made " Standardization " the main road to commercial success, that dairy farmers should also keep abreast of the movement. Of all the processes on a dairy farm, perhaps, the art of feeding cattle is the most difficult to standardize. The factors involved are numerous, many vary from day to day, and although an immense amount of scientific help, in the shape of data based on accurate research work, is available, much of this data may be most misleading when applied to local conditions. In putting forward these tables, I, therefore, do so with diffidence and only claim that they fulfil three conditions, which inter alia, are in my opinion, essential in any system offered to the ordinary farmer, namely:FEEDING TABLES FOR DAIRY CATTLE IN INDIA 125 The quantity of concentrate mixture is fixed to bring the feeding value of the entire ration up to what is at present considered the most economical standard for the various animals. These figures are based on feeding for the past 6 years, over 3,000 animals scattered over the Punjab, North-West Frontier Province and Baluchistan. 2. WORK PERFORMED BY THE ANIMAL. It is economical to feed individual animals according to the work they perform. See Tables B and D. 3. SIZE OF THE ANIMAL. The surface area of an animal has a very direct bearing on its food require- ments. This is most easily allowed for by weight. Weight also plays an important part in checking the efficiency of a ration, especially for calves. See Tables A, B, C and D. 4. PERIOD OF PREGNANCY. The nourishment of the growing foetus calls for little extra food until the last few months of pregnancy. It is, however, important that the animal should be in good condition when calving, as this has an appreciable effect on its subsequent yield during the lactation. See Table C, where an allowance has been made for pregnant cattle from " 3 months to calve " onwards. 5. CLIMATE. It has been found that cattle need extra ration during the winter months in some parts of India. See Table E. 6. MINERAL REQUIREMENTS OF CATTLE. This question is still to some extent in the experimental stage. See Table F. 7. INDIVIDUALITY OF THE ANIMAL. Never mind what system of feeding is devised to suit the average animal, there will be certain individuals which it will, obviously, not suit. Such animals must be given special attention and their rations altered accordingly if economical to do so, otherwise they should be cast. See (8).
126 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II 8. CONDITION OF THE ANIMAL. For the intelligent application of any system it is essential that the farmer should continually study the condition of his cattle; this will give him a good indication as to whether he is, or is not, feeding correctly. At least once a week he should go round his herd and after carefully inspecting each animal mark up its condition. See Ration Statements I and II (5). 9. PERCENTAGE OF FAT IN THE MILK. Most authorities make an allowance in the ration for the percentage of fat in the milk. I do not think it is worth the trouble involved in India. The marked difference between the percentage of fat in cows' and buffaloes' milk, appears to be compensated for best by an increase in fodder for buffaloes ; these animals have a remarkable capacity for utilising fodder and thrive better on a wider nutritive ratio than cows. I must acknowledge the many valuable suggestions which I have received from time to time and which are embodied in these tables from Mr. H. B. Claxton, Deputy Assistant Controller, Dairy Farms, Managers of Military Dairies in the Northern Circles, and from Mr. Balwant Singh, M.Sc., Agricultural Research Chemist, Military Farms Department. CONDITIONS NECESSARY FOR THE SUCCESSFUL WORKING OF THESE TABLES. To work these tablesFEEDING TABLES FOR DAIRY CATTLE IN INDIA 127 c. Animals over 18 months:128 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II (c) Are they of sufficient variety ? It is safer to feed at least three different foods in the concentrate mixture. By different foods I mean foods from different sources; for example, linseed cake and gram are different foods but not wheat bran and wheat. (d) What is their local cost in relation to their feeding value ? The feeding value of one food in comparison with another even when only considering dairy cattle, is a question on which there is much difference of opinion. I, however, give some figures in Table 1 which may help the farmer in making up his mind as to what to feed. Table 1 will also be found very useful in making corrections in the " Feeding Tables " without too many calculations. For example, if instead of 4 parts wheat bran, 2 parts toria cake, 2 parts gram husk and 1 part gram, a farmer wishes to feed 3 parts linseed cake, 1 part barley, 2 parts wheat bran and 3 parts gram husk, he would make the following calcula- tions :FEEDING TABLES FOR DAIRY CATTLE IN INDIA 129 A certain quantity of wheat bran should be a feature of all mixtures fed to the milking herd as it is an excellent feed for such animals, and at the price at which it is usually available in India, good value for money. TABLE 1. Food stuff Unit value Category No. Minimum and maximum percentage of each category which should be in final mixture Not less than Not more than % % Linseed cake . . . . . . 74 Til cake . . . . . . 72 Toria cake . . . . . . 65 } I 30 50 Cotton seed . . . . . . 63 Mustard cake . . . . . . 61 Gram . . . . . . 68 Oats . . . . . . 60 Maize . . . . . . 81 } II 25 50 Wheat bran . . . . . . 43 Gram husk . . . . . . 35 Cotton seed husk . . . . . . 10 } III .. 40 Rice husk . . . . . . 8 Barley . . . . . . 71 } IV .. 25 Wheat . . . .. . .. 72 FEEDING FOR ANTICIPATED YIELD. Farmers should feed an increased concentrate ration to animals in the milking herd in anticipation of yields in the following cases:130 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II (b) When an animal calves, it may be fed extra concentrate ration in anticipa- tion of what it is going to give. For example, if it is anticipated that a cow will give 30 lbs. a day, it may be fed as if it was actually giving this amount. If it reaches 30, it may be fed for 40 and so on. This is subject to the following restrictions :FEEDING TABLES FOR DAIRY CATTLE IN INDIA 131 NOTE 3. In cases when a mixture of dry and green fodder is fed not exactly in the above proportions, the farmer should feed in the nearest category using his own judgment. NOTE 4. Green fodder out too dry to be classified under green should be classified for quantity to feed in categories c (2) and c (3) according to its moisture contents and the concentrate mixture fed accordingly. Semi dry fodders containing an appreciable quantity of grain should be classified for quantity to be fed as above but the concentrate mixture should be fed as per Scale D. NOTE 5. If fodder is not chaffed or cut up, 20 per cent. extra should be fed. NOTE 6. When grazing is available,.it should be classified into c (2), c (3) or c (4) according to its moisture contents and the quantity of fodder fed decreased as follows :132 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II Buffalo No. 3 would receive 10 lbs. concentrate mixture, 11 lbs. bhoosa and 55 lbs. green jowar. Buffalo No. 4 would receive 9 lbs. concentrate mixture, 12 lbs. bhoosa and 58 lbs. green jowar. NOTE.FEEDING TABLES FOR DAIRY CATTLE IN INDIA 133 RATION TABLE B. For the milking herd weighing up to 800 lbs. FODDER Daily milk yield lbs. CONCENTRATE MIXTURE QUANTITY TO BE FED A B C D If all dry If all green 1134 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II Extra ration to be fed for weight. ADD THE FOLLOWING BUFFALOES COWS Weight in lbs. Concentrate mixture Fodder Concentrate mixture Fodder A B C D If all If all A B C D If all If all dry green dry green 800FEEDING TABLES FOR DAIRY CATTLE IN INDIA 135 2. Buffaloes. FODDER CONCENTRATE MIXTURE Weight in lbs. QUANTITY TO BE FED A B C D If all dry If all green Under 400 . 3 2 2 1 12 60 400136 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II 2. For adult buffalo bulls. CONCENTRATE MIXTURE FODDER Weight in lbs. QUANTITY TO BE FED A B C D If all dry If all green Under 1,000 6 4 3 2 18 90 1,000FEEDING TABLES FOR DAIRY CATTLE IN INDIA 137 TABLE F. Mineral feeding. Generally speaking, the danger of mineral deficiency in the dairy animals ration in India is ever present. Although little experimental work has been done on this subject, it appears that this danger is dependent to some extent on the following factors:138 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II TABLE G. Salt. Each adult animal should receive approximately one ounce of salt per diem. This may be given:FEEDING TABLES FOR DAIRY CATTLE IN INDIA 139 Ration Statement I for calves from birth to nine months for week ending.................. Number Initial of the person incharge of calves. Initial of the Manager of the Farm. Name Weight on birth Date Age in days Present weight Good Condition { Fair Total. Bad Milk Sep. Milk Concentrates Milk Sep. Milk Concentrates Milk Sep. Milk Concentrates Milk Sep. Milk Concentrates Milk Sep. Milk Concentrates Milk Sep. Milk Concentrates Milk Sep. Milk Concentrates
140 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II APPENDIX II. The form overleaf has been drawn up to facilitate the rationing of concentrates to adult milking stock, dry stock, bulls and young stock over 9 months. NOTE 1. It is advisable to use a separate form for different classes of animals. NOTE 2. In column 6 ' milking average for the week ' of course only applies to animals in milk. By ' service' is meant whether bulls are in service or idle. These animals should be marked I for idle and S for service and fed accordingly, see note to Table D. NOTE 3. In column 7 'month to calve' only applies to adult female not in milk (Table C). NOTE 4. The condition of the animal should be noted in column 5 by using the appropriate letter. If the animal is too fat, the ration should be reduced and if its condition is bad, the ration should be increased. See column 10.
FEEDING TABLES FOR DAIRY CATTLE IN INDIA 141 Ration Statement II for milking stock, dry stock, bulls and young stock over nine months for the week ending............... 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 Number of animal Name of animal Ration scale being fed as per Table Weight Physical condition F142 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II APPENDIX III. The form given below has been drawn up to facilitate the serving and drying off of animals at the proper time and estimating with reasonable accuracy the calving date. It is necessary to have the latter information to utilise Table "C" correctly. NOTE 1. Names of animals should be entered on this statement as they calve. NOTE 2. The date an animal should be served after calving depends on a large number of factors which cannot be discussed in this paper. NOTE 3. The date of service should be written in pencil until it is definitely known that the animal has held to that service. NOTE 4. The date of drying off will depend on several factors but as a rule should be 60 days before the animal is due to calve. First calvers should not be kept in milk over 365 days. NOTE 5. The date due to calve will be approximately date of service plus 282 days for cows and date of service plus 306 days for buffaloes. NOTE 6. The actual date calved should be recorded in the statement to facilitate checking the correctness of service recorded. NOTE 7. From this record the actual number of animals to calve in future months can be easily tabulated. Service and calving statement. No. of animal Name of animal Date calved Date due for ser- vice Date served Name of bull Date due to be dried off Date due to calve Date calved
EQUINE MICROFILARIASIS: A SHORT REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE.* BY S. K. SEN, M.Sc., F.E.S., Protozoologist, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar144 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II Therapeutics state that the evolution of this parasite is unknown. Likewise, Railliet's original description of this parasite, as published in Traile de Zoologic [1895], does not contain any reference to the embryos of P. multipapillosa occurring in the blood, although both NeveuREVIEW OF EQUINE MICROFILARIASIS 145 of 1,500 camels examined by him in various camel corps in India, only two cases showed filarial infection, although, according to Cross [1922-1923], "the disease is common in camels ". CLINICAL SYMPTOMS OF MICROFILARIASIS IN EQUINES. In a great majority of the cases of equine microfilariasis recorded by various workers, no definite clinical symptoms have been reported, and in a few instances where this has been done, the symptoms were not such as could not be ascribed to causes other than microfilariasis. As a matter of fact, several workers have noted the occurrence of microfilariasis in the horse as a condition concomitant with other forms of blood infection, where systematic examination of blood smears has been resorted to as a routine procedure, so that the possibility suggests itself that a more extensive search would result in the finding that a proportion of the equine species normally harbour these parasites without developing any visible clinical symptoms. The more notable observations on record upon the nature and extent of morbid disturbances evoked in the equine species by the presence of these para- sites may be summarized as follows. (a) Occurrence of Microfilariasis in Conjunction with other Diseases. Macalister [1917], in India, in the course of a lengthy discussion upon the ætiology of " Kumri" refers to the frequent association of this disease with Selaria equina, and this would appear to lend considerable primâ facie support to the view that the two are ætiologically connected. He concludes, however, that "this is to be regarded as a chance conjunction and not implying a causal relationship". Aldigé [1920], in French West Africa, observed that the occurrence of filarial embryos was frequently associated with trypanosomiasis (Trypanosoma congolense infection), especially in New Guinea and Senegal, and also with such other local diseases as might be prevailing at the time, and in certain instances the parasites were even detected by him in the blood of healthy animals, although their presence was not revealed by any manifest symptoms. In regard to the so-called "Fez" disease (infectious anæmia) of the horse in Morocco, it was demonstrated by Velu [1921] that this disease did not represent a single entity but that it comprised as many as four infections, namely, trypano- somiasis, spirillosis, piroplasmosis, and microfilariasis. The occurrence of microfilariæ in the blood of equines affected with trypano- somiasis has been mentioned by a number of workers, and the presence of the parasites has not infrequently been detected at this Institute in the course of the F 2
146 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [I, II routine examination of blood smears from animals experimentally infected with surra trypanosomes. Likewise, in the case of the Remount Depot mentioned earlier in this paper, the parasites were found in smears taken from mules and horses belonging to a " surra area ". Similar remarks apply also to the bovine species, for Teague and Clark [1918] readily demonstrated the presence of filarial embryos in the blood of Panama cattle affected with trypanosomiasis, and Ford [1919], in the Malay States, found them in the blood of an Indian bull suffering from surra, whilst, recently, Davis [1929], in the Sudan, has described the occurrence of filarial embryos in the blood of a bull suspected of trypanosomiasis. The two infections have also been sometimes found coincident in the camel, as is illustrated by an instance cited by Littlewood [1919-20], in Egypt, whilst, in India, " surra and filariasis are often found in the same animal " and " this has generally complicated the investigation of the latter disease " [Leese, 1910]. (b) Clinical Symptoms definitely ascribed to Microfilariasis. From the descriptions given by various workers of the symptoms of the disease, one finds it difficult to resist the impression that microfilariasis of the horse is not associated with any clear clinical picture. Symptoms have been described which are characteristic of diseases referable to widely different categories (e.g., trypano- somiasis, glanders), or, else, except for the occurrence of eosinophilia (indicative of general verminous infections), the symptoms described are so diffuse (e.g., "debility", '' wastage ", " anæmia ", etc.) as to be applicable to a number of other affections. The truth of this statement is illustrated by the following citations. Littlewood [1914], in Egypt, found that the occurrence of filarial embryos in the circulating blood of equines was characterized by the presence of petechiæ, anæmia and wasting. Wirth [1917], in Hungary, observed that microfilariasis of the horse was associated with " general lassitude ", " somewhat diminished appetite " and the heart action being " violent on slight exertion ", although the parasites were sometimes detected by him in the blood of horses showing no apparent symptoms of disease. Yakimoff and his collaborators [1915], in Turkestan, found the disease to be characterized by the presence of abrasions (due to irritation), REVIEW OF EQUINE MICROFILARIASIS 147 According to Vleming [1917], the acute form of equine filariasis in Surinam is characterized by such general symptoms as wasting, anæmia, and 148 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II It would thus appear from the foregoing extracts that the observations recorded by various workers, in regard to the nature and extent of morbid disturbances evoked by the occurrence of filarial embryos in the circulating blood of the different species of animals, afford one reasonable ground for thinking that the clinical symptoms that have been attributed to a microfilarial invasion in these animals may (at any rate, in a large proportion of the recorded cases) have been, in reality, due to causes other than microfilariasis 1. TREATMENT OF EQUINE MICROFILARIASIS. As one would expect, in the absence of precise knowledge as to the pathogenic rôle played by filarial embryos, the various forms of therapeutic treatment designed to combat these parasites have been of a very empirical character. So far as the equine species is concerned, Wirth [1917] found that no special treatment was called for, as the disease generally ran a favourable course, although recovery did not take place before two to four months from the onset of the disease. Wirth, however, tested the efficacy of atoxyl, without any beneficial results. Yakimoff and his col- laborators [1915] found the intravenous injection of salvarsan valueless. Aldigé [1920] would appear to have given a fairly extensive trial to the various products utilized in the treatment of trypanosomiasis, namely, orpiment, atoxyl, trypanblue, trypanred, and tartar emetic, but except for the last, all the drugs tested by him yielded negative results. With tartar emetic, the injection of the drug in from 1.2` to 1.4 gramme doses was followed by the disappearance of the parasites and an amelioration of the symptoms, provided the injections were repeated from four to twelve times (one or two injections were found by him to be valueless). In the case of the affected horses in the Remount Depot mentioned above, treatment was attempted by the intravenous administration of single doses (50 c. c. of a 10 per cent. solution) of " Bayer 205 ", but the results were negative. As a matter of fact, only a limited number of drugs would appear to have been tested as to their efficacy for animal microfilariasis. Of these, mention may be made of galyl, which was employed by Curasson [1920], in doses of 0.5 c. c. of a 1 per cent. solution per kilo., intravenously, in the treatment of microfilariasis of the carrion crow, but the application of this remedy resulted only in a partial recovery. For the treatment of the microfilariasis of the dog (due to Mf. immitis), Itagaki and his collaborators [1927], in Japan, employed sodium antimonyl tartrate, admi- nistered intravenously in doses ranging from 0.003 to 0.004 gramme per kilo. body weight, at intervals of one or more days. The treatment is claimed by them to have resulted in a disappearance of the embryos from the circulation of the affected animals. 1 A view which would seem warranted even allowing for the possibility that the parasites con- cerned in the cases described by the serveral authors were not specifically identical.
REVIEW OF EQUINE MICROFILARIASIS 149 REFERENCES. Aldigé (1920). Rec. Med. Vet. 96, 46-54. Beal (1920). Report on Live-stock Industries of the Northern Territories of Gold Coast. [Abstr. in Trop. Vet. Bull. 9, 48; 1921.] Blanck (1927). Arch. f. Wissenschaft. U. Prakt. Tierheilk. 55, 557-579. [Abstr. in Trop. Vet. Bull., 15, 106; 1927.] Bodkin and Cleare (1916). Bull. Entom. Res. 7, 179-190. Curasson (1920). Bull. Soc. Path. Exot. 13, 654-655. Davis (1928). Ann. Trop. Med. and Parasit. 22, 59-61. Dios and Zuccarini (1926). Compt. Rend. Soc. Biol. 95, 827. Foley (1921). Ann. Inst. Past. 35, 212-217. Foley, Catanei and Vialatte (1926). Arch. Inst. Pasteur d'Algerie, 4, 485-518. [Abstr. in Trop. Vet. Bull. 16, 17-18; 1928.] Ford (1919). Vet. Journ. 75, 45-54. Iliesco (1923). Arch. Veterinaria, 17, 116-119. [Abstr. in Trop. Vet. Bull. 14, 13; 1925.] Deals with hæmorrhages caused by P. multipapillosa. Itagaki and Makino (1927). Journ. Jap. Soc. Vet. Sci. 6, 15-23. Littlewood (1915). Minist. Agric. Annual Report of the Vet. Service for the year 1914 (Egypt.) Littlewood (1921). Ibid. for the year 1919-20. Macalister (1917). Mem. Dept. Agric. India, Vet. Ser. 2, 207-261. Martin (1917). Berl. Tierärzt. Wochenschr. 33, 520-524. Oguni (1927). Journ. Jap. Soc. Trop. Vet. Sci. 6, 188-190. Richardson (1921). Annual Report Dept. Agric. Uganda Protect. for the year ended 31st March 1920. [Abstr. in Trop. Vet. Bull. 9, 134; 1921.] Smit (1925). Nederl.-Indië Blad. V. Diergeneesk, 37, 529-534. [Abstr. in Trop. Vet. Bull. 14, 61; 1926.] Smit and Ihle (1925). Centralbl. f. Bakt. I. Abt. Orig. 96, 30-32. Teague and Clark (1918). Journ. Infect. Dis. 22, 154-158. Velu (1921). Trop. Vet. Bull. 9, 261-262. Vleming (1917). Tidjs. v. Vergelijk. Geneesk. 2, 109-116; 180-193. [Abstr. in Trop. Vet. Bull 7, 207-208; 1919.] Wirth (1917). Zeitschr. f. Infektionskr. parasit. Krankheit. u. Hyg. d. Haustiere, 18, 380-413. [Abstr. in Trop. Vet. Bull. 5, 237-248 ; 1917.] Yakimoff, Schochos, Koselkin, Winogradow, and Demidow (1915). Ibid. 16, 275-286. [Abstr. in Trop. Vet. Bull. 6, 96-97; 1918.] Yakimoff and his collaborators (1916). Bull. Soc. Path. Exot. 9, 219-226. Yakimoff and his collaborators (1917). Bull. Soc. Path. Exot. 10, 102-105. Zeiss (1927). Deut. Tierärzt. Wochenschr. 35, 364-367.
SELECTED ARTICLE INTERIM REPORT ON THE IMMUNISATION OF DRAFT ANIMALS IN BURMA AGAINST ANTHRAX. BY D. T. MITCHELL, M.R.C.V.S., Director of Veterinary Services, Burma. (Reprinted from Bulletin No. 1 of 1930 of the Veterinary Department, Burma.) DISTRIBUTION. The distribution of anthrax in this Province is widespread. In the last two years, during which time an effort has been made to increase the number of blood smears submitted for microscopic examination from dead animals in the districts, the disease has been recorded from practically every district. It usually occurs in sporadic form and results in the death of only a few ani- mals in each outbreak, so there is every reason to presume that many of these out- breaks in cattle and buffaloes pass unnoticed. Epidemics have been recorded in wild animals in the neighbourhood of an outbreak in domestic stock, and as practi- cally all species, with the exception of carnivora, are highly susceptible, such an epidemic seriously complicates the ordinary preventive measures of segregation or isolation. Where animals are concentrated in any area, the disease is liable to assume epidemic form. As examples of this, we have the recent mortality (1928-29) in the horses of the Rangoon Paper Chase Club and the annual epidemics which have occurred up to the present in the elephants of the timber firms, working in infected forest areas. MORTALITY FROM ANTHRAX. It is very difficult to arrive at any estimate of the losses which are occurring in cattle and buffaloes from this disease as it can only be definitely diagnosed by mi- croscopic examination of blood smears. The difficulties at present existing in get- ting smears from animals which die in the village-tracts are almost insuperable and ( 150 )
IMMUNIZATION OF DRAFT ANIMALS AGAINST ANTHRAX 151 many years will require to elapse before the villager can be taught to realise the importance of a correct and early diagnosis in the prevention of epidemic disease in stock. The grouping of black quarter, hæmorrhagic septicæmia and anthrax under one heading in the annual report of the Department indicates the present position regarding diagnosis. So long as the returns submitted by the Thugyi remain the principal source of information in compiling mortality statistics, little reliance can be placed on these as an index of distribution of disease or mortality in animals. In the case of elephants the methods of recording mortality and submitting material for a laboratory diagnosis are well organised by the firms concerned, and the records can be relied upon. The mortality from anthrax in these returns over a period of years is a staggering figure when converted into terms of cash. One reads of losses from anthrax varying from 20 to 90 animals per annum in the herds of one of the firms concerned. ECONOMIC VALUE. The average total annual mortality from anthrax in working elephants in Burma has not yet been worked out, but it may be taken for the purpose of illustra- tion at the low estimate of 60 animals. The average value of these animals is about Rs. 5,000 each or Rs. 3,00,000. Averaging the season's work of one elephant at 80 tons of timber, the royalties to the Government in respect to 60 elephants works out at about Rs. 1,16,160 which are indefinitely or permanently deferred. To this must also be added the loss in holding up the work in a forest where an outbreak occurs and the loss of profit on the timber which might have been extract- ed, etc., which cannot be estimated. These figures in relation to one class of animal and one section of Agriculture only gave one some idea of the economic importance of the problem and indicated that research into methods of prevention should be considered first among the very urgent problems which confronted the Veterinary Department in Burma. RESEARCH WORK BEGUN. A Special Research Officer was appointed in December 1927, but it was not found possible to commence serious work on anthrax until nearly a year later, Octo- ber 1928. This was due to (a) the necessity for training a staff in general laboratory duties, (b) the provision of internal fittings for the laboratory, (c) the absence of suitable apparatus and equipment which had to be purchased locally, borrowed or ordered from England, (d) repairs to Incinerator, (e) arrangements for the supply of small laboratory animals, etc., etc.
152 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II Considerable difficulty was experienced in procuring a local strain of anthrax from each species. Specimen bottles for despatch of a piece of dried ear from sus- pected cases were distributed, but the fear of spreading infection prevented speci- mens being freely submitted. Only one specimen from an elephant was found to be infective, although smears from animals, dead of the disease, were frequently being received. STRAINS USED. This specimen came from an elephant of Messrs. T. D. Findlay of Nyaunglebin on 8th March 1928 and the strain was used in these tests as the virulent anthrax emulsion. Strains from cattle and horses were secured from local outbreaks in the Insein area. For the production of the vaccine a strain was used which was brought from South Africa in 1927 and was of " Bovine " origin. This was obtained with other anthrax strains, through the courtesy of the Director of Veterinary Services, Union of South Africa. NATURE OF VACCINE. The preparation of the vaccine was carried out on lines similar to those employ- ed in South Africa and recorded in the Annual Report of the Department Union of South Africa. The finished vaccine consists of a suspension of living anthrax spores, freed from the bacilli, from a strain attenuated to a fixed degree by incubation at a te mperature higher than the optimium, in a solution of water and glycerine. It is therefore a very stable product and one which, even in jungle conditions in Burma, may be expected to remain unchanged for a considerable period if given a reason- able amount of protection from light and heat. NATURE OF THE VIRULENT ANTHRAX MATERIAL. The virulent anthrax suspension was prepared by isolating the strain from the case in the elephant at Nyaunglebin and growing it under ordinary incubator condi- tions in the laboratory. The virulent suspension was prepared by emulsifying the spores in old cultures in water and glycerine. For use, this emulsion was standar- dised on sheep. The minimum amount required to kill a sheep being named in this report " The M. L. D." which was found to be 0.00005 c.c. The virulency of this strain was found to be about double that of a virulent cattle strain which has been brought from South Africa. The dose of the vaccine was calculated on the amount required to protect a sheep one month later against 1,000 M.L.D. of virulent spore emulsion by an experi- ment on a series of these animals.
IMMUNIZATION OF DRAFT ANIMALS AGAINST ANTHRAX 153 Having thus produced a supply of standardised attenuated anthrax spore emul- sion for use as a vaccine and a standardised virulent anthrax spore emulsion of elephant strain for use as a test of the immunity produced, it was possible to con- sider arrangements for estimating the value of the vaccine prepared from the South Africa strain against the local Burmese strains of anthrax. The strains in the various species of animals in Burma do not show very much variation and the history of outbreaks indicate that in all probability the strains present in elephants, cattle and buffaloes are the same or may be considered so at present from the point of view of immunisation. TESTS ON SHEEP. Preliminary laboratory test on sheep were commenced on 5th January 1929. Batch (I) anthrax vaccine was used and varying doses were given from 0.1 c.c. to 20.0 c.c. The results from this batch of sheep were unsatisfactory. The animals were allowed to graze in the Research Laboratory compound and a very heavy mortality occurred a few days after inoculation from a condition resembling plant poisoning. None of the animals showed anthrax on blood examination. It was later established by animal experiment that this condition was due to eating the thorny branches of the " sensitive plant " (Mimosapudica) which was very plentiful and at an attractive stage. The sheep had come from the dry zone and were not accustomed to the local Insein vegetation. The test was repeated on 18th February 1929 on a further batch of sheep which, on this occasion, were stable throughout the tests. Vaccine in doses varying from 0.002 c.c. to 10.0 c.c. were injected into two animals each. The inoculation of the vaccine was followed by a distinct thermal reaction about the third day. A month was allowed for establishment of immunity, and on 28th March 500 and 1,000 M.L.D. of virulent cultures were injected into each of the pairs of vaccinated sheep. The sheep which received a dose of 0.002 c.c. vaccine died of acute anthrax in 48 hours, of those which received 0.005 c.c., one died after being injected with 1,000 M.L.D. of virulent emulsion and the second sheep which received 500 M.L.D. of virulent culture survived. All sheep receiving a dose of 0.01 c.c. or higher survived. These tests were considered to be very satisfactory as they indicated154 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II TESTS ON CATTLE. The vaccine was then tested out on cattle at the dose indicated in the previous experiments and multiples :IMMUNIZATION OF DRAFT ANIMALS AGAINST ANTHRAX 155 Africa. The vaccine and stock emulsions, cultures, etc., were placed on ice until work could be resumed. In the following month an outbreak occurred among elephants belonging to Messrs. MacGregor & Co., Limited, Toungoo, at Gwe Chaung. Vaccine was asked for and issued for the inoculation of three remaining elephants. The inoculation was performed on 24th May by the firm's Veterinary Assistant, Mr. Birch, and inoculations were done in the neck. From the details submitted it is difficult to arrive at any satisfactory conclusion regarding this test. The test was carried in the presence of active anthrax infection and there was a possibility of one or other of the animals being already infected. A dose of carbolic acid had been administered 12 days previously and the vaccination was inadvertently done in the neck instead of on the side. One animal developed no thermal reaction but the remaining animals showed a marked rise in temperature 4156 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II Two animals showed large swellings at the site of the inoculation and one animal had died from some complicating factor. These results were as good as could be excepted when it is considered that the inoculations were carried out under jungle conditions by men who had no previous experience in inoculation of elephants. The swellings were probably due to some contamination. The skin of an elephant is difficult to render sterile and the insertion of the needle requires a considerable muscular effort until one gets accustomed to it. From these results it was concluded that the vaccine was safe for use in elephants in doses of 1 c. c. (0.01 c. c. stock vaccine.) RETURN OF RESEARCH OFFICER TO BURMA. No further inoculation work was carried out in elephants between this date and the return of the Research Officer to Burma in October 1929. The next step contemplated was the estimation of the degree of immunity, if any, produced by this vaccine on elephants. This phase of the work had already been discussed with the representatives of the timber firms at an informal meeting before departure from Burma and it was then accepted that an experiment involv- ing a number of vaccinated elephants, inoculated subsequently with virulent cul- tures, would be necessary before the issue of the vaccine for general immunisation work could be considered. ARRANGEMENT FOR THE CRUCIAL TEST. At a combined meeting on October 31st, 1929, representatives from four firms agreed to share the cost of the animals for the experiment and the incidental ex- penditure in connection with transport and supervision. A site was suggested on the Toungoo-Thandaung road at Shwenyaungbin as suitable for the test as it provided the conditions laid down of (1) good water, (2) good fodder for the animals, (3) no cattle or buffaloes in the vicinity, (4) plenty of timber for cremation of carcases and (5) convenient to the main line. This area was inspected and approved. The decision to use virulent cultures of elephant strain anthrax on the animals in this test and the anticipated deaths in control animals from anthrax necessitated the strictest care and supervision at every stage of the experiment in order to prevent permanent infection of the site by the disease. A retest of the vaccine which had been in storage for eight months was made on six 2 years old cattle at the Research Laboratory in November 1929 when it was found that the vaccine was active, although it did not give rise to so acute
IMMUNIZATION OF DRAFT ANIMALS AGAINST ANTHRAX 157 a reaction as had been produced in cattle at the former test in April of that year. The virulent spore emulsion was retested and found to be unchanged. The elephants selected for the crucial tests were two males and two females for immunisation and two crock elephants as controls158 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II hours from microscopically diagnosed anthrax. Elephant A developed a local swelling about 3" in diameter which persisted for a few days but otherwise showed no effect from the inoculation. The elephant A presumably possessed the strongest immunity of all the inoculated elephants having been given the largest dose of vaccine (4 c. c.). As no ill effects were shown in this animal and as it was desired to push the test to a conclusion as soon as possible, the remaining elephants B, C, D and one non- inoculated control elephant F were injected with virulent spore emulsion on February 7th, the vaccinated elephants receiving 1,000 M.L.D. and the control F 500 M.L.D. or half the quantity administered to the first control elephant E. Elephants B and D showed a slight temperature reaction within 48 hours after the inoculation, elephant C remained normal. No local swellings developed and the animals remained perfectly fit. The control elephant E developed an enormous swelling at the site of the in- oculation on the 3rd day and death from anthrax occurred on the fourth day. CONCLUSION OF THE TEST. The remaining four elephants were discharged from experiment on February 23rd and experiment concluded. Notes on the Test. The dose of virulent culture (1,000 M.L.D.) which the vaccinated animals received was many times greater than would ever be met with in the infected areas in the jungle. The incubation period under natural conditions is estimated at about 10 days and half the dose (500 M.L.D.) given to the second control elephant showed an incubation period of three days and death in four, we can therefore assume that the immunity would be sufficient to protect against any natural infection. The absence of swellings in the vaccinated animals at the site of the inocula- tion was probably due to care in sterilization of the skin and to having the animals under good control in a specially erected crush pen which facilitated the operation of inoculation. It will be noted that on each of the three occasions when virulent material was inoculated, a control (non-vaccinated) animal was also injected, so the results may be accepted as definitely conclusive. It is remarkable that quite as good an immunity resulted from the single dose of 1 c.c. as for the double dose of 2 c.c., but when it is remembered that the vaccine is an emulsion of living spores which are capable of multiplying in the tissues on injection, the quantity of material originally injected requires only to be enough to set up a local focus of infection and start the immunising process.
IMMUNIZATION OF DRAFT ANIMALS AGAINST ANTHRAX 159 Conclusions. From the results of the test on elephants at Shwenyaungbin, the following data has been obtained:160 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II Conclusions. These results in cattle when considered with the previous Laboratory tests indicate that the use of the anthrax vaccine is safe in cattle. It is not considered necessary to test out the immunity against a dose of virulent emulsion as it is considered that a good protection is given. BUFFALO TESTS. It was considered desirable to test out the action of the vaccine on buffaloes as these animals frequently contract the disease and are undoubtedly a source of danger to the elephants working in the adjoining forests. Great difficulty was experienced in getting suitable animals for a test in the Insein area. The majority of the buffaloes kept in this area are of the Indian type of milch buffalo. The problem was discussed with one of the members of the firm of Bombay Burmah Trading Corporation (Mr. Phillips) and he kindly offered to place 12 animals at our disposal for a test, on the basis of payment for any animals which died as a result of the inoculation. This was accepted and a test on a mixed lot of twelve young and old animals was carried out at Alegyun on February 24th, 1930. The vaccine used was the same as that employed in the test on cattle and elephants in doses of 1 c.c. The result of the inoculation was very satisfactory. All the animals developed a temperature reaction about the fourth day, becoming normal two to three days later. One aged very thin buffalo developed a severe reaction and was off feed for one and half days but recovered rapidly. The reactions resembled those given by cattle during immunisation. Conclusions. From these results, and taking into consideration the results in the allied species, it is considered that anthrax vaccine is safe for use in buffaloes. The ques- tion of degree of immunity is not at the moment of great importance, but this may be tested out later if break-downs after vaccination are reported. GENERAL REMARKS ON THE TESTS. The vaccination against anthrax of the three species of draft animalsIMMUNIZATION OF DRAFT ANIMALS AGAINST ANTHRAX 161 PROPOSALS FOR THE FUTURE. The question of introducing the vaccine for general immunisation of animals in the infected areas can now be considered at the next step, and arrangements are in progress for the inoculation of a number of elephants in the danger zones during the approaching hot weather " rest period ". Inoculation of cattle and buffaloes against the disease will give rise to consider- able difficulties as there is no provision for compulsory inoculation against any disease in the Cattle Disease Rules and only in the presence of an epidemic will the villager consent to any inoculation being carried out on his animals. Inoculation with anthrax vaccine under these conditions is not to be recommended. Vaccination against anthrax is a preventive and not a curative measure and should be done as an annual routine procedure, otherwise its value as a prophylactic is not made full use of. Inoculations carried out in the presence of active infection, in animals not previously vaccinated, are associated with considerable risk of trans- mission of the disease to healthy animals by the operator's needle. Deaths under these conditions, due to natural infection, would, in the majority of cases, be attributed to the vaccine. Until powers are available for compulsory inoculation of cattle and buffaloes at any time it is considered necessary, little progress in connection with the control of the disease in village herds can be hoped for. Although the results in the Laboratory tests were considered satisfactory and conclusive, it is realized that the final test of the efficacy of the vaccine will be the results during the coming anthrax period (April to July) in vaccinated animals working in the infected areas. It is hoped that the inoculation of a sufficiently large number of elephants will be completed this year before this period to allow of reliable data being obtained for comparison with figures for the same areas in previous seasons. DURATION OF DEGREE OF IMMUNITY. It is the experience, in immunisation of animals against anthrax, that immunity lasts about 12162 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II Under ordinary conditions this annual inoculation is all that is necessary to prevent mortality, but if the area is grossly infected or if an outbreak among non- protected animals occurred in the neighbourhood, it would be necessary to re-inoculate for the sake of safety at intervals of six months. The question of duration of the immunity elephants may be tested out in the future when arrangements can be made, and if it is considered that a test is neces- sary. At present there is no intention to do so as it would involve considerable expense for which there is no justification. KEEPING QUALITIES OF THE VACCINE. The vaccine is a very stable product and under good storage conditions will remain unaffected for a considerable period. No difficulty should be experienced with regard to its distribution in the jungle areas where it will be used, as it will keep for about two months after issue from the Laboratory if protected from light and heat. INOCULATION OF HERDS. The operation of vaccination is a very simple procedure and can be performed by any one having a knowledge of general principles of sterilization and asepsis. It is proposed therefore to train forest assistants in the various timber firms, etc., which will require to have large numbers of animals vaccinated annually in this work, by a series of practical demonstrations now being arranged. This will relieve the Civil Veterinary Department of the responsibility for having to arrange for these annual inoculations in the future. With the present staff at our disposal it would be impossible to undertake this work on firm's elephants in the forest areas, but selected members of the Veterinary Staff will be trained in the work so that they will be able to deal with animals in infected areas in their districts. SUPPLY OF VACCINE. A sufficient supply of tested vaccine is available to meet all requirements during this season 1930-31, but it will be necessary to make provision for the season 1931- 32 during this present year. The Special Research Officer having now taken over control of the Department, it will not be possible for him to devote any lengthy periods of time to research work and it is hoped that from among the applicants for the posts now being advertised it will be possible to select one having the requisite Laboratory experience to carry on this work.
IMMUNIZATION OF DRAFT ANIMALS AGAINST ANTHRAX 163 ANTHRAX IN HORSES. No Laboratory tests have been carried out in regard to the immunisation of horses against this disease. Horses are highly susceptible to anthrax, much more so than cattle or elephants, and a vaccine suitable for immunising this species would require to be specially made and of a very low degree of virulence. The cost of preparing a vaccine is mainly the cost of the experimental animals used, and if only a small quantity was necessary the cost of production would be prohibitive. The distribution of the disease in horses appears to be limited to the Insein District and the number of animals which would be submitted for vaccination would be comparatively few. Under these conditions it is considered that it would not be economical to maintain a stock of vaccine suitable for horses. If however it can be shown that the cost of production would be justified., a stock could be prepared in the future. CONCLUDING REMARKS. The assistance which has been given by firms and individuals during the last couple of years while work on this problem was in progress is most gratefully acknowledged, in particular the help and encouragement which was received on many occasions from members of the Bombay Burmah Trading Corporation. The arrangements for carrying out tests in elephants and buffaloes were organised by this firm and no trouble or expense was spared to make the arrangements as perfect as possible. To Mr. Wroughton and Mr. Prior must be given the credit for making these tests possible. The public spirited action of the four contributing firms in putting up elephants for the test will be recognised as highly commendable when it is realized that had the tests been unsuccessful they would have lost, in elephants alone, a sum of approximately Rs. 30,000. The local arrangements for the test at Shwenyaungbin were dealt with by Messrs. MacGregor & Co., Toungoo, who willingly seconded their Veterinary Assist- ant for the duration of the tests at considerable inconvenience. The work of this officer, Mr. Birch, was very highly appreciated. He was in sole charge of the camp until the work, with virulent anthrax was commenced and rendered invaluable aid throughout in the control and management of the elephants and their attendants, erection of crush pen for inoculation and cremation of the carcases of the animals which died. The developments during this coming season in immunised animals will be awaited with interest, and, in view of the results herein recorded, with a consider- able amount of confidence. H
CLINICAL NOTES. An Interesting Case of Cystic Calculi. (With Plate VI.) A Sahiwal stud bull, eight years old, while in active service, suddenly showed acute symptoms of colic, on the morning of the 9th October, 1930. I suspected acute digestive trouble and full dose of linseed oil with spt. ammonia aromaticus was administered and the bull was given gentle walking exercise. After three hours, finding no relief and the pain getting severer, another dose of oil was administered with the same result. The temperature and pulse were normal, but the respiration was laboured. Defecation and urination were arrested. A full dose of magnesii sulph. with spt. ammonia aromaticus and tinct. belladona was administered and warm soap water enema was given in the afternoon at 3 P.M. A small quantity of soft dung was passed and the animal looked a bit relieved, but there was no attempt to urinate, which drew attention to some obstruction in the urinary tract and treatment was directed to stimulate the urinary apparatus to perform its held up function. The bull was given internally repeated doses of dieuretics and blankets wrung out in hot water were applied to the loins. He passed a small quantity of urine on the 10th morning, at about 11 A.M., after which he did not even attempt to urinate till he died, although all medicinal treatments were tried up to the end. Palpation of the bladder from the rectum showed that it was full and the animal evinced pain on pressure. The bull appeared spiritless, ceased to eat or drink, the pulse quickened latterly and the expiration became prolonged and painful. There was considerable oedema of the dewlap and brisket; the animal broke into profuse sweat and ultimately died of uraemic poisoning on the 15th morning. The obstruc- tion was suspected to be in the urethra, as the bladder was full on palpation. It was diagnosed as calculi which had escaped from the bladder into the sigmoid flexure of the penis which is especially predisposed to this accident owing to the narrowness of the lumen and tortuous course of the canalPLATE VI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Calculi found in the bladder and urethral canal. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. Showing the position of calculi in the bladder (a), urethral canal (b) and the sigmoid flexure (c).
CLINICAL NOTES 165 animals, such as horses and dogs, very early signs of discomfort and pain, whereas in the indolent ruminant, especially bulls several days may elapse before any charac- teristic symptoms are noticed. On post mortem the bladder which was intensely congested with diptheritic centres all over was found still full. The whole urinary canal from the bladder to the end of the penis was dissected out intact and cut open. On the floor of the bladder were found numerous round bodies varying in size and shape from Snipe shot to Buck shot with a shining metallic surface (Plate VI). Similar bodies were found all along the course of the urethra ; and the sigmoid flexure was choked with these round bodies of varying sizes (Plate VI). One of the largest size was found lodged in the lumen, 4 inches below the second flexure and this was the cause of complete blockade of the flow of urine from the bladder. The kidneys were highly congested, and the cortical portion of the right kidney showed fatty degeneric centres. The other organs showed more or less pathological changes, and interstitial oedema due to uraemic poisoning. The death resulted from uraemia from retention of urine in the bladder for a week owing to the serious obstruction caused by calculi. The calculi was analysed and found to be chiefly composed of calcium carbonate. These are due to an excess of salt in the urine caused by drinking water containing too much lime or eating food too rich in lime and magnesia. The calculi weighed 4 drachms and 40 grains. The shining metallic colour when removed from the bladder was due to the coating of urobilin, the colouring matter present in the urine accumulated in the bladder. This metallic lustre dis- appeared after exposure and drying. The indolent habits of Sahiwal bulls serve as predisposing causes to this trouble. In places where the soil and water are rich in lime, it is essential to examine the urine of the stud bulls as they advance in age, and if any deposits or sediments are noticed to give them acidulated water (dilute hydrochloric acid166 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II " Anasarca " (fluid beneath the skin). A half-Ayrshire-Sahiwal cow, Vida No. 170, aged about six years in calf 7½ months to a Montgomery bull, Moti No. 368, which died recently from uraemic poisoning, after her three previous normal calvings and normal healthy calves, threw her still-born monster heifer calf on the morning of the 19th October, 1930, without any undue straining or exertion on the part of the mother. From the size of the foetus as seen from Plates VII and VIII, one would wonder how the process of expulsion was effected so easily without any external help. The explanation is, that the connective tissue of the entire body of the foetus from head to the croup was infiltrated with serum, and the young creature although in appearance double the size of an ordinary calf and weighing 50 lbs. was quite supple, and the rent in the spinial column facilitated the expulsion without any external aid. GENERAL APPEARANCE. The body of a wild boar with short legs, ears and tail, the head of a lioness, enormously large, short face and hare lipped. There was a rent of 4 inches on the back behind the withers. The post mortem revealed a large quantity of serosanguineous fluid in the abdominal and thoracic cavities and similar fluid was found under the skin. The spine appeared broken, having a gap of 4 inches, between the end of the cervical and the beginning of dorsal regions and the spinal chord was found as if torn asunder and hanging. The other organs were normal and perfectly developed. In India people believe that the appearance of monstrosities in domestic animals is due to the influence of enraged gods, and they are regarded with fear or horror. Some regard them as prodigies, or freaks of Nature, and describe them as marvels or curiosities, but scientifically they are simple modifications, or irregularities in the development of organs of the foetus in utero. The embryo of the domestic animals, in arriving at its ultimate development, appears to pass through all the degrees of organization which mark the different types in the zoological series. The embryo has been submitted to some kind of alteration ' in utero ' and this has been produced during the interval between conception and birth [L. S. JOSEPH].
PLATE VII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Showing the head. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. Showing the whole length of the body. A CASE OF SIMPLE MONSTROSITY IN PUSA DAIRY HERD.
PLATE VIII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Showing the hind legs and tail. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. Standing posture. A CASE OF SIMPLE MONSTROSITY IN PUSA DAIRY HERD,
ABSTRACTS The Inheritance of Butter-Fat percentage in Crosses of Jersey with Red Danes.168 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II This fact caused the author to decide upon the publication of the results which he obtained at Onderstepoort in 1925 and 1926 with a new drug which he calls " Piroblue ". The experiments carried out in the Sandoz laboratories by Muller have shown that the parasiticidal action of stains such as trypanblue and others can be greatly increased if they are combined in an appropriate form with the bile acids. This combination can be effected without producing any proportional increase in their toxicity. The bile acids and their salts possess no parasiticidal power of their own, but their association with pure trypanblue renders it possible to reduce the dose of the drug to a point at which toxicity does not come into consideration at all. Not only so, the parasiticidal action is actually increased. According to Stoll, the explanation of this effect is probably as follows : Bile acids exert a profound effect upon the surface tension of liquids containing them. This fact is made use of commercially in dyeing, and this property enables drugs combined with them to come into closer contact with parasites. Two compounds, which are called T18 and T19 were used for experiment. These were composed of the pure dye and sodium cholate in different proportions. These compounds possessed similar properties, and it was decided to make one intermediate in composition between these for commercial application. The toxicity of " Piroblue " was tested upon mice, but, in spite of the use of a large series of animals (nearly 100) the results were, for some unknown reasons, discordant. A series of guinea-pigs was placed under test by intravenous injection. In the majority of cases a 5 per cent. solution was used, and doses were graduated so as to give 0.1 g. per kg. upwards. In this series concordant results were obtained, and the toxic dose by intravenous injec- tion was found to be 0.19 g. per kg. Full details are given of twelve observations carried out on pure-bred Polled Angus cattle, five upon African native bred animals obtained from areas free from piroplasmosis, and five upon horses. Four of the latter were animals undergoing hyperimmunization against horse sickness, the other a sporadic case. One of the animals was infected with P. caballi, and the other four with Nuttallia equiThe whole of the seventeen bovines used were infected artificially with P.bigeminum. Of the twelve Scotch animals six developed haemoglobinuria as did also two of the African cattle. The blood used was therefore of considerable virulence. The majority of animals also developed high fever. Both compounds T18 and T19 were used, in 1 and 2 per cent. solutions, and doses of 100 c.c. for adults and 50 c.c. for calves were given intravenously. In no case was any evidence of shock observed. One of the African cattle was given 50 c.c. of 4 per cent. solution of Tl8 without producing trouble of any kind. In every case the temperature promptly fell and parasites disappeared from the circulation within 24 hours, and there was a rapid and surprising improvement in condition. In one case death occurred, but the calf in question should not have been put under treatment, as it was suffering from a paratyphoid infection. T18 and T19 do not produce complete sterilization as is shown by the fact that in eight in- stances parasites reappeared in the blood in small numbers some days after their first disappearance. This is not an undesirable result, because premunization against piroplasmosis depends upon the persistence of the parasite in the blood. The new drug is suitable therefore for use in the premuni-
ABSTRACTS 169 zation of animals, and it can be given without risk to valuable imported animals. The possibility of using solutions up to 4 per cent. strength permits of a reduction in the amount of liquid injected to reasonable proportions. Until further experimentation has furnished fuller information, Theiler recommends the follow- ing doses :170 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II Based on Anderson's formulae, the requirements for milk of various fat percentages would be per gallon:ABSTRACTS 171 or absence of bacterial cells in the product has no effect on the potency. It is shown that the amount of growth, the production of aggressive substances and the pathogenicity of a blackleg culture are independent. Virulent blackleg cultures consists of three parts: (1) living bacterial cells, (2) aggressive substances or products of growth produced during the development of cultures of Clostridium chauvaci and (3) a lethal substance or specific activity of the virulent bacterial cells. Potent blackleg products should have a potency of at least 20 aggressive units per dose. By the use of certain mineral salts and of the proper amount of formaldehyde, blackleg filtrates and bacterins having potencies of 130 and 260 aggressive units can be produced. Formaldehyde inhi- bits the agglutinogen but increases the activity of the protective antigenic complex. (Reprinted from Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association, New Series, Vol. 30, No. 6, November, 1930.) Eleventh International Veterinary Congress, London, August 4th to 9th, 1930.172 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II V. Relationship of the Veterinary Surgeon to Animal Husbandry.ABSTRACTS 173 Rinderpest in Goats in Nigeria.174 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [I, II found effective. Unfortunately, the only wash available for these tests failed to give more than 75 per cent. kill under ordinary farm conditions. It was at first thought that the frothy nature of the wash on application prevented the entrance of the solution; but a second sample was received which had been prepared on a less frothy base and showed no greater efficiency. COST OF APPLICATION. Derris powder, highly toxic to warble fly larvæ, was obtained last season at a retail price of 3s. per lb. This was sufficient to make 1 gallon of wash. The number of cattle that can be treated with 1 gallon of wash obviously varies with the degree of infestation with warbles, the care taken in application, etc. In the general tests (Division 2) above, with a heavy infestation, 1 gallon was sufficient to dress 50-60 cattle once. This was the initial dressing and naturally less wash would be required at subsequent dressings. It is estimated, from the work in the Demonstration Scheme where small herds were involved, that 1 lb. of derris powder is sufficient to provide wash for four-monthly dressings on a farm with 20-25 infested cattle. On this basis, the cost for four-monthly treatments should not exceed 2 d. per animal. DISCUSSION. From the preceding trials, it is evident that the farmer has at his disposal materials which, with ordinary care, are highly efficient in the destruction of warble-fly larvæ when applied under ordinary farm conditions. Derris powder wash is particularly suitable for this purpose, but, where- as most of the derris available to the farmers is highly toxic,the farmer must beware lest he obtains derris which is valueless for the destruction of warbles. Although, last season, few firms could give a guarantee of toxicity it should be possible in future to obtain such guarantee provided the firm can state that the derris was obtained from the same source or that it has been subsequently tested. With the existence of an efficient and inexpensive insecticide, the control of the warble-fly now depends very largely upon the co-operation of farmers in organized anti-warble-fly campaigns. The advantage of treating cattle over large areas is obvious. During a period of agricultural depression, however, no additional expenditure upon insecticides will be undertaken unless prospects of a quick return are forthcoming. The farmer will receive the immediate benefit through the better condition of his treated cattle and he will also reduce the losses resulting from the " gadding" caused by the fly. The monetary value of these factors, unfortunately, is difficult to estimate, but several farmers who dressed their cattle for the first time this season have expressed the opinion that there was a decided improvement in the condition of the cattle after treatment. Further, there is evidence that the local butchers and dealers are fully alive to the situation and are prepared to pay 10 s. to 20 s. more for a non-warbled beast. These factors should encourage farmers to join in an anti-warble-fly campaign. Experiments on the Mechanical Transmission of West African Strains of Trypanosoma Brucei and T. Gambiense by Glossina and other Biting Flies.ABSTRACTS 175 3. Successful transmission has been effected by as few as four infecting bites. 4. Direct transmissions of T. brucei by the agency of G. tachinoides have only proved success- ful where the average number of trypanosomes in the peripheral blood of the infected animal exceeds one in five microscopic fields. 5. Some difference appears to exist in the direct transmissibility of the three strains of T. brucei used. 6. Negative results have been obtained in each of fifteen direct transmission experiments in which attempts were made to transmit six strains of T. gambiense by the agency of G. tachinoides. 7. T. brucei has been successfully transmitted by S. calcitrans by the direct method. 8. Experiments in which attempts have been made to employ A. costalis, A. funestus, Aëdes vitatus, and Lyperosia (sp?) as mechanical vectors of T. brucei have failed to effect transmissions. 9. Dissection and examination of the proboscis of G. tachinoides at intervals after an infecting meal, reveals the fact that motile trypanosomes may survive in the proboscis for as long as three hours ; and that the maximum number of trypanosomes contained in the proboscis immediately after an infecting meal is often very considerably in excess of 600 when trypanosomes are abundant in the peripheral blood of the infected animal. 10. A brief account is given of the behaviour of trypanosomes taken up during an infected blood meal in the proboscis and gut of Stomoxys, A. costalis, A. funestus and Lyperosia. In none of these flies do the trypanosomes survive in the proboscis as long, or in such large number, as in G. tachinoides. The Nature of Milk Fever.176 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, II (ix) The effect on the blood-calcium concentration of the oral administration of massive repeated doses of vitamin D is discussed. The observations suggest that the disease may be prevented by this means by commencing a massive administration of vitamin D a few days before calving. An important general principle governing the counteraction effects of the calcium controlling mechanism upon sudden alteration of the normal blood-calcium level appears to have emerged. (x) The blood-calcium values of normal sheep were observed. It would appear that the normal variation of blood-calcium is greater in sheep than in cattle. The association of acute hypocalcaemia with lambing sickness is determined and the identity of this disease with milk fever established. The known curative effects of mammary inflation in lambing sickness are also correlated with a rise in the blood-calcium values. In one case the therapeutic effect of subcutaneous injection of calcium was tested: The treatment resulted in rapid recovery. (xi) The calcium values of normal horses were found to be considerably higher than those of cattle and sheep. In an examination of two cases of transit tetany in mares a pronounced hypocal- caemia was found. In one case of transit tetany, mammary inflation, and in the other calcium injection, was followed by complete cure. CONCLUSIONS. I. The essential cause of milk fever is an acute blood-calcium deficiency. II. The specific curative action of mammary inflation consists in raising the blood-calcium values. These conclusions are based on the following considerations:ERRATUM The Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry, Vol. I, Part I, Plate V, facing page 27. Delete " ORIGINAL ARTICLES. SOME DIGESTIBILITY TRIALS ON INDIAN FEEDING STUFFS, PART VII. KANGRA RICE STRAW. BY P. E. LANDER, M.A., D.Sc., A.I.C., I.A.S., Agricultural Chemist to Government, Punjab, AND PANDIT LAL CHAND DHARMANI, L.AG., B.SC. (AGRI.), Assistant to Agricultural Chemist to Government, Punjab. (Received for publication on 24th March 1931.) (With Two figures.) The Kangra District has long been notorious for the poor and neglected con- dition of its cattle, and the equally unsatisfactory condition of the majority of the people living in this tract. Malnutrition, whether of man or beast, may be due to a variety of causes, either actual undernourishment due to insufficient food in quantity, or to its being qualitatively deficient in certain ingredients necessary to physical well-being. It is scarcely necessary to say that each of these factors reacts on the other, and it is little use introducing new breeds of cattle into a district, if a deficient food supply, either quantitative or qualitative, is likely adversely to affect their condition. Under conditions such as are met with in Kangra, what is most essential is a general improvement in feeding standards, without which the introduction of valuable bulls will be of little use. No systematic investigations of the fodders used by cattle in Kangra have yet been carried out, nor has it been possible yet to conduct well regulated feeding experiments on the spot. Rice straw is the staple cattle feed of the District and only in exceptional cases do the cattle receive concentrates and green materials to supplement this sparse inadequate diet. In order to throw some light on the degree of inadequacy of this ration, feeding experiments were carried out at Lyallpur with this material, the results of which are embodied in this paper. A very brief description of the District may, however, first be given. Kangra is the most northern of the five districts of the Jullundur Division and embraces an area of some 10,000 square miles, extending from the plains of the Bari and Jullundur Doabs over the Himalayan ranges to the boundary of Tibet. It may be divided into three main agricultural divisions :178 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III of the Kangra and Palampur Tehsils (the Kangra Valley proper) with an average annual rainfall of from 75-100 inches, and lying from 3,000 to 4,000 feet above sea level, (b) the irrigated parts of Nurpur and Dehra Tehsils lying lower down with a rainfall of 50 inches, and (c) the unirrigated parts with a somewhat lesser rainfall (Fig. 1.) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1.
DIGESTIBILITY TRIALS ON INDIAN FEEDING STUFFS 179 The indigenous breed of cattle in Kangra is small in size, weighing only about 500 lbs. Small bullocks are a necessity in the hilly areas in order to be able to plough the minute and narrow fields on the hill side. In spite of their small size, they are, however, sturdy, and would be admirably adapted to their environments were it not that underfeeding diminishes their agricultural worth and lays them open to attacks of contagious diseases ; a remark which applies with no less force to the general condition of the people themselves. Large animals are certainly used in the lower regions having a more level contour, but it is a serious reflection on local conditions that the indigenous cows rarely give more than 5 lbs. of milk a day and cows after being imported soon give much less milk than they did in the plains. In the heavy rice lands which are met with in this district, the strain on the working bullock is so great that he rarely lasts more than three or four years and it is not unusual for cattle harnessed to the plough to fall dead under the yoke. The prices of cattle in recent years in Kangra have ranged as follows :180 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III TABLE IDIGESTIBILITY TRIALS ON INDIAN FEEDING STUFFS 181 3. On the whole, concentrates are unknown in the Kangra valley ; bullocks during heavy work are given wheat or barley flour as concentrates. More concentrates and of greater variety are given to milch buffaloes. 4. The supply of fodder in the unirrigated parts of the District is better than the irrigated. This is due to more grazings supplemented by leguminous crops. Note.182 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III Three animals 122, 128 and 133 were fed with rice straw as the sole ration from the 1st October, 1929, the actual experimental period starting from the 9th Novem- ber, 1929. Table VI gives the details of the digestibility figures obtained. It was found that the protein in the rice straw was insufficient and gave a negative digest- ibility figure. This rice straw is therefore deficient as judged by the daily nitrogen balance figures. For example, heifer 122 lost 6.87 grm. of nitrogen daily, while heifers 128 and 133 lost 6.55 grm. and 5.19 grm. of nitrogen respectively per day, which shows that this ration is much below a maintenance standard. These parti- cular animals, moreover, did not show any liking for the rice straw as they ate about 5 lbs. daily against 20 lb. which hill cattle are reported to eat. Table III gives the chemical and mineral analyses of the rice straw and concent- rates used. In Table IV the data obtained from Kangra rice straw is shown in comparison with similar data obtained from other places [Warth, 1926]. The figures for the chemical analyses show that the Kangra rice straw of 1929 is poorer than any of the others in its protein content, a fact which is reflected in the negative digestibi- lity of the same. It contains, moreover, the highest percentage of crude fibre, which detracts from its feeding value. The ash percentage is also lower than the figures obtained from Pusa and Bangalore, but higher than the American. The digestibility figures for dry matter, organic matter and carbohydrates are lowest, while the digestibility of the protein is negative, a result which is necessarily reflect- ed in an indefinitely wide albuminoid ratio. All the animals lost weight as shown by the body weight curves and became much emaciated with staring coats and lachrymose eyes, in fact so much so that the trials were terminated before the origi- nally planned period. 2. Rice Straw and Maize Grain, 15th December 1929 to 11th January 1930. The results obtained with these three animals while fed on Kangra rice straw alone, definitely showed that the fodder was poor in its nitrogen content and failed to meet the proteinous need of the cattle. It was consequently decided to investi- gate the requirements in added concentrates necessary to bring this straw up to a maintenance ration and meet the deficiency. As there is generally but limited scope for choosing a supplementary ration in the Kangra valley, maize grain was selected as it is a widely grown local cereal. The animals had lost condition considerably while on the rice straw ration, so it was necessary to add comparatively large quan- tities of this concentrate, two lbs. of maize grain being given twice daily in a crush- ed condition after being soaked in water for about six hours. The details of the digestibility figures and other data on the combined ration are given in Tables III
CURVE SHOWING FLUCTUATIONS IN DAILY BODY WEIGHTS OF THE ANIMALS NON-EXPERIMENTAL PERIOD EXPERIMENTAL PERIOD [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
DIGESTIBILITY TRIALS ON INDIAN FEEDING STUFFS 183 to VII, from which it will be seen that the previous negative daily nitrogen balance was converted into a positive one by the addition of maize grain as a concentrate. No. of heifer. Average daily nitrogen balance on rice straw, grm. Average daily nitrogen balance on rice straw and maize grain, grm. Average efficiency of 4 lbs. of maize grain, grm. Average nitrogen efficiency of 1 lb. of maize grain, grm. 122 184 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III experiment are given in Tables III to VII. Under this ration the condition of the animals improved considerably and they gained in weight as shown in the body weight curve, and the negative daily nitrogen balance with rice straw fed ad-lib converted to a positive one with maize has been maintained and improved as the following Table shows:DIGESTIBILITY TRIALS ON INDIAN FEEDING STUFFS 185 4. Rice Straw and green Oats, 13th March 1930 to 29th March 1930. The value of adding concentrates to the inefficient Kangra rice straw is clear from these trials, but it is not possible for the people at present to feed the neces- sary concentrates. There is, however, a possibility of feeding a certain amount of green fodder, and in concluding the trials it was thought advisable to obtain some figures to indicate the effect of adding green oats to rice straw. Oats were selected because they are grown in the District here and there, although a leguminous fodder would have been of distinct advantage from the point of view of meeting protein deficiency. It must be borne in mind that this period ensued after the animals had been brought into condition by an adequate diet in terms of concentrates. In this trial rice straw and green oats were fed in the ratio 1: 3, and it will be seen from the data given in Table VII that there is now a negative daily nitrogen balance of roughly 3 grammes or half that of the original period on rice straw alone. Thus this ratio 1: 3 is too low to bring the ration up to maintenance standard although it affects considerable improvement on the original straw. There is considerable scope for further investigations into the fodders available in the Kangra District, but it is essential in order to obtain information of the most reliable kind to carry out these trials in the district itself on the local cattle, for whereas the observations made during these trials have shown the serious deficiency of the straw as a staple diet, and the best manner of correcting this deficiency, it is likely that more exact data would have been obtained under local conditions. It is hoped that facilities will be forthcoming in the near future to extend this work on the Kangra cattle. SUMMARY. This preliminary enquiry reveals the fact that rice straw, the staple feed of the Kangra cattle is deficient in protein, which deficiency can be made good by supple- menting the ration with concentrates such as maize grain and toria cake, the latter being more economical from the point of view of protein supply; and to some extent by a green stuff, such as green oats, when added in the ratio of 1 : 3. The extensive use of these concentrates is perhaps out of question at present for the people in the Kangra Valley where the dietary of people themselves is poor, but the introduction of a leguminous fodder in the Kangra valley to supplement the general fodder and protein deficiency is perhaps the easiest way to improve the present condition of the cattle. This leguminous feed might be used as such and any surplus made into silage for the winter months.
186 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III The authors wish to express their appreciation of the valuable assistance ren- dered by Mr. Akbar Ali, B.Sc. (Agri.) of the Chemical Section, in carrying out the analyses. BOTANICAL NAMES OF FODDERS AND TREES MENTIONED IN THIS PAPER. English or Vernacular names. Botanical names. Rice straw . . . . . Oryza sativa. Oats . . . . . . Avena sativa. Toria . . . . . . Brassica campestris var. toria. Maize . . . . . . Zea Mays. Wheat . . . . . . Triticum sativum (vulgare). Barley . . . . . . Hardeum Vulgare. Chari . . . . . . Andropogon Sorghum. Sugarcane . . . . . Saccharum officinarum. Mash . . . . . . Phaseolus radiatus. Maina . . . . . . Medicago sativa. Kulth . . . . . . Dolichos biflorus. Bamboo . . . . . . Dendrocalamus strictus. Sirs . . . . . . Albizzia Lebbek. Khirk . . . . . . Celtis australis. Bhera . . . . . . Terminalia belirica. Kich . . . . . . Grewia berulaefolia. Karal . . . . . . Bauhinia purpurea. Dhaman . . . . . . Grewia oppositifolia. REFERENCES. Lander (1926). Agricultural Journal of India 21, 5. Lander and Lal Chand Dharmani (1924), Mem. Dept. of Agri. India, Chem. Ser. 7, 4. Ditto (1927) ditto 9, 3. Ditto (1928) ditto 9, 7. Ditto (1929) ditto 10, 5 and 6. Ditto (1930) ditto 10, 7. Ditto (1925), Pusa Bulletin 158. Warth (1926). Mem. Dept. Agri. India, Chem. Ser. 9, 2.
DIGESTIBILITY TRIALS ON INDIAN FEEDING STUFFS 187 TABLE III. Chemical composition. Name of the feed Moisture % Dry matter % Ash % Fat % Crude fibre % Protein % Nitrogen free extract % Rice straw 6.20 93.80 15.47 0.82 34.23 2.25 41.03 Green oats 72.68 27.32 1.89 0.62 9.57 1.38 13.86 Maize grain 12.20 87.80 1.70 3.85 1.67 9.75 70.83 Toria cake 5.31 94.69 7.14 11.83 10.61 32.00 33.11 Mineral matter in 1,000 lbs. of the feed. Phos- phates P²O3 Calcium CaO Sodium Na²O Potas- sium K²O Magne- sium MgO Manga- nese Mn²O4 Alumi- nium Al2O3 Iron Fe2O3 Sulphate SO4 Chlori- des Cl. Insoluble residue Kangra Rice straw. 2.30 3.76 4.11 21.65 2.29 0.26 1.49 0.58 1.15 188 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III TABLE IV. Comparison of data on Kangra rice straw with similar data from other places. Locality Dry matter Ash Fat Crude fibre Protein Nitrogen free extract Organic matter Carbo- hydrates Chemical composition per 100 grammes of oven dried rice straw. Pusa .... 100.00 17.03 1.25 35.74 2.43 43.57 82.97 79.29 Bangalore .... 100.00 17.59 0.86 30.91 2.79 47.88 82.41 78.79 American .... 100.00 15.68 1.51 36.22 4.22 42.38 84.32 78.59 Kangra .... 100.00 16.49 0.87 36.49 2.40 43.74 83.51 80.23 Comparison of digestibility coefficients. Pusa Old . 47.00 .. 60.20 72.00 .. 44.10 57.10 .. Pusa New .... 52.37 .. 41.34 72.96 .. 41.95 58.84 61.22 Bangalore 53.54 .. 43.41 70.43 11.17 57.71 60.61 62.53 American .. .. 23.00 59.00 22.00 46.60 49.97 52.00 Kangra .... 42.73 12.61 46.67 60.72 DIGESTIBILITY TRIALS ON INDIAN FEEDING STUFFS 189 TABLE V. Dietary standards. Period No. of heifer Average of daily body- weight lbs. Food eaten per day lbs. Per 100 lbs. of food Albumi- noid ratio 1: Daily nitrogen balance in grm. Staroh equiva- lents per day Protein per day lbs. starch equiva- lents Protein 9-11-29 to 3-12-29 122 446 Rice straw . 6.1 18.41 Negative 8 190 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III TABLE VI. Digestibility factors. Average Digestibility Coefficients Nutrients digested per day lbs. Period No. of heifer of daily body weight lbs. Food eaten per day lbs. Dry Matter Ash Fat Crude fibre Protein Nitrogen free extract Dry Matter Ash Fat Crude fibre Protein Nitrogen free extract 9-11-29 to 3-12-29 122 446 Rice straw 6.1 41.79 8.51 40.00 60.30 DIGESTIBILITY TRIALS ON INDIAN FEEDING STUFFS 191 TABLE VII. Showing details of daily nitrogen balance in grammes. Period No. of heifer Feed Intake Outgo Total intake grm. Total outgo grm. Balance grm. Straw grm. Concen- trates grm. Dung grm. Urine grm. 9-11-29 to 3-12-29 . 122 Rice straw 9.96 .. 11.90 4.93 9.96 16.83 A VETERINARY ENTOMOLOGY FOR INDIA, PART XIV.* BY T. BAINBRIGGE FLETCHER, R.N., F.L.S., F.E.S., F.Z.S., Imperial Entomologist to the Government of India, AND S. K. SEN, M.Sc., F.E.S., Assistant Veterinary Research Officer, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar (lately Assistant to the Imperial Entomologist). (Received for publication on the 10th April 1031.) (With Plate IX.) The TabanidaeEXPLANATION OF PLATE IX, TABANID FLIES. 1. Tabanus indianus, Ricardo. 2. PLATE IX. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
VETERINARY ENTOMOLOGY FOR INDIA 193 The presence of water is necessary for the majority of Tabanidae, so that dry and arid tracts are inhabited only by some rare194 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III Madras Tabanus speciosus and T. rubidus settle down on the lower parts of the back of the hind leg, whilst T. striatus also frequently selects the same site, but may bite on the under surface of the abdomen. T. macer usually settles on the sides of the neck or abdomen and T. ditæniatus frequently on the udder. Chrysops dispar bites on the inner sides of the forelegs and Hæmatopota on the hump or the neck. Isaac [1925], at Pusa, found that T. macer preferred the venter of the abdomen and T. tenens usually attacked the stomach and the lower portion of the legs. In this connection Bedford [1926] makes the interesting remark that Tabanids that are most likely to act as mechanical transmitters of disease are those that confine their attacks mainly to the legs, whence they are easily dislodged by the tail or by stamping. Kelser [1927] found that flies that were disturbed in their feeding bit two or three horses in the space of a minute or two. Webb [1922], in U. S. A., who carefully observed the act of biting in certain species of Tabanus, says that in taking a meal of blood a female Tabanus will usually insert and withdraw the beak several times, puncturing the skin of the host in a new place each time, before finishing the meal. The length of time occupied in taking a meal in the cases observed by this writer varied from 3 to 11 minutes, and during this time the position may be changed 5 or 6 times. Mitzmain, in the Philippines, found the period of feeding for T. striatus to be 23 minutes, and flies of this species did not bite oftener than once in two days. In regard to the feeding habits of Tabanus Cragg [1920] observes: "......Tabanus is generally quiet and deliberate in its mode of feeding. Having selected a suitable spot on the skin of the host it inserts its mouth parts and usually takes a full meal before they are withdrawn. The meal may last as long as 3 or 4 minutes. As the stomach becomes more and more distended, the abdomen increases in size, until the dorsal and ventral plates become separated sufficiently to disclose the connecting membrane. The distension, however, is not so great as in the case of the mosquito. During the meal the abdomen exhibits slow rhythmical contractions, which are probably due to peristaltic movements of the wall of the alimentary tract. Towards the end of the act a few drops of a dark fluidVETERINARY ENTOMOLOGY FOR INDIA 195 experienced in inducing many of the bred specimens to feed. It was found that bright sunshine is essential, and that it is usually several days after hatching before the first meal is taken ". Cross and Patel [1921] found that Tabanids preferred to bite surra-infected animals rather than a healthy one and that buffaloes were the favourite hosts, donkeys being the least preferred. They are of the opinion that Tabanids find their hosts by means of sight and not by smell, and this view would seem to find support in the observations made in South Africa where it is stated that several species of Tabanids are attracted to dummy animals (Jl. Dept. Agric. Union S. Africa, VIII ; 1923). It seems possible that advantage of this habit may be taken by using decoy- traps such as have recently been adopted in Africa for trapping Tsetse Flies. That Tabanids are attracted by moving objects, even a railway train, is a common observation when travelling in India and they may often be carried long distances in this way. As regards the feeding habits of Tabanids in captivity, observations at Pusa (vide Report of Entomological Section for 1915-16) showed that when bred females of Tabanus nemocallosus, starved under humid conditions for 24 hours after emer- gence, were allowed to bite under cover of test tubes the shaven and moistened skin of a goat, they sucked blood within five minutes. Further they were capable of resisting starvation for 5 days in humid surroundings, showing a marked tendency to drink water, and if the habit of sucking sugary food was acquired, the blood-sucking habit was resumed with reluctance. Nieschulz [1927] in Java, observed that T. rubidus and T. striatus could live for 70 days in captivity and that, if opportunities were given, they sucked blood on an average rather oftener than every second day. The actual mechanism of biting in the Tabanidæ has been discussed by Surcouf and his account is briefly reproduced below. The part of the skin to be attacked being first selected by feeling it with the proboscis, the labella are retracted, the stylets are evaginated and enter into action in the following fashion: the mandibles are rotated inwards under the action of the adductor muscles and the cutting blades penetrate obliquely in the tissues, then they are brought back to their original position by the abductors; their action is comparable to that of a section of a saw worked by alternate movements. During this time the maxillæ are alternately pushed forward and brought back in position by their corresponding muscles in. two different directions and at each retreat the barbed blades cut through the tissues. According to Nitzulescu [1926], the buccal armature of Tabanids more closely resembles that of Phlebotomus (" Sand-flies ") than that of mosquitos. B 2
196 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III As a rule, Tabanids attack animals standing in the sun, as we have frequently observed while collecting these flies in various localities in India. Writing of the Tabanids of Pusa, Isaac [1925] states that Tabanus macer is generally active from mid-day to evening, attacking animals standing in the sun, whilst T. rubidus is active when the day is bright and warm. On the other hand, T. tenens, which is the most abundant species at Pusa, was found by him to be most active at sunset just before dark, when the females came in large numbers to cattle. It would be interesting to recall here the experience of workers in this respect in certain other countries. Williston [1908] working in U. S. A., observed that none of the Tabanids was active on dark, cloudy days, though some were partial to shady woods, but they were most plentiful about cattle and horses while the sun was shining. On the other hand, Lutz [1923], in Brazil (where he records a total of about 300 species), states that Tabanids are more frequent in the shade in forests or when the sun is low and that some species are even crepuscular in habits. In India some species occasionally come in to light at night and it is probable that some Tabanids are normally nocturnal. Several members of this family have been shewn to be capable of transmitting Surra mechanically. Of these mention may be made of Tabanus striatus in the Philippines (Mitzmain), T. striatus and T. rubidus, especially the latter, in Java (Nieschulz), and of T. rubidus, T. nemocallosus in India (Cross, Patel, Kahan Singh, Abdulla Khan). Of other Tabanid-borne diseases of animals, reference may be made to Anthrax, conveyed by T. striatus (Mitzmain, Nieschulz), T. rubidus and Chrysops flavicinctus (Nieschulz); hæmorrhagic septicæmia from buffalo to buffalo (Nieschulz); and sarcocystis (Sergent). Under natural conditions, the existence of a relationship between outbreaks of trypanosomiasis on the one hand and the relative abundance of Tabanids on the other is strikingly illustrated by the following information abstracted from the Annual Reports of the Egyptian Veterinary Service for 1916 and 1917 (Trop. Vet. Bull., VIII, 274 ; Sept. 1920): " For a number of years past Mason had noted that the Tabanidæ which carried trypanosomiasis, viz., T. taeniola and T. ditaeniatus, were usually very numerous during the fly season in the Suez Canal Zone, along the Ismailia Canal and in Eastern Sharqûya ; this was what happened in 1915 and a considerable number of cases of trypanosomiasis occurred in Army Camels in consequence. During 1916 Tabanids were fortunately not observed in the above localities although the number of camels had greatly increased. No cases of trypanosomiasis apparently occurred in the Canal Zone during the year. " For the same reason the Wadi Natrûn District remained free in 1916. On the other hand, both the above species of Tabanids were extremely numerous as
VETERINARY ENTOMOLOGY FOR INDIA 197 usual in the Western Oases and a considerable number of cases of trypanosomiasis occurred in camels, but none was observed in any other animals." The Tabanidæ are divided into two sub-families and the Indian forms are com- prised under ten genera. These are differentiated as follows :198 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III Antenna not arising from a frontal tubercle, third segment conical. Palpus elongate, subulate Diachlorus, O. S. 4. Antenna not arising from a prominent tubercle. Frontal calli usually present .... Tabanus, Linn. Antenna arising from a prominent tubercle. No frontal calli....... Neotabanus, Ric. Udenocera, Diachlorus, Neotabanus, Silvius and Melissomorpha are each repre- sented by a single Indian species and none of these is recorded from the Plains of India. The genus Gastroxides includes two Indian species. So far, Gastroxides ornatus is known only from Ceylon and little information would appear to be on record concerning its bionomics. G. ater has been recorded from Central India, Calcutta, Pusa, Coimbatore, Chapra, Fyzabad and Surat. The larvae of G. ater breed in hollows of trees and the flies are said to come to light at night and to be probably nocturnal in their habit of flight (Report of Imperial Pathological Entomologist for 1915-16). More recently, Isaac [1925], at Pusa, has published some notes on G. ater. The full-grown larva is about 24 mm. in length and yellowish white in colour. The larval growth is very slow and the larva is able to resist starvation for long periods. The pupa is blackish in appearance and is about 22 mm. long and occurs in the same site where the larva is found. The pupal stage lasts six days and the adults emerge in June and July. There is only one brood in a year, hibernation occurring in the larval stage. The mouth-parts of the female are apparently adapted for piercing and sucking, although the flies do not appear to have been observed actually to suck blood. The eggs or the young larvae have not been observed. The genus Corizoneura (commonly known as Pangonia) includes two Indian species, but Ricardo recognizes, in addition, a variety. As would appear from the localities of their occurrence, both C. taprobanes and C. longirostris are almost exclusively denizens of hilly tracts. (It is more than probable that the record of occurrence of C. longirostris in Allahabad is an error). Very little is known concerning the bionomics of these species, but at Muktesar (alt. 7,500 ft.) C. longirostris makes its appearance about the latter part of July and disappears by the first week of September and during this period they may fre- quently be observed to suck nectar from flowers of the species, Roscoea purpurea, of the family Scitamineae. Imms [cited by Tetley, 1917-18], working at Bhowali (Kumaon ; 5,000 ft.), similarly records having observed flies of this species " on the basis of forests towards the end of the rainy season, feeding on flowers of the orders
VETERINARY ENTOMOLOGY FOR INDIA 199 Scrophulariaceæ and Labiatæ by thursting their proboscis into them, poising them- selves in the air during the process ". Nothing is known concerning the young stages of C. longirostris, but in one instance about 150 eggs were dissected out from a gravid female at Muktesar and each egg measured about a millimetre in length. Observations made at Kasauli [Mitter, 1917-18] and Muktesar would appear to indicate that the females are capable of sucking blood, which they do while hover- ing by making repeated darts at the host, and in certain instances the actual presence of blood has been detected in the midgut of dissected flies. It may be mentioned that the long proboscis of the fly which meets the eye of the casual observer is merely the labium, which never functions in the act of biting, the actual stylets being much shorter and more or less hidden away in the labium. This latter organ, however, is probably well-adapted for scooping out sugary fluids (e.g., nectar of flowers), being paired and honey-combed at the tip, in the fashion of a double spoon. C. laprobanes, however, sucks blood only when settled on its host. The species of Tabanids which the field veterinary worker is most likely to en- counter are comprised under the genera Haematopota, Chrysops and Tabanus, the Indian species included in those genera numbering approximately 31, 11 and 75 re- spectively. Senior-White [1927] has given keys for the identification of these species, but the Veterinary worker in India is not likely to require more than a generic reference so that it seems unnecessary to reproduce these keys here. (To be continued).
INVESTIGATIONS INTO THE FLUCTUATIONS OF MILK YIELD WITH THE ADVANCEMENT OF LACTATION BY L. S. JOSEPH, G.B.V.C., Cattle Superintendent, Pusa, AND C. N. DAVE, B.AG. (BOM.), Post-graduate Student in Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Imperial Institute of Agricultural Research, Pusa. (Received for publication on 22nd April 1931.) (With three text figures.) It is one of the most essential problems for a dairyman to maintain a regular and steady supply of milk to his customers. The method usually adopted for this pur- pose is to regulate the services and therefore the calvings of the animals throughout the year. This alone does not completely and successfully solve the problem as it is co-related with tendency to the decline of milk in different lactations. The dairyman has, therefore, before regulating services, to analyse his stock with re- spect to the monthly milk yield in each lactation ; thus to work out the general tendency towards decline in milk with the advancement of lactation. By combin- ing the knowledge of decline in milk yield with the regulation of services, he will be able to overcome the difficulty with regard to the surplus or shortage of milk. With a view to study the above problem, records of Montgomery breed of cows at Pusa Cattle Farm were gone through. The investigation is sub-divided into two headings:FLUCTUATIONS OF MILK YIELD WITH ADVANCEMENT OF LACTATION 201 TABLE I. Showing the season of calvings in Montgomery cows. Months January February March April May June July August September October November December Total No. of calvings 160 141 138 127 116 111 109 122 111 109 142 167 1,553 Percentage 10.3 9.1 8.9 8.2 7.5 7.2 7.0 7.8 7.2 7.0 9.1 10.8 Rank with respect to II III IV V VII VIII IX VI VIII IX III I calving. It would appear from the above Table that the distribution of calvings is fairly uniform throughout the year. The variations are from 7.0 to 10.8 per cent. Fig. 1 gives a comparative view of the percentage of calvings in different months of the year. Fig. 1. Showing percentage distribution of calvings in Montgomery cows.
202 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III DECLINE IN MILK YIELD WITH ADVANCEMENT OF LACTATIONS. The procedure adopted for this inquiry was to sort out the monthly milk yield in each lactation along with the date of calving in each case. The latter was essential in arriving at the exact number of days, the cow was in milk during the first month of calving. It may be pointed out that it is the general practice at the Pusa Farm to record the milk from the 7th day after calving, the days prior to that being considered as the colostrum period. It is also the practice here to record the lactation yield for ten calendar months, i.e., 304 days, which is the average lacta- tion period in almost all the milch breed of cows. Hence the figures referred to in this paper are in accordance with the above practice. The total number of cases studied works up to 397 in all, a consolidated re- view of the detailed analysis of which is given in Appendix B. The following Table gives the monthly milk yield in different lactations.
FLUCTUATIONS OF MILK YIELD WITH ADVANCEMENT OF LACTATION 203 Showing the average monthly milk yield of Montgomery cows in different lactations. 1st lactation 2nd lactation 3rd lactation 4th lactation 5th lactation 6th lactation 7th lactation 8th lactation Months Milk yield (lbs.) No. of cases Milk yield (lbs.) No. of cases Milk yield (lbs.) No. of cases Milk yield (lbs.) No. of cases Milk yield (lbs.) No. of cases Milk yield (lbs.) No. of cases Milk yield (lbs.) No. of cases Milk yield (lbs.) No. of cases 1 . . 183(13)*105 273 (15) 83 336 (16) 62 342 (15) 57 361 (16) 38 290 (13) 25 336 (16) 17 340 (17) 10 2 . . 398 105 544 83 629 62 667 57 666 38 596 25 613 17 587 10 3 . . 366 105 464 83 561 62 597 57 607 38 526 25 544 17 531 10 4 . . 331 105 393 83 491 62 522 57 537 38 452 25 489 17 454 10 5 . . 308 105 336 83 431 62 453 57 466 38 416 25 450 17 431 10 6 . . 287 104 298 82 376 62 411 56 420 37 388 24 394 17 384 10 7 . . 267 102 275 77 326 62 358 56 365 37 325 24 337 17 338 10 8 . . 254 98 254 72 293 58 301 56 316 34 286 23 315 17 308 10 9 . . 239 93 241 65 258 55 265 51 288 31 265 22 274 16 303 9 10 . . 217 87 220 58 223 51 229 45 240 27 207 20 242 16 218 9 11 . . 125 75 115 50 94 41 130 36 120 19 100 15 82 12 242 4 TOTAL 2,975 3,413 4,018 4,275 4,386 3,851 4,076 4,136 * Figures in brackets show the number of days, for which the animals' first month's yield was recorded during the first month of calving.
204 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III Inferences from Table II. 1. It would appear from the above table that irrespective of number of lacta- tion, the milk yield tends to decline as the lactation advances, in spite of a number of cases remaining constant up to six months. 2. That the milk yield shows a rapid rise from first to second and second to third lactation by about 450 and 600 lbs. respectively, reaching its maximum in the fifth lactation. 3. That there is a heavy decline in milk yield by about 500 lbs. from fifth to sixth lactation. Fig. 2 gives comparative view of lactation yields. Fig. 2. Showing lactation yields of Montgomery cows.
FLUCTUATIONS OF MILK YIELD WITH ADVANCEMENT OF LACTATION 205 The following Table shows month to month decline in milk yield. TABLE III. Showing month to month decline in milk (lbs.) in different lactations of Montgomery cows. Decline from month 1st lact. 2nd lact. 3rd lact. 4th lact. 5th lact. 6th lact. 7th lact. 8th lact. Total Average 2nd to 3rd . 32 80 68 70 59 70 69 56 504 63.0 3rd to 4th . 35 71 70 75 70 74 55 77 527 65.9 4th to 5th . 23 57 60 69 71 36 39 23 378 47.2 5th to 6th .... 21 38 55 42 46 28 56 47 333 41.6 6th to 7th . 20 23 50 53 55 63 57 46 367 45.9 7th to 8th . 13 21 33 57 49 39 22 30 264 33.0 8th to 9th . 15 13 35 36 28 21 41 5 194 24.2 9th to 10th 22 21 35 36 48 58 32 85 337 42.1 Total . 181 324 406 438 426 389 371 369 2,904 .. Average . 22.6 40.5 50.7 54.7 53.2 48.6 46.4 46.1 45.4 Inferences. 1. The above table shows that the average decline is greater up to seventh month than in the remaining period of the lactation. 2. That the decline shows wide fluctuations in different lactations during the same period. 3. That the average monthly decline shows a rapid rise from the first to the third lactation reaching its maximum in the fourth after which it becomes less pro- nounced. 4. That the average monthly decline of all lactation combined works out at 45.4 lbs. with 65.9 lbs. as maximum and 24.2 as minimum decline from third to fourth and eighth to ninth month respectively. It may be pointed out here that the above table of decline in milk includes cases which showed some increase in their milk yield from one month to another. Such cases showing increase in milk yield from second to third month in different lactations formed 18 per cent. of the total number under observation. Among these there were ten cases showing increase from third to fourth month and three, showing increase from fourth to fifth month, as detailed below.
206 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III TABLE IV. Showing increase in milk yield (lbs.) in different months of lactation. Month 1st lact. 2nd lact. 3rd lact. 4th lact. 5th lact. 6th lact. 7th lact. 8th lact. 2nd to 3rd 30 (25)* 20(7) 44 (12) 55 (12) 55 (8) 70 (2) 14 (1) 44 (3) 3rd to 4th 34 (5) .. 54 (1) 13 (2) 19 (1) 20 (1) .. .. 4th to 5th 28 (3) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. * Figures in brackets show number of cases in each lactation. The following Table shows month to month percentage decline in milk in different lactations:FLUCTUATIONS OF MILK YIELD WITH ADVANCEMENT OF LACTATION 207 TABLE VI. Showing the progressive percentage decline of milk in different lactations (based on 2nd month). Decline from month 1st lact. 2nd lact. 3rd lact. 4th lact. 5th lact. 6th lact. 7th lact. 8th lact. 2nd to 3rd . 8.0 14.7 10.8 10.5 8.9 11.7 11.2 9.5 2nd to 4th 16.8 27.7 21.9 21.7 19.4 23.9 20.2 22.6 2nd to 5th . 22.6 38.2 31.4 32.0 30.1 29.9 26.5 26.5 2nd to 6th . 27.9 45.2 40.1 38.3 37.0 34.6 35.6 34.5 2nd to 7th . 32.9 49.4 48.0 46.2 45.3 45.2 44.9 42.3 2nd to 8th . 36.2 53.3 53.2 54.7 52.7 51.7 48.5 47.4 2nd to 9th . 40.0 55.7 58.8 60.1 56.9 55.2 55.2 48.2 2nd to 10th . 45.3 59.6 64.4 65.5 64.1 64.9 60.4 62.7 Average monthly per cent. decline. 5.7 7.4 8.0 8.2 8.0 8.1 7.5 7.8 Average 7.6 percentage. Inferences. 1. It would appear from the above table that the total percentage decline is least in first lactation. 2. That from second to eighth lactation the average percentage decline remains practically constant. 3. That on the whole the average percentage monthly decline in Montgomery cows works out at 7.6.
208 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III Fig. 3 shows the average percentage monthly decline in different lactations of Montgomery cows. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 3. Showing the average percentage monthly decline in milk in different lactations of Montgomery cows.
FLUCTUATIONS OF MILK YIELD WITH ADVANCEMENT OF LACTATION 209 APPENDIX A. Showing the season of calvings in Montgomery breed (1907 to 1930). Year January February March April May June July August September October November December Total 1907 - 1 1 2 1 210 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III APPENDIX B. Showing month to month lactation yields and their decline in Montgomery cows. 1st Lactation 2nd Lactation 3rd Lactation 4th Lactation Months Milk yield in lbs. Decline in lbs. Month to month decline per cent. Progressive decline per cent. No. of cases Milk yield in lbs. Decline in lbs. Month to month decline per cent. Progressive decline per cent. No. of cases Milk yield in lbs. Decline in lbs. Month to month decline per cent. Progressive decline per cent. No. of casses Milk yield in lbs. Decline in lbs. Month to month decline per cent. Progressive decline per cent. No. of cases 1 183 in 13 days. 105 273 in 15 days 83 336 in 16 days ... 62 342 in 15 days ... 57 2 398 32 8.0 8.0 105 544 80 14.7 14.7 83 629 68 10.8 10.8 62 667 70 10.5 10.5 57 3 366 35 9.5 16.8 105 464 71 15.3 27.7 83 561 70 12.4 21.9 62 597 75 12.5 21.7 57 4 331 23 6.9 22.6 105 393 57 14.5 38.2 83 491 60 12.2 31.4 62 522 69 13.2 32.0 57 5 308 21 6.8 27.9 105 336 38 11.3 45.2 83 431 55 12.7 40.1 62 453 42 9.2 38.3 57 6 287 20 6.9 32.9 104 298 23 7.7 49.4 82 376 50 13.3 48.0 62 411 53 12.9 46.2 56 7 267 13 4.8 36.2 102 275 21 7.6 53.3 77 326 33 10.1 53.2 62 358 57 15 9 54.7 56 8 254 15 5.9 40.0 98 254 13 5.1 55.7 72 293 35 11.9 58.8 58 301 36 11.9 60.1 56 9 239 22 9.2 45.3 93 241 21 8.7 59.6 65 258 35 13.5 64.4 55 265 36 13.5 65.5 51 10 217 ... ... ... 87 220 ... ... ... 58 223 ... ... ... 51 229 ... ... .... 45 11 125 ... ... ... 75 115 ... ... ... 50 94 ... ... ... 41 130 ... ... ... 36 Total 2,975 181 ... .. ... 3,413 324 ... ... ... 4,018 406 ... .... ... 4,275 438 Average monthly decline (lbs.) ... ... 22.6 ... ... ... 40.5 ... ... ... .. 50.7 ... .... ... ... 54.7 Average monthly decline in percent- age. 5.7 7.4 8.0 8.2
FLUCTUATIONS OF MILK YIELD WITH ADVANCEMENT OF LACTATION 211 APPENDIX BEFFECT OF SEASON OF CALVING ON MILK YIELD AND CALVING PERIOD OF MONTGOMERY COWS. BY L. S. JOSEPH, G.B.V.C., Cattle Superintendent, Pusa, AND C. N. DAVE, B.AG. (BOM.), Post-graduate Student in Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Imperial Institute of Agricultural Research, Pusa. (Received for publication on 23rd April 1931.) The value of a milch breed to the practical dairyman is dependent not only upon the quantity of milk the cow gives, but also upon the number of days she remains in milk and dry. With the object of studying the relationship between yields per lactation and intervals between successive calvings, pedigree records of Farm bred Montgomery cows (for the past 11 years) at Pusa Dairy were examined. The procedure adopted for this enquiry was to sort out the lactation yields with respect to the month of calving along with the number of days in milk and dry. The total number of cases examined was 369 as detailed below :CALVING ON MILK YIELD AND CALVING PERIOD OF MONTGOMERY COWS 213 Inferences. 1. It will appear from the above table that the month of calving shows no correlation with the milk yield. 2. That the average lactation yield is 3,811 lbs. in an average period of 448 days of which 157 are dry. 3. That the average calving period when calves are hand-fed is 448. Taking 283 days as the average gestation period, the average period required for conception after calving is 165 days, i.e., a Montgomery cow is likely to conceive 165 days after calving, yielding milk for 126 days after conception, and remaining dry for 157 days, thus completing her average calving period of 448 days. It may be interesting to note that the calving period is enhanced by about 25 per cent. when calves were allowed to suckle the dams. The following table gives its details. TABLE II. Showing the average calving period of Montgomery cows, when the calves are hand-fed and allowed to suckle. No. of cases Average No. of days in milk Average No. of days dry Average calving period REMARKS 286 304 255 559 Calves allowed to suckle the dams. 369 291 157 448 Calves hand-fed. Difference 13 98 111 The above Table indicates that in case of suckled calves the total calving period is increased by 111 days comprising of 13 and 98 days as wet and dry periods respectively. The figures of Table I are further analysed with respect to the season of calving.
214 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III TABLE III. Showing the effect of season on lactation yield and calving period. Season of calving No. of cases Average lactation yield Average No. of days in milk Average No. of days dry Average calving period in days Spring . . . . . 121 3,834 287 155 442 Summer . . . . . 103 3,852 290 157 447 Rains . . . . . 70 3,688 292 158 450 Winter . . . . . 75 3,831 299 158 457 Total . 369 .. .. .. .. Inferences. 1. It will appear from the above Table that there is a decrease in the average lactation yield by about 150 lbs. in case of rains calvers. This may probably be attributed to change in climatic conditions preventing the animals from taking their regular exercise in the open air. 2. That the average calving period along with the number of days in milk and dry practically remains unaffected irrespective of the season of calving.
THE DIAGNOSIS OF JOHNE'S DISEASE-SOME EXPERI- MENTAL RESULTS USING A "BOWEL-WASHING" METHOD. BY HUGH COOPER, M.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., Veterinary Research Officer, AND M. K. SRINIVASAN, G.M.V.C., Veterinary Inspector, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar-Kumaun. (Received for publication on 21st April 1931.) Johne's disease is undoubtedly prevalent among cattle in India to a much greater extent than is usually supposed. Much evidence has accumulated at this Institute to show that this disease exists in herds where there is no clinical history of its occurrence and none suspect its existence. Animals in good condition and apparently quite healthy may be infected, and many months at least may pass before clinical symptoms are shown to attract the attention of owners. Such animals are obviously a source of great danger to others in the herd as the causal organisms of the disease are voided continuously with the faeces. The first and most important step that must be taken if the disease is to be controlled or elimi- nated in a herd is to detect the infected animals. The most satisfactory test that has so far come into use in this country for the diagnosis of Johne's disease in the early stages is the avian tuberculin test. The double intradermal test recommended by the British Medical Research Council, with concentrated avian tuberculin, may be used for the detection of Johne's disease in the same way as " ordinary " tuberculin is used for the detection of tuberculosis, and in testing a herd both the agents may, with great advantage, be used simultaniously. The value of avian tuberculin for the detection of Johne's disease will be seen from the results recorded below, where a number of reactors to this agent, although not showing definite clinical symptoms, were subsequently con- firmed to be infected. In cases where a positive reaction to avian tuberculin is obtained, or where animals are suspected to be clinically affected with the disease, it is desirable to obtain confirmation of the diagnosis by the actual demonstration of the causal organism. The usual method for the demonstration of acid-fast organisms in the intestine of cattle is the rectal mucous membrane smear method, which is described ( 215 )
216 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III in the printed circular instructions on Johne's disease, written by Dr. J. T. Edwards, formerly Director, and issued from the Muktesar Institute, dated 27th July 1923, an extract from which is given below :DIAGNOSIS OF JOHNE'S DISEASE 217 prepare for examination smears from fragments taken from two or three different parts of the rectum, on account of the unusual distribution of the bacilli. At least one hundred fields of the microscope should be examined in each smear, after staining in the usual way for acid fast bacilli. The bacilli when they are found are usually rare and occur as short, delicate, scattered single rods. Mistakes frequently occur in the diagnosis of smears containing rare bacilli. Observers are apt to confuse other acid-fast bacilli such as normally found in fæces (the so-called "manure bacillus") and even bacterial spores with the true Johne's bacillus. This error can usually be avoided if the decolourising agent employed in the Ziehl Neelsen method consists of an alcoholic acid solution (such as three per cent. hydrochloric acid in methylated spirit) applied for a long time, about 5 minutes or longer, instead of the usual watery solution of acid, for the other organisms are usually not " alcohol fast " although they are acid-fast ". This method is the best one available when the lesions are in the lower parts of the bowel. Very often, however, as already mentioned, the lesions exist higher up the intestine and diagnosis cannot then be established by this method. When this method fails, the bowel-washing method described below should be carried out. The bowel-washing method employed by Mr. V. Krishnamurti is described in his article entitled " A note on the treatment of Johne's disease by intravenous injections of formalin " (Proceedings of the Indian Science Congress, Madras, 1929). The method employed is described by him as follows:218 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III blood-tinged fluid containing a few mucus shreds will be obtained, and after centrifuging the topmost layer of the deposit will often consist only of small particles of mucous membrane. Since the organisms are contained in the mucous membrane the material thus obtained is ideally suited for the purpose of diagnosis. It has also been found that a long period of centrifugation is necessary as in some cases examination after 5 to 10 minutes yielded negative results, while after further centrifugation organisms were detected in the same samples. Centrifuging must, therefore, be continued for at least 15 to 20 minutes where an ordinary hand centrifuge is employed. The two methods of diagnosis described above have recently been employed in a number of animals at the Muktesar Institute and the results obtained are recorded below. A batch of nine cows and two bullocks which had all given definitely positive reactions to avian tuberculin was received at Muktesar from a dairy farm in July 1930. In order to confirm the existence of the disease in these animals by demonstrating acid-fast bacilli of Johne's disease, rectal smears were taken and examined, but in every case with negative results. Smears were taken again the next day and examined in every case with the same result. The bowel washing method was then tried and all of them eventually revealed acid-fast organisms, although in two or three cases the examination had to be repeated more than once before they were found. The details of these examinations are given in the appended Table. After a period of nearly two months from the first examination, six of the animals began to reveal the bacilli also by the rectal smear method. This fact indicates that the disease was in its early stage with lesions only high up in the intestine at the time of the first examination. It is of interest to note that when housed under good conditions at Muktesar and with a liberal diet the majority of these animals began to improve greatly in condition and diarrhCOLON BACTERIA IN THE MILK SUPPLY AT PUSA 223 A positive reaction for B. coli was given by 1 c. c. milk on only four out of twelve tests in October 1930 and three out of fifteen in November 1930, and was absent in all the tests in December 1930 and January 1931. We see from the table that in the months November to February members of the VP+MR220 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III TABLE ITHE COLON BACTERIA OCCURRING IN THE MILK SUPPLY AT PUSA. BY J. H. WALTON, M.A., M.Sc., Imperial Agricultural Bacteriologist, Pusa. (Received for publication on 14th April 1931.) In the course of investigations for the purpose of raising the standard of cleanliness of the Pusa milk supply, it was found that both the plate and the coli counts of bacteria per c.c. milk rose with the onset of the rainy season. At other times of the year the plate counts could, by proper management in the dairy, be kept down to very low figures, but the coli count was much more difficult to control, and though this might rise with the plate count, yet anomalous instances were frequent. In one sample giving a plate count of 6,000 bacteria per c.c., colon bacteria were found in 0.1 c.c. and two days later, in milk giving a plate count of 29,000, the colon bacteria were absent in 0.1 c.c. On other occasions colon bacteria have been found in 0.01 c.c. milk with a total plate count of under 10,000 colonies per c.c. After some preliminary experiments in December 1928 and January 1929, the samples of milk were examined regularly in order to form an opinion regarding the types of colon bacteria that might be found, and also to find out whether the prevailing types varied with the season of the year. The tests for the presence of coliform bacteria were made by inoculating 1 c.c., 01 c.c. and 0.01 c.c. milk into tubes of a medium composed of 20 grms, peptone, 5 grms. lactose, 5 grms. sodium taurocholate, 1 litre water, and coloured blue with litmus. The tubes contained a Durham fermentation tube. The presence of coliform bacteria (Coli +) was indicated by the presence of gas in the fermentation tube and reddening of the litmus. Plates were made on Endo Agar from a tube of the highest dilution giving a Coli + reaction. A sample of the red (i.e., Coli) colonies, generally nine, was taken from a portion of the plate, subcultured on ordinary agar, and the agar cultures examined for motility and inoculated into tubes of a glucose broth, consist- ing of 5 grms. each glucose, peptone, and dipotassium phosphate per litre water. The broth tubes contained Durham fermentation tubes. ( 221 )
222 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III After incubation for 48 hours at 37°C., the reaction of the broth medium to methyl red was observed, and the Voges Proskauer test applied. The latter test was carried out by pouring about 2 c.c. of the medium into a watch glass and adding an equal volume of 20 per cent. caustic potash. A pink colour, generally developing in 20 minutes to half an hour, indicated a positive Voges Proskauer reaction (VP+). The positive Voges Proskauer reaction is associated with an alkaline reaction towards methyl red (MRCOLON BACTERIA IN THE MILK SUPPLY AT PUSA 223 A positive reaction for B. coli was given by 1 c. c. milk on only four out of twelve tests in October 1930 and three out of fifteen in November 1930, and was absent in all the tests in December 1930 and January 1931. We see from the table that in the months November to February members of the VP+MRSELECTED ARTICLES ON TREATMENT OF STERILITY IN COWS WITH WHEAT GERM OIL (VITAMIN E). BY P. VOGT-MOLLER, M.D., AND F. BAY, D.V.M. Denmark. (Reprinted from the Veterinary Journal (London), Vol. 87, No. 4, April 1931.) The existence of a fat soluble anti-sterility vitaminTREATMENT OF STERILITY IN COWS 225 In 1927, Evans and Burr (1927 (2) (3)) showed that various fats, e.g., lard, when mixed with vitamin E (wheat germ or wheat germ oil) were capable of depriving the latter of its value as a vitamin; this vitamin destroying property of the fat increased with the growing rancidity of the latter, and Evans and Burr (1928) drew the attention to "the possibility of destroying vitamin E by the development of rancid substance in wheat germ oil itself " ; it is then of importance to use fresh preparations. We shall not go into further details, but as far as researches of recent years are concerned, we refer to the monographs of McCollum and Simmonds (1929), and Jackson (1929). The preparation used as vitamin E source in the investigations referred to below was wheat germ oil; by courtesy of Miss M. H. Roscoe (Lister Institute, London), the wheat germs used, a very pure preparation, were delivered by Messrs. I. and H. Robinson, Ltd., Deptford Bridge Mills, London, and the wheat germ oil was made from the said wheat germs by the following simple procedure :226 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III are kept and fed in this country. For through generations, these animals have gradually been selected almost exclusively according to the demandTREATMENT OF STERILITY IN COWS 227 covered regularly every third week. When in heat the cow was treated 6-11 with 10 c. c. of wheat germ oil intramuscularly and covered on the same day, and was then quiet. On examination, 7-2-31, the cow was found to be pregnant (about three months). (2) Owner, the manor of H. Ten-year-old cow, No. 117. Calved 20-1-30. Covered 27-2, 20-3, 10-4, 1-5, 23-5, 14-6, 22-7 (ovary treatment on the same day), 12-8 (ovary treatment repeated); was then covered every third week except a few times in the autumn, where the cow was not brought to the bull even if in heat. Treatment, 8-11 with 10 c.c. of wheat germ oil intramuscularly, covered 21-11, and was then quiet. On examination, 11-2-31, the cow was found to be pregnant (about two-and-a-half months). (3) Owner, same as under (2). Five-year-old cow, No. 160. Calved 4-5-30. Was covered 5-6, 27-7, 16-8, etc., until treatment, 8-11, with 10 c.c. of wheat germ oil intramuscularly, then only covered once, 28-11. On examination, 11-2-31, the cow proved to be pregnant (about two-and-a-half months). (4) Owner, same as under (3). Three-year-old cow, No. 194. Calved, 5-1-30. Covered 20-2, 3-4, 29-4, 22-5, 23-6 (ovary treatment 22-7), covered again 17-8, etc. When in heat 8-11, treated with 10 c.c. of wheat germ oil intramuscularly, but not brought to the bull until next heat, 1-12, then quiet. On examination, 11-2-31, the cow was found to be pregnant (scarcely two-and-a-half months). (5) Owner, the manor of B. Three-year-old cow, No. 59. Calved, 13-6-30. Covered 13-7, 5-8, 9-9, 10-10, 1-11. Treatment 11-11, with 10 c.c. of wheat germ oil intramuscularly, was covered 18-11, and was then quiet. On examination, 6-2-31, the cow was found to be pregnant (about two-and-a-half months). (6) Owner, same as under (5). Five-year-old cow, No. 110. Calved, 13-6-31. Covered 7-8, 19-9, 20-10, 11-11. When in heat, 11-11, treatment with 10 c.c. of wheat germ oil intramuscularly, and covered on the same day. On examination, 6-2-31, the cow proved to be pregnant (about three months). (7) Owner, same as under (6). Eleven-year-old cow, No. 213. Calved, 14- 10-29. Covered 28-12-29, 27-1-30, 16-2, 28-3, 17-4, 14-5, 27-6, 25-7, 15-8, 4-9, 26-9, 14-10, 11-11. Ovary treatment two to three times. When in heat, 11-11, treat- ment with 10 c.c. of wheat germ oil intramuscularly and covered on the same day; became quiet, but proved not to be pregnant on examination 6-2. (8) The farm of A. Five-year-old cow, No. 29. The cow slunk, 29-4-30. Covered 17-6, 6-7, 31-9, 2-10. Treatment, 12-11, with 20 c.c. of wheat germ oil intramuscularly, covered 14-11 and 26-11; was brought to the bull 17-12, but was restless and had to be forced, was then quiet. On examination, 24-2, the cow proved to be pregnant (two-and-a-half months). D 2
228 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III (9) Owner, L. H., farmer of R. Three-year-old cow. Calved, 4-1-30, but a prolapse occurred; has been covered serveral times (exact information has not been obtained). Ovary treatment, 5-8, 16-8, and 1-9, but was in heat every week or every fortnight, then treated with iodine (by a colleague), but continued to be-in heat, ovary treatment repeated 23-10. Treatment, 12-11, with 20 c.c. of wheat germ oil intramuscularly, covered on the same day, and three to four times later on. On examination, 22-1 and 17-2, the cow was found not to be pregnant. (Perhaps this cow ought to be excluded from the number of experiments, as, owing to the complication occurring during delivery, there is every reason to suppose that the sterility may have been of an anatomicopathological causation). (10) Owner, the manor of R. Seven-year-old cow, No. 9. Calved 24-7-30. Covered 7-9, 2-10, 8-11. Treatment, 12-11, with 20 c.c. of wheat germ oil intramus- cularly, covered twice, the last time 25-12. On examination, 24-2-31, the cow proved not to be pregnant. (11) Owner, A. M., farmer of M. Six-year-old cow, No. 10. Calved 28-10-29. Covered 10-5-30, 25-7, 24-8, 30-10, 19-11. When in heat, 19-11, treatment with 20 c.c. of wheat germ oil intramuscularly, was covered on the same day and has been quiet since. On examination, 10-2-31, the cow proved to be pregnant (about two- and-a-half months.) (12) Owner, I. O., small holder of K. Six-year-old cow. Calved in July 1929 ; milked satisfactorily. Covered for the first time two-and-a-half to three months after calving, and then every third week by two different bulls; a couple of months ago the owner gave up hoping to get the cow with calf. Treatment, 22-11-30, with 12 c.c. of wheat germ oil, as the cow had been in heat a few days before; was covered 14-12, and on examination on 24-2-31 the cow proved to be pregnant (about two- and-a-half months). As will be seen, the above material is not so comprehensive that it is possible safely to base anything decisive on it, but, nevertheless, it will presumably hint that vitamin E preparations may be of therapeutic value in sterility in cows. When everything is considered, also the fact that the dosage was rather an arbitrary one, and that two of the " negative " cows proved incapable of being influenced despite repeated treatment of the uterus and the ovaries, whilst several of the positive cows resisted repeated ovary treatment, we believe to be justified in saying that in the case of such a batch of permanently sterile cows as we have had to do with here, none of the methods hitherto in common use would have yielded better results after one treatment. We therefore believe that the results encourage continued experi- ments on a considerably larger scale, and we have commenced such experiments, using partly wheat germ oil, partly a vitamin E concentrate.
TREATMENT OF STERILITY IN COWS 229 RÉSUMÉ. Referring to vitamin E and the importance of this vitamin in the organism, and to the pathological alterations occurring when vitamin E is lacking in the food, the results of treatment of sterility in cows with wheat germ oil (vitamin E) are com municated. The results obtained after a single dose of wheat germ oil administered intramuscularly must be termed so satisfactory that they encourage further experi- ments with the said therapy. BIBLIOGRAPHY. Beard, H. H.: Am. Journ Physiol., 75, 682, 1926. Evans, H. M.: Journ. Nutrit, 1, 23, 1928-29. Evans, H. M., and Bishop, K. S.: Science, 56, 650, 1922. Evans, H. M., and Burr, G. O.: " The Anti-Sterility Vitamin Fat Soluble E." Mem. Univers. of California, Vol. 8, 1927, 1. Evans, H. M., and Burr, G. O.: Journ. Am. Med. Ass., 88, 1462, 1927, 2. Evans, H. M., and Burr, G. O.: Journ. Am. Med. Ass., 89, 1587, 1927, 3. Evans, H. M., and Burr, G. O.: Journ. Biol. Chem., 76, 273, 1928. Hart, E. B., Miller, W. S., and McCollum, E. V.: Journ. Biol. Chem., 25, 239, 1916. Hart, E. B., McCollum, E. V., Steenbock, H., and Humphrey, G. C.: Journ. Agr. Research, 10, 175, 1917. Jackson, C. M.: Arch. Pathol., 8, 273, 1929. McCollum, E. V., and Simmonds, N.: " The Newer Knowledge of Nutrition.," 4th ed., New York, 1929. Osborne, T. B., and Mendel, L. B.: Journ. Bio. Chem., 37, 557, 1919. Sure, B.: Journ. Biol. Chem., 69, 29, 1926
THE USE OF NICOTIN AND ITS COMPOUNDS FOR THE CONTROL OF POULTRY PARASITES*. BY CLIFF D. CARPENTER, Petaluma Laboratories, Los Angeles, Calif. (Reprinted from the Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association, N. S., Vol. 31, No. 5, May 1931.) The use of tobacco and its alkaloid, nicotin, for the control of insects, began with the introduction of its use in floriculture, about 1890, when nurserymen and gardeners used tobacco stem fumigation as a means of protecting their flowers against insect life. These insects were destroyed by burning the tobacco stems, producing a dense smoke, and also by spreading the tobacco several inches deep in the greenhouses or beneath the plants. In 1892, the first standardized extract of nicotin, called " Rose Leaf ", was placed upon the market. This product contained slightly less than 3 per cent. nicotin and had many disadvantages, being thick and gummy and was employed by exposing the extract to live steam under high pressure, and forcing the diluted vapors throughout the greenhouses by a system of pipes. As early as 1898, the Florida Agricultural Experiment Station reported that Rose Leaf cost less, was easier to prepare, was more effective and had a wider range of application than any form of insecticide used up to that time. The first entrance of nicotin into the control of animal parasites dates back to the early nineties, when sheep were first dipped for scabies, ticks and lice. It was soon proved that nicotin destroyed all three of these external parasites with a single dipping and was greatly superior to lime-sulfur solutions, arsenical dips and coal-tar previously used. In 1910, Arnold developed a 40 per cent. solution of sulfate of nicotin and for twenty years this product has been available, principally in the form of " Black Leaf 40". Lamson found that Black Leaf 40 was an effective agent in the control of stomach worms of sheep. For several years nicotin had been given in various * Presented at the 67th annual meeting of the American Veterinary Medical Association, Los Angeles, Calif., Aug. 26-29, 1930. ( 230 )
NICOTIN FOR THE CONTROL OF POULTRY PARASITES 231 forms with the food, including tobacco stems, leaves and dust. Again, however, it was found that these were too uncertain in their nicotin content and with the advent of Black Leaf 40 it was possible to standardize the dose and obtain more efficient results than with copper sulfate treatment. It was cheap, easy to obtain and did not have the prolonged after-effects of copper sulfate. With this evidence of nicotin controlling external and internal parasites in sheep and cattle, Beach and Herms, in 1916, first employed tobacco stems for the control of poultry parasites. Beach found that by steeping finely chopped tobacco stems for two hours and mixing the stems and the liquid with about one-half of the usual ration of the ground feed and by fasting the birds for a day previous to the treatment, many roundworms were expelled. This treatment was followed by Epsom salt and repeated in ten days. Some evidence was secured to indicate that from ten to twenty-five per cent. of the cecum worms also were removed by this method and it was suggested that the treatment be repeated at intervals of three to four weeks in an attempt to control these parasites. The fasting before and the purging after treatment caused a loss of egg-production and greatly shocked the birds, and was otherwise undesirable even though many worms were expelled. A commercial poultryman of California provided the next step by recommend- ing that commercial tobacco dust be mixed with the mash and fed over a period of time. Dougherty and Beach confirmed these results and recommended adding to the mash two per cent. by weight of tobacco dust, containing 1½ per cent. nicotin and feeding for a period of three or four weeks. For several years the tobacco dust treat- ment was the best known means of removing roundworms. During the period from 1916 to 1923 many products were offered on the market, using nicotin sulfate as a base, which were sold under trade names and were no more efficient than steeped tobacco stems and no less harmful. In 1924, Freeborn developed the first individual treatment for the elimination of roundworms, using nicotin sulfate as the active ingredient. He combined 7.9 grams of nicotin sulfate with 16 grams of a selected fullers' earth, known as Lloyd's Alkaloidal Reagent, and found that he could thus safely administer an amount of nicotin serveral times the lethal dose. This mixture was packed in a number two gelatin capsule, which, when filled, weighed from 350 to 400 milligrams. These capsules were administered by introducing them into the back of the throat and after locating them from the outside, forcing them into the crop with the thumb and forefinger. Freeborn reports an efficiency of 97.2 per cent. for 312 birds treated. It is not definitely known how fullers' earth protects the bird from the poisonous effects of nicotin, but it is a fact that the nicotin is both absorbed and adsorbed and the nicotin is undoubtedly released slowly enough that the birds are not seriously
232 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III affected. A lethal dose of nicotin causes a depression on the somatic reflexes to the extent that respiration and other body processes cease. In the early field application of the capsule treatment, quite a few birds were killed by leaving capsules in the back of the throat, since many nerve endings are exposed in this area. Other birds were suffocated by faulty application in that capsules were introduced into the trachea. When the capsule is placed well into the crop, very little shock results. Freeborn concludes that inasmuch as the fullers' earth loses its normal ability to remain in suspension when subjected to extracts of intestinal washings, there is a possibility that the direct cause of the nicotin being liberated is due to the derange- ment of its colloidal system from purely physical factors. It is quite evident that colloidal chemistry is seriously involved in this phenomenon. Linsteadt found that certain colloids were safe carriers of nicotin and stated that molecular weights and sizes are determining factors in the protection granted to the bird. Since the molecular weight of nicotin (alkaloid) is 162.13 and of nicotin sulfate 211.17, it is thus seen that the alkaloid nicotin is more toxic to the bird than nicotin sulfate. He successfully combined nicotin and casein and determined the molecular weight as 1297.13, more than six times that of nicotin sulfate making it a safe carrier. With a thought of overcoming the undesirable features of the nicotin sulfate capsule, Linsteadt combined 10 per cent. soap with his nicotin caseinate compound and produced a pellet of a size and shape that it could not enter the trachea and one which would be slippery when moistened and therefore not stick in the throat. Many tests have been employed, by the writer, to determine the efficiency of this product, called " Nicocides". In no instance has the efficiency fallen below 99 per cent. In an attempt to make a dual-purpose Nicocide for both tapeworms and round- worms, nicotin alginate and crude kamala were combined, using the same amount of nicotin with one gram of kamala. This has been done without sacrificing the efficiency of either ingredient when used singly and Freeborn states that the dual nicocide produces less toxicity than the combining of kamala with nicotin sulfate. Undoubtedly molecular size is again involved, since nicotin alginate is approxi- mately six times as heavy as nicotin caseinate and over thirty-seven times that of nicotin sulfate. Older than the industry itself is the fight against body lice. Thirty years ago it was considered standard practice to get birds out of doors in the spring, as soon as sufficient road dust had accumulated to allow the birds an opportunity to smother
NICOTIN FOR THE CONTROL OF POULTRY PARASITES 233 the lice by dusting. This procedure evidently regulated by an idiosyncracy of the species, was thought to be sufficiently effective to keep under reasonable control six of the seven recognized varieties of lice. These varieties have been named prin- cipally for their location on the bird, but do have several distinguishing characteris- ties, including size, shape and color. The one species not controlled by this " nature-provided treatment " is commonly called head lice and greasing with butter or lard was resorted to for control. For several years tobacco dust, mixed with the road dust, has been officially recommended as an aid in minimizing the infestations of body lice. Bishopp and Wood developed the sodium fluorid treatment, recommending both the dipping and dusting methods. Both were thoroughly efficient but laborious, hazardous and disagreeable to the operator. In 1928, another commercial poultryman of California brought to the attention of the manufacturers of Black Leaf 40, a new use for their product, revolutionary in its application and far-reaching in its benefits to the industry because of its efficiency, availability and small cost per bird. This poultryman found that he got a perfect kill of all varieties of lice by merely applying a thin film of nicotin sulfate, in the form of Black Leaf 40, to the roosts in the evening. Freeborn, Lunn and Bittenbender, in rapid succession, verified these practical findings and standard recommendations for the use of this product are as follows : Paint the roosts with a thin coating of undiluted Black Leaf 40 shortly before roosting time, using one-half pound to each one hundred feet of roosts, including cross-arms. If roosts have been whitewashed, clean off the lime completely before painting. Be sure that all birds are on the roosts for at least two successive nights following application. Leave ventilators open in the front of the house, to provide sufficient air for the birds, but close ventilators above or behind the roosts to pre- vent fumes from being blown away too quickly. Lice eggs hatch in from six to ten days, so examine birds ten to twelve days following treatment of the roosts to determine the necessity of repeating treatment. If more lice are found, the material should be applied again, at once, to prevent their developing into maturity and laying more eggs for another reinfestation . Under good conditions two treatments a year should prove adequate. Nicotin is highly volatile at temperatures of 100 to 105 degrees Fahrenheit and is released by the body temperature of the fowl. Since lice breathe through the pores of the skin, they absorb the free nicotin and are killed by contact.
234 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [I, III The advantages of this method of louse control are obvious : 1. No loss of egg-production. 2. No handling of birds. 3. Roost space for one thousand can be treated in one hour. 4. Meat is not flavored nor feathers stained. 5. Supplies are usually conveniently available. Attempts to use free nicotin on the roosts have not been so successful as nicotin sulfate. Nicotin alginate has been found to remain on the roosts for a period of time longer than nicotin sulfate. This again is apparently due to the larger size molecules. While much has been done with nicotin in the field of poultry parasite control by practical poultrymen, investigators and private laboratories, there yet remains much to be accomplished. This is evidenced by the fact that new pro- ducts, many of them inefficient and some actually harmful, are continually making their appearance. Some manufacturers are diluting forty per cent. nicotin sulfate as much as one-half by adding various sticky substances to back their claims of greater efficiency, for the eradication of lice. The claims of many manufacturers of products for worm control may be similarly criticised. Just recently the writer received literature citing the merits of one which is a fair sample. To quote, " Now science has worked another wonder. Prof. Blank's great worm remedy not only removes all tapeworms, round- worms, etc., from the intestinal tract, but also makes all the thirty other parasitic worms drop off and disappear as though by magic". The evident misstatement is accompanied by a sectional drawing of a fowl, picturing grape worms, gizzard worms, air sac mites and other parasites quite probably attempting to demonstrate the " etc." group above referred to, or else part of the group of " thirty ". The writer deplores the present situation, which is costing the poultry industry many hundreds of thousands of dollars in wasted resources, lack of results, and a false security which surrounds the average poultryman after he has treated his flock with any one of these products, if they contain an insufficient quantity of nicotin sulfate or other of its compounds. The time is rapidly approaching when the practicing veterinarian will be held directly responsible by the industry for the control of poultry parasites, and until such time as uniform legislation throughout the United States requires manufac- turers to register the amount of nicotin employed per unit of treatment, the veterinarian must make sure that the amount is adequate to assure results from the use of those products, where nicotin is the active ingredient.
NEW TREATMENT OF FLUKE. BY Prof. G. MAROTEL, of the Lyons Veterinary School. (Revue Vétérinaire, December, 1930.) (Reprinted from the Veterinary Journal (London), Vol. 87, No. 4, pp. 205-207, April 1931.) Oil of male fern is known to be a classic remedy against distomes, but recently criticism has been levelled at its high price (10 to 20 francs per sheep, and 70 to 150 francs per cow), at its sometimes insufficient action, and above all to its danger (for it has caused fatal accidents). These defects have led to research for a better therapeutic remedy and for two years some ten new anti-fluke remedies have been issued without any scientific study of control ever having been published on the subject. I considered it necessary to undertake experimental researches with a view to ascertaining what amongst these new treatments appeared to be most advantageous and to be recommended from the different points of view of effectiveness, harmless- ness, cost price, and ease of administration. My studies are not yet finished, but in view of the past rainy year a prevalence of fluke may be expected, and I consider that it is as well to make known that there is a remedy better than male fern, and that is Vitan. Vitan is a Bulgarian product, which is sold in red gelatinous capsules as big as a cherry, and containing a liquid of the following composition : benzol, 78 ; vaseline 5 ; camphorated alcohol, 5 ; essence of turpentine, 12. Price of a capsule, 2 francs. I have experimented with this drug on thirty-five sheep with constant success and no accidents ; the eggs of flukes disappeared from the excrement in three to four days, the animals treated did not seem in any way upset, although badly affected. Here is, therefore, an anti-fluke remedy which, being quite as effective as male fern, is clearly superior in several respects : 236 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III The discovery of an easily marketable anti-fluke remedy is not only a progress for treatment of the malady, but should have its effect and repercussence on pro- phylaxis. In practice fluke epidemics have for origin and point of departure the scattering of marshy grass land, pools, ditches, and stagnant ponds with excrement charged with eggs which emit individual parasites each day. The first thing to do then is to suppress these sowers of germs, and this can be done by systematic ad- ministration, preventive in some measure, of an anti-fluke agent to all the animals (ailing or not) of a flock one knows to be affected ; one thus rids them of their parasites in such a way that at this time they cannot any longer throw out infective dejections. But to be effective this anti-fluke remedy should be administered three times. (1)Before putting out to pasture (about April) to expel the flukes of indivi- duals affected, and thus avoid contamination of the ground. (2) Five months later (about September) for that is about the necessary time for adult worms to become egg layers. In effect it has to be recognised that a few sheep escape the first treatment; their helminths therefore lay eggs which after two or three months from cercaria, which in their turn, after two or three months, are transformed after ingestion into adult distomes ; total five months. If one expels them before this delay, one is then sure that they will not yet have been able to produce eggs, and this is the reason for the September worming. Finally, the third intervention two to three months later (towards November) after the return from pasture, to destroy the trematodes, the issue of some cercaria which may have been swallowed after the second treatment. Thus, nothing but this rule of a three period anti-fluke treatment before, during, and after pasturage will rid surely and periodically all the animals of their distomes almost immediately after the arrival of these in the liver, before in all cases they have had time to become adult egglayers. Vitan suppresses the voiding of eggs, therefore no more flukes are possible. With male fern this therapeutic preventive was not realisable, as stated before, notable due to its too high and prohibitive price. But with a remedy as active, as handy, and as marketable as Vitan, I am sure that breeders and rearersCLINICAL NOTES Echinococcosis and Carcinomatous Growth in a Cow. (I. P. No. 144, Subject Cross-bred Ayr. Scinde Cow No. 17, aged 9 years.) The cow delivered a full grown calf normally on 3rd August 1930. She was brought to the hospital again on 7th August 1930 looking very dull and with impaired appetite. The temperature was throughout about normal except for a few days when it rose up by one or two degrees. A growth, as large as a man's fist, was observed in the abdominal cavity just below the lumbar region. On rectal exami- nation it was found to be very hard and adherent to the roof of the abdomen. Throughout her illness she was given only symptomatic treatment with stimulants, iodides, laxatives, etc., as the progress of the case indicated. The condition of the animal gradually became worse and the swelling became more-prominent. The milk yield also steadily decreased until, towards the close of the cow's illness, it was almost nil. From 28th August 1930 the animal showed great weakness and was noticed to turn constantly to the left. The concentrated food consumed also became less and less day by day. On 5th November 1930 swellings were noticed in the front legs and below the temporal region. The cow appeared to be semi comatose. On 6th November 1930 she assumed a recumbent position and was unable to get up until she died on 13th November 1930. Post-mortem examination revealed extreme congestion of the liver with innumerable echinococcus cysts. Posteriorly a growth of the size of a cocoanut soft and friable in consistency was seen. A bonelike growth of the size of a small cocoanut was found adherent to the right kidney. This is the growth that was seen on the right side of the animal during life. The right lung also contained many echinococcus cysts. The growths from the kidney and liver were sent to Madras Veterinary College for microscopical examination. Result. Sections from the liver and kidneys revealed carcinomatous growths. Appearances were highly suggestive of malignancy. The growth adherent to the peritoneum was a lipoma. The point of interest in this case is that this cow, though affected with so many echinococcus cysts in the lungs and liver, and malignant growths in the kidney and liver, was apparently quite healthy, yielding the usual quantity of milk, for a long period, before she was actually noticed to be ill [G. KRISHNASWAMI MUDALIAR ]. ( 237 )
238 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III A case of Sinusitis. (I. P. No. 142. Subject Dairy Cow No. 93.) This cow was admitted into hospital on 4th August 1930 for epistaxis. The previous history of the case could not be traced exactly. There was a longitudinal scar about 1½" in length on the left side of the forehead just above the eyeball. From this it was inferred that there must have been some external injury due to accident. The usual treatment for epistaxis was given, but the animal did not show any improvement. The bleeding was usually only from one nostril but occasionally it was observed from both the nostrils. The bleeding was scanty and occurred at irregular intervals. At the commencement of the ailment the cow was feeding satisfactorily and was otherwise quite normal. Gradually the milk yield decreased and she was not able to consume her usual fodder ration which at a later stage was refused completely. The concentrated ration was also refused now and then. The breathing of the animal became more and more distressed with the pro- gress of the disease and it was evident that the animal was suffering much pain. In the beginning of the disease nasal exploration with a tube did not reveal anything abnormal. A slight swelling was noticed in the region of the frontal sinus on the left side. As the case was getting worse it was decided to trephine the frontal sinus with a view to removing any obstruction found. This was done on 16th October 1930. Only a small quantity of pus came away. The animal showed slight improvement after the operation for a few days but again became worse. The breathing was now very much distressed and suffering was very intense. The left front leg showed slight swelling. As there was no free drainage between the frontal and nasal sinus, it was suspected that the obstruction was somewhere in the vicinity of the nasal sinus and so the lowest region of the frontal sinus was trephined on 3rd November 1930 with the idea that this at least might relieve the animal. The obstruction was not located however and the cow continued to suffer excruciating pain. On 4th December 1930 the left nasal cham- ber was again explored and a small piece of tissue was removed. This was sent to Madras Veterinary College and the microscopical examination revealed granulation tissue. The left eyeball was noticed to become opaque with lymph deposit from 5th December 1930 and it was being slowly protruded from its socket, the sight being gradually lost. On 12th December 1930 the greater part of the eyeball was out of the socket and it had to be removed to relieve the animal of pain. On 8th Decem- ber 1930 the cow aborted a foetus about 4 months old. As the case was incurable and the suffering of the cow was increasing day by day it was thought advisable to destroy the animal to relieve her of her sufferings and this was carried out, with the permission of the Deputy Director of Agriculture, Livestock, on 16th December 1930,
CLINICAL NOTES 239 A Post-mortem examination was duly conducted. On making a vertical sec- tion of the nasal chamber and the frontal region it was found that the whole of the frontal sinus on the left side extending to the superior turbinated bones and involving the sphenoid bones was affected. The membrane covering the sinuses was necrosed and a large quantity of necrosed tissue was found. The condition was apparently due to an injury resulting in sinusitis [G. KRISHNASWAMI MUDALIAR]. Bull Burn. (I. P. No. 214. Subject Breeding Bull No. 106.) Bull No. 106 was admitted into hospital on 13th October 1930 for coital Exanthema or " Bull burn ". Vesicles and ulcers were noticed on the glans penis and the anterior portion of the penis and there was a viscid yellowish white dis- charge from the sheath. It was treated with usual astringents and disinfectants. During treatment there was a temporary subsidence of the disease but after some- time it reappeared. Sterile swabs from the discharge were therefore submitted to the Principal, Madras Veterinary College, and he was requested to supply auto- genous vaccine for treating the case. The first dose of 1 c.c. of auto-vaccine was injected subcutaneously on 23rd November 1930. The second dose of 2 c.c. was given on 26th November 1930. The 3rd dose of 5 c.c. on 29th November 1930 and the last dose of 10 c.c. on 2nd December 1930 was given. For a fortnight after the injection the lesions on the penis were washed with an astringent lotion (Zinc sulphate and lead acetate a.a. 6 grs. to an oz.). Afterwards local treatment to penis was discontinued. On 3rd December 1930, viz., the day after the last injection a circular swelling 3" in diameter and very hard to touch was noticed on the right maxillary region. There was no rise of temperature at any time. The swelling gradually went down with fomentation and application of resolvents and com- pletely disappeared after 3 weeks. Two weeks after the injection the bull was examined and there was no discharge or lesion in the penis. He was again examin- ed from time to time and observed to be healthy. Again on 18th January 1931 I made a thorough examination of the bull and as he appeared to be cured of his complaint he was discharged and allowed for service [G. KRISHNASWAMI MUDALIAR]. Foreign Body in the Oesophagus. Subject. A country-bred heifer in apparent good health, 3½ years old, and owned by a clerk, was admitted into the out-patient clinic on 15th September 1930. Cuo. 521. History. Her appetite was reported to be not good for the last 2 days. She took only a small quantity of green fodder with reluctance. She was very thirsty, but drank only very little plain water, constantly sipping and leaving it.
240 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III Symptoms recorded. The patient was restive and had an anxious facial expression. Partial inability to swallow. Frequent extending and stretching of the head. Odaema of the throat and oesophageal furrow. Pain and extreme tenderness at the region of the throat. Rumen slightly tympanitic. Dung con- stipated, conjunctive injected, breathing normal. No salivation or eructuation, temperature normal. Frequent attempts to swallow something. Half a pint of water was slowly given as a drench, which was swallowed with difficulty, producing small intermittent gurgling sound during her act of deglutition. The region of the throat and its adjacent parts in the oesophagus, on palpation, was found to have been subjected to a traumatic injury with some hard and pointed object fixed in the upper end of the oesophagus. Diagnosis. Traumatic injury caused by the presence of a foreign body in the oesophagus close behind the pharynx. Prognosis. Not unfavourable. Treatment. It was decided to remove the foreign body, if possible, through the mouth by gentle traction and manual removal by hand, after the application of a " Reliance Mouth Gag " on the patient. With this in view, the patient was kept in a secure steady position, with her head kept extended and lifted up for the operator to work upon, the gag having been duly fixed on her. The foreign body could be felt with the tip of the middle finger, but could not be extracted conveniently without injury to the glottis and its neighbouring tissues during the process. With a pair of dressing forceps, and aided by gentle external manipulation, the offending body was caught hold of and removed carefully, and it was found to be an ordinary iron sewing needle 2" long, bent and rusty. It is surmised that the animal must have picked it up along with her concentrated ration, she was wont to get in the mornings. Four ounces of Oleum lini with half a drachm of Acidum carbolici (3p) was given as a draught after making it lukewarm, as an antiseptic soothing drench. Hot water fomentations were given to the odaematous region followed by stimulating embroca- tion. Rice congee with common salt added to taste, was prescribed for diet, besides ripe plantain fruits soaked in castor oil, 2 or 3 times daily. The patient attended the infirmary for four more days, during which period the treatment consisted only of a normal saline solution as a drench in the morning, after repeating the hot fomentations. The patient made an uneventful recovery and she was discharged cured on 19th September 1930 [V. P. MENON].
ABSTRACTS Control of Stomach Worms in Sheep.242 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III Observations have also been made in the field on one property where administration of postassium permanganate in the drinking water has been extensively employed, but it was not possible to find evidence that the drug had any effect whatever in controlling infection with stomach worms, while the abandonment of drenching with other proved drugs has led to a recrudescence of the parasitic infection on this property. The Council, therefore, considers it necessary to warn pastoralists against abandoning tried and reliable methods of treatment for stomach worms and other parasites recommended by it or the State Departments of Agriculture, and in the place of such reliable methods substituting the administration of drugs in drinking water or in the form of licks. The adoption of such unsound methods as last mentioned, while attractive superficially, will merely lead to much unnecessary expense, and will allow stomach worm infection again to become serious on properties whereby regular drenching its gravity is being steadily reduced. Further experiments are now being conducted in order to determine whether it is possible to develop some method of treatment as an auxiliary to existing methods for the control of internal parasites, and which may combine some of the features hoped for from the use of the drugs specified and others. [I. C. R.] The Influence of Frequency of Cutting on the Productivity, Botanical and Chemical Composition and the Nutritive value of " Natural" Pastures in Southern Australia.ABSTRACTS 243 (8) The percentage of P2 O5 in the herbage is low compared with the percentages obtained from Continental pastures. It is, however, very similar to the results obtained from certain South African pastures. The highest production of P2 05 is obtained from Series 3 in 1927 and Series 2 in 1928. (9) The P2 O5 content of fortnightly and monthly cuts is almost identical. With less severe cutting, however, the P2 O5 content drops markedly to a minimum in the herbage at maturity. (10) The P2 O5 content is maintained throughout the season when the pasture is cut at fortnightly intervals. (11) The calcium-phosphorus ratio is very high in all cases, but is reduced when pasture is cut at fortnightly intervals. (12) The herbage from fortnightly and monthly cuts is more than twice as rich in crude protein as the mature herbage from a single cut. (13) The highest production of crude protein is obtained from pasture cut at 2-4 weekly intervals, the higher protein content of the young herbage more than counterbalancing the depressed yield. (14) Pasture cut at fortnightly intervals is lowest in percentage crude fibre. With decreased frequency of cutting, the crude fibre content steadly rises. The Requirements of Concentrates of Sindhi cows yielding upto 10 lbs. of Milk per day under Deccan Conditions.244 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III 3. The isolation of the species of the organism in question is difficult to accomplish. There appears to be no certain period during the course of infection in which the organism can be regularly isolated. 4. The microscopic study of the tissues of 33 birds has shown these definite lesions ; perivascular foci of hyperplasia in the spleen, perivascular foci in conjunction with the interlobular vessels of the liver and hydropic degeneration of the parenchymal cells of the liver, cloudy swelling and necrosis of tubular epithelium of the kidneys and peribronchiolar lesions in the lungs. Further: The disease has been found to exist in naturally infected flocks. Fourteen birds ob- tained from two of these flocks reacted to the agglutination test and showed typical microscopic lesions. Although the disease is not necessarily fatal, it may be of considerable economic importance due to the greatly decreased egg yield of the infected birds. The Mineral Requirements of Dairy Cattle.ABSTRACTS 245 In the case of half-grown animals good pasture supplies an abundance of all the mineral elements necessary to maintain optimum growth and health. In the later stages of development, both growth and health may be adversely affected when the animals are grazing in specially deficient areas, as, for example, in the phosphorus-deficient areas in South Africa. There is, however, no direct evidence to show that pastures grazed by cattle are so poor in calcium that this deficiency affects the rate of growth and health. The fact that there are no observations on record, however, cannot be taken as evidence that such cases do not occur. In indoor feeding of half-grown animals on the ordinary rations used in practice, there is no evidence that deficiency of calcium or phosphorus occurs to such an extent as to cause obvious signs of malnutrition or retardation of growth. In milk cows, good pasture, which resembles milk closely in its mineral composition, supplies both calcium and phosphorus in the proper proportions. Further, the factors which make for assimilation of calcium are present. On poor pastures, however, deficiency of phosphorus may be so extreme as to limit milk production. The direct feeding of inorganic phosphates may make good this deficiency and lead to increased milk yield. There are no observations to show whether or not deficiency of calcium in poor pastures may be so extreme as to affect milk yield. In indoor feeding of milk cows the cereals and other concentrates used, though relatively rich in phosphorus, are deficient in calcium. Under experimental conditions with diets specially poor in calcium, this deficiency adversely affects milk yield and reproductive capacity. In the lactating animal there is difficulty in ensuring that the amount of calcium assimilated will equal the amount of calcium lost in the milk and excreta. In most of the observations which have been made during the period of heavy yield there is a continuous negative balance. On rations with a low calcium content this negative balance may be reduced by the addition of calcium salts. The presence in the ration of a sufficient amount of calcium must be regarded as the most important factor in maintaining calcium equilibrium. Factors which aid assimilation are of secondary importance with a sufficient supply of calcium, but become of primary importance if the supply is likely to be inadequate, as must very often be the case at the height of lactation. Optimum conditions for calcium assimilation would appear to be obtainable by feeding fresh green leguminous pasture, or failing that, leguminous hay cured with a minimum of exposure and by exposing the animals to sunshine and providing for a certain amount of exercise. Even then the addition of a calcium supplement with or without cod-liver oil would probably increase the amount assimilated. On the whole, the evidence indicates that in most heavy milking cows, there may be a progressive depletion of calcium from the tissues, so that at the end of lactation there is actually less calcium in the animal's body than at the beginning. In the case of dry cows, there is no difficulty on good rations in obtaining a positive calcium balance, and it has been recommended, with reason, that before the onset of lactation a diet with generous supplies of calcium and phosphorous rich foods should be given so that reserves may be built up to the highest limit before the onset of lactation. Shortage of calcium with the resulting depletion has been shown to have an adverse effect on reproduction. With regard to other minerals, practical observations have shown that both on grazing and on indoor feeding, there is liable to be a deficiency of chlorine which, however, can be easily made good by the provision of ordinary rock salt or salt bricks, and this is usually done under good farming conditions. In some districts deficiency of iodine has affected reproduc- tion, and there is some recent evidence to show that it may also affect milk yield. To what extent, however, this deficiency actually occurs in practice is as yet unknown. Concerning the many other minerals present in milk we have almost no information as to either the amounts present in the foodstuffs or the requirements, and there is no information on which F 2
246 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [I, III to base even an opinion as to whether or not deficiency of some of these may affect milk yield or health. The making good of gross mineral deficiencies in the rations of cows, by the addition of mineral salts, involves no great difficulty. It is a simple matter to compute the approximate mineral content of the ration from available analytical data, A comparison of the percentages of each of the minerals present and of the ratios of these amounts to the percentage amount of protein or to the energy value of the rations, with those found in either milk or good pasture, will show whether, and roughly, to what extent, any of the minerals is deficient. Calcium and phosphorus can be supplied in the form of bonemeal or ground limestone; sodium and chlorine as common salt. So far as we know the only other mineral which may be deficient in certain rations or in certain areas is iodine, which may be supplied as potassium iodide. It is obvious that no mineral mixture of constant composition is adapted for use with all kinds of rations. Further, the substances dealt with are easily obtainable, so that any intelligent person can make cheaply the mineral mixture required for whatever ration is being used. The addition of inorganic salts to deficient rations is, of course, only a second best method of ensuring that the cow shall have a sufficient supply of all that is necessary. A slower, but certainly more efficient, method is to grade up pastures and crops so that their mineral composition more and more closely resembles that of milk, and thus provide also for indoor feeding a roughage of high mineral content. Even then the selection of concentrates and other indoor feeds must aim at securing the highest possible mineral content, so that the amounts supplied in a composite ration may be in excess of that found in good pasture. The viability of B. Tuberculosis (Bovinus) on pasture land, in stored faeces and in liquid manure. The following conclusions were arrived at as a result of a series of experiments carried out in England by Messrs. R. Stenhouse Williams and W. A. Hoy, and published in the Journal of Hygiene, Vol. XXX, No. 4, 14th November, 1930, viz :ABSTRACTS 247 It has been found that by taking advantage of their behavior toward dyes in suitable dilutions in a medium, all strains fall into one or the other of three groups or species. Those strains which are slightly, if at all, inhibited in their growth on beef liver infusion agar containing thionin in a 1248 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III mineral content is responsible for a lack of palatability in the herbage and a consequent de- pression of appetite in the grazing animals. Neither is there any evidence that the shortage of mineral causes the herbage to be digested any less efficiently than " normal" cultivated herbage of similar maturity and organic composition. The amount of net energy which ruminant animals are able to derive from any form of herbage seems to be independent of the mineral content and to depend solely on the amount and character of the organic constituents. Malnutrition on pasturage of sub-normal mineral content is due directly to the failure of the diet to supply the necessary inorganic materials for constructional purposes and for maintaining the normal balance of minerals in the blood and tissues, and is not even in part, to be ascribed to any indirect effect, such as is embodied in the suggestion that the mineral deficiency leads to under- nutrition of the animal by causing a depression of its appetite and its capacity to digest the organic constituents of the herbage." Report of work in animal bacteriology.ABSTRACTS 249 In control work with the intestinal worms in poultry, carried out by E. M. Alderman in co-operation with the division of poultry husbandry of the station, it was established that the colloidal iodine suspensoid containing 1.8 per cent. 12 and 4 per cent. gum arabic is apparently 100 per cent. efficient in killing and removing ascaridia and the various species of tapeworms, thus offer- ing a substitute for the iodine vermicide (an iodine-protein compound carrying absorbed iodine), with a possible reduction in cost of about 33 per cent. The results of these and numerous similar experiments are considered to have established the fact that dosing the birds with either the iodine vermicide or the colloidal iodine does not throw them off egg production. The results of daily feeding of colloidal iodine to birds in excess of the normal iodine requirements indicate that in cases of intestinal parasitism, either worms or coccidia, a marked improvement in the birds' condition may be brought about. In one experiment a flock of 40 adult birds heavily infested with coccidia and harboring a medium number of roundworms was divided into two nearly equal groups that were fed alike with the exception that one received daily an average of 5 mg. of iodine in the form of powdered colloidal iodine. At the end of 60 days the control lot showed 6 paralyzed birds and 1 death and an average loss of weight per bird of 0.51 lb. In the lot receiving the iodine there were no cases of paralysis, no deaths and each bird showed an average gain of 0.38 lb. The work with diseases of poultry is next reported upon by H. J. Stafseth and W. L. Mallmann, their work relating largely to pullorum disease. As a result of experimental work in routine ob- servations of over 40,000 agglutination tests for pullorum disease, they conclude that it is no longer necessary to employ a two-tube test. By employing an antigen with a turbidity equal to tube No. 1 of McFarland's nephelometer and containing 2 c. c. of a 2 per cent. solution of NaOH per 100 c. c. of antigen they succeeded in eliminating zone phenomina or proagglutinations. As a result, the one-tube test of a serum antigen mixture of 1: 50 is now employed, thus saving labor and material to the extent of from 25 to 30 per cent. The finding by Mallmann et al. (E. S. R. 60. p. 374) that brilliant green in 1: 1,000,000 dilution will inhibit the growth of Escherichid coli and completely prevent the growth of most contaminating organisms commonly encountered in the tissues and intestinal contents of poultry and yet allow Salmonella pullorum to grow unhindered made possible the isolation of S. pullorum from the intestinal mucosa and contents where there was a failure to find it in the heart, liver, or kidneys. In badly decomposed specimens cultures of this organism were successfully obtained from the bone marrow of the femur. It is reported that leukemia is a disease that is becoming very common in chickens in the State. The results of bacteriological and pathological examinations of 1,044 consignments of diseased poultry, including 2,482 specimens, are reported in tabular form. Of 18,747 samples to which the agglutination test for pullorum disease was applied, 2,217 were positive, 1,393 doubtful, 46 cloudy, and 134 unfit. Report of work in animal pathology.250 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III The chemotherapy of infectious abortion with trypan blue.CORRESPONDENCE MINERAL DEFICIENCY AND PARASITIC INFESTATION OF CATTLE IN ASSAM. To the Editor, The Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry. Sir, The Editorial Note at the head of Mr. C. H. Parr's article " Some factors which affect the supply and efficiency of cattle in the United Provinces "*, leads me to offer some remarks on mineral deficiency and parasitic infestation in Assam. Mr. Parr's remarks on conditions in the Terai might all be applied to Assam; but the annual rainfall on the plains here runs from 60 to 200 inches and the resultant effects on the cattle are probably even more extreme. Signs of deficiencies in the nutrition of local cattle, apart from the quantity of feed, are very obvious. Height behind the hump runs from 33" upwards in the cow, and from about 38" in the bullock, the maximum being about 44". The horns of many of the cows are un- developed, though existent; they give the impression of having oozed out of the head in a soft state and then hardened; the horns of the bullocks are usually more normal. Bone is poor; most cattle have a backward bend at the knee and many are excessively ' cow-hocked'. During the monsoon lack of hair is common. Almost every animal in the Province (excluding cattle in the hills which generally are in all ways superior) carries a more or less permanent ' hump-sore ' which expands in the rains and dries up somewhat in the cold weather. Cows taken generally though, rather surprisingly, conceive regularly once a year, usually all in the same season; but premature delivery seems to be common, though infectious abortion is not. It is a well-known fact that cattle imported from 'up-country', which means from the United Provinces westward, deteriorate and do not live a normal length of time; calves of such cattle reared in Assam do not reach the adult size of their parents. The ' hump-sore' appears soon after they arrive in Assam and is more prominent than in local cattle. In spite of this, I find in my short experience here that any noticeably decent animal has up-country blood in it. Local buffaloes do not seem to be affected physically by any deficiency, mineral or otherwise. The only word to use in describing the physique of Assamese and Cachari buffaloes is magnificent. The milk yield of females is undeveloped and * Published in the Journal of the Central Bureau for Animal Husbandry and Dairying in India, Vol. IV, Part II, p. 46. ( 251 )
252 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III rarely exceeds five pounds a day; one could scarcely expect more, considering that they find their own feed throughout their lives. I cannot give comparison of feeding and not feeding minerals, as in all cases under my observation the matter has been confused by the presence of parasites. There is a suspicion that shortage of minerals predisposes the cattle to the attacks of the parasites, and that the two questions are closely connected. Parasites. The climate of these tracts of heavy rainfall would seem to be ideal for the development of certain parasites. Moisture is always present (the dripping of the dew on the leaves in an Assam jungle in the cold weather sounds like a shower of rain); and variations of temperature are comparatively small. There is no frost and no heat with drought. Hence that part of the life-cycle of worm parasites which is spent outside the animal host is subject to few checks on numbers; there is not even the check of an intermediate host as there is in the case of flukes. My own experience with up-country breeds here has been confined to a group of 28 Sindhi cows which were brought into Assam early in 1928, and a few bulls of various breeds; and that experience has been sufficient to make me very chary of getting any more cows (I believe none the less that the local cattle can be graded up successfully by using up-country bulls). The difficulties met with in endeavouring to maintain them in condition, to breed from them, and to obtain milk yields anywhere near their capacity have been enormous, and the main trouble all the time has been infestation by parasites, in particular a wire-worm identified as ' Mecistocirrus digitatus '. Omitting one cow which lost her life by accident and taking 27 cows, the mor- tality has been:CORRESPONDENCE 253 of distoma and amphistoma were present in many specimens at the beginning, the most recent report shows only one case of distoma. But ova of Mecistocirrus digitatus and of strongles and other nematodes have been present all through, though in decreasing numbers during the last six months. The dung examinations have also consistently shown that local cattle of Assam and North Bihar are infested to an extent far less than the Sindhis. This indica- tion of the action of copper sulphate on distoma must be qualified by the fact that clearing, cultivation and drainage of hitherto wild and unbroken land has probably reduced the distribution of the intermediate host254 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III the dung gives little indication of any connection. An animal of good appearance will show large number of ova, whereas an emaciated creature will show few. The above information, though meagre, all goes to support Mr. Parr's conclu- sions that mineral deficiency and parasitical infestation explain in great measure the poor cattle of these tracts of country with heavy rainfall. Research on both matters is needed but to my mind the parasities need tackling first, as estimation of the results of lack of mineral supplies would always be confused by the presence of parasities. The local professional graziers have some very shrewd ideas on prevention and treatment. I have seen copper coins put into very acid dahi with the result that after a few hours the dahi turns a bluish colour ; this coloured dahi is then fed to the cattle. And they firmly believe in the use of leaves of certain trees. Their temporary shelters are frequently moved to new ground, a benefit which the cattle of settled cultivator are denied and consequently they suffer. To maintain the supply of any decent local bullocks at all, the continuance of large grazing reserves seems essential, as under confined conditions these parasities have things all their own way. Luckily, Assam has such reserves up till the present though they are threatened. I remain, Yours truly, R. C. WOODFORD, Live-stock and Dairy Expert, Assam. [ Note by Mr. G. D. Bhalerao, Helminthologist, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, on the note by the Live Stock and Dairy Expert, Assam, regarding parasitic gastritis amongst cattle produced by Mecistocirrus digitatus :CORRESPONDENCE 255 2. Life-history.256 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, III the parasites that I have examined from Assam, and from two minor local collections, I am forced to conclude that there is a very great repeated infection in the case of this parasite. If in a case of heavy infection all the parasites are carefully examined it will be noticed that they are not all at the same stage of development and maturity. The majority of them are found to be immature adults and comparatively few have reached sexual maturity. The number of fertilised females is still less. On the contrary, in the case of hill bulls, where the infection is, as a rule, very light, almost all the worms are at the same stage of maturity. The inevitable conclusion is that in the plains repeated infection of the same animals takes place. At Muktesar, where the larvae experience adverse conditions, the chances for reinfection are reduced to a minimum. 4. Prophylaxis.CORRESPONDENCE 257 Dairy Export, Assam, himself, who says in another place that " The result of this confinement is generally an improvement in condition." Another point raised by the Live-stock and Dairy Expert, Assam, and which appears to be inexplicable to him is "An animal of good appearance will show larger numbers of ova, whereas an emaciated creature will show few." It has already been remarked above, while discussing the question of repeated reinfection, that in any infected case the number of fertilised females may not be large, and in that case the ova passed in the faeces will be few, although the actual number of parasites infecting the animal, including a large number of immature ones, may be very large. The animals in better condition may harbour a much less number of parasites, but the proportion of gravid females in them may be much more than in the previously mentioned cases. The number of ova in the faeces is always governed by and proportional to the gravid females inhabiting the alimentary canal of the host. [ The above letter from the Live-stock and Dairy Expert, Assam, and note thereon by the Helminthologist, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, are of very great interest to all concerned with the breeding and roaring of cattle in humid areas, throughout India. The parasite particularly incriminated in this instanceORIGINAL ARTICLES SILAGE INVESTIGATIONS AT BANGALORE. II. QUALITY AND YIELD OF SILAGE IN RELATION TO FILLING CONDITIONS. BY T. S. KRISHNAN, B.A., Animal Nutrition Section, Imperial Department of Agriculture, Bangalore. (Received for publication on 9th May 1931.) OBJECT. In a previous paper (" Silage Investigations at Bangalore ", Memoirs of the Department of Agriculture in India, Chemical Series, Volume X, No. 10) the results of a study of the ensilage of Jowar (Sorghum vulgare) were reported. There, the ensilage was done only under one set of conditions. In the present experiment an attempt has been made to determine the effect of (a) rate of filling and ( b) addition of water on the resulting silage, with the same material. METHOD OF EXPERIMENT. The following scheme was adopted. Ensiling was done in pits of rectangular shape, 12 feet long, 6 feet wide and 8 feet deep, the increased depth being employ- ed to diminish the exposed surface, while ensuring a greater capacity. The Jowar was harvested when in prime condition for ensilage, and was chaffed to bits of about an inch in length. The chaffed material was employed for filling the pits. Generally, the harvesting of the crop was done in the forenoons and the chaffing and filling in the afternoons. Portions of the thoroughly mixed, chaffed Jowar, being filled in the pits, were enclosed in loosely woven tared gunny bags, and the weight of the green sample determined. The bags were buried in the pits at suitable depths. During the filling of the bags, separate samples were taken for immediate analysis. Pits were filled according to the following scheme :260 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [I, IV. In each pit four bags were buried, two at a height of 3 feet from the bottom, and the other two at 6 feet from the bottom and vertically over those lower down. They were arranged to lie along the length of the pit centrally, and at 3 feet from the ends. One bag in each layer had a clinical thermometer, enclosed in an iron tube, to register the maximum temperature attained. Only these bags were employed for the complete analysis. The others were used only for the determina- tion of the loss of dry matter on ensilage. Filling of the Silos. Table I gives the details of the filling of the silos. The conditions of ensilage, duration of filling of the pits, numbers and details of the location of the experi- mental bags, as well as of the weather during the operations, will be found therein. At the close of each day's operation, during filling, the material in the pit was thoroughly trampled down by half a dozen men. The pits were always filled to a height of a foot above ground level before closing up. They were closed and press- ure applied by earth being piled on to a height of two feet above ground level, in all cases, with slopes on all sides to allow any rain water to drain away. Opening of the Silos. The pits were opened in serial order, and as the bags turned up during the consumption of the silage, they were removed, weighed, sampled and an aliquot taken for analysis. Details of the settling as well as of the depth of spoilt silage at the top are given in Table II. TABLE II. Statement of settling and spoiling during ensilage. Pit No. Conditions of ensilage Total height filled Depth of settling Thickness of spoilt layer at the top Depth of resi- dual good silage 1 Slow filling with water- ing. 9' 1' 6" 0' 3" 7' 3" 2 Slow filling without water- ing. 9' 1' 9" 0' 4" 6' 11" 3 Rapid filling with water- ing. 9' 3' 0" 0' 6" 5' 6" 4 Rapid filling without watering. 9' 4' 0" 1' 6" 3' 6"
SILAGE INVESTIGATIONS AT BANGALORE 261 In all the pits considerable settling has taken place, the effect being most marked in Nos. 3 and 4262 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [I, IV. Note on Temperature Record. In the present experiment only the maximum temperatures attained in the bags were recorded. These are given below in Table III. TABLE III. Record of maximum temperatures attained in the various pits. Pit No. . . . . 1 2 3 4 Conditions of filling Slow filling with watering Slow filling without water- ing Rapid filling with watering Rapid filling without water- ing Maximum temperature attained in bags put in at 3' from the bottom. 42.1 °C 42.1°C 36.0°C . . Maximum temperature attained in bags put in at 6' from the bottom. 40.5°C 47.0°C 47.8°C 38.9°C Even here, the reading of the one in pit 3, 36°C, is not above suspicion, as it denotes scarcely any rise of temperature, while the other one in the same pit regis- tered a considerably higher temperature, viz., 47.8°C. The range of tempera- tures recorded agrees well with the detailed study made in the previous experiment at Bangalore (Loc cit). The temperature record was in the region appropriate to the production of " Brown Silage " with a slightly " Acid " character. It is quite likely that in the pits which were watered a greater quantity of heat was produced but the large bulk of water added, having also to be raised to that temperature, prevented the recording of an otherwise higher temperature. Method of Analysis. The determination of the dry matter in the green Jowar, as well as in the silage, and the corrections for the volatile substances, were carried out exactly as described in the earlier publication. The preparation of the alcoholic extract was carried out according to Woodman ( Journal of Agricultural Science, XV, 343) as modified by Foreman ( Biochemical Journal, XXII, 208) and the analysis of the same according to Woodman (above). The rest of the processes were identical with those quoted in the previous paper.
SILAGE INVESTIGATIONS AT BANGALORE 263 DISCUSSION OF RESULTS. A. Changes in Moisture, Dry matter and Organic matter. Tables IV to VII contain some of the information gained from the bags in pits 1 to 4 respectively. Pit No. 1.264 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [I, IV. formed where a dry product was aimed at. The loss of dry matter in this pit was found to be 4.85 per cent. and 6.94 per cent. respectively on the corrected and uncorrected basis (Table VII). This is the lowest loss recorded in any of the pits. It seems probable that the actual loss was very much greater, but has been replaced to a considerable extent by material washed down from the spoilt surface layer where extensive decomposition took place. Further evidence in support of this view will be brought forward below (see nitrogen losses). In spite of this large replacement the organic matter loss comes to 10.0 per cent. (Table XV), which is indeed a high figure, even as it is. The figures of this pit are of interest in showing what may occur in a flooded pit. Considering the evidence of the unspoilt pits, it may be said that rapid filling causes a larger loss of dry matter than slow filling, while watering gives a better aroma and consistency to the resulting product. So, to obtain the best results, it is indicated that filling should be done reasonably slowly, and water should be added in sufficient amount to avoid the production of a very dry silage and to improve the aroma. The average loss of the dry matter in this experiment works out to 7.67 per cent. if all the bags in all the pits are considered. This experiment shows a higher loss than the last one ( l. c.) which gave a loss of only 4.2 per cent. for dry matter. The loss of 7.67 per cent. noted here agrees remarkably well with the loss of 7.7 per cent. noted by Amos and Woodman ( Journal of Agricultural Science, XV, 344) at Cambridge in the production of "Acid Brown" silage, though working with different material, as well as with the loss of 7.5 per cent. noted by Annett and Aiyer (Memoirs of the Department of Agriculture in India, Chemical Series, Volume VIII, No. 10), also working with Jowar. In this connection it is very important to remember that there are two types of losses in the process of the preparation and utilisation of silage. The first is the loss resulting from the activity of enzymes, bacteria, etc., which cause the fermen- tation, and produce the typical characteristics of silage. It is this loss that has been studied in these experiments and it is only this loss that has been recorded. The second kind of loss is due to the production of mouldy, rotten silage at the sides and top of the silo. This, of course, cannot be avoided entirely, but could be reduced to a minimum by suitable means. It is under this latter category that the rapidly filled pits, and more especially pit No. 4, show considerably larger losses than the others (Table III). In pit No. 4, as has already been noted, the thick layer of rotten silage at the top formed a very large proportion, about a third, of the total. In this respect also, therefore, the slowly filled pits score an advantage over the rapidly filled ones.
SILAGE INVESTIGATIONS AT BANGALORE 265 The percentage composition of the samples ensiled, as well as of the silage pro- duced, is given in Tables VIII to XI. The changes affecting the entire contents of the experimental bags in all the various constituents may be gathered from Tables XII to XV. B. Changes in the Nitrogenous Constituents. That considerable changes take place in the proteins of plants during ensilage is too well known to be emphasised. Not only is the quantity of protein liable to be changed, but also the quality, to a very large extent. Whereas a loss of 8.4 per cent. of the crude protein was noticed in the previous experiment, in the present case there are wide variations. No. 1 pit shows an average loss of 5 per cent., No. 2 an average gain of 2.2 per cent. and No. 3 pit, an average loss of less than 1 per cent. Pit No. 4 shows an increase of 13.3 per cent. There is little doubt that this exceptional result is due to leaching down of soluble nitrogenous material from the surface mass of organic matter destroyed. It may be noted that a similar explanation was offered for the apparently small loss of dry matter in this pit. An uniformly large decomposition of true protein takes place on ensilage. The losses of true protein are very considerable, and taking the reasonable view that the most easily available portion of it 266 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [I, IV. Table XVII. It will be seen therefrom that volatile bases and amino acids increase on ensilage, while asparagin diminishes. While the production of volatile bases is not much affected by the alteration in the conditions of ensilage, it is quite significant, that, in the unwatered pits, the amino acids show a considerable diminution in two bags, is not much affected in another, and one shows an increase. It is also the amino acids which bring out clearly the effects of leaching, especially in the watered pits, by the draining down of the expressed juice, e.g., No. 7 bag which was at the top shows a loss, while No. 5 at the bottom records a large gain. Similarly, No. 17, an upper bag, shows a much smaller increase than No. 15, the corresponding lower one. It is also noteworthy that there was a greater production of amino acids in this experiment than in the last one and hence the ratio of volatile bases to amino acids (Table XVIII) is lower than the figures of the older experiment. The increase in volatile bases over amino acids produced, confirms the previous work in India, that good silage can result in spite of a higher production of the former over the latter. The ratio is consistently less than unity and the average of 0.62 could be given as supporting the observation of the Cambridge workers, that in good silage the ratio is small. C. Changes in the Ether Extract. The most important component of the plant which is primarily affected by bacterial action during ensilage is the carbohydrate fraction, which is converted into organic acids, carbon-di-oxide and water. The organic acids are all soluble in ether and hence they are included in the term ether extract. The increase under this head in a measure of organic acid production, and hence, indirectly, of bacte- rial activity in the silos. There is always a very considerable increase in the ether extract as the result of ensilage. An average increase of 103.8 per cent., for the four pits, has been recorded. The individual figures may be seen from Tables XII to XV. In all cases the bottom bags show a greater increase than the top ones. This is probably due to the leaching action of the expressed juice which washes down the soluble constituents as it descends, thus depleting the upper layers and enriching the lower strata. Table XIX gives in detail the changes in the volatile as well as non-volatile organic acids as the result of ensilage. It will be seen therefrom that very large in- creases take place in both constituents. Another significant fact revealed therein is the considerably larger production of volatile organic acids in the watered pits. The same remark holds good for the non-volatile acids as well. It is also noticeable that rapidity of filling has a similar influence in increasing the organic acid pro- duction, though to a smaller extent than watering.
SILAGE INVESTIGATIONS AT BANGALORE 267 It is very remarkable that in the present experiment it has been observed that all the organic acids present in the green plant are entirely volatile, only three bags showing the presence of non-volatile acids as well. On ensilage, however, enor- mous quantities of non-volatile acids are produced in all bags. This distribution of organic acids in the green plant is not in agreement with the former observa- tions. There, a large amount of non-volatile organic acids which was present before ensilage was lost during ensilage. Essentially, it is the nature and extent of the organic acids produced that de- termines the quality of silage which results. It has been stated by the Cambridge workers that a greater production of non-volatile acids than volatile ones is essen- tial for the silage to be of good quality. This has been found to be quite unneces- sary by all workers in India and this experiment is a further confirmation of the same. Table XX shows that, except in two cases, the ratio is greater than unity ; nevertheless the resultant silage has been of excellent quality. What seems to be the deciding factor is the nature of the volatile acids produced. The absence of butyric acid is essential for the silage to be good. In the experiments conducted here no butyric acid, at least not sufficient to be identified, was observed. D. Changes in the Carbohydrates. Over 80 per cent. of the dry matter of plants consists of carbohydrates. It is at their cost that the main bacterial activity goes on during ensilage and hence they suffer the largest losses. The changes in this group of substances could be more easily dealt with under the following three heads :268 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV. but are more than that noticed in the earlier experiment. The average loss for the 4 pits is 8.15 per cent., the individual figures being 4.2 per cent., 7.8 per cent., 12.7 per cent. and 7.9 per cent. respective- ly in the various pits in serial order. Rapid filling has caused the largest loss (Pit 3). Watering also seems to have inhibited this loss to some extent as is seen from the lower loss in No. 1 than in No. 2. Hence the loss in No. 3 would have been more serious if no watering had been done. (3) Changes in the Total Carbohydrates.SILAGE INVESTIGATIONS AT BANGALORE 269 is but natural the constituents show less loss in the lower bags than in the upper ones. SO3 alone is rather peculiar. Considerable losses are noticed in the slowly filled pits, while large gains are evident in the rapidly filled ones, probably due to reasons already adduced above. However, it has to be remembered that only sulphate sulphur was determined and most if not all of the organic sulphur might have escaped, undetermined. It has also to be pointed out, that, while in the last experiment, under conditions of filling similar to those of pit 1, a gain of SO3 was noticed, the present experiment reveals a loss on ensilage. Barring pit 4, which shows a gain in all items owing to the cause already set out, all the others show losses of varying degree in P2O5, CaO and MgO. They all show gain in the alkalis owing to the leaching action. These being the most soluble components would be the first to be affected. This is also evident from the fact that the upper bags show losses in the case of pits 1 and 2, while the lower ones show large gains. Pit 3, owing to the fact that greater leaching has taken place even from the very top, shows a gain in both bags, though it is less in the upper than in the lower one. SUMMARY. The effect of varying the conditions of ensilage on the resultant product was studied. There was little difference in the quality of the silage produced though conditions of filling varied considerably. " Acid Brown " silage of good quality, with slight variations in acidity in the different pits, was produced. The maximum temperature recorded varied between 36°C and 47.8°C. The losses of dry matter and organic matter noticed, agree with the results of Amos and Woodman and Annett and Aiyer. Changes in the proteins, ether extract, carbohydrates and minerals were studied. It has been noticed that extensive decomposition of true protein takes place with a large increase of "Amides ", owing to the production of considerable quan- tities of volatile bases and amino acids. The ratio of the former to the latter was less than unity, thus confirming the work of the English workers. The large increase in volatile bases, along with the production of good silage, also supports the work in India. Very large quantities of organic acids, both volatile and non-volatile, have been developed as the result of ensilage. The ratio of the former to the latter is greater than unity, thereby supporting the past observations in India. Carbohydrate losses, both as nitrogen free extractives and as crude fibre, show higher figures than the last experiment at Bangalore but agree fairly well with those of Amos and Woodman.
270 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV. It has been noticed consistently, in all soluble substances, that there has been a washing down of the same from the top of the pit down to the bottom. This is best seen in the soluble minerals, especially the alkali salts. Even silica, an in- soluble substance, exhibits this downward movement. It has been established that slow filling with watering results in the production of good silage with the least losses in the various constituents. Acknowledgment.SILAGE INVESTIGATION AT BANGALORE 271 TABLE IV. Pit No. 1.272 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV. TABLE V. Pit No. 2.SILAGE INVESTIGATIONS AT BANGALORE 273 TABLE VI. Pit No. 3.274 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV. TABLE VII. Pit No. 4.SILAGE INVESTIGATIONS AT BANGALORE 275 TABLE VIII. Pit No. 1.276 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV TABLE X. Pit No. 3.SILAGE INVESTIGATIONS AT BANGALORE 277 TABLE XII. Pit No. 1.278 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV TABLE XIV. Pit No. 3.SILAGE INVESTIGATIONS AT BANGALORE 279 TABLE XVI. True protein expressed as percentage of crude protein. Type of ensilage Bag No. Green Jowar Silage Prime Jowar silage, slow filling with watering. Pit No. 1. {13 17 Average 76.63 74.76 75.76 48.09 61.76 54.92 Prime Jowar silage, slow filling without watering. Pit No. 2. {15 19 Average 74.93 67.37 71.15 43.08 65.46 54.27 Prime Jowar silage, rapid filling with watering. Pit No. 3. {5 7 Average 71.42 76.74 74.08 44.56 46.39 45.47 Prime Jowar silage, rapid filling without watering. Pit No. 4. {9 11 Average 65.24 72.62 68.93 37.81 53.31 45.56 TABLE XVII. Changes in volatile bases and amino acids during ensilage. Type of ensilage Bag No. Volatile bases Amino acids Asparagin Green Jowar Silage Green Jowar Silage Green Jowar Silage Prime Jowar silage, slow filling with watering. Pit 1. { 13 17 13.8 12.1 75.9 44.1 55.2 24.2 132.8 66.1 67.7 85.4 42.9 22.2 Prime Jowar silage, slow filling without watering. Pit 2. { 15 19 20.0 8.2 57.9 39.7 103.9 65.5 94.1 53.0 60.3 98.9 32.8 10.0 Prime Jowar silage, rapid filling with watering. Pit 3. { 5 7 28.1 12.4 115.5 69.7 177.8 165.4 207.8 149.3 56.5 74.9 34.9 30.0 Prime Jowar silage, rapid filling without watering. Pit 4. { 9 11 8.2 11.7 69.6 66.5 40.8 116.8 89.5 123.5 73.8 64.6 15.0 ..
280 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV TABLE XVIII. Ratio of volatile bases to amino acids before and after ensilage. Type of ensilage Bag No. Green Jowar Silage Prime Jowar silage, slow filling with water- ing. Pit 1. 13 0.25 0.57 17 0.50 0.67 Average 0.38 0.62 Prime Jowar silage, alow filling without watering. Pit 2. 15 0.19 0.62 19 0.13 0.75 Average 0.16 0.68 Prime Jowar silage, rapid tilling with water- ing. Pit 3. 5 0.16 0.56 7 0.08 0.47 Average 0.12 0.51 Prime Jowarsilage, rapid filling without watering. Pit 4. 9 0.20 0.78 11 0.10 0.54 Average 0.16 0.66 TABLE XIX. Changes in organic acids during ensilage. Pit No. and conditions of ensilage Bag No. Volatile organic acids (as acetic acid) Non-volatile organic acids (as lactic acid) gms. Green Jowar Silage Increase Green Jowar Silage Increase per cent. per cent. Pit No. 1. Slow filling with watering. 13 85.2 318.8 274.2 67.4 117.1 58.9 17 52.7 181.5 244.8 83.1 166.3 100.1 Average .. .. 259.5 .. ... 79.5 Pit No. 2. Slow filling without watering. 15 85.0 188.7 122.0 141.5 0.0 19 56.2 95.4 69.8 92.7 143.1 54.4 Average .. .. 95.9 .. .. .. Pit No. 3. Rapid filling with watering. 5 105.9 475.2 348.7 ... 344.6 0.0 7 68.1 293.6 331.1 .. 276.5 0.0 Average .. .. 339.9 .. .. .. Pit No. 4. Rapid filling without watering. 9 167.8 245.5 46.3 .. 112.5 0.0 11 136.2 208.6 53.2 .. 224.9 0.0 Average .. .. 49.7 .. .. ..
SILAGE INVESTIGATIONS AT BANGALORE 281 TABLE XX. Ratio of volatile to non-volatile organic acids in silage. Pit No. 1. Slow filling with watering Pit No. 2. Slow filling without watering Pit No. 3. Rapid filling with watering Pit No. 4. Rapid filling without watering Bag 13 Bag 17 Aver- age Bag 15 Bag 19 Aver- age Bag 5 Bag 7 Aver- age Bag 9 Bag 11 Aver- age Ratio 2.722 1.091 1.906 1.334 0.667 1.000 1.379 1.062 1.220 2.182 0.927 1.554 TABLE XXI. Pit No. 1.282 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV TABLE XXIII. Pit No. 3.PROPHYLAXIS AGAINST EQUINE SURRA BY MEANS OF " BAYER 205 " (NAGANOL). (A REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE.) BY S. K. SEN, M.Sc., Assistant Research Officer, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on 3rd September 1931.) In considering the prophylactic action of " Bayer 205" (Naganol) against equine surra, it would be profitable also to discuss at relevant points in the fol- lowing pages the observations recorded by different workers in regard to the pro- tective value of the drug for surra of camels and bovines and also for certain other common forms of animal trypanosomiasis, notably, dourine (due to Trypano- soma equvperdum) and Mal de Caderas (due to T. equinum), for these observations provide useful indications which might be well utilized for combating surra of equities. Moreover, whilst, therapeutically, a drug is liable to exhibit considerable variation in its capacity to ameliorate the clinical symptoms peculiar to each of these different forms of animal trypanosomiasis, no such variation need be anti- cipated in regard to its prophylactic action, inasmuch as, for the same species of animal, such action is merely a matter of the trypanocidal power of the drug in respect of the species of parasite concerned, so that, provided the minimum lethal dose of a drug is approximately the same for these species of trypanosomes, the same scheme of dosage should be suitable for adoption for prophylaxis against the disease caused by any one of them. As a matter of fact, some workers, although experimenting with only one species of trypanosome, have regarded their findings as being applicable also to other species. Thus, Hesselbach [1922], in the course of a lengthy discussion upon the trypanoci- dal action of "Bayer 205 " on T. equiperdum, has stressed the importance of his findings in relation to surra and sleeping sickness. To present the subject in true perspective, brief mention is also made of the results recorded by various workers in regard to the prophylactic action of the drug in small animals. By way of contrast, it is also proposed to make mention of instances where " Bayer 205 " has been found almost entirely valueless as a prophylactic against certain forms of trypanosomiasis, such as T. congolense infection, since, as will be pointed out later; these instances may provide some possible explanation for any failure on the part of workers in India to use the drug successfully against cases apparently due to T. evansi. ( 283 )
284. THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV PROPHYLACTIC ACTION OF " BAYER 205 " AGAINST EXPERIMENTAL TRYPANOSOMIASIS IN ANIMALS. Perhaps the earliest published records of experimental observations upon the prophylactic action of "Bayer 205" are those of Mayer and Zeiss [1921], who, experimenting upon mice, found that the drug remained for several months in the animal body and during this period it served as a prophylactic against infections due to T. brucei, T. gambiense, T. equiperdum and T. equinum. Pfeiler [1922], working with T. equiperdum, found that " Bayer 205 " conferred protection on small animals which lasted for periods up to 200 days. Ruppert [1923] found that a dose of 0.4 gramme per kilo. body weight pro- tected rabbits, for periods up to 6 months, against infections due to T. brucei, T. equipendum and T. equinum. He also injected 8 horses with increasing doses of the drug, 3 with 0.25, 2 with 0.5 and 3 with 0.75 gramme per hundredweight (" pro zentner "), the animals being inoculated with T. equinum after varying intervals. It was found that a dose of 0.5 gramme was effective for one month, but that in animals that had received 0.25 gramme, the infection was succesfully produced after 14 days. Hesselbach [1922] published the results of a rather remarkable series of ex- periments upon the prophylactic action of " Bayer 205" against experimental infection of guinea-pigs with T. equiperdum. Four equal-sized guinea-pigs were each given a subcutaneous injection of 0.04 gramme of " Bayer 205 " and infected intraperitoneally with the trypanosomes, 1, 3, 6 and 10 days after the prophylactic inoculation. None of these animals developed the disease. Hesselbach's findings are of special interest in that he made laborious observations upon the morpholo- gical changes undergone by the parasites from hour to hour following upon the injection of the drug, and for this purpose the trypanosomes that had been injected into the abdominal cavity (" die in die Bauchhöle gespritzten ") were lifted out again ("wieder herausgehebert ") by means of a capillary pipette and examined both in fresh and dry preparations. Brumpt and Lavier [1923], working with T. equinum, failed to produce the disease in mice that had been given 5 mg. of " Bayer 205 " 78 days previously. Schmidt and Oliveira [1924] failed to infect small animals with Mal de Caderas within a month of the protective inoculation with " Bayer 205 ". These workers also observed the prophylactic effect of the drug against the same infection in a mule and a mare which were given 2 and 3 grammes of the drug res- pectively a fortnight and 6 weeks before inoculation with 10 c.c. of the infective blood. Neither of these animals developed the infection.
PROPHYLAXIS AGAINST EQUINE SURRA 285 Dios [1925] records an experiment in which a single dose of 4 grammes of " Bayer 205 " prevented infection in a horse subsequently injected with 70 c.c. of very virulent blood containing T. equinum. Two dogs were also inoculated with 1.24 grammes and 0.48 gramme of " Bayer 205 " and later infected along with controls, with the same species of organism (information is not available as to the intervals between drug injection and infective inoculation). Both the treated dogs resisted infection while the controls died. Perhaps one of the most extensive series of experiments yet carried out with " Bayer 205 " were those by Rodenwaldt and Douwes [1922] upon the efficacy of the drug for T. evansi infection, although the greater part of their work was carried out with reference to the therapeutic effect of the drug. An attempt was made to immunize a horse, weighing 85 kilos, by the simultaneous injection of trypano- somes and " Bayer 205 ". The animal subsequently received eight inoculations with trypanosomes alone during a period of 11 weeks, and it was after the eighth inoculation that it developed surra and finally died of it. Baermann [1923] (cited by Edwards, 1928) found that protection lasting for about 30 to 42 days was conferred on 3 horses injected with 2 to 6 grammes of " Bayer 205 " and subsequently inoculated, at varying intervals (here again in- formation is not available as to the duration of these intervals), with surra parasites. Kligler and Weitzman [1924] tested the prophylactic effect of various doses of "Bayer 205" against experimental infection of rabbits and guinea-pigs with T. evansi. The following protocols are typical of the results obtained by them :286 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV after 36 days and thereafter the animal was normal. After 88 days the animal was re-infected a second time; result negative. In a later paper, Kligler and Weitzman [1925] published the results of a further series of three experiments with " Bayer 205 ", and these were as follows:PROPHYLAXIS AGAINST EQUINE SURRA 287 The foregoing table shows that while a dose of 7.5 grammes of " Bayer 205 " per 1,000 lb. body weight protected up to 22 days, a dose of 10 grammes failed to confer protection for 2 months. Kasai and Akazawa [1927], in Formosa, record the results of a series of experiments carried out by them upon the prophylactic action of "Bayer 205" against a species of trypanosome which they regard as being " in all probability identical with T. evansi", the disease caused by it affecting water-buffaloes, zebras, and dogs in that country. In mice, 0.005 gramme of the drug conferred protection from experimental infection for 5 months. With 0.00003 gramme, " some of the injected mice were completely protected and others had death delayed for several days", whereas 0.00001 gramme had almost no prophylactic action, so that 0.00003 gramme proved to be the minimum dose exercising any protective power. In calves, subcutaneous injection of 1 gramme per 100 kilo. body weight protected for a period of 4 months, whereas in horses a dose of 1 gramme per 100 kilo. body weight was not protective " even one month after introduction", although the duration of the disease was prolonged. Doses of 2 grammes per 100 kilo. body weight, however, protected for 3½ months. ( Cf. Bubberman, infra,) The authors would seem to regard the special virtue of " Bayer 205 " as consisting in its prophylactic, rather than in its therapeutic properties, and they even consider the discovery of this drug " as an epoch-making event to open the field of ' chemo- prophylaxy' as salvarsan to chemotherapy ". Kleine [1924], however, records having obtained very unsatisfactory results in regard to the prophylactic action of " Bayer 205", against experimental infection with Trypanosoma theileri, T. brucei, T. congolense and trypanosomes of the vivax group, for even a dose of 10 grammes of the drug for a bullock of about 5 cwt. failed to prevent infection with these trypanosomes. Certain other workers, too, have recorded their failure to use the drug successfully against T. congolense or T. vivax infection. Thus, Van Saceghem [1925] succeeded in setting up infection with these parasites in all of a group of three bovines that had previously received 5 grammes of " Bayer 205 " per kilo. bodyweight, the intervals ranging from a fortnight down to simultaneous injection of the drug. PROPHYLACTIC ACTION OF "BAYER 205" AGAINST NATURAL TRYPANO- SOMIASIS. A perusal of the available literature shows that there are remarkably few observations on record in regard to the prophylactic action of " Bayer 205" against natural trypanosomiasis of animals. This doubtless, to a large extent, to be ascribed to the fact that it is barely ten years since the drug was introduced
288 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV into the field of experimental therapy of trypanosomiasis, so that, hitherto, the bulk of the work with this drug has been carried out under laboratory conditions, without the results having been sufficiently tested as to their value in the actual prevention of the disease under natural conditions. Of the recorded observations upon the prophylactic action of " Bayer 205 " against outbreaks of natural trypanosomiasis in animals, the only ones that would seem to deserve any special mention are those of Bakker [1925], and Yakimoff and his collaborators [1927], all of whom employed the drug (for- tunately for workers in India) against natural surra. Bakker's observations, which were all made in Padang Sidempoean, were on horses, whilst Yakimoff and his collaborators used the drug against camel trypanosomiasis in the Ural Region, the parasite concerned being designated by them as Trypanosoma ninae-kohl- iakimoff, which, however, as the authors themselves remark, probably represents a race of T. evansi. Bakker [1925] used the drug intravenously at the rate of 1 gramme in 5 per cent. solution and altogether he inoculated 321 horses which were divided into 7 batches, each batch consisting of from 26 to 71 animals. In one batch of 51 animals, the inoculation was repeated after a month, but all the other animals would appear to have received a single injection of the drug. The horses were from places where cases of surra were actually present at the time the inoculations were performed, or, at any rate, 10 to 12 days previous to the inoculations. None of the treated horses developed surra or any other complication (information as to the post-treatment observation period, however, is not available). The observations of Yakimoff and his collaborators [1927], although made on camels, would seem to bear quotation at some length, in view of the many points of interest which these observations incidentally furnish in regard to the question of the infectivity of grazing lands and transmission by vectors, both of which factors, it is needless to say, will have to be given due consideration in order to obtain the full measure of benefit from any scheme of drug prophylaxis against equine surra. From 1923 to 1927, a total of about 11,052 camels were examined in the Ural Region, and the examination showed that on an average 25 per cent. of the camels were infected, the infection in some districts being as high as 40 per cent. Treatment of infected camels failed to prevent the spread of the disease, and Yakimoff and his collaborators [1927] therefore tested the prophylactic value of " Bayer 205 ". The test was carried out on four groups of camels. In the first group of 20 camels, 12 received a subcutaneous injection of 5 grammes each and the remaining 8 were kept as controls ; in the second group there were 24
PROPHYLAXIS AGAINST EQUINE SURRA 289 camels, and of these, 14 received intravenously 6 grammes of the drug each, the other 10 being left as controls, together with a 1½ year diseased foal, which was left without treatment for supply of the " virus" ("zur Aufbewahrung des virus"); the third group comprised 17 camels, out of which 10 received 8 grammes of the drug subcutaneously, and the remaining 7 were kept as controls ; in the fourth group there were 30 camels, of which 17 were given a subcutaneous dose of 10 grammes each, the remaining 13 being left as controls. All the inoculations were performed during the first week of July 1926. The camels that were pro- phylactically treated were branded with a special brand on the haunch. The camels comprising the four groups were now left loose on four different sets of premises ("rayons"), where, as will be described later, the natural conditions varied. At this time, 564 camels were examined in other parts of the district, and about 10 per cent. of these were found infected. During July, large numbers of Tabanidae were noticed in the locality where the experiments were initiated, and these were collected from all the premises except the one where the second group of camels was kept. The examination of blood smears from both the treated and. the untreated animals was carried out from 1st to 25th October 1926. There were at this time 53 treated animals and 33 controls (no reference occurs in the article about the remaining 5 controls). The results of blood smear examination and also subinoculations made, from 1st to 7th October 1926, into guinea-pigs showed that all the 53 treated amimals were free from infection. As to the controls, those of the first, third and fourth groups were grazed, along with the treated animals of these groups, in elevated ("hochgelagenen") areas, where there were present large numbers of Tabanidae and an abundance of gnats in the vicinity of large collections of water (" quellen- tränke "). None of the controls of those three groups was infected. The camels of the second group (14 treated and 10 controls) were kept in a low-lying (" niedriggelegenen") steppe, where the ground was flooded during the spring by snow-water from the elevated areas, with weeds (" schilfrohr") and other morassy plants, and where large numbers of gad-flies were also to be observed. In this sector, a considerable number of diseased animals was observed in 1925. In the course of the present experiments, the first occasion when the camels of the second group were examined was from 8th to 10th July, and the Naganol injections were also given at this time. The second examination was made on 3rd August, when neither the treated animals nor the controls were found affected. The third examination was made on 7th October, when 7 out of the 10 controls (70 per cent.) were found infected, but, as already men-
290 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV tioned, all the treated animals were found free from infection. Concurrently, 280 camels from the adjoining areas were also examined, and of these 79 were found affected. From these observations, the authors conclude that under natural conditions Naganol protects for at least 3 months. The findings of Yakimoff and his collaborators, as reproduced above, strikingly illustrate the extent to which the natural conditions of a locality contribute towards the success of any operations designed to combat natural surra of animals by means of Naganol prophylaxis. A mention should be made here of a very recent paper by Bubberman [ 1931 ], where reference is made to certain experimental observations indicating that in the horse a prophylactic dose of 1 gramme of Nagonol per 150 kg. body weight will produce in the majority of cases " a condition of non-susceptibility " to natural surra which will last for a month or more. A brief reference may also be made to the experiments carried out by Berg [ 1925 ] upon the prophylactic action of " Bayer 205 " against cattle trypanoso- miasis in South Africa. As one would expect from what has been said earlier in regard to the action of this drug on T. congolense infection, the results obtained by Berg were very disappointing, the drug having conferred practically no protection, even when employed in doses of 10-25 grammes, for cattle exposed to natural infection in fly belts 2 days after the inoculation. From the records summarized above, it would appear that except for the congolense group of trypanosomes, " Bayer 205 " has been more or less successfully used for prophylactic inoculation against all of the common species of trypanosomes affecting domesticated animals. The failure of the drug to affect trypanosomes of certain species, while it is endowed with marked trypanocidal properties for others, is a point of importance for workers in India, inasmuch as this might be held to explain any failure on their part to use the drug successfully against individual cases of animal trypanosomiasis, which, although apparently due to T. evansi, might, in reality, be due to some other undetermined species of "small" trypanosomes analogous to one of the species of the congolense group of trypanosomes. It would be useful to remember this possibility in dealing with outbreaks or sporadic cases of " surra " in India, and to endeavour definitely to establish the identity of the causative parasite whenever cases are encountered which appear markedly resistant to the prophylactic or therapeutic action of " Bayer 205 ". RECOMMENDATIONS, WITH A DISCUSSION ON THE GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF PROPHYLAXIS AGAINST EQUINE SURRA BY MEANS OF " BAYER 205 ". A perusal of the available literature shows that few workers have made actual recommendations in regard to the employment of "Bayer 205 " for prophylactic
PROPHYLAXIS AGAINST EQUINE SURRA 291 purposes under field conditions, although the records of their own work, as summarized above, provide useful indications as to the manner in which the drug might be successfully used for such purposes. For prophylaxis against dourine, Pfeiler (cited by Ruppert and Edwards), recommends two doses of 3 grammes each, to be administered at an interval of eight days during the covering season. For Mal do Caderas, Migone and Osuna [ 1922 ] recommend a dose of 2 grammes of " Bayer 205 " to be given in physiological salt solution. Writing about T. venezuelense infection which is reported to kill hundreds of horses every year in Venezuela, Tejera [ 1924 ] recommends that for prophylaxis against this disease, 2 grammes of "Bayer 205'' should be injected every six months. For prophylaxis against the form of camel trypanosomiasis known as "su-auru", Emelin and Zeiss [1928] employed a dose of 5 to 10 grammes of " Bayer 205 ", and they consider doses above 10 grammes as unnecessary. It is of interest that for curative purposes they employed only 4 grammes, the drug being injected into the large abdominal vein. Coming to surra, Yakimoff and his collaborators ( loc. cit.) consider that for prophylaxis against the disease in camels in the Ural Region during the summer period, a dose of 6 grammes of " Bayer 205 " should be effective. Rodenwaldt and Douwes [ 1922 ], speaking of equine surra, recommend that all animals " which are suspected of being infected " with surra should receive a prophylactic injection of 1 gramme for every 150 kilogramme body weight, this dose being repeated every 4 weeks, for the authors believe that by injection of non-toxic doses of the drug during the first days of the incubation period of surra, it is possible to inhibit outbreaks of the disease. According to Kligler and Weitzman [ 1924 ], however, the injection of the drug during incubation cannot be depended upon for preventing the disease from developing. According to Bakker [ 1925 ], all horses in the district should be injected with 1 gramme of " Bayer 205" when surra appears amongst these animals and horses from outside the district should not be admitted for a time unless they also are inoculated. A single injection should protect for a month and the injected animals could still be used, so that ordinary business did not suffer. The results of experiments carried out by Edwards [1926] in India (ante) appeared to him to warrant the conclusion that " for horses continually exposed to the risk of natural infection in surra districts the prophylactic administration of the drug intravenously at the rate of 1 gramme per 1,000 lb. body weight at intervals of a D
292 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV fortnight during the period of risk should be capable of warding off the disease ". More recently, Allen [ 1930 ], in India, has also made a recommendation which is essentially to the same effect, namely, that for prophylaxis against equine surra, the drug should be used at the rate of 10 c. c. of a 10 per cent. solution per 1,000 lb. body weight. In the rationale of successful prophylaxis, it would seem necessary that the drug should be maintained in a sufficiently trypanocidal concentration in the circulation for the desired period. This brings us to the much disputed question of the mechanism of the trypanocidal action of " Bayer 205 ". In regard to this, Kligler and Weitzman [ 1924-25 ] would appear to have adduced sufficiently convincing evidence (based on the results of experiments mentioned earlier in this paper) in support of the contention that the drug confers protection so long as it remains in a concentration sufficient to affect the parasites, so that it would seem unnecessary, as some workers have done, to invoke the aid of certain hypothetical substances produced, as they believe, as a result of the interaction between the drug on the one hand and the tissues of the host on the other. It has been urged in support of the latter contention that the drug behaves very differently when tested against the parasites in vitro and in vivo. As to this, Kligler and Weitzman [ 1925 ] have demonstrated that such differences are more apparent than real: if the amount of dilution undergone by the drug when introduced into the circulating blood is taken into consideration, then " the effective dose in vivo " will be found to " correspond fairly well with those in vitro " so that, according to these authors, the rational conclusion is that " the therapeutic property of ' Bayer 205 ' is due to a direct injury to the trypanosomes which renders them avirulent for the host and thus readily destroyed and eliminated ". The findings of Kligler and Weitzman are of some practical importance in that they point to the possibility that, within certain limits, the dosage of " Bayer 205 " might be increased to lengthen the intervals between two successive injections, and this would, obviously, be a distinct advantage for field workers having to treat prophylactically a large number of animals within a brief space of time. As a matter of fact, the recent findings of Launoy and his co-workers [ 1930] in regard to the prophylactic action of " Bayer 205 " against T. brucei infection would seem to bring such a possibility within the bounds of practical realization, for these workers found that when "Bayer 205" was used protectively on cats in doses ranging from 0.0025 to 0.04 gramme, the period of resistance to infection increased with the dose of the drug used, but not in arithmetical progression. In the case of mice, the drug was used prophylactically in doses varying from 0.0001 gramme to 0.0006 gramme, and within this range the protective action increased in a regular
PROPHYLAXIS AGAINST EQUINE SURRA 293 manner with the dose, each increase of 0.0901 gramme increasing the period of resistance by about 5 days, although with large doses the progression was not so regular. Reference has already been made to the observations of Berg [1925 ] pointing to the fact that "Bayer 205 ", when used alone, is valueless as a prophylactic agent against T congolense infection. Berg, however, records having obtained satisfactory results from the combined use of " Bayer 205 " and tartar emetic when tested upon cattle exposed to natural infection in fly belts in South Africa. The animals were injected in doses ranging from 2.5 to 10 grammes of " Bayer 205 " and with 1 to 1.5 grammes of tartar emetic, the two drugs being mixed and injected mainly ("in der Hauptsache")by the intravenous route. Perhaps it would be useful to indicate here the actual method of preparing the two drugs for injection. One gramme of tartar emetic is added to 40 c. c. of water in a clean flask, and at the same time, the appropriate quantity of " Bayer 205 " is weighed and kept apart. The mouth of the flask is closed with a piece of linen or wadding and the flask is now placed in a vessel of cold water which is brought to the boil over fire. When the mixture has been thus sterilized' for ½ hour, the flask is removed from the jacket of water, the contents cooled to 60° C. and the previously weighed quantity of " Bayer 205 " added to the solution. The results obtained from the prophylactic use of the two drugs singly and in combination were as follows :294 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV Berg (1925). Die Eignung von " Bayer 205" zur Bekaämpfung der afrikanischen Haustier trypanosomen. Deut. Tier?rzt. Wochen., 33, 561-571. Brumpt, & Lavier (1923), Mode d'action du " Bayer 205" sur les infections expérimentales a Trypanosoma equinum et a Trypanosoma pecaudi. Ann. Parasit. Humaine et Comparée, 1, 247-251. Bubberman (1931). The Control of Trypanosomiasis in the Dutch Indies. Reports for Sectional Meetings, 11th Internal. Vet. Congress, London, 3, 610-611. Collier (1925-26). On the Combined Action of " Bayer 205 " and Antimony. Revist. de Med. Vet., 8, 119-127. (Abstr. in Trop. Vet. Bull, 14, 85-86 ; 1926.) Dios (1925). "Bayer 205". Curative and Protective Properties. Revist. Inst. Bact. Dept . Nac. Hyg., 4, 51-56. (Abstr. in Trop. Vet. Bull, 13, 73; 1925 and also in Trop. Vet. Bull. 15, 6; 1927. Apparently the same article is abstracted in both the numbers of Trop. Vet. Bull., but in the latter case, the abstract is entitled " Preventive and Curative Treatment with ' Bayer 205 '. ") Edwards (1926). The Chemotherapy of Surra. (Trypanosoma evansi) Infections of Horses and Cattle in India. Trans. Roy. Soc. Trop. Med. & Hyg., 20, 10.71. See also Mem. Dept. Agri. India, Vet, ser.,4, 1-100; 1928. Emelin & Zeiss (1928). Die therapeutische and prophylactische Behandlung der Kameltrypanoso- miasc Su-auru mit Naganol. Rev. Microbiol. Epidemol, et Purasitol., 7,462-463. (Abstr. in Trop. Vet. BullPROPHYLAXIS AGAINST EQUINE SURRA 295 Schmidt, & de Oliveira (1924). Mal do Cadeiras and scine Behandlung mit " Bayer 205 ". Arch. f. schiffs-u. Tropen-Hyg., 28, 91-100. (Abstr. in Trop. Vet. Bull., 12, 113-114; 1924.) Tejera (1924). Investigations in the Treatment of Horses affected with Trypanosomiasis in Venezuela by " Bayer 205 ". Gac. Méd. de Caracas, 31, 177-180. (Abstr. in Trop. Vet. Bull., 12, 114; 1924.) Van Saceghem (1925). Le Traitement des trypanosomiases animales avec le 205 Bayer (Naganol). Ann. Soc. Belge. Med. Trop., 5, 101-107. (Abstr. in Trop. Vet. Bull., 14, 50; 1926.) Yakimov, and others (1927). An experiment on the Prophylactic Use of Naganol (" Bayer 205 ") in Camel Trypanosomiasis. Russian Journ. Trop. Med., 5, 43-46. (Abstr. in Trop. Vet. Bull, 15, 97; 1927.) Yakinoff, Amanchuloff, Arbuzoff, Schuravleff, and Clenomorskoff (1927). Versuch den prophylac- tischen Anwendung von Naganol (''Bayer 205") bei Trypanosomose der Kamele. Arch.f. SchiffsTHE DIAGNOSIS OF "REDWATER" (PIROPLASMOSIS) IN INDIAN CATTLE.* BY HUGH COOPER, M.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., Pathologist, AND P. R. KRISHNA IYER, G.M.V.C., Veterinary Inspector, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on 30th July 1931.) In two articles contributed from this Institute to another Journal DIAGNOSIS OF " REDWATER " (PIROPLASMOSIS) 297 ordinarily not attended with untoward symptoms, must be regarded as a source of potential risk to them in view of the possibility of the resuscitation of these organisms through the effects of intercurrent disease conditions, notably rinderpest, or when the vitality of the host is depressed by some cause. Accounts of the disease in technical literature are mainly based upon experience in other countries and they only apply to India in the comparatively rare cases of primary infection of highly susceptible adult cattle as mentioned above. As may be expected from what has been said, in " carrier " animals the disease may manifest itself in varying degrees of virulence, from the acute and severe form down to a mild resuscitation of the piroplasms resulting in no more than a transient fever. The great variability in clinical symptoms observed in the disease in India makes its detection frequently difficult in practice, and since, as will be explained later, the existing methods of diagnosis are far from adequate, it would seem probable that many true cases of "redwater " have escaped the notice of workers in the field in the past. The existing methods for the diagnosis of the disease are briefly as follows :298 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV blance to Theileria parasites and this may render the question of diagnosis of "redwater" by blood smear examination a matter of some difficulty. The round signet ring forms, however, appear to undergo no such change. The microscopical method of diagnosis does not readily lend itself for adoption in the field, since, apart from the fact that it is not every field worker who has a microscope available for his use, it may happen that smears have been taken before the parasites have appeared in any large numbers in the circulation, or again, when they have already disappeared, for they may be present in the blood only during a relatively short time in the course of an attack, as is witnessed by the fact that at Muktesar organisms have been found to occur in large numbers in smears taken on one day but have been completely absent in smears made on the following day. 2. By the thermal reaction.DIAGNOSIS OF " REDWATER" (PIROPLASMOSIS) 299 no means be depended upon as a sure indication of the disease and, further, the apparatus for blood counting is not generally available for use in the field. II. POST-MORTEM DIAGNOSIS. 1. By the character of the blood.300 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV the fibrous capsule intact, these appear to be of an oily dark-bluish colour which is quite distinct from the greyish-green colour brought about by decomposition changes and resembles to a certain extent the colour of the distended cardiac veins. On removal of the easily detachable fibrous capsule, the surface presents a dark- violet colour, and an examination of a section of the organ shows that the blue colour is not present in the parenchyma, but that the cortex shows only intense congestion. Particles of dark-yellowish pigment have been found in the leucocytes on histological examination of this kidney lesion. In over three hundred cases of post-mortem examination conducted on animals dead of piroplasmosis at Muktesar, this kidney lesion was constantly found to be present. Cases have been met with where no other lesions were encountered, excepting this colour lesion of the kidneys, and microscopical examination in such cases has always confirmed the diagnosis of clinical piroplasmosis. It is believed, therefore, that this hitherto undescribed lesion forms an easy and reliable method of post-mortem diagnosis in " redwater " of Indian cattle.
TICK INFESTATION IN THE COASTAL TRACT OF NORTH KANARA DISTRICT.* BY R. N. NAIK, G.B.V.C., Assistant Veterinary Research Officer, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on 30th July 1931.) (With 4 figures.) In the course of his duties while he was in charge of the Veterinary Dispensary, Kumta, the writer's attention was repeatedly drawn towards the emaciated condi- tion in a considerable proportion of the cattle inhabiting the coastal tract of North Kanara District. From enquiries it transpired that the tick was mainly responsible for this condition; the opinion prevalent amongst the local residents seemed to describe the damage to the fact that the tick sucked up gradually the blood of cattle and made them useless for purposes of work or for milking. They believed that its ravages have told upon the existing mongrel breed and helped to degene- rate it to the extreme and as a result there was no encouragement for cattle breeding. In the present publication an endeavour has been made to present what facts the writer has been able to collect concerning the different aspects of tick infesta- tion considered in relation to the local conditions of the tract to which these facts relate. A few suggestions are offered upon what has appeared to the writer the most feasible methods of control of this pest. It is hoped that these suggestions will be found generally applicable to other localities in India, where, as the writer's enquiries have revealed, tick infestation constitutes perhaps one of the ever serious scourges that the livestock owner has to contend with. It is also hoped that the information embodied in this paper will constitute an addition to the tick literature in India. * Paper read at the 17th Indian Science Congress, Allahabad, 1930. ( 301 )
302 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV The writer desires to express his grateful thanks to the following officers for the encouragement given by them in the prosecution of the investigation :TICK INFESTATION IN COASTAL TRACT OF NORTH CANARA 303 It is a belt of the country on the Arabian Sea about 110 miles from north to south and from ten to sixty miles from east to west. Central Kanara is a country of great richness of scenery and includes three belts: the coastal tract with broad winding lagoons, rich plains and wooded hills running to the sea; the central belt of the lofty Sahyadris (Western Ghats) covered with magnificent forests; and an eastern upland which is wild waving and thickly wooded in the west and in the east passes into a bare land and thickly populated plain. A somewhat broken and irregular range of central hills divides the district into two parts; the Up-ghats and the Below-ghats. The investigation of ticks was carried out in the latter part of the country. CLIMATE. There are four seasonn which along with the average mean temperature, humidity and rainfall are tabulated below :304 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OP VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Temperature (Mean), coastal talukas N., Kanara.
TICK INFESTATION IN COASTAL TRACT OF NORTH CANARA 305 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. Humidity (Mean twenty years' average), North Kanara. The country is comprised of forest area, garden area, and rice field area. The former two covered with evergreen trees, plants, bushes and pastures. Rice fields supply straw for cattle. CATTLE AND CATTLE SHEDS. Cattle belong to the indigenous mongrel breed and are inferior. In this tract they number to 1,24,284 according to the latest census. It is said that some
306 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [I, IV decades ago they were of better breed and quality but now they have degenerated on account of restricting the grazing area, non-observance of breeding principles and the increase in the tick infestation. All bulls above five or six years of age are mulled or castrated leaving scarcely any one for breeding purposes. A. large number of cattle are imported every year from round about districts. The cattle shed is generally built of kutcha-mud walls, soft murum floor and thatchings of rice straw, palm leaves or hay. The manger is made of bamboos or stumps. The shed structure and the floor present a most shabby appearance and are unhealthy to the extreme, the exposed sides adding to it. Quantities of green leaves and dry leaves are usually spread under the feet of cattle as litter in order that they may be turned into humous condition by the action of animal excreta and be thus useful as manure. The leaves, green or dry, spread as litter is left uncollected at the average of six days to more than a week and then are stored in the manure pit which is ordinarily maintained in close proximity of the shed. The cattle shed is not only used for housing cattle but also for storing fodder on its upper portion. TICK FAUNA OF KANARA. Through the courtesy of the Zoological Survey of India, the ticks collected by the writer from cattle in Kanara have been identified as follows:310 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 4. A graph expressing the correlated influence of temperature and humidity upon tick metabolism.
308 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV days later he felt much pain at the pit below the scrotum and eventually dis- covered that this was due to the tick being located in this region. In the absence of natural hosts ticks may crawl into the human habitations much to the annoyance of their inmates. Such occurrences are not infrequent in this tract, for instance, Superintendent, Agricultural Farm, Kumta, had his quarters invaded by an army of ticks, although they were situated at a distance of about 80 yards from the cattle shed. Ticks possess passive means of defence which are mainly the so-called pro- tective resemblance which connotes inconspicuousness. When a tick is touched or dropped on the palm of the hand ." death feint" for a short while is exhibited. Amblyomma forms appear to mimic some insects or small animals which being nauseously distasteful are often conspicuous having a combination of colour markings termed " warning colours ". The general rule observed in nature is that smaller species of ticks abound in their number, possess less resisting power, lay smaller number of eggs and finish their life cycle much earlier than bigger species which, on the other hand, are found in very small number though greater number of eggs are laid by them, possess comparatively greater resisting power and take nearly double the period for finishing the life cycle. CORRELATED INFLUENCE OF CLIMATIC CONDITIONS ON TICK METABOLISM AND INFESTATION. Fig. 3 shows the number of tick-infested cattle treated at the Kumta Veteri- nary Dispensary during the years 1923 to 1926. This figure, when read in con- junction with Table II which represents temperature, humidity and rainfall, reveal the following interesting facts:TICK INFESTATION IN COASTAL TRACT OF NORTH CANARA 309 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 3. Chart showing tick cases treated in the veterinary dispensary, Kumta, Outpatients and M. S. cases. E 2
310 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 4. A graph expressing the correlated influence of temperature and humidity upon tick metabolism.
TICK INFESTATION IN COASTAL TRACT OF NORTH CANARA 311 TABLE II. Showing rainfall, thermometric and hygrometric records at Kumta Town. Serial No. Months 1923 1924 1925 Rainfall Temparature Hygrometric readings Rainfall in inches Temperature Hygrometric readings Rainfall in inches Temperature Hygrometric reading Max. F. Min. F. Wet. F. Dry. F. Max. F. Min F. Wet. F. Dry. F Max. F. Min. F. Wet. F. Dry. F 1 January .. .. 87.4 77.1 72.2 79.9 .. 87.7 77.5 73.5 79.5 .. 84.6 77.9 69.2 75.9 2 February .. .. 85.0 76.1 71.7 77.6 .. 88.1 76.8 75.9 80.6 .. 84.0 76.0 67.0 75.0 3 March .. .. 88.1 80.1 75.8 81-4 .. 90.6 79.5 77.1 83.7 .. 86.4 82.3 72.0 81.4 4 April .. .. 91.3 83.8 80.8 86.3 .. 91.1 83.2 80.0 85.8 .. 90.0 87.9 79.1 85.6 5 May . .. 0.11 91.3 82.8 79.5 85.2 2.62 91.8 83.0 80.2 85.1 6.96 90.0 86.4 79.0 84.3 6 June . .. 24.53 89.6 80.1 80.6 83.6 56.24 81.8 81.6 76.7 80.4 55.66 81.8 80.0 77.3 79.8 7 July . .. 63.99 81.4 76.3 77.2 77.8 52.90 81.8 81.1 79.2 79.8 3323 81.4 79.7 77.2 78.9 8 August .. 44.64 83.1 76.4 78.l 78.7 16.13 82.0 80.6 81.4 81.4 33.90 80.6 78.4 74.4 77.9 9 September .. 17.2 84.3 77.0 77.8 80.2 9.70 81.5 80.5 81.1 82.1 2.27 84.1 79.2 71.1 78.7 10 October .. 0.32 87.1 78.5 78.1 81.6 1.55 81.2 80.3 81.0 82.2 6.50 97.8 76.9 75.6 79.0 11 November .. .. 88.3 76.9 75.3 81.3 0.26 81.7 79.6 80.2 81.9 0.87 100.8 73.8 72.1 77.7 12 December .. .. 90.6 78.0 72.9 81.2 .. 84.3 82.1 78.5 79.8 0.50 88.0 77.7 70.6 76.9 (Obtained from Agricultural Experimental Station, Kumta.)
312 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV The exact extent of correlation existing between the virulency of tick infestation on the one hand and the climatic condition on the other will be readily understood by a reference to Fig. 3 read in conjunction with Table II. DISSEMINATION OF TICK INFECTION. Although, a priori, there is a considerable likelihood of tick infestation occur- ring as a result of contact with infested animals, under natural conditions there does not appear to be any appreciable spread of the infection by this method since the tick once attached to the host does not disengage itself except when such a step is demanded by any special circumstances. However, male ticks do detach them- selves and wander about in search of mates on the skin of the host itself. It is generally conceded that the most common way of picking up the in- fection is from such wooded tracts as providing grazing for cattle. Ticks in various stages have been observed to climb up blades of grass and leaves of shrubs, and to remain attached to them by means of their posterior limbs, the anterior ones being left free to gain purchase on moving animals. During rainy season, one may observe his cattle returning home in the evening harbouring innumerable ticks on the extremities of the body, especially on the muzzle. In Kanara it has been observed that gurgi (Strobinlanthus perfoliatus) and chirkul (Grewia microcos) bushes are invariably infected with ticks. Thick shrubs of these plants notably of the former species occur in abundance in the local forests, and these constitute a favourite hiding place for wild animals during the day time and also harbour ticks in great abundance. The cattle sheds as they are constructed in these localities with their rough mud walls and kutcha floor, are admirably adapted for the breeding of ticks. In the course of his investigation the writer found certain sheds literally covered with these parasites. Fodder and Agricultural materials are as much responsible as cattle themselves for the spread of the infection. PATHOGENICITY. Injurious effects caused by ticks may be due to :TICK INFESTATION IN COASTAL TRACT OF NORTH CANARA 313 axillæ, groin, perineum, mammary or scrotal region. The lesions are more pro- nounced and persistent if ticks are removed forcibly leaving the hypostome in the wound. Human beings are often bitten and the lesion is much more marked among them: a pea-sized tumour with a small wound is found on the part bitten b y the tick ; the wound persists discharging the purulent matter until hypostome is completely disintegrated and thrown off and then heals leaving a hard tumour which subsequently takes about four to six months for complete absorption. It is also seen that following the rupture of the hypostome the wound sometimes heals up readily imprisoning the ruptured hypostome : a small abscess develops later accompanied with much pain. When the contained matter is squeezed out or the abscess, the wound heals leaving a tumour to be absorbed after a long time. These are not readily seen on cattle on account of the thickness of the skin. The wounds caused by adult ticks notably those belonging to the Longirostrata become very commonly fly-blown, especially when such wounds occur on the softer parts of the body surface. The tick disengages itself after engorgement from the wound and falls off leaving the wound to bleed in small droplets which attract flies and thus maggots are formed. Such wounds are very frequently seen on the udder, scrotum and flanks and in the case of milking animals, this may lead to a considerable re- duction in the yield of milk or the yield may even completely cease. As for bacterial invasion it is conceivable that the sites where bites are inflicted by ticks may be invaded by various pathogenic organisms through the agency of dust, dirt and mud. The writer has observed cows and buffaloes developing mammitis due to the Amblyomma tick biting the udder. EXTRACTION OF BLOOD. It is known that the tick after being engorged with blood weighs ten times its weight of the body. The extraction debilitates the host to the extreme and makes it useless for any kind of work ; milking animals cease partially or completely to yield milk. Repeated invasion by large numbers of ticks would seem calculated to shorten the life of an animal and the animal dies at the slightest constitutional derangements influenced by feed or atmospheric conditions. TRANSMISSION OF PROTOZOON DISEASES. The existence of P. bigeminum and T. mutants, the causative organisms of Piroplasma bovis and Theileriasis respectively has been established by microscopic examination in this district. But the true extent of the prevalence of these could not be ascertained for want of facilities. However, it has been computed that
314 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV whilst mortality due to Rinderpest in the whole of India is 35 per cent. it is 56 per cent. in the Kanara districts, and this is suggestive of the possibility that com- plication with Piroplasmosis is one of the causes for the increased mortality. TICK TOXAEMIA. In the course of an extended investigation conducted in this intensely tick-in- fested area, the writer has observed what appeared to be a form of toxæmia affect- ing a fair population of the infested animals. Many observers in the past have recorded the presence of toxins or poisonous saliva excreted by ticks, but have not defined any disease caused by these toxins. It is a well known fact that a tick, before beginning to feed, injects its pharyn- geal contents into the puncture made by it in order to retard the coagulation of blood. The composition of this excretion is as yet unknown ; at any rate, it is foreign matter secreted by the tissues of tick. It should undoubtedly contain some antigens with a certain degree of toxicity represented by the protein of the anatomical elements and the byproducts of their autolysis. The toxicity of these antigens may further be considered from the point of view of cytolysis produced which might exert a highly injurious action on the elements of the organism. The clinical symptoms and the results of Post-mortem examination indicate that a series of structural deterioration and relative enfeeblement of all the functions of the organism occur, this being evidently brought about as a result of the action of these toxins, by hindering the formation of blood corpuscles in the embryonal tracts due to the functional disturbance of the bone marrow and by disturbing the forma- tion of secretions that regulate assimilation. The ox at first gets one or more attacks of intense tick infestation. If it is not freed from these parasites immediately, it gradually begins to lose its condition although it may maintain a good appetite. The mucous membrane assumes a pale pink colour. The urine and fæces, however, have their normal appearance. The hairs lose their glossiness. The skin cannot be easily pinched. The body temperature ranges from 100.0° F. to 98.4° F. Gradually the ribs, joints and bones become prominent; the legs become slender ; the peritoneal cavity shows effusion of a small quantity of fluid and the animal becomes extremely thin and emaciated. A few days later, cold and painless swellings appear on the submaxillary space and dewlap and these are larger in size in the morning than in the evening. Sometimes these swellings disappear as soon as treatment is resorted to but reappear after a few days with their size increased. The prescapular and precrural glands are slightly enlarged and TICK INFESTATION IN COASTAL TRACT OF NORTH CANARA 315 longer seen, and the yield of milk ceases entirely. The animal now becomes un- able to get up independently and if lifted up it walks with a staggering gait. Even in this condition the appetite is maintained but usually grains which are hard to masticate are refused. In the last stage swellings appear all over the body and the animal is bedridden. The body temperature goes below 98. 0° F. and the ex- tremities become cold. Diarrh316 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV blue ticks and which died as a result of this infestation, from acute anæmia, owing to the withdrawal of blood. Within three days 14 lbs. weight of blue ticks were collected which had dropped off this horse, and this amount only represented about half of the ticks which engorged themselves on it ". According to Hutyra and Marek, " The chief effects of the ticks as ectopara- sites are exerted as blood suckers. Their number increases to many thousands, each one gorging itself with blood day after day (a female Ixodes recines takes 0. 4. c. c. of blood). As a result of the destruction of red blood cells (some 7 to 10 per cent. of the total amount) follows the history of the ticks, while at the same time a poisonous saliva is excreted by them. After absorption of the toxins the symp- toms of generalised affection, uneasiness and emaciation ( " Tick worry " ) appear, which grow worse in hot weather". From the above two quotations it would appear that the chief injurious effects of the ticks as ectoparasites are believed to be caused by the abstraction of blood by the ticks. A mere abstraction of blood can hardly be regarded as a factor of any importance in accounting for the disease. The writer has noted that larvæ of intermittent feeders, which do not suck appreciable amounts of blood can also produce the disease, and the observation finds confirmation in the statement made by Hutyra and Marek [ 926], namely, guinea-pigs that are bitten by larval ticks die within three days. Again, Marrillat [1916] states, " it is well known that the abstraction of a limited amount of blood or even a large amount has no harmful effects upon a healthy animal. Instead it improves the general health by exciting vital forces to renewed activity to réplenish the loss". Smith [1912] says " Perci- vall tells us that in the horse he occasionally drew 3 gallons of blood, which may be taken as half the amount in the body, apparently without fatal consequences " and he further states, " Regeneration of the fluid portion of the blood is extremely rapid, experiments showing that after slight hæmorrhage the normal volume is regained within a few hours. This is supported by clinical observation; in the days of severe bleedings venesection to the extent of producing syncope was frequent, yet in a short time the volume was restored ". The following familiar fact is one more example to the point. The so-called rinderpest serum producers are bled at the progressive rates of 4 c. c. and then 6 c. c, 7 c. c. and 8 c. c. per pound body weight 15 times at intervals of three days and are subsequently utilised for the pro- duction of other sera or are sold. The amount of blood drawn out from the body of a serum producer, whose weight is 600 lbs., in these 15 bleedings amounts to 115 lbs. or 19 per cent. of the body weight during a period of 43 days. Nevertheless, the animal does not succumb to such heavy bleedings except for rare cases of death by shock. From the extensive observations made by him, the writer has found that
TICK INFESTATION IN COASTAL TRACT OF NORTH CANARA. 317 the amount of blood abstracted as a result of one or more infestations of ticks in any degree of intensity is never reaching to 115 lbs. in an animal of 600 lbs. body weight. According to Hutyra and Marek [1926]. " The acute anæmia which develops after great losses of blood terminates with suitable nutrition of the animal almost without exception in a relatively short time in recovery. ..... If the animal has lost at least half of the normal quantity of its blood within a short time, there exists no longer any hope for its improvement (Joss)". "In primary anæmia with normal digestion, a purely dietetic treatment alone frequently produces an improvement progressing from day to day and even complete recovery may result in a relatively short time " [ Hutyra and Marek, 1926]. However, in animals in which anæmia and hydremia are produced by tick infestation medical and dietetic treatment is of little avail318 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV certain instances extended to 8 per cent., while in the extreme coast it was about 3 per cent. The cattle population of this tract according to recent census [Statistical Atlas, 1925] is 124,285. If we take the rate of mortality due to ticks to be 5 per cent. on an average, the total number of deaths comes to 6,114 every year. Assuming that the cost of the average animal is Rs. 20, the total loss to this tract on account of tick infestation comes to Rs. 1,22,280 annually. A point of interest in respect of death rate of cattle in these tracts is that the death rate is much higher in the tick infested area than in those which are rela- tively free from this pest.* The number of adult cattle imported in these tracts per year is not less than 3,000, their aggregate cost being Rs. 1,20,000, if the price of each head of cattle is taken as Rs. 40, which price has been rendered necessary by the heavy death rate in these localities. The number of milking cattle in these tracts is about one-third of the total number of cattle, namely, 41,428, supposing that about 40 per cent. of them give birth to calves, the yearly addition to the cattle population will be 16,571. The average mortality of the cattle population in India is said to be 5 per cent. as against 3 per cent. in the western countries. Still we may suppose that the average mortality in these tracts is 6 per cent. which means a loss of 7,457 animals annually. So, the increase every year after deducting the number of mortality would be, under natural course, 9,114 and the quinquennial increase would be 45,570. But there is practically no increase in the cattle population, which could be seen from the following table :TICK INFESTATION IN COASTAL TRACT OF NORTH CANARA 319 When considering these figures it may be borne in mind that not a single animal is exported from these tracts, and not more than 100 cattle are used for food, while about 3,000 cattle or more annually imported. In the face of these figures it will be meet and right to say that the tick infestation is the main cause for this state of cattle population. REMEDIES AGAINST TICKS. Cattle owners in these tracts take resort to a number of native remedies, the more important of which are as follows :-320 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV thorough trial and an 1 in 60 solution of it was found very useful in destroying ticks when sprayed or mopped at least twice. CONTROL MEASURES. Grazing areas are the most prolific centres for the dissemination of tick infes- tation. Unfortunately the individual stockowner barely possesses any grazing area of his own and for this purpose he utilises the reserved and minor forests which are under the control of the Forest Department; so that it is incumbent on the Government authorities to apply such control measures as have been found by scientific experimentation to be the best for combating ticks. As the majority of cattle sheds in these tracts are infested with ticks, the ideal course would be to discard preferably many old sheds and to disinfect the remain- ing as follows:TICK INFESTATION IN COASTAL TRACT OF NORTH CANARA 321 The most efficient curative and preventive remedy against these parasites, as found out recently by extensive experimentation is the arsenic dip. A number of dipping mixtures with arsenic as the principal ingredient have been devised and the following are well known :322 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV Edwards, J. T (1927). The Acclimatization of Imported Stock. Agri. Jour. Ind., Vol. XXII, Part VI, November 1927, pp. 411SELECTED ARTICLES ANTI-RABIES IMMUNIZATION. VALUE OF KILLED CARBOLISED VIRUS IN CASES OF WOLF-BITE. BY G. STUART, O.B.E., M.A., M.D., D.P.H., AND K. S. KRIKORIAN, M.D. From the Central Laboratories, Department of Health, Government of Palestine. (Reprinted from the Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, Volume XXV, No. 1, 30th June 1931.) In the evaluation of any method of anti-rabies immunization the influence on statistical results of the nature of the biting animal cannot be disregarded, ranking in importance as it does with virulence of local virus, severity of wounding, degree of exposure to risk, duration and mode of treatment, lateness of arrival at an insti- tute and the constitution of the attending population. The dog undoubtedly plays the chief role in the infection of man with rabies, but transmission is fre- quently effected by others of the Cynoidea, viz., wolf, fox, jackal and hyena; of all animals, however, wolves are, in this connection, mostly to be feared, for, on account of the greater severity of their wounding, they cause a proportionately higher incidence of hydrophobia among the bitten and that too despite intensifica- tion of treatment. It seems probable that in the case of dog-bites the benefit derived from Pasteurian treatment is generally an overstatement and no agree- ment here is ever likely to be reached ; with regard to wolf-bites and the value of treatment, however, less misconception exists and the position is adequately reviewed by BABES (1912). First it has to be noted that, while at least 50 per cent. of dog-bites are inflicted by non-rabid animals, wounding of human beings by healthy wolves is altogether exceptional; indeed any wolf which suddenly appears in an inhabited area and makes an unprovoked attack on man and domes- tic animals alike is to be regarded as definitely rabid. Secondly the percentage mortality among persons bitten by mad wolves is generally accepted as being over 60 and as high as 90 when severe head injuries have been sustained. The effect of ( 323 ) F
324 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV anti-rabies treatment, however, on these high mortality figures has been consider- able ; thus by Pasteur's classical method the death rate has been reduced to 15 to 20 per cent, and by the Roumanian method in which the use of a heat-weakened virus permits the exhibition of a much larger immunising dosage, the rate has fallen to 6.66. To illustrate the risks run by human being wounded by rabid dogs and rabid wolves, BABES (1912) quotes the résumé given by REMLINGER, viz., (a) of persons bitten by rabid dogs and remaining without treatment 1 in 6 deve- lops hydrophobia; treatment following dog-bite, however, reduces the risk to 1 in 200 ; (b) of persons bitten by rabid wolves and remaining without treatment 1 in 1.66 succumbs to rabies or in the case of head injuries, 1 in 1.11; here treatment by Pasteur's classical method reduces the mortality to 1 in 5 or 6 and treatment by the Roumanian method to 1 in 15. Now in the treatment of persons bitten by dogs, cats, jackals, foxes, solipeds and ruminants, the efficacy of killed carbolised virus has been placed beyond dispute by the results obtained at Kasauli and at LisbonANTI-RABIES IMMUNIZATION 325 made by the injection, deep into the neck muscles, of 2 c. cm. of a 1 per cent, emulsion of street virus recovered from a dog. No records, however, are available of cases of wolf-bite treated with carbolised vaccine and in Palestine the wolf is so very rarely encountered that up till now the opportunity has not arisen of testing in this respect the value of the carbolised preparation of fixed virus sent out under the scheme of complete decentralisation of treatment in force here. It is to be understood that the anti-rabics vaccine manufactured at the Central Laboratories consists of a 2 per cent, suspension of the brain of a rabbit killed with fixed virus, in a dilution of 1 per cent, phenol in distilled water. After the emulsion has been in the incubator for 24 hours and the virus destroyed as a result of the combined action of heat and phenol, it is then taken out and mixed with an equal volume of normal saline solution so that the vaccine finally consists of a 1 per cent, brain suspension in 0.5 per cent, car- bolic solution. The complete course of treatment consists of the daily injection of 5 c. cm. intracutaneously on 14 consecutive days. The dosage is universal, re- maining constant for all bitten persons, irrespective of age, sex, severity of bite, location and multiplicity of wounding, interposition of clothing and the several different conditions requiring consideration when most other methods of treat- ment are employed. It is true that during the past eight years twelve Arab peasants attending for treatment, other than those affected by the incident about to be described, have, at different times, incriminated wolves as their attackers, but until Febru- ary, 1930, no authentic case of wolf-bite had been brought to our notice and no biting animal identified as a true wolf by a competent zoologist. On February 15, 1930, early in the morning, a male wolf, Canis lupus, one of a pair which had been recently observed in the district, made its appearance; at El Auja, a small Arab settlement near Jericho and caused much excitement by its indiscriminate attack on villagers, dogs, and goats alike. On quitting the settlement the animal made for a flock of sheep grazing some distance away but by chance it was observed by the herdsman Suleiman el Hussein (Case 1) who, after a sharp tussle during which he was badly wounded, succeeded in dispatching it with a dagger. In all, six persons received injuries of a sufficiently serious nature to necessitate their removal to the Government Hospital, Jerusalem, for general and specific treatment. The five dogs and twenty goats bitten were de- stroyed. Three weeks after this occurrence, on 8th March, the female wolf visited the same settlement El Auja, and savagely attacked the inhabitants; among the three persons bitten was Suleiman el Hussein, who killed this second wolf also with his F 2
326 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV dagger. All three wounded were brought immediately to Jerusalem for treatment but on this occasion no anti-rabies vaccine was administered to the herdsman. Including then Suleiman el Hussein (Case 1), who was bitten by both animals, eight persons were injured by this pair of wolves. The nature of the wounding is shown in Table II. Anti-rabies vaccination proved successful in each case, all eight bitten persons treated in the ordinary way with a total dosage of 0.7 grammes carbolised rabid nerve substance being alive and well one year after completion of the 14 days' course. Laboratory diagnosis of rabies was, unfortunately, impossible in respect of the male wolf, for, according to a local superstition, immunity against hydrophobia can only be secured by removal and destruction of the biting animal's head and these customs had been duly observed before the arrival of the investigating Veterinary Officer. From this it will be seen that in the more unenlightened parts of the country confidence still continues to be reposed in ancient beliefs and that a sturdy conservatism is antagonistic to the introduction of newfangled methods of treatment. The Veterinary Officer's visit, however, prevented a repetition of the customary rites in the case of the female wolf, with the result that the head arrived for laboratory investigation on the same day as that on which the second attack on the settlement had been made. Histological examination of the hippocampus major showed, with Mann's stain, negri bodies measuring 2 to 8 ANTI-RABIES IMMUNIZATION 327 TABAL II328 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV ment and not having undergone a further course of injections, have died of hydrophobia. Such cases are very rare; indeed, only two have come within our notice, viz., the case of de Blasi and Russo Travali reported by BABES and that of Park referred to by ROSENAU (1927), but these only indicate that in one patient immunity lasted less than four years and in the other not longer than fourteen months. From the above mentioned experiments on animals, however, BABES (1912) concluded that it is not necessary to repeat the protective inoculations if a second infection takes place within 18 months after completion of treatment. LUBINISKI and PRAUSNITZ (1926), on the other hand, quite apart from the fact that 21 per cent., of the animals in the experiments referred to were proved to be no longer immune in one year's time, " do not believe that such important conclusions, reached after animal-experimentation, should be applied to man. It might easily lead to disastrous results ". They consider that " in the case of a further bite occurring later than three months after completion of treatment, the treatment should be repeated, but in case of particularly unfavourable prognosis (head and face injuries, etc.), the inoculations should in every case be repeated". These authors, however, do not state on what clinical or experimental evidence they have based their opinion. Now if the development and duration of anti-rabies immunity could on all occasions be ascertained by the appearance and persistence of rabicidal substances in the serum of treated cases, a reliable guide would be furnished as to the need for further courses of treatment. But experience has shown this not to be the case; thus BIGLIERI and VILLEGAS (1926) counted that anti-rabies immunity is not necessarily a blood immunity and few will deny that occasionally a solid immunity is encountered when no antibodies can be found in the sera of the immunised. Further MARIE (1927), while accepting the view that specific changes in the blood serum characteristic of all active immunisation follows treatment with anti-rabies vaccine, maintains that the rabicidal antibodies so produced gradually disappear without there being any correlation with the dura- tion of immunity. That ordinarily there exists a definite relationship between immunity and the antibody content of immune serum, however, is the belief of many workers including FERMI, PEREIRA DA SILVA and ourselves. FERMI (1929), for example, was able to prove that a highly virulent strain of rabies virus used as an immunising agent confers a much higher degree of immunity and evokes a correspondingly greater rabicidal antibody response than an avirulent. Again, PEREIRA DA SILVA (1927) asserts the superiority of his etherised vaccine over all other protective methods on the ground that in the serum of patients treated at his Institute anti-rabies substances appear most quickly, attain the highest value and persist the longest. We (1929), also have stated that normally " immunity and rabicidal action of the serum are produced concomitantly; they appear
ANTI-RABIES IMMUNIZATION 329 together, are present in greatest degree together and disappear at or about the same time " and that " it may be concluded with reasonable certainty that the rabicidal properties of the serum of an animal are an indication of the immunity against rabies possessed by that animal ". Further it is of importance to note that among the resolution adopted by the second and third Commissions of the International Rabies Conference held in Paris during 1927, was one to the effect that " This Conference, having considered the results obtained by the various methods of anti-rabic treatment now employed in the different Institutes and the advantages and disadvantages of each, have arrived at the following conclusion :330 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV TABLE IIIANTI-RABIES IMMUNIZAT 331 of carbolised virus vaccine in ordinary dosage. If, however, the presence of such detectable rabicidal substances is actually an index of immunity acquired, then in the present case immunity was already established three weeks after the commencement of treatment and at the time of second biting by a rabid wolf. A logical reason for the non-treatment would thus be advanced. Further, accord- ing to this conception, anti-rabies immunity would actually be highest some two months after commencement of treatment, and would last in all three months. Arguing on these lines one might feel justified in advising with LUBINISKI and PRAUSNITZ that" in the case of a further bite occurring later than three months after completion of the treatment the inoculation should be repeated, with the exception of cases which are particularly unfavourable prognostically (head and face injuries, etc.), in which cases the inoculation should in every case be repeated ". CONCLUSIONS. 1. Carbolised killed fixed virus in a total dosage of 0.7 gramme administered intracutaneously over 14 consecutive days proved wholly successful in protecting eight human beings bitten by rabid wolves. 2. Anti-rabies immunity was established at the time when rabicidal antibodies first became demonstrable in the patient's serum. REFERENCES. Babes, V. (1912). Traite de la rage. Paris, Bailliere of File. Biglieri, R., and Villegas, C. (1926). Immunite locale dans la rage. C. R. Soc. Biol., xcv, 1176. Fermi, C. (1929). Beeinflusst die virulenz des fixen Virus die immunisierende Wirkung des anti- rabischen Impfstoffes und die Produktion des Antikorpers ? Ztschr. Immun-Forsch, lix, 276. Kraus, R., and Kreissl, B. (1902). Ueber den Nachweis von Schutzstoffen gegen Hundswut, beim Monschen. Zentble. Bakt., xxxii, 810. Lubinske, H., and Prausnitz, C. (1926). Lyssa. Ergeb. Hyg. Bakd., viii, 1. Maric, A. C. (1927). Report to the International Rubies Conference, Paris. Geneva, League of Nations. Pereira Da Silva, E. (1927). Substances rabicides dans le sang des individus traites par le virus rabi- quo fixe etherise Arquiros. Inst. Bact. Cam. Pest, vi, 42. Pereira Da Silva, E. (1930). Substances rabicides dans le sang des individus vaccines au virus fixe pheniquo mort. Ibid, vi, 138. Rosenau, M. J. (1927). Article on Rabies Preventive Medicine and Hygiene. Now York, Appleton and Co. Stuart, G., and Krikorian, K. S. (1929). Studies in anti-rabies immunisation. Jour. Hyg., xxix, 1. Stuart, G., and Krikorian, K. S. (1931). Appearance and persistence in rabbits' blood of rabicidal antibodies produced by various methods of anti-rabies immunisation.
BOVINE NASAL GRANULOMA. BY MAJOR G. E. OXSPRING, R.A.V.C., Jubbulpore, India. (Reprinted from the Journal of the Royal Army Veterinary Corps, Volume 2, No. 4, August, 1931.) This condition will bo to many of academical interest only, but to officers serving in India, whose duties may include the Veterinary charge of a Government Military Dairy Farm, it may, at any time, become of practical importance. This experience was encountered in Jubbulpore last year, and the greater part of the hot weather was devoted to dealing with it. The disease does not appear to be mentioned in English or Continental liter- ature, apart from two articles published by the Imperial Institute of Agricultural Research, Pusa, by V. Krishnamurti Ayyar, I.V.S., and the late Rai Sahib P. N. Das, I.V.S., respectively. The scene of the outbreak in question was the Government Military Dairy Farm, Jubbulpore, C. P., India. At the time, the herd consisted of roughly 95 cows of various breeds, 5 bulls, 51 young stock, 135 buffaloes and 41 bullocks. The first cases of Bovine Nasal Granuloma were observed by the writer in January, 1930, when seven cases of nasal growths were reported. Two of these animals were admitted to hospital, with a view to attempting to discover the nature of the disease, and also some form of treatment. At this time it appeared to be confined to a very few animals, but in April the disease had attained con- siderable proportions, no less than 45 cows being affected. The transport bullocks contracted the disease later. There is no doubt that these animals were all affected sometime previous to this, but the lesions were minute and no clinical symptoms had developed. Had we then possessed the experience afterwards gained, I am confident, it would have been recognizable in most of the cattle in January. However, in April, the symp- toms had become alarming, the animals were losing condition, the milk supply was rapidly diminishing, all were having difficulty in breathing, and some almost to the stage of asphyxiation. The snoring noise of affected animals could be heard some distance from the sheds.a The disease has been reported in various parts of India by the authors pre- viously mentioned, but as far as the present outbreak is concerned, inquiries over ( 332 )
BOVINE NASAL GRANULOMA 333 several months failed to discover any cases in the district which were not either directly connected with this farm, or had originated from it. Lesions334 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV That it is not identical with the Ray Fungus of actinomycosis bovis is quite definite from the symptoms, for lesions of the tongue, jaw or lips are never seen. Moreover, the effect of iodine in the European condition is quite negative in nasal granuloma. The mode of infection of this condition is obscure. Attempts to pass the disease from one animal to another, by direct transmission of material from the lesions, always failed. A similar result was obtained by Rai Sahib P. N. Das, I.V.S., in an interesting series of experiments, published by the Agricultural Research Institute, Pusa, in 1929. It is a fact, however, that in the outbreak under review, the cattle in one shed rapidly becoming infected, and not until three months later did the disease break out amongst the bullocks, which are housed some distance away. These animals all became affected about the same time. The food supplied to them was from the same source as that fed to the cattle. It has been suggested that the nose strings used in bullocks in India might be the cause, but the experience here where most of the cases were in dairy cattle, which do not have nose strings, rules that out entirely. It appears to be probable that the casual agent is passed on by infected fodder, on which it may lead a saprophytic existence. Animals affected.-A point of interest noted during this outbreak was the fact that no case occurred amongst the buffaloes, although these animals constituted about 50 per cent, of the total herd, and were fed and watered under the same condition, whilst over 60 per cent, of the mature cattle suffered. It appears to be a disease of mature animals, as no cases were seen in calves. The youngest animal affected was nearly two years of age, from this age onwards the infection was heavy. One country-bred bull contracted the disease, but two Frisian bulls on the farm escaped ; the latter were possibly kept under more pampered conditions, and were more isolated from the remainder of the herd. Period of Incubation.BOVINE NASAL GRANULOMA 335 Treatment.336 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV It is a fact that all cases on the farm were eventually cured by this treatment, and have remained so now for a period of over six months. Although the experience gained during this outbreak leads us to assume that in tartar emetic we have a specific for Bovine Nasal Granuloma, yet there is no doubt that the method might be improved with advantage. The large number of injections make the process long and laborious when many animals are concerned. Also the fact that the drug must be injected intravenously necessitates the employment of a skilled person for giving each dose. An increased dose, with shorter intervals, might curtail the period of treatment, but experiments would be necessary to ascertain what the patients could tolerate with a reasonable margin of safety. Unfortunately, lack of material has prevented this point being settled. My grateful thanks are due to Major G. F. Watkins, R.A.V.C., who has collaborated with me throughout this outbreak, and to Jemadar Noor Mohd. Khan, I.A.V.C, who has skilfully given very many injections.
ARTIFICIALLY INDUCED HYPOGLYCEMIA AND HYPOCAL- CEMIA IN THE COW AND THE RELATIONSHIP TO PARTURIENT PARESIS OR MILK FEVER .* BY WILLIAM E. PETERSEN, E. A. HEWITT, W. L. BOYD AND W. R. BROWN. Divisions of Dairy Husbandry, Veterinary Medicine and Biochemistry, University Farm, Saint Paul, Minnesota, and the Department of Veterinary Physiology, Iowa Stale College, Ames, Iowa. (Reprinted from the Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association, N. S. Vol. 32, 2.) Probably no problem has baffled the investigator more than the etiology of parturient paresis. Considerable interest as to the cause of this condition has been revived during the past decade, which has resulted in the evolution of numerous theories with the stimulation of a vast amount of research. As a result of conti- nued investigations, many of the proposed theories have been discarded and addi- tional support added to others. It seems an established fact that the prevalence of milk fever is correlated with the improved methods of agriculture and the development of superior milking qualities which have resulted from the employment of scientific methods of breed- ing and feeding cattle. Milk fever is a disease almost exclusively confined to cattle although it has been reported as occurring in goats, sheep and swine. Fish reviewed the history and incorporated an extensive bibliography in an article in which he discussed the sugar theories as explaining the cause of milk fever and concluded that a variation in the sugar content of the blood, either above or below normal, has not been patisfactorily demonstrated as the causative factor, and considers it more likely a secondary factor resulting from an interference with the processes of oxidation in the tissues. Hayden and Sholl reported that the normal standard of sugar in the blood is definitely lower in the cow, goat and sheep than in the blood of man or the dog. *Published with the approval of the Director as Paper No. 953 Journal Series, Minnesota Experi- ment Station. ( 337 )
338 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV They found in a herd consisting mostly of milk cows (an average of 75 tests on 44 cows) the blood-sugar to be 51.75 mg. per 100 cc of blood. Hayden states that his figures from the use of the Benedict method in the determination of sugar in the blood of the milk cow gave a low average of 41 .15 mg. per 100 cc of blood. Schlotthauer reports that the average blood-sugar content in a group of ten non-lactating cows was 65.45 mg. for each 100 cc of blood, the highest was 70.90 mg. and the lowest 59.85 mg. In a group of lactating cows, yielding from 8 to 30 pounds of milk daily, the blood-sugar averaged 63.59 mg. per 100 cc of blood, with a range from 68.45 mg. to 59.98 mg. In another group of lactating cows, yielding from 45 to 58 pounds of milk daily, the blood-sugar averaged 61.19 mg. per 100 cc of blood with a range from 68.72 to 52.9 mg. Amadon reports that the normal average sugar content of blood samples secured from thirty-five lactating and non-lactating cows and one bull was 68.5 mg. per 100 cc of blood, with a range of from 40 to 86.9 mg. Hewitt found the blood-sugar average of 94 determinations on four heifers, one bull and one steer under two years of age, was 95.9 mg. per 100 cc, and that the blood-sugar average of eight determinations on three non-lactating cows was 89.1 mg. per 100 cc of blood, whereas the blood-sugar average of eight determina- tions on three lactating cows was 54.1 mg. per 100 cc of blood. Widmark and Carlens state that the blood-sugar for the dry cow and heifer is around 80 mg. per 100 cc, and for the milking cow as low as 40 mg. per 100 cc, with an average of 60 mg. Auger confirmed the findings of Widmark and Carlens. Maguire states that the sugar content of the blood of the cow normally ranges from 80 to 120 mg. per 100 cc of blood. From the above investigations it is apparent that the sugar concentration in the blood of cows is subject to quite wide variations but the general conclusion can be drawn that the sugar level is lower in lactating cows than it is in heifers and non-lactating animals. Widmark and Carlens report the successful treatment of cases of milk fever by the use of glucose injections. They found an increase in the blood-sugar after udder inflation of cows suffering from this disease and they conclude that hypogly- cemia is an etiological factor in milk fever. Hayden and Sholl report the blood-sugar findings for fourteen cases of milk fever which showed 35.7 mg. to 190.4 mg. per 100 cc, with an average of 99.42 mg.
HYPOGLYCEMIA AND HYPOCALCEMIA IN COW 339 From seven of these a second sample was taken at intervals sufficient that the animals had shown recovery from the attack. These seven samples showed from 35.2 to 98 mg. per 100 cc, with an average of 64.98 mg. Based on these findings, the authors stated there was a hyperglycemia at the onset of the disease. Several other investigators, among them Schlotthauer and Amadon, report an increase in the total blood-sugar to cows suffering from milk fever. Amadon produced an artificial hypoglycemia in a cow by the injection of iletin (Eli Lilly and Co.), being able to reduce the blood-sugar from 55.5 mg. to 41 .6 mg. per 100 cc in two hours by the injection of 480 units of this product. A further administration of 800 units of iletin, on the same day, brought the blood- sugar down to 23.5 mg. per 100 cc. After the injection of this amount of iletin, the animal became comatose in the recumbent position. Numerous other theories have been advanced as to the cause of milk fever. Moussu advanced a theory of a hypocholesteremia as a hypothesis for the cause of milk fever. Hayden reports that the cholesterol content of the blood is not increased by udder inflation, and concludes that hypocholesteremia does not contri- bute to the cause of milk fever. Dryerre and Greig suggest that certain symptoms observed in milk fever are analogous to those seen in animals deprived of their parathyroids, or those in which a parathyroid deficiency exists, particularly with reference to the guanidine func- tion. Fish reports the effects of injecting 200 cc of a solution containing 60.75 grams of guanidine carbonate into a heifer weighing 980 pounds, which resulted in increasing the sugar in the blood 18.7 per cent. The urea in the blood was in- creased 9.7 per cent. and the non-protein nitrogen was increased 17.2 per cent. Hayden reports that the guanidine average is higher after udder inflation than before. A guanidine toxemia due to parathyroid deficiency or other causes should show a greater guanidine content in the samples before inflation. He con- cludes that the evidence is against the contribution of guanidine to the cause of milk fever. The work of Little and Wright, of Dryerre and Greig and of Fish has shown that there is a marked diminution in the amount of blood calcium in cows down with milk fever. Fish found in 18 cases of milk fever the blood phosphates were uniformly and consistently lower than normal. The calcium was likewise found to be sub-normal, confirming the earlier work of Little and Wright and agreeing with the observa- tions of Dryerre and Greig. G
340 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV Fish reports that the examination of 27 cases of milk fever gave a range from 1.75 to 6 mg. of calcium per 100 cc, with an average of 3.31 mg. Little and Wright found a range of 3.35 mg. of calcium per 100 cc to 7.16 mg. with an average of 5.18 mg. per 100 cc. Meigs et al found the plasma calcium content in cows to be between 8.6 and 11.4 mg. per 100 cc of blood, practically unaffected by pregnancy, lactation, or considerable changes of diet. In calves, however, it is higher, up to 111 mg. per 100 cc of blood. Sjollema reports upon studies of the blood which have shown that a mineral metabolism is disturbed in milk fever. He maintains that the disease is a disturb- ance of the vegetative nervous system and a "labile" condition of the parathy- roids, in which they are unable to respond to increased demands put upon them. The calcium of the blood serum in most cases is about 5 mg. per 100 cc. That calcium deficiency plays an important role in the onset of milk fever may be con- cluded from the rapid recovery of more than 20 cows by the intravenous injection of 300 to 400 cc of a 10 per cent. solution of crystallized calcium chlorid. In a few other cases there was a transient recovery, a relapse occurring in 24 hours or later. After mammary inflation there was an increase in the percentage of cal- cium, which also points to the significance of the calcium deficiency. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE. The Effect of Hypoglycemia in the Cow. To produce hypoglycemia, insulin was injected intravenously into two cows in three experiments. The cows used (141 and 143) were pure-bred Jerseys. Cow 143 was lactating, while cow 141 was dry. In all cases blood samples for sugar determination were taken from the jugular vein before the injection of insulin and then at intervals thereafter. The blood- sugar was determined by the Folin-Wu method. Temperatures of the animals were taken before and at intervals following the administration of insulin. The animals were constantly watched for any abnormal symptoms that might appear. In trial I (cow 143) 800 units of insulin were injected in four equal portions at 8-40 A.M., 11-10 A.M., 11-50 A.M. and 1-55 P.M. In trial II cow 143 was used again but was not given any feed for 48 hours before the experiment and while on trial 1,000 units of insulin were administered in five portions of 200 units each, at 9-45 A.M., 11-50 A.M., 4-00 P.M., and 9-00 P.M., and at 4-00 A.M., the following morning.
HYPOGLYCEMIA AND HYPOCALCEMIA IN COW 341 In trial III cow 141 was used after a 48-hour fast. Between 9-15 and 9-40 A.M., 800 units of insulin were injected. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Chart 1. The effect of insulin on the blood sugar of cows (expressed in per cent). Results.342 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV In trial III, 800 units of insulin were injected in twenty-five minutes. Marked muscular tremors developed in five minutes, followed by profuse watery nasal ex- cretions which dripped into the manger. This condition lasted for about fifteen minutes, after which the animal appeared normal. In no case was there any suggestion of paralysis or coma. THE EFFECT OF HYPOCALCEMIA IN COWS. The previous experiment demonstrated to our satisfaction that hypoglycemia could not be responsible for milk fever symptoms. Speculating on the theory that a hypocalcemia is a factor in the cause of milk fever, it was thought that it should be possible to produce artificial conditions simulating milk fever by displacing the calcium. It was therefore decided to produce hypocalcemia to determine definitely whether or not this condition alone would produce symptoms analogous to milk fever. It is well known that sodium citrate reacts with ionized calcium in the blood to form unionizable calcium citrate, and thus displaces the ionized calcium in the blood. Intravenous injection of sufficient sodium citrate should lower the ionized calcium of the blood and produce hypocalcemia, which should demonstrate whether or not a low blood-calcium alone can produce symptoms analogous to milk fever. The first part of this work was to try the effect of sodium citrate injected in- travenously into rabbits. The injection of 4.5 cc of a 1 per cent, solution of sodium citrate produced no noticeable effect in a rabbit weighing 1810 grams. Two cc of an 8 per cent. solution of sodium citrate injected slowly into the posterior auricular vein of a rabbit weighing 1500 grams produced tetany and prostration in about 30 seconds. The injection of 2 cc of an 8 per cent. solution of calcium chlorid restored the animal in one minute. The experiment was re- peated with two other rabbits with the same results. A 20 per cent. solution of sodium citrate was slowly injected into the posterior auricular vein of a rabbit. As the injection progressed, the rabbit went into violent tetany and then into complete anesthesia. A 20 per cent. solution of calcium chlorid was then injected, which brought about complete recovery in less than one minute. This experiment was repeated several times with the same results. After the preliminary experiments on rabbits, cows were used for the experi- ments. A 20 per cent, sodium citrate was used in all cases. In each case it was injected into the jugular vein. Seven experiments on five cows were conducted at
HYPOGLYCEMIA AND HYPOCALCEMIA IN COW 343 TABLE I. Typical observations of hypocalcemia produced by intravenous injection of sodium citrate. Time Injected Sodium Citrate (20 per cent. Solution) (cc) Injected Calcium Chlorid (20 per cent. Solution) (cc) Observation 1-43 p.m. 30 No clinical symptoms. 1-48 p.m. 30 Slightly dull eye; lost alertness. 1-59 p.m. 30 Ears drooped; shook hoad; slight paralysis over loin. 2-08 p.m. 60 Anesthesia of skin over the loin; barely able to walk. 2-17 p.m. 30 Paralysis extending forward; dyspnea. 2-22 p.m. 60 At 2.24 went down; completely paralyzed; marked dyspnea ; animal considered in ex- tremis. 2-25 p.m. 60 2-28 p.m. 0 0 Back on her feet ; apparently normal in all respects. the University Farm, Saint Paul: two experiments on one high-grade Holstein cow, four experiments on three pure-bred Jersey cows, and one experiment on a pure-bred Guernsey cow. Table I gives the details for one experiment on a grade Holstein cow, which is typical of dairy cows. The injection of 30 cc of a 20 per cent. sodium citrate solution had no visible effect. Subsequent injections caused a drooping of the ears followed by a stagger- ing gait as a result of inco-ordination of the hind legs. Further injections caused complete paralysis from the lumbar region posteriorly, while the animal still re- tained more or less control of the head and fore legs. The eyes, however, became glassy and starey. Further injections caused the animal to develop complete paralysis with marked dyspnea. An intravenous injection of a 20 per cent, solu- tion of calcium chlorid effected a rapid and complete recovery. Table II gives a summary of the experiments, performed at University Farm, with injection of sodium citrate, giving the amounts injected and the time over which the injections took place, together with the amounts of calcium chlorid solution injected and the time for recovery. Similar experiments were conducted by one of us (E. A. H.) at Iowa State College.
344 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV The first animal used in this series of experiments was a grade Holstein cow. This animal withstood the intravenous injection of 400 cc of 20 per cent, sodium citrate solution. Although this did produce decided muscular tremors, the animal remained on its feet. The sodium citrate solution was injected by means of a 40-cc syringe over a period of twenty minutes. No calcium chlorid was administered to this animal. TABLE II. Summary of experiments with intravenous injection of sodium citrate into cows of dairy lype. Cow Amount of Sodium Citrate to produce Paralysis (cc) Time from 1st Injection to Last (Minutes) Amount of Calcium Chlorid Injected (cc) Time for Recovery (Minutes) E 81 240 39 60 3 E 81 240 34 None Slow spontaneous recovery. 141 250 17 60 2½ 143 210 9 60 1½ 143 270 14 60 1½ 547 210 9 60 1½ 171 110 HYPOGLYCEMIA AND HYPOCALCEMIA IN COW 345 in 40 minutes. Smears of this blood showed crenated red blood cells and anisocy- tosis. Another cow, a grade Shorthorn was given 500 cc of sodium citrate solution over a period of 20 minutes, at which time the animal went down. She showed muscular tremors, although the expiratory dyspnea was absent. In one and one- half minutes after the animal went down, 120 cc of a 20 per cent. solution of calcium chlorid was injected intravenously and in three minutes the symptoms produced by the sodium citrate had entirely disappeared. The next animal, a grade Shorthorn cow, was injected with 360 cc of the sodium citrate solution intravenously and in three and one-half minutes the animal was down. She made attempts to rise but there was a lack of co-ordination. The pupils were greatly dilated, there was a marked expiratory dyspnea and the act of breathing was accomplished with considerable noise. Nine minutes after the animal went down, 60 cc of calcium chlorid solution was administered intraven- ously. The pupils immediately constricted down to normal, the dyspnea and noise of breathing ceased and all the symptoms produced by the injection of the sodium citrate disappeared at once. The next subject was considerably more of a dairy type than were the preced- ing animals. This cow received 420 cc of sodium citrate solution intravenously over a period of seven minutes, which caused the animal to go down. This cow did not show the muscular tremors of the previous cases, although a marked expi- ratory dyspnea was present. The condition in this case more closely simulated that found in milk fever cases. There was present the comatose condition so characteristic of milk fever. After the animal had been in this condition for twenty minutes, 100 cc of calcium chlorid solution was administered by intraven- ous injection. The respiratory symptoms disappeared at once, although the coma persisted. Sixty cc more of the calcium chlorid solution was given and in five minutes the animal got up on its feet, and at first was unsteady but, after taking a few steps, appeared apparently normal. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS. Hypoglycemia.346 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV Hypocalcemia.THE INFLUENCE OF DIET UPON THE COURSE OF COCCI - DIOSIS INFECTION IN CHICKENS, (Reprinted from Poultry and Poultry Husbandry, dated 14th August 1931.) [ Observations made at the Southern Table Poultry Experimental Station, at Wye College, which tend to show that in Coccidiosis in Chickens the diet of birds exerts a material influence upon the ailment. This is perhaps the first experi- ment which so " strongly indicates that the nature of the ration plays a vital part in determining whether chickens are going to withstand or succumb to Coccidiosis infection, an infection which the great majority of chickens are exposed to ".] When a diet definitely deficient in certain essentials is fed to animals, clearly defined symptoms of disease and pathological changes occur. Where disease is caused by living organisms which are parasitic upon the animal body it is probable that the nature of the diet may play contributory part in lessening or aggravating the condition, but the function of diet in this respect is as yet not clearly defined. Should the course of disease be influenced by diets which are not in the strict sense deficient but considered as coming within the sphere of normal, the question becomes one of practical moment. These notes are concerned with observations made at the Southern Table Poultry Experimental Station, Wye, which tend to show that in coccidiosis of chickens the diet of the birds exerts a material influence upon the disease. The contributory cause of outbreaks of coccidiosis is often obscure, though a variety of plausible explanations may be advanced to account for outbreaks of the disease. The soundness of these explanations is generally doubtful, and it has to be remembered that with this disease care must be exercised to avoid placing importance upon a factor which may be purely coincidental. Every year coccidiosis causes a heavy mortality among fowls, but despite this and the scientific interest of the problem comparatively few investigations of a fundamental nature have been made upon the disease, and authoritative knowledge is scanty regarding such aspects of the question as the plurality of species of coccidia, the pathogenicity of possible different species, the lesions these produce in the host bird, the resistance of the host to the invasive and destructive action ( 347 ) H
348 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV of the parasites under different environmental condition, and the question of acquired resistance or immunity on the part of the host. However, it may be accepted that more than one species of coccidium exist and that these probably vary in their pathogenicity; further, there are indications that birds are capable of building up a resistance to infection as the result of a previous attack of the disease, and that as far as is known there is no very definite increase in resistance due to age alone. Again it is known that if reinfection of the bird is prevented the disease runs a remarkably rapid course, and that from the time of the birds ingesting the sporulating oocyst to the disappearance of the infection is a matter of not more than 10 to 14 days. The longevity and great viability of the sporulated oocyst, the infective stage of the parasite, is well known, and practical measures for the prevention of the disease have been formulated with a view to keeping young chicks off ground or pasture upon which poultry have been running and which probably contaminated, and chicks are confined to the narrow limits of the brooder house and possibly a sun porch. But unless the chicks are kept on wire floors it is very questionable whether the exposure to infection in the brooder house is not as great as, or some- times even greater than, would be the exposure were the chicks allowed to range over an area of grass. This is because, if infection of the ground outside the brooder house or on the farm exists, it is virtually impossible, under farming conditions to prevent the infection reaching the chicks in the brooder, and once infection is acquired by the chicks, the small area in the brooder will rapidly become heavily contaminated. Nevertheless, apparently good results have followed the adaptation of the more confined system of rearing, and the losses attributed to coccidiosis have in many instances diminished. Is this improvement due to the adoption of the enclosed system or is it merely coincidental and is it possible that any change in the treatment of the chicks was made about the same time, that might have a bearing upon the course of the disease, e.g., a change of feeding, say, from a wet to a dry mash, etc.? These questions are worthy of consideration. The suspicion that diet might have some bearing upon coccidiosis infection arose from the experience of this year's chicken rearing at the Southern Table Poultry Experimental Station, Wye. For the past three years the brooder-house and sunporch system has been used for rearing chicks in their first eight weeks of life, and there has been no suspicion that during this period the chickens had been infected with coccidiosis. A number of deaths certainly occurred but these were not considered in excess of the usual wastage caused by unknown and unspecified causes and they excited no alarm.
INFLUENCE OF DIET UPON COCCIDIOSIS IN CHICKENS 349 Previous to the introduction of the confined brooder-house there had been definite loss from coccidiosis among the young chicks in the late summer and autumn hatchings. In 1931 a change was made in the feeding of certain of the chicks. These were given a ration which was calculated to supply growth and maintenance requirements but not fat, in other words a store ration. This was fed for the first time to a batch of 100 chicks. These chicks commenced to die at the end of the third week, and by the end of the sixth week the majority were dead and the survivors were unthrifty and worthless. One or two of the dead chicks were sent to the Ministry's laboratory at Weybridge and a diagnosis of coccidiosis was returned. Meantime other chicks kept under comparable conditions, but receiving the customary ration fed at the Institute continued to behave apparently normally, and though a number of these animals died, they were too few to excite suspicion, and the cause of these deaths was not ascertained. At first it was thought that the chicks fed upon the store ration and which died from coccidiosis must have been accidentally exposed to a heavy infection, and fresh houses were selected which had been free from all poultry for a period of twelve months, and into these houses batches of newly-hatched chickens were placed. These were again fed the two rations in order to test their relative merits as regards growth in the chicks, etc., but again the experiment was upset in as dramatic a manner as on the former occasion, chicks fed on the store ration rapidly dying while the others survived. The results of feeding this store ration were so striking, though along an entirely different line from that intended at the commencement of the experiment, that it was considered of sufficient interest to follow the course indicated and ascertain as far as possible if the ration alone did play such a vital part in the incidence of the disease. Accordingly, with the supervision of the Veterinary Department of the South-Eastern Agricultural College, a further experiment was planned under what appeared more controlled but still farming conditions. The plan of the experiment was as follows:350 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV were practically identical with what had previously been experienced. These are herewith tabulated:INFLUENCE OF DIET UPON COCCIDIOSIS IN CHICKENS 351 By the end of the seventh week 256 birds out of 272 birds fed upon the store ration had perished and the remainder were too unthrifty to make further rearing profitable. As against this, at the end of the eighth week only 39 birds fed upon the usual Institute ration had died from disease. The following week 11 were killed because of being unthrifty and 22 birds were drafted into the fattening pens. The deliberate infection of pens had little effect upon the course of the epizootic, and the experiment illustrates in no uncertain manner the impossibility of excluding coccidiosis from brooder houses under ordinary farming conditions, even though all ordinary precautions are taken. That deaths did not commence until the fourth week suggests that the initial infection of the chicks was not a heavy one, and it was only after recontamination of the houses by the chickens' droppings commenced that the infection became sufficiently severe to kill the chicks. Finally, the experiment strongly indicates that the nature of the ration plays a vital part in determining whether chickens are going to withstand or succumb to coccidiosis infection, an infection which the great majority of chickens are exposed to. It is hoped that the necessary aid may be available to continue this investiga- tion both under controlled laboratory conditions and in the field, where the import- ant factor or factors in the diet may be arrived at by adequately planned experi- ment, and further knowledge concerning the relationship between the parasite and the host obtained. [ Speaking of coccidiosis in the informative paper he read to the National Poultry Parliament at Scarborough, Mr. Y. Watanabe said :CLINICAL NOTES Two cases of Compound Cysts. Case No. 1. -Dentigerous cyst.-A Bullock O. P. No. 68 was admitted into hospital on 23rd May 1930 for an abscess in the intermaxillary space. On examina- tion it was felt to contain some hard substance. The abscess was opened and pus evacuated. Then it was found that the capsule of the cyst contained two teeth embedded in hard tissue. The whole capsule and tissue was removed and the wound was treated as an open wound. As the wound was in the healing stage, the owner expressed his inability to attend the hospital every day for treatment and so medicine was supplied to him with instructions. Case No. 2. -Dermoid cystCLINICAL NOTES 353 TreatmentABSTRACTS Transmission of Fowl-pox by Mosquitoes. The following results of a series of experiments carried out on " The Transmission of Fowl-pox by Mosquitoes " by Robert Matheson, E. L. Brunett and A. L. Brody of the N. Y. State Agricultural and Veterinary Colleges, Ithaca, N. Y., and published in the Poultry Science, Vol. X, No. 5 of July 1,1931, are of interest, viz.:ABSTRACTS 355 Zoologische Beitrage zum Surraproblem. XXV. Ueber den Einfluss verschie- dener Versuchstiere auf das Ergebnis von Surraubertragungsversuchen mit Stomoxys calcitrans. [ Influence of different experimental animals on the results of experiments in the transmission of surra by S. calcitrans.] Nieschulz, Otto. Centralbl Bakt. I Abt. Orig. 113 (1-2): 80-89. 1929. With over 3600 individuals of S. calcitrans 103 experiments were made by direct transmission in which horses, monkeys, rabbits, guinea pigs, rats and mice were employed as carriers of surra or as subjects for infection. It was shown that the result of transmission may be decidedly influenced by the kind of animal to be infected, while the particular species used as carrier plays only a subordinate part. Horses were much less easily infected than small experimental animals, whatever the species of surra carrier used. The average expectation of positive transmission of surra in these experiments was : in horses 1 : 150, in rabbits, guinea pigs and rats 1 : 23, and in mice 1 : 155.356 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ I, IV 8. The virus does not affect mammals. 9. The virus is found in the spleen, kidneys, ovaries, testes, liver, lungs, crop, saliva, intestines and brain, very rarely in the blood and the faeces, and not in the gelatinous infiltration at the thoracic inlet. 10. Fifty degrees Centigrade to 55°C. for 30 minutes kills the virus. 11. Direct sunlight kills the virus in one hour exposure. 12. A 1 : 10000 aqueous solution of potassium permanganate inactivates the virus in 40 minutes. 13. Sheep serum has a neutralizing effect on the virus of avian pest in vitro. 14. Immune serum (l½-cuhic centimeter serum to 125 minimum infective doses) has a neutraliz- ing effect on virus. 15. The minimum infective dose of the virus (minimum infective doses) was 1 cubic centimeter of a dilution of 1 to 1,250 of saliva. 16. The virus of avian pest as determined by cataphoresis is negatively charged. 17. The virus is not thrown down by centrifugation. 18. Virus can be kept viable in the ice-chest for at least 10 months and 20 days ; at room tem- perature virus in the liquid form remained active for 15 days. Virus in garden soil and in stagnant water placed in a room where diffuse sunlight entered through rough glass was inactivated in 4 days. Active virus can be obtained from a bird 168 hours after death 19. The cross-immunity tests performed independently by Doctors Doyle, Picard, and Cooper and those by us were unanimous in results. 20. The treatment of artificial infection by the use of drugs has so far been quite unsuc- cessful. The result of individual treatment with Fowler's solution naturally injected is encouraging if given early. 21. Treatment by the use of immune serum injected intravenously was partially successful. 22. The employment of immune serum as a field control measure was unsatissfactory. 23. The control of outbreaks by means of chemicals has been successful in well equipped poultry yards. 24. Attempts to produce a vaccine of prophylactic or therapeutic value have failed. The few good results could not be repeated. 25. Diagnosis by complement fixation was not successful. [ Reprinted from the Philippine Journal of Agriculture, 1, 4,1930.]
REVIEW Report of the Proceedings of the 4th World's Poultry Congress, at the Crystal Palace, London, England : July 22-30,1930, Pp. 1023.NOTES IMPERIAL AGRICULTURAL BUREAUX. The Imperial Agricultural Bureaux have, during the last few months, under- taken the periodical issues of abstracts (or extended titles) of current literature in the branches of science in which they are interested. Brief particulars are as follows:NOTES 359 field are omitted. Thus the list of titles is to some extent selected, but the widest possible range is covered with regard to the needs of the correspondent of the Bureau. It will be noted that all the publications have been priced. This is necessary as there is clearly a limit to which the Bureaux can undertake the free distribution of their literature. On the other hand, arrangements have been made to supply a considerable number of copies free varying with the different publications. The number of free copies of Animal Nutrition abstracts and reviews is strictly limited. This journal is a joint effort on the part of the Executive Council of the Imperial Agricultural Bureaux, the General Medical Research Council and the Reid Library at the Rowett Institute, Aberdeen. The scientific reason for this joint effort is apparent. On questions of nutrition it is impossible to draw a strict line between the Research undertaken primarily for human benefit and that undertaken primarily for the benefit of stock. Both those who are working on human problems and on stock problems are interested in each others progress in research. As three different bodies are financing this venture it was found necessary to limit the num- ber of free copies issued. Concurrently with the issue of these abstracting journals papers will be issued by all the Bureaux on particular technical problems or containing bibliographies on special research questions as hitherto. CARBON TETRACHLORID AS A PARASITICIDE, BY HENRY L. HIRSCHER. The following may be of interest to members of the profession who have work with small animals and who have had no previous experience with carbon tetra- chlorid as a parasiticide : Animals infested with fleas or other kinds of vermin may be practically rid of these infestations with one rubbing of a preparation having carbon tetrachlorid as a base. By saturating a piece of cotton or sponge with a little of this preparation and rubbing it over the coat briskly, I can safely state that every parasite will be destroyed, without the danger of spreading them all over the house. The hopping off of fleas, especially when any parasiticide is used, is entirely eliminated. The danger of poisoning, even in cats, is not apparent from my experience with the use of this method. I really did fear it at the beginning, but now I use this method indiscriminately in treating small animals. It may be used by any one, even to rid the smallest puppy or kitten of fleas or other vermin. The action is immediate. [Reprinted from the Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association, N. S. Vol. 32, 2.]
BOOKS. IMPERIAL BUREAU OF ANIMAL HEALTH : THE VETERINARY BULLETIN. Since the appearance of our last issue we have received the first 2 numbers of the Veterinary Bulletin, the official organ of the Imperial Bureau of Animal Health, a notice regarding which is printed below. The need for such a comprehensive abstracting journal as this, which deals with all matters affecting the health of domesticated animals in tropical as well as temperate climates, has been long felt, and the high standard reached in the first numbers justifies us in drawing special attention to this publication. Judging from the abstracts contained in the above two numbers the information given should be sufficiently full to enable busy men to keep in touch with current work without being compelled themselves to study the great mass of literature from which the abstracts are taken, and we feel that these numbers have only to be seen to ensure wide circulation for such a valuable source of authentic information. We feel also that the appearance of this bulletin marks a great step forward towards that co-ordinated development of Veterinary Research within the Empire, which is so necessary in order that the Veterinary Pro- fession may keep abreast of the constant advances of scientific knowledge, which occur almost daily, in regard to matters affecting the health of domesticated animals all over the world. It is impossible to mention in detail the many matters dealt with in a bulletin of this kind but an extensive review, running to 5 pages of print, of the uses of B. C. G. vaccine, may be mentioned to indicate the extent of some of the abstracts, while it may be stated that the generality of the abstracts, though not so full, sufficiently described the matter dealt with to enable useful conclusions to be formed. [A. O.] The Imperial Agricultural Research Conference, in 1927, recommended that the Tropical Veterinary Bulletin, hitherto published by the Bureau of Hygiene and Tropical Diseases, should be merged in a more comprehensive publication, which, it was proposed, should be published by the Imperial Bureau of Animal Health. Arrangements have accordingly been made with the Bureau of Hygiene and Tropical Diseases whereby the publication of the Tropical Veterinary Bulletin has been discontinued with its number of December, 1930, and in its place a new Journal, under the title of the Veterinary Bulletin, will be issued by this Bureau. The Veterinary Bulletin will deal with all aspects of Animal Health, in so far as they relate to original research and to administrative control, but it will not deal ( 360 )
BOOKS 361 with clinical material from the point of view of the practitioner. The ground covered by the Tropical Veterinary Bulletin will be included, and, in addition, the diseases of temperate climates will be given full consideration. The subjects dealt with will be classified under the following headings :ERRATA The Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry, Volume 1, Part III. Page 197, line 9, for ' PangonianINDEX TO AUTHORS PAGE. BAY, F., see VOGT-MOLLER, P. BEACH, J. R., and MICHAEL, S. T., " Pullorum Disease (Bacillary White Diarrhvi INDEX TO VOL. I PAGE. JOSEPH, L. S., " An Interesting Case of Cystic calculi" . . . . 164 INDEX TO VOL. I vii PAGE. NIESCHULZ, OTTO, " Experiments on Transmission of Surra with T. rubidus after considerable intervals of Time " (Abstract) . . 355 INDEX TO SUBJECTS PAGE. Abortion, infectious, chemotherapy with trypanblue . . . . . 250 Anatomy of Gorizoneura longirostris, Hardwicke..... 26 Animal bacteriology, report of work in the Michigan State . . . . 248 Animal nutrition, see " Feeding and Feeding Stuffs." Animal pathology, report of work in the Michigan State . . . . 249 Anthelmintic medication, principles and procedure..... 36 Anthrax, immunization of draft animals in Burma .... 150 Anti-rabies immunization ....... 323 Avian pest, a new disease in the Philippine Islands..... 355 Babesia bigeminum, reactions of........ 10 Bacillary white diarrhINDEX TO VOL. I ix PAGE. Calving season of Montgomery cow, effect on milk yield and calving period . 212 Carbon tetrachloride, as a parasiticide...... 359 Carcinamatous growth and echinococcosis in a cow .... 237 Cattle-breeding, inheritance of butter-fat percentage in crossing of Jersey with Red Danes.......... 167 Cattle dairy, statistical studies of milk records of . . . . . 63 Cattle disease and pestsx INDEX TO VOL. I PAGE. Tick infestation in the coastal tract of the North Canara District .. 301 Trypanosomes, adaptation to man...... 170 Tuberculosis in the U. S. A........ 173 Undulant fever, a review of........ 29 Warble flies, control in North Wales...... 173 Worm diseases, drugs in the treatment of .... 35 "Bull burn".......... 239 Compound cysts.......... 352 Cystic calculi in a Sahiwal stud bull ...... 164 Echinococcosis and carcinomatous growth in a cow . . . . 237 Foreign body in the oesophagus....... 239 Nerium oleander poisoning in a bullock ...... 352 Parasitic cyst.......... 352 Simple monstrosity in the Pusa dairy herd..... 165 Sinusitis........... 238 Dairy cattle, mineral requirements of...... 244 INDEX TO VOL. I xi PAGE. Directions for the serum-simultaneous anti-rinderpest inoculation of cattle 1 Disease and Pests, see under names of animals. Draft animals, immunization against anthrax . . . . . 150 Drugs, administration in drinking water for control of stomach worms in sheep . . . . . . . . . . 241 Drugs, in the treatment of worm diseases of cattle . . . . . 35 Echinococcosis and carcinomatous growth in cow, a clinical note on 237 Eimeria (coccidium), causing coccidiosis in poultry, . . . . . 46 Entomology, veterinary, for India . . . . . . . . 192 Equine microfilariasis, review of the literature on . . . . . 143 Equine surra, prophylaxis by means of " Bayer 205 " (Naganol) . . . 283 Faeces, viability of B. tuberculosis (Bovinus) in . . . . . 246 Feeding and feeding-stuffsXii INDEX TO VOL. I PAGE Holstein calves, how long they should receive milk . . . . . 250 Horse diseases, surra, prophylaxis by means of Bayer 205 . . . 283 INDEX TO VOL. I xiii PAGE. Nasal granuloma, bovine . . . . . . . 332 Nematodes infesting lands, control measures against . . . 53 Nerium oleander poisoning in a bullock, a case of . . . 352 Nicotin and its compounds in the control of poultry parasites . . . 230 Nigeria, rinderpest in goats in . . . . . . 173 North Kanara District, tick infestation in the coastal tract of . . . 301 Nutritive value of pastures, influence of frequency of cutting on . . . 242 Oesophagus, foreign body in the, a clinical note on . . . 239 Parasites, carbon tetrachloride as a parasiticide . . . 359 xiv INDEX TO VOL. I PAGE. Publications of the Imperial Bureau of Animal Genetics . . . . 60 INDEX TO VOL. I xv PAGE. Surra, transmission experiments with S. calcitrans, influence of different experimental animals . . . 355 xvi INDEX TO VOL. I PAGE. Veterinary medicine