REPORT OF THE Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar For the year ending 31st March 1925 [NLS note: poor quality text appears here and has been omitted REPORT OF THE Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar For the year ending 31st March 1925 [NLS note: poor quality text appears here and has been omitted Government of India Publications are obtainable from the Government of India Central Publication Branch, 8, Hastings Street, Calcutta, and from the following Agents:- EUROPE. OFFICE OF THE HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR INDIA, 42, GROSVENOR GARDENS, LONDON, S.W. 1. And at all Booksellers. INDIA AND CEYLON. Provincial Book Depôts: MADRAS :REPORT OF THE Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar For the year ending 31st March 1925. (J. T. EDWARDS, B.Sc., M.R.C.V.S.) PART I. GENERAL SUMMARY.* The orders of the Government of India were published on the 15th January 1925 notifying the change in designation of the Institute from "Imperial Bacteriological Laboratory" to the title stated above. It was felt that a change in designation was necessary to denote clearly the functions of the institution, which, on its establishment in 1890, were stated to be "to investigate diseases of domesticated animals in all provinces in India and to ascertain, as far as possible, by biological research both in the laboratory and, when necessary, at the place of outbreak, the means of preventing and curing such diseases." The most apparent function of the institution has come to be, in the course of its development, the preparation on a very large scale of certain products for the prevention of the formidable cattle plagues of India, and hence from an administrative standpoint the Institute has assumed the nature of a considerable manufactory, with a large yearly expendi- ture and an income derived from the sale of its products, for the most part to Provincial Governments and Indian States, which it is hoped will balance more or less its cost to the Central Government. With effect from the commencement of the financial year 1922-23, the prices of the products sold were adjusted so that the income would balance expenditure, with an undiminished demand for the laboratory products. The Inchcape Committee in 1922-23, having in mind the possibility of adjusting the balance, reported that an endeavour should be made to place the institution on a self-supporting basis. This * This short general summary of the activities of the Institute has been written at special request, to convey a ready impression of their scope to the lay reader.
2 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH,. consummation, however, was not immediately forthcoming, for there followed the readjustment in sale prices a period of very considerable natural diminution in the spread and intensity throughout India of the most important cattle plague, namely rinderpest, against which the laboratory to the largest extent manufactures a preventive serum. This salutary depression in cattle disease for stockowners in India connoted diminished demands for the main saleable product of the laboratory, and hence the reduction in its income subsequent to the readjustment of prices. Towards the close of the financial year 1924-25 there occurred a change from this state of relative quies- cence ; symptoms of recrudescence in the intensity of rinderpest occurred in the form of large and pressing demands for preventive serum from the Bombay Presidency, and not long afterwards there arrived large indents for preventive serum from nearly all the other Provinces. At the close of the year the demands had assumed such magnitude that the income of the laboratory swelled up to a figure which was not far from that of its total expenditure for the year. Thus, for the financial year 1924-25 the income of the laboratory was Rs. 6,66,927-0-5 (made up as follows :MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1925 3 It is anticipated that there will always be three yearly periods of de- pression alternated with similar periods of recrudescence of rinderpest in India so long as measures of effective sanitary police control are not practicable in the country. The reason for this alternation is not difficult to comprehend : after a severe widespread visitation the survivors are left in a state of immunity and susceptible " soil " for the intensive pro- pagation of the disease germ is not again provided until some time has lapsed, during which a considerable number of new, non-immune stock have been born and have grown. The following figures represent (i) the income, (ii) expenditure- (iii) issues (in " doses") of the main saleable product, anti-rinderpest serum, for the past 12 years :4 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, as stated at the commencement of this report, the costs of manufacturing the rinderpest preventive there are disproportionately high as compared with the estimated costs generally on the plains, for Muktesar is located in an isolated situation, in the Himalayan foothills, at an altitude of 7,500 feet above sea-level, and 24 miles by bridle path from the nearest railhead (Kathgodam, R. & K. Railway). The isolation of the station makes transport arrangements to it difficult and expensive, and the costs of foodstuffs for animals and other necessities unduly high. The area of land acquired at Izatnagar about 13 years ago has thus been rapidly developed for the maintenance of serum producing animals during the last three years, and with the precise knowledge obtained as the result of intensive economic research executed in the meantime at Muktesar it has been found possible to undertake continuous manufacture, throughout the year, at the plains sub-station. Now, the procedure at the sub- station is to place the buffaloes on anti-rinderpest serum production for an appropriate period of time ; then they are immediately prepared for the production of serum against Hæmorrhagic septicæmia (the second most formidable cattle disease of IndiaMUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1925 5 resources in material for this purpose are unique, probably for the whole world, but little further progress can be made unless the permanent trained staff of the laboratory is strengthened and suitable accommodation pro- vided for the visitors who come here to be taught. One Officer (a professor of the Madras Veterinary College) entered the laboratory to commence the two years' course of training for Provincial officers selected for promotion to Imperial grade. One officer of the Royal Army Veterinary Corps undertook a syste- matic two months' course of training. One officer of the Indian Veterinary Service underwent one month's training. Fourteen selected Provincial officers and subordinates from the Provin- cial veterinary services undertook special systematic courses of training, ranging in duration from two to six months. It was thought that the training for short periods, particularly in the practical methods of modern disease investigation, of selected subordinates from the Provinces would conduce most effectively towards the rapid dissemination of important information concerning the control of animal disease throughout India. Experience shows that this form of instruction is the most profitable kind to take up in the interests of the country and the laboratory, and when the requisite staff is sanctioned by Government it is hoped to resume this work intensively. RESEARCH. (a) Rinderpest. Intensive research was again prose- cuted upon this most serious morbid entity of cattle in India and striking advances were made in regard to our knowledge upon the etiology of the disease and the phenomena attendant upon immunity production. The factors which govern the survival of the virus in blood withdrawn from infected animals were investigated, and with the information forthcoming it has been found possible to devise means of transporting the virus readily throughout India in a state fit for use in the active immunization of cattle in the field against the disease, by the so-called serum-simultaneous method. In the production of a potent anti-serum for use in combating the disease it was discovered that "hyperimmunization " of the serum producers, which has hither to been regarded as indispensable, was quite unnecessary, and that immune animals (buffaloes) could furnish a satisfactory serum for a period extending over three months by merely adjusting the dosage of serum administered to them in the initial treat- ment, with virus and serum simultaneously, so that they exhibited a de- cided febrile reaction. In the process of active immunization in the field, however, the dosage of serum necessary to produce the optimum effect upon inoculated animals was found to be one administered in such ex- cess that the subsequent reaction was " symptomless " or " blocked out," so that the animals were not constitutionally depressed to a degree likely to evoke resuscitation of dormant internal parasites, notably coccidia. Systematic tests carried out for over two years indicated that a powerful and durable immunity could be readily set up in very young calves by the application of the serum-simultaneous treatment. Researches covering
6 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, a similar period of time also showed that animals could be safely submitted to this procedure of immunization during hot weather conditions on the plains. As in previous years the manufacture of anti-rinderpest serum con- stituted the chief function of the laboratory ; 28,48,110 doses were issued during the year, as against an average of 22,84,850 doses during the pre- ceding three years. The increase in issues is attributable to a general recrudescence in the number and severity of outbreaks of the disease throughout India, which are treated by the Provincial veterinary authori- ties by the application of the " serum alone " method. The great bulk of serum production is now undertaken, as has been stated before, at the plains branch laboratory, at Izatnagar, near Bareilly, for reasons of economy, and the manufactured supplies are returned to Muktesar for testing and cool storage prior to issue. (b) Hæmorrhagic septicæmia of cattle. Much progress was made in our knowledge of methods for dealing effectively with this second most important disease condition of cattle in India. In affected districts, notably in the Punjab, liable to seasonal visitations cattle are treated preventively on a large scale by vaccination, based upon similar methods of intervention to those adopted for combating human plague. The local authorities report very favourably upon the efficacy of the system. In other districts cattle are inoculated only in the actual scene of out- breaks, with an anti-serum supplied from the laboratory, and the serum treatment would appear to render conspicuous service in cutting short immediately the outbreaks. The research work done at the laboratory has now culminated in the development of a very cheap and rapid method of anti-serum production,by the simultaneous inoculation of the producers (buffaloes) with a large initial dose of culture of living antigen of low virulence and a suitable counteracting dose of serum ; curiously, rigorous tests have proved that the use of antigen of low virulence leads to the production of an anti-serum of as high potency as that obtained after the use of. highly virulent antigen. A most powerful immunity is set up in susceptible animals by the simultaneous treatment with anti-serum and a small dose of living culture of degraded virulence. (c) Contagious bovine abortion. The application of the agglutination test to the milch cattle belonging to some of the Government Military Dairies showed that about 50 per cent. are infected with the common form of this disease, and about 20 per cent. abort, usually repeatedly. Tests upon cattle belonging to the " grantee " farms of the Punjab, however, showed that under " natural " conditions of stock raising in India about 10 per cent. are infected, while none would seem to become clinically affected with abortion. Efforts to vaccinate cattle at the Mili- tary Dairies, by the inoculation of massive doses of living culture, whether of low or high virulence, have hitherto been somewhat discouraging. Steps are being taken to investigate more thoroughly the factors governing the production of immunity against this harassing conditions.
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1925 7 (d) Bovine tuberculosis in India. The services of a trained worker (Dr. M. B. Soparkar) from the Indian Research Fund Association were secured in 1923 to conduct experiments upon a large scale upon this problem. The experimental evidence hitherto available would seem to indicate that the Indian breeds of cattle do not possess a degree of resistance which is notably superior to that possessed by cattle bred in India containing a large admixture of European blood, and that the strains of tubercle bacilli isolated from natural cases of the disease in India display as high a degree of virulence as those grown from the lesions of cattle in Europe. The relatively great rarity of the disease among cattle in India would appear to be dependent upon the ordinary manner in which they are bred and raised. (e) Coccidiosis in cattle. This infection was found to be prevalent to a degree hitherto quite unsuspected, and that resuscitation of the causal parasites in " carriers" from a state of dormancy was a common disastrous complication in rinderpest. (f) Piroplasmoses. The common piroplasms of cattle in India would appear to be Piroplasma bigeminum and Theileria mutans. Usually, the latter may be regarded as a harmless and almost ubiquitous para- site, but occasionally it becomes exalted in virulence and produces tissue and other changes rather similar to those seen in East Coast fever of cattle in Africa. (g) Surra. Buffaloes suffering from the effects of invasion with ex- alted strains of Trypanosoma evansi were readily amenable to treatment by intravenous injections of tartar emetic and certain bismuth salts, but even powerful trypanocidal agents such as tryparsamide were rot capable of producing a complete sterilization of the system. This in- adequacy of chemotherapeutic treatment would explain the difficulty in obtaining cures in the more susceptible animals, horses, mules, and to- some extent camels. (h) Contagious equine abortion. Attempts were made to limit the spread of infection due to Bacillus abortivo-equinus in a number of import- ant breeding studs in India by the segregation of carriers detected by the- application of the agglutination test. (i) Blackquarter of cattle. Steps were taken to estimate the efficacy of " germ-free " products in preventive inoculation against this disease. (j) Strangles. Large scale researches upon the preventive treatment of this disease were carried out at Army Remount Depôts. (k) A number of other minor researches were made particularly in connection with the identification of micro-organisms responsible for certain disease conditions in India.
8 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, PART II. SPECIAL I. Staff of Imperial and Gazetted Officers. Director. Mr. J. T. Edwards. First Veterinary Research Officer. Held by Mr. S. C. J. Bennett until he resigned his appointment, at the termination of his three years' probationary period, on the 27th February 1925 ; subsequently, Mr. J. R. Haddow (formerly, Veterinary Officer) has fulfilled the duties of the post. Second Veterinary Research Officer (officiating). Mr. M. B. Menon. Third Veterinary Research Officer. Held by Mr. Haddow, who then as senior sub- stantive research officer filled the post vacated by Mr. Bennett. Vacant from 25th Feb- ruary. Pathologist. Mr. H. Cooper. Officer deputed by Research Fund Association for Tuberculosis, Enquiry. Dr. M. B. Soparkar. First Laboratory Assistant (Upper Grade). Mr. D. Keiller. Second Laboratory Assistant (Upper Grade). Mr. G. P. Goffi. Third Laboratory Assistant (Upper Grade). Mr. W. Mobbs, Engineer. Mr. W. Pryde Watson. Farm Manager. Captain A. J. Hearsey. Granted leave on average pay for two months with effect from 13th January 1925 ; Mr. Narain Singh Thapa, Farm Overseer, officiated during his absence. Veterinary Deputy Superintendent Mr. J. D'Costa. Granted leave from 1st Decem- ber 1924 to 6th April 1925 ; Mr. Abdul Ghani, Senior Veterinary Inspector, officiated during his absence. Tours undertaken by Staff. From 28th October 1924 to 16th November 1924, the Director undertook a tour which embraced visits, (i) to the American Presbyterian Mission Agricultural Farm, Allahabad, to arrange for the immunization of the whole of the herd, including some valuable imported American pedigree bulls, against rinder- pest ; (ii) to Ahmednagar, to advise the Veterinary Officer in charge of the Remount Depôt ; (iii) to Poona, to consult Deputy Assistant Director, Veterinary Services, Poona District, in regard to the outcome of the new, postal, method of transporting virulent blood for active immunization against rinderpest, first tried as a field procedure on the herd of Government Military Dairy, Kirkee, and also in regard to the progress of eradi- cation measures against Johne's disease, based upon the application of the avian tuber- culin test ; the Principal of the Poona Agricultural College was consulted, particularly to devise a scheme of demonstrations for an officer under training selected for promotion to Imperial grade with the material available at the College ; (iv) to Bombay, to consult the Director, Bombay Bacteriological Laboratory, Parel, in regard to possible concerted technical action, notably upon the group of diseases known as the " pasteurelloses," and arrange for practical demonstrations for the above officer under training ; and (v) to Lucknow, to consult Royal Army Veterinary Corps officers in charge of the Govern- ment Military Dairy, in regard to measures for the control of bovine contagious abor- tion. On the 10th January 1925, he proceeded to the 12th Meeting of the Indian Science Congress at Benares, to present a number of papers (24) dealing with veterinary subjects before the Agricultural Section, and expose the veterinary standpoint at the special joint meeting of the Medical and Agricultural Sections, in which it was resolved that technical veterinary papers should be presented in future before the Medical Section of the Congress. At the Meeting he was assisted by Mr. S. K. Sen, B.A., B.Sc., Assist- ant to the Imperial Entomologist, who had collaborated with him in preparing the papers for presentation. From Benares, he proceeded to Pusa, to consult the Agricultural Adviser to the Government of India with regard to a number of administrative projects, and thence to Delhi, to discuss further with the Secretary to Government of India, De- partment of Education, Health, and Lands, problems of veterinary interest. The Pathologist (Mr. Hugh Cooper) was directed to undertake a prolonged cold weather tour in Assam, from 15th October 1924 to 28th March 1925, to investigate the prevalence
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1925 9 and characteristics of certain disease conditions which he had had under close study for some time at Muktesar. Primarily he was instructed to ascertain the frequency and significance of bovine coccidiosis, notably as a possible serious complicating sequela to rinderpest, and data in this connection were ascertained also from some important herds which he submitted to the serum-simultaneous inoculation against rinderpest in the Shillong district. He also made some valuable observations on bovine piroplas- mosis, and collected material for study from a number of disease conditions. Mr. J. R. Haddow was entrusted with the execution of the programme of manufac- turing work and administration at the plains branch laboratory at Izatnagar, from the end of October 1924. He remained in charge till the end of the financial year, when arrangements were made for the continuous execution, throughout the year, of large scale manufacturing work there, under his supervision, and for the agricultural develop- ment of the estate. In March, he proceeded to the Imperial Cattle Breeding Farm, Karnal, to commence the application of a special policy of active immunization against rinderpest on the farm. Mr. M. B. Menon, Officiating Second Veterinary Research Officer, was deputed on tour from the 15th January 1925 and was still away from headquarters at the end of the financial year. He first executed the programme of immunization against rinderpest upon the whole of the cattle at the Allahabad Institute mentioned above, with complete success, and was thus instrumental in restoring confidence after the set-back suffered by the method as the result of the accidents that occurred there to some imported Ameri- can bulls in the cold weather 1922-23. He next undertook the immunization by the same method of the cattle at the Agricultural Research Institute, Pusa, and the Impe- rial Institute of Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Bangalore and Wellington. At the last named institution he was instructed to remain to carry out careful systematic tests upon the cattle to ascertain the spread of Johne's disease among them. The Engineer (Mr. W. Pryde Watson) proceeded to Lucknow on the 17th December 1924 to furnish details to the Electrical Inspector to the United Provinces Government in preparing a fair project for a standby power set and renewal of the storage battery at Muktesar. He inspected with him the steam plant available for sale at Government House, Lucknow, proposed as the standby set. During his return journey he inspect- ed the laboratory appliances at the branch institute at Izatnagar, and drew up schemes for a water supply to the laboratory. He returned on the 23rd December. II. Administration. (a) Fodder and grain. The supply of hay sufficient to meet anticipated needs deli- vered by a contractor to Muktesar was 23,916 maunds from outside areas (at Rs. 1-1-9 per maund) and 4,000 maunds (at Rs. 0-11-6 per maund) from the Reserved Forest of the Institute. 741 maunds of bedding was collected at Rs. 0-6-0 per maund through local labour. 12,202 maunds of grain were delivered by a contractor from Haldwani ; this amount was in excess of the 7,040 maunds agreed upon in the terms of the contract, the increase being due to the numbers of cattle subsequently retained at Muktesar for researches into economic serum manufacture. There was no difficulty in obtaining the desired supplies. Plans and estimates were drawn up by the Public Works Department for more ample godown accommodation at Muktesar. The Izatnagar requirements were supplied by a contractor who provided green dhoob grass at 13 As. per maund, and dry dhoob at Rs. 1-6-0 per maund ; he also arranged to supply the grain and miscellaneous requirements daily for consumption at the current price rates of the Bareilly tehsil, with an addition of 4 As. per maund for carriage. In this manner 3,860 maunds of grain and 10,258 maunds of fodder were supplied. In addition, 1,129 maunds of gram and barley were received for consumption from the lease holder of the cultivated land in the estate in lieu of rent, on the batai system. The policy of leasing the land was terminated after the close of the year, and arrangements made for the cultivation of as much as possible of the 700 acres appertaining to the estate by the laboratory staff ; it is hoped in this manner to make the branch institute self- supporting in the matter of feeding stuffs. (b) Animal supplies. The number of animals purchased for routine manufacturing and experimental work at Muktesar were 2,252 hill bulls, 77 hill buffaloes and 141 plains buffaloes. In addition, 300 calves, with 56 cows, were purchased from various parts of India for use at Muktesar in connection with the special tuberculosis enquiry, and of these, 291 calves and 56 cows arrived alive. 129 hill bulls (as compared with 1,140 in the preceding year) were despatched for use at Izatnagar ; after the close of the year the policy of transferring bulls was abandoned altogether, and arrangements made for des-
10 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, patch of the necessary rinderpest virus as required from Muktesar. A mortality amount- ing to 689 hill bulls occurred in the out-kraals before the animals were used, partly attri- butable to foot and mouth disease but mainly to a form of debility mentioned in the pre- ceding Report. The bulls were purchased as required according to their estimated suit- ability for virus production and serum testing, as indicated in last year's Report. No difficulty was experienced in obtaining adequate supplies. 506 large plains buffaloes were purchased for use at the Izatnagar laboratory from local fairs by members of the staff (at an average price of Rs. 36-3 per head). The animals were used for anti-rinderpest serum manufacture, and a certain number after discon- tinuance used for the production of hæmorrhagic septicæmia serum. Some were used in experimental work in testing the latter serum, and a small number in experimental anthrax serum production. After the close of the year 158 buffaloes that had been used for serum manufacture were placed on the strength of the farm section employed for the cultivation of the estate, and 193 remained in use. Only 14 animals were thus disposed of by sale. The mortality among the buffaloes in the course of anti-rinderpest serum manufacture alone was 74. (c) Forest supplies. 31,911½ maunds of fuel wood, 1,925½ maunds of charcoal, 4,012 maunds of green grass, 13,855 maunds of oak leaves (for fodder), and 4,000 maunds of hay were obtained from the Muktesar Reserved Forest. The installation of the steam boilers, for use in connection with the new autoclaves, has caused an increased con- sumption of firewood. The operations in the Reserved Forest were carried out as before according to the prescribed working plan drawn up by the Indian Forest Service, with success. There were no incendiaries in the forest area. The fuel requirements of the Izatnagar laboratory were 582 maunds of firewood, supplied by the grain contractor. (d) Labour. At Muktesar, the average daily number of coolies employed, in general farm duties, comprising out-kraal attendance, maintenance and development of estate, was 320 ; 433 were recruited and 305 absconded or were discharged. In special farm duties, in connection with the dairy and the attached project of development of cultiva- tion at Latoli there was also employed a daily average of 121 men ; 174 were recruited and 90 absconded or discharged. There was employed in the inner sheds, an average daily strength of 252 gwallas (cattle attendants) in connection with serum making and experimental work ; 170 were recruited and 60 were discharged or absconded. There was no difficulty in obtaining labour (mostly Dotiyals), and there were no outbreaks of disease among them. With the falling in price of food stuffs and in the local rates for labour the scales of pay were revised and graded systematically during the year, with resulting considerable economy to the laboratory. During the period of serum manufacture at Izatnagar, from 27th October 1924 to the end of the period under report, the average daily labour strength was 141. 89 of these were men transferred from Muktesar ; the rest were recruited locally at much cheaper rates, but the local labour does not appear to be quite so proficient for the work as the Dotiyal labour from Muktesar. Only 18 resigned or were discharged. (e) Transport. The arrangements, with the same contractor, of the preceding year were made, at much the same rates, and there were no real difficulties in despatching serum issues promptly, and in forwarding supplies from railhead and consignments of serum for storage from Izatnagar. (f) Laboratory appliances and technical equipment. A sum of Rs. 25,000 had to be diverted by reappropriation from savings under other budget headings to meet the cost of necessary materials required in executing the developed functions of the laboratory, in addition to Rs. 30,000 which Government had sanctioned for some years past, since the time when mere routine manufacturing work was undertaken and prices of technical equipment had not materially appreciated. However, the great bulk of expenditure under this heading is still incurred in connection with the manufacture of saleable pro- ducts. There was no considerable item of purchase for research or experimental work ; in fact, for this class of work advances were made almost entirely with the use of such cheap commodities as glass tubing, medicine bottles, and test tubes, and so it cannot be alleged that schemes of research made extravagant demands for equipment upon our budget resources. It has been stated in preceding Reports that endeavours were being made to obtain glass containers for the issue of sera from manufacturers in India, but that difficulty was experienced in obtaining suitable standard bottles. Following upon War conditions, the laboratory had to resort to the use of empty beer and other bottles procured locally for the issue of its products. Early in the year, negotiations were made with a firm of British bottle manufacturers for the supply of receptacles for the issue of sera, and orders were then placed for specially made bottles of uniform size, shape and
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1925 11 quality, bearing the mark of the laboratory, to contain these products. These bottles were amber coloured, " Apollinaris-pint" bottles, fitted with " Crown " caps, and were brought into regular use for the issue of all sera, instead of the improvised containers hitherto employed, by the close of the year. The Auditors, Local Fund Accounts, in their scrutiny of the accounts of the laboratory, had raised objections to the system in force for the recovery of the cost of packing material. According to this system pur- chasers of laboratory products were not debited with the cost of packing in their bills for sera, but were to return empties to the laboratory or credit the laboratory with the price of sold empties at the local treasuries. This system led to much confusion in accounts and loss to the laboratory through the non-return in intact condition of a very large per- centage of containers. In order to obviate audit objections the Government of India was approached with a view to having all customers debited with the costs of packing material on issue to them of sera. Local Governments agreed upon consultation to the institution of this charge, and the detailed orders of the Government of India, which were published after the close of the financial year, sanctioned the debiting of purchasers with the packing costs, to be refunded to them on return of the receptacles intact. Cal- culations show that the cost of the new standard glassware (with caps) bears a ratio to the cost of the contained product of 3 per cent. and of the locally made wooden cases of 1.2 per cent. in the case of anti-rinderpest serum, and 3.7 and 1.5 per cent. respectively, in the case of hæmorrhagic septicæmia serum. These ratios are undoubtedly most favour- able when compared with those estimated for prophylactic or therapeutic remedies sold by commercial firms. It has now been further decided to utilize the standard bottles without any indelible laboratory mark upon them so that they can be sold by purchasers of serum at a good rate locally if they find it more economical to do so than return them to the laboratory. It will be understood thus that with the systems now to be adopted the expenditure dwelt upon in this section is to a large extent recoverable. (g) Farm Cultivation and Dairy. The policy of developing cultivation at Muktesar was carried out according to the instructions of the Imperial Agriculturist in 1922. At the main seat of extension, at Latoli village, 44½ acres of jungle land were cleared, so that an estate comprising 142½ acres of good cultivated land had been formed at this spot at the close of the year, with the object mainly of producing green fodder for the dairy cattle and other animals of the station. The amounts of food stuffs procured from this estate and the small area of five acres around the Dairy during the year were 6,256 maunds of coarse fodder and 158 maunds of grain. A system of rotation, for clover, maize, and oats, was drawn up for the area in consultation with the Imperial Agricul- turist. Elsewhere in the Station 35 acres were brought under cultivation, excluding 20 acres placed under permanent pasture. This area provided 6,622 maunds of coarse fodder and 204 maunds of barley, together with 437 maunds of vegetables for small animals and the residents from Ritani Garden. The Dairy was maintained on the same basis as mentioned in the preceding Report One portion of the herd was maintained on a self-supporting basis for the supply of milk to the residents ; another portion, known as the Experimental Herd, was maintained primarily to supply suitable animals for research purposes, notably on rinderpest and contagious abortion. The quantity of milk sold to the residents was 30,613½ lbs., at 2 annas per lb., and 124½ lbs. were consumed by experimental animals. It is stated elsewhere in this Report that the land at Izatnagar was let on lease, on the batai system, during the year, and 564 maunds of barley and a similar quantity of gram were obtained by these means. It was realized that this method of utilizing the 700 (about) acres of land at the branch laboratory was a very unprofitable one, particularly in view of the demands for fodder from the large number of buffaloes to be maintained there throughout the year after the adoption of the new policy of serum manufacture. Steps were therefore taken for the land to be taken over for direct cultivation by the laboratory staff after the close of the year, and it is hoped that the estate will be capable of contributing in large measure to the needs in food stuffs of the animals maintainea there for serum production. (h) Laboratory Engineering Department. The staff employed under Mr. Watson was hard pressed to meet the demands in electric power at Muktesar. The number of units generated was 30,152, an increase of 54.2 per cent over the number of the preced- ing year. The overall cost of production was 13.76 annas per unit, which is 5.11 anna less than the cost per unit in 1923-24. The engine was worked for 2,750 hours, which
12 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, is 855 hours longer than in the preceding year, and the engineering staff was thus en- gaged for abnormally long daily working hours. The efficient working life of the storage battery is now spent, but, nevertheless, the number of charging units held by it amounted to 14,050,MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1925 13 (i) Building construction. A lump sum amounting to Rs. 58,000 was placed at the disposal of the Agricultural Adviser to the Government of India for the construction of so-called " Minor Works," and a sum of Rs. 32,000 was placed in the budget of the Local Government for repair works. Owing to administrative delays consequent upon efforts made to take the building work out of the hands of the Public Works Department of the Local Government, for execution departmentally by the laboratory, the building pro- gramme laid down for the expenditure of the available money was not commenced till August, 1924, when as the result of representations to the effect that no organization was available for the execution of the work departmentally, building construction re- mained in the same hands as hitherto. These delays resulted in the lapse of a sum of money allotted for minor works amounting to Rs. 18,869 at the end of the year. Among the items of construction which could not be executed owing to delay in the allocation of funds were important repairs to damages caused by the heavy late monsoon. In addition to the Minor Works, a special sum of Rs. 10,000 was allotted by the Govern- ment of India for the construction of a small animals' breeding house; a building actually costing Rs. 7,400 (after deduction of expenses due to departmental charges) was put up by the end of the year. The period under report marked, however, the last year in which building construction remained on the hands of the Public Works Department, United Provinces, for orders have been passed now by the Government of India for the transference of control to the Chief Engineer, Delhi. (j) Medical and sanitary arrangements. The dispensary at Muktesar remained through- out the year in the charge of Dr. O. H. Gade, I.M.D. The total number of patients treated at the dispensary was : outdoor, 3,488 ; indoor, 170 (new cases). The services of a trained sanitary inspector (a dresser from the laboratory trained for 4 months at King George's Medical College, Lucknow) were secured after the end of the year. Among other sanitary makeshifts instituted was the adoption of a trench system of latrines for the out-kraals. There were no cases of epidemic disease of serious nature in the station. The sanction of Government has been asked for the services of a trained dhai for the residents. (k) Library. A sum of Rs. 4,000 had been provided in the laboratory budget for expenditure upon this most essential part of the institution, but it was found imperative to divert an additional sum of Rs. 4,000 by reappropriation from savings under other budget headings, to meet the cost of necessary current literature and for the pruchase of missing numbers of journals extending over many years past. The question of ap- pointing a trained librarian which has been submitted to Government is still under con- sideration. (l) Finance. The general financial results of the working of the laboratory are dis- played in Appendix V, and have been commented upon at the commencement of this Report. The audit report, drawn up by the Auditors, Local Fund Accounts, upon the accounts and registers for the year 1922-23, representing the first of its kind since the inception of the Institute, was received early in the year and steps were taken to give effect as far as was practicable to every recommendation made in the report; a number of statements of irregularities in the report were examined and mostly reconciled. The accounts were again examined by the Auditors, for the year 1923-24, in October 1924. The systems of maintaining accounts at the laboratory had developed for many years upon the basis of attaining the maximum technical efficiency with the funds avail- able, without regard to their maintenance for the purpose of inspection by lay auditors. As this method of inspection has now become necessary to check expenditure, the need for the establishment of a fully trained Accounts and Checking Section has become im- perative. The waste of time in the technical direction of the institution now enforced by the demands for increasing vigilance to be exercised in official routine administration represents a loss far out of proportion to the relatively small economies made. In reality, as the expenditure of the laboratory is for the most part recoverable, or, if certain recom- mendations are to be given effect, wholly recoverable, the institution differs in nature entirely from the general run of Government concerns, which are not directly productive. When the average saleable issues for the six. years ending with the year under report are computed, and their value estimated at the present sale prices, fixed by Government (in late Department of Revenue and Agriculture letter No. 721 dated 24th April 1922), the average annual income of the laboratory amounts to Rs. 6¾ lakhs. The average budget allotment made by Government for expenditure during these 6 years has been Rs. 6,80,750 this sum excludes expenditure on capital outlays, depreciation, and repairs). The
14 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, portents are that revenue directly measurable in income will increase in future years. The present Report has been written at greater length than the reports of preceding years, largely to convey in the much condensed accounts of work done, the steps that have been taken to make technical improvements and economies in manufacture to draw near to the self-supporting ideal. If these accounts are studied intelligently, however, it will be seen that an earnest endeavour has been made to prosecute activities in harmony with the objects which Government laid down to be the functions of the laboratory on its inception, to elucidate perhaps the most universal problem in India,MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1925 15 parts of the country. Provincial veterinary authorities were circularized to this effect and there arrived afterwards the following individuals for training :16 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, Name Province or other authority From To 9. Mr. Maung Ko KoGyi. Veterinary Inspector, Civil Veterinary De- partment, Burma. 19th July 1924 20th October 1924. 10. Mr. Maung Tun Hlaing. Ditto . 19th July 1924 20th October 1924. 11. Mr. S. K. Gupta . Veterinary Officer, Municipal Board, Allahabad. 1st June 1924 15th August 1924. The above visitors pursued their studies according to a set time-table, and attended a series of elementary lectures, demonstrations, and practical laboratory exercises given to them by the technical officers on the staff. The assiduity and degree of intelligence dis- played by all were most encouraging, and it seems that the laboratory can well render a real service to the veterinary organizations throughout India by developing this system of instruction. The main difficulties towards the expansion of this line of activity at present lie in the inadequacy of the higher technical staff sanctioned by Government to cope with all the work that presents itself to them, and also in the lack of living accommoda- tion for visitors within the station. Proposals were put up to Government during the year for the erection of hostels for visitors under training, and schemes were discussed towards its close for strengthening the staff so that the beneficial activities already ex- ploited might stand in no danger of discontinuance. M. Yakub Ali, Laboratory Assistant, Government Bovine Lymph Depôt, Patwa Dangar, United Provinces, stayed at the laboratory from April 1st to June 30th, 1924, and was instructed in the vernacular chiefly in regard to the routine out-door processes. Judging from the nature of the enquiries received at the laboratory and the demands for material to combat cattle disease, the veterinary organization of the Mysore Govern- ment appears to be actuated with an earnest desire to be ranked in the forefront as regards efficiency. After correspondence with regard to the best method of improving its staff so as to have available men competent to undertake the technicalities connected with modern methods of investigation, the Mysore authorities obtained the sanction of the Government of India to depute to the laboratory two of its most promising junior in- spectors for a prolonged course of tuition, extending over three years. The two inspectors Messrs. K. Ranganath Rao and P. N. Nair on arrival, on the 3rd January 1925, were placed for instruction under Mr. Haddow at the Izatnagar laboratory, for preliminary training in elementary subjects and upon the large scale manufacture of anti-sera. IV. Preparation and Issue of Sera Vaccines. (A summary of the results reported to have been obtained in the field is given in Appendix I.) What have been termed the processes of routine manufacture of all products for issue to the field have been subjected to the closest review during the last four years, with the object of obtaining unequivocal evidence as to the efficacy of these prophylactic agents, of ascertaining the most economic and expeditious modes of manufacture, and of distributing them with the greatest despatch on request to consumers in the field. Such work must indeed be regarded as of the nature of research, although it is undertaken for plain economic reasons, and, in reality, schemes of genuine research at an institution of this kind must necessarily be so intimately bound up with those of routine manufac- ture that it is very hard to dissociate them. During the earlier period of the development of this work an endeavour was made to execute both routine and research measures side by side at Muktesar, but experience showed that close vigilance was required lest the exi- gencies of Provincial customers might have to suffer through lack of regard on the part of the organization employed at the laboratory for the prime nece sity of accumulating ample stocks of standardized material for ready despatch to the field. The possession of
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1925 17 a tributary station on the plains, at Izatnagar, has therefore proved of inestimable value for the solution of this difficulty, and its steady development to an institution where al- most all the bulky products of the laboratory are now manufactured is the outcome of the lessons learned at Muktesar. The tributary station is equipped with a permanent organization, under the continuous supervision of an Imperial Officer (Mr. Haddow) and the processes of manufacture of sera there are executed strictly according to a precisely set programme. No alteration is made in this programme until such time as the indica- tions furnished by research at Muktesar have been tested out on a sufficiently large, practical scale to justify their incorporation in the Izatnagar routine operations. It has been found expedient at times to have certain projects tested cut also at Izatnagar, in order to have a second, probably less biassed, execution of experiments, but nothing is allowed to hamper there the routine execution of the manufacturing programme. In this manner, the methods of manufacture of almost all the routine products issued from the laboratory have undergone a complete transformation in the course of the last few years. (a) Anti-rinderpest serum. The manufacture of this product for the preventive in- oculation of cattle, by the " serum alone " method, throughout India and Burma conti- nues to be the main function of the laboratory, as regards expenditure and income. The quantity issued was 28,48,110 doses (" dose "= 5 c. c., which is the protective dose for the least susceptible plains cattle), as against 19,86,399 doses in 1923-24. The much in- creased issue of this serum accounts for the more favourable financial position of the laboratory during the year under report. The quantity manufactured was 25,76,814 doses as compared with 33,09,027 doses made in 1923-24. Izatnagar, where operations commenced with the onset of the cold weather towards the end of October 1924, contributed 21,79,032 doses, and Muktesar 3,97,782 doses to the quantity made, but the Muktesar manufacture was represented mainly by a large volume of serum (3,37,414 doses) forthcoming from an experiment carried out there on a practical scale to test the soundness of the assumption that a good serum could be derived economically from buffaloes without "hyperimmunization." The remainder of the Muktesar serum was also derived from various experiments upon manu- facture, and found to be potent, for in such experiments a profitable yield of serum can usually be obtained in such quantity as to compensate very largely for the outlay on the research. A quantity amounting to 241,400 doses remaining in stock from the time when the older method of manufacture was practised and found to be rather toxic and of low potency was discarded. At the expiry of the year under report there was available a stock in hand for preventive- inoculation amounting to 92,500 doses tested and passed for issue, and 18,69,646 doses in parcels of varying known potency to be mixed in certian indicated proportions for issue. In addition there were on hand 1,01,185 " doses " (5 c. c.) of specially prepared serum of high potency for use in the active immunization of cattle, by the serum-simulta- neous method, against rinderpest. The policy now adopted is to despatch (in specially adapted kerosene oil tins) the crude stocks manufactured at Izatnagar to Muktesar, where they are stored in four 500 -gallon tanks, one containing the sera from early bleedings and the remaining three the sera from subsequent bleedings in consecutive order. The four tanks thus contain sera of decreasing potency, which is ascertained by systematic tests from time to time on hill bulls, and the serum issued to the field is composed of mixtures from the tanks found quite adequate to protect cattle at the guaranteed dosages (tested to protect hill bulls at 90 c.c. per 600 lbs. body weight). The policy of manufacturing excess stocks during the period of depression in demand in anticipation of a wave of increased intensity of rinderpest throughout India has been fully justified. There came evidence towards October 1924 of this increased intensity from the direction of the Bombay Presidency, and by the close of the financial year insist- ent demands for unusually large quantities of serum came from all Provinces. The aver- age monthly issue of rinderpest serum during the first half of the year to provinces and Indian States amounted to 1,65,566 doses, and during the second half to 2,74,119 doses. In addition, towards the end of the year consignments were exported to Siam (1,60,000 doses) and to Iraq (50,000 doses). It may be added that after the end of the financial year the wave of intensity of rinder- pest, as judged by the consumption of serum, has steadily increased, but no anxiety is apprehended regarding the capacity of the laboratory to meet all orders. It may also be noted that a wise step has been taken by the Madras Presidency in rescinding its previous orders enacting a monetary charge upon cattle owners for serum B 2
48 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, inoculation. The text of the orders now in force provides for the compulsory inoculation of cattle exposed to danger in certain selected districts and all inoculations with serum are to be performed free of charge.* The process of so-called " hyperimmunization " was definitely abandoned ; no cattle were bled out for " virus " during the year, and the method of anti-rinderpest serum manu- facture is now as humane as any other method of serum production. Experiments in connection with the action of salts in provoking an increase in immune bodies when injected into the circulation, according to principles laid down by Madsen, had progressed so far towards the latter part of the year that salt injection was practised as a routine measure in the case of the majority of the buffaloes used for serum production at Izatnagar during the cold weather. Active immunization against rinderpest, by the serum-simultaneous method. Consider- ing the large extent to which passive immunization, by the "serum alone " method, is practised in India, it is rather surprising to find that the system of conferring a permanent immunity has been undertaken hitherto on a relatively diminutive scale, especially when account is taken of the wide application that the method finds in African territories beset with the disease. The reasons why the system has not hitherto found much favour in India except on Government-owned establishments, where it is largely now systema- tically adopted, are to be found in the disfavour of cattle owners towards the inoculation of blood and also in the risks, although perhaps small in degree, and the trouble connected with the form of inoculation. Much pains have been taken by the laboratory during recent years to propagate the method, by simplifying the procedure to be adopted while safeguarding it as far as possible from danger, and the method of inoculation is now prescribed in printed circular instructions in which the various steps to be taken are pre- cisely explained. A rather serious inconvenience connected with the method is that of obtaining suitable virulent blood at the place of inoculation, for even richly virulent blood may lose its virulency within three days of withdrawal, and it has been found that if *Copy of G. O. No. Press 1004 Dev., dated 23rd May 1924. Read the following paper :MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1925 19 blood is taken from relatively insusceptible cattle for the inoculation it may be devoid of virulence when used after a few hours ; it has indeed transpired that some cattle subjected to the inoculation in former years contracted the natural affection during recent outbreaks, due undoubtedly to the blood used for the immunization not possessing any virulence. The information obtained from many laboratory researches, that the blood taken from an infected animal retains its virulence for three times at least the period during which it does so when it is allowed free access to air if the sample is placed at once after with- drawal in hermetically sealed sterile containers, led to the adoption of a method of des- patching virulent blood in this manner by the postal service. Hence, during the cold weather of 1924-25, blood was despatched to veterinary authorities who wished to carry out the serum-simultaneous inoculation in small sealed bottles (one-ounce sterile bottles, with waxed wool plugs) from the Izatnagar branch laboratory, and " controls " ino- culated in the Madras Presidency showed that the blood was highly virulent on receipt after 7 and 8 days. Specially manufactured " brews " of serum, from the early bleedings of buffaloes, were also sent from the branch laboratory for the inoculation. Records are available concerning 1,422 cattle immunized during the season. There was a mortality of 14, largely accountable for by the accidental development of acute piroplasmosis in animals bred in areas free from this infection. In one herd in Assam, inoculated by Mr. Cooper, four succumbed to Piroplasma bigeminum infection, and unfortunately the sample of trypanblau used by him to counteract the complication produced disturbing symptoms. Some young buffalo calves succumbed, due apparently to the administra- tion of an insufficient dose of serum. On the whole, it seems that there is sufficient evidence available for the intensive propagation of the method throughout India, especially on young indigenous cattle, and it seems that the system instituted at the Imperial Cattle Breeding Farm, Karnal, is well worthy of emulation, whereby the inoculation is to be applied at half-yearly intervals, to all cattle under two years of age that have not been protected. The higher resistance of young cattle towards the complicating effects of piroplasmosis points in favour of this system. Nevertheless, it is hoped that work in progress at the laboratory will soon cul- minate in the production of virulent material for the inoculation free from piroplasms or other harmful contaminating organisms. (b) Hæmorrhagic septicæmia serum and vaccine. The demands for these products remained fairly steady. 2,79,061 dqses (dose=15 c. c.) of serum were issued, as compared with 2,21,174 doses in 1923-24. The quantity manufactured was 4,56,566 doses, as com- pared with 2,53,004 doses in 1923-24. The number of doses of vaccine issued was 2,12,600, as against 1,77,600 doses in the preceding year. The vaccine is prepared fresh to meet demands, and hence no considerable stocks are kept on hand. The large excess stocks of serum were manufactured to meet the anticipated demand of the next period of increased seasonal prevalence of hæmorrhagic septicæmia, namely, the rainy season. In the past, the process of manufacturing this serum had been a rather costly one. The method adopted followed closely the plan generally pursued in manu- facturing an immune serum, by " hyperimmunization" of suitable serum producers, which were found to be buffaloes in the experience of the laboratory. The steps in " hyperim- munization" consisted in inoculating the producers initially with a small dose of live culture and a suitable dose of anti-serum to protect the animals against risk from the effects of the culture ; subsequently, the animals were injected with gradually increasing doses of culture alone at intervals of about a week, and in about six weeks' time they were considered fit to be bled at a suitable rate for the production of the immune serum. They were then injected at intervals of about a fortnight with the largest dose of culture already given, and bled some days after each inoculation. The live cultures used were "passaged" frequently through rabbits in order to maintain them, it was believed, in a state of virulence for bovines, for it was thought that the maintenance of a high degree of viru- lence was an essential property of a good antigen. At the commencement of the year under report, when the knowledge then available did not justify any departure from the established system, it was thought that perhaps large hill bulls would be more suitable as producers, for the buffalo's constitution seemed relatively delicate and particularly susceptible to the rigours of the cold weather in the hills. On the other hand, the locally bred hill bulls thrive well when properly fed in these conditions, and hence it was believed that it would be economical to use them as they would be much more likely to survive through the cold weather from one year to another, for the process of preparing afresh at the commencement of the warm weather in the hills a new series of producers was a rather costly and slow one. The main drawback to the use of bulls apart from their smaller size, is that all their plasma has to be separated artificially by centrifugation of the oxalated blood, for the corpuscles show very little tendency to separate spontaneously
20 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, as in the case of the buffalo blood. Specially selected large hill bulls were therefore pur- chased in considerable numbers to be utilized as continuous producers of anti-hæmorrha- gic septicæmia serum. The research work on this disease envisaged in last year's report yielded fruitful re- sults later in the year. It was found that, (i) the " passage " through rabbits of the strain of organism used for immunization did not bring about any exaltation in virulence for bovines after it had been maintained in laboratory media for some time : (ii) exaltation in virulence for bovines of a much degraded culture could only be brought about by " passage" through bovines; (iii) cultures of much degraded virulence (" avirulent " except when inoculated in very large dosages) were as effective antigens as highly exalted cultures in the production of potent anti-serum ; (iv) there was no advantage in intra- venous over subcutaneous injection of the cultures, as judged by the relative potency of the sera obtained ; (v) if a sufficiently large quantity of antigen is administered as an ini- tial step, simultaneously with a protective dose of anti-serum, the buffalo furnishes as the result of this mere initial intervention in a few days a serum of high potency ; (vi) re- peated injection of the culture dose at definite intervals does not result in an increase of potency, but the serum potency can be retained in this manner at a satisfactory high level for a long time,MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1925 21 of infection, with very successful results. The efficacy of serum in " stopping dead " outbreaks while in actual progress has been dwelt upon in the preceding Report. (c) Blackquarter vaccines and serum. The developments concerning the modifica- tions in the form of prophylactic agents recommended for issue to the field for the pro- tection of cattle against blackquarter have been mentioned in the preceding Report. The form of vaccine issued for many years, consisting of a single dose of heated infected muscle powder, corresponding with the first dose of the old ARLOING system, made up for convenience of injection into " pillules," was issued to the extent of 28,800 doses during the year, and 40,000 doses were prepared, as against 40,600 doses issued and 29,600 doses prepared in the previous year. Although a vaccine manufactured according to the old system is undoubtedly of value and has rendered good service for many years, particularly when administered according to the original instructions, in two consecutive doses, of graded virulency, the system has certain inherent defects, especially when for the convenience of the ino- culator it is reduced to a single-dose system, and the infective powder is treated so as to deprive it of any risk towards the inoculated animal. Consequently, the field services were acquainted with the advances made in recent years in the preparation of prophylac- tic agents claimed by reliable investigators to be quite dependable and, at the same time. wholly devoid of risk to the inoculated animals in that they are" germ-free," and not, as in the case with the old form of vaccine, dependent for their efficacy upon the persis- tence in minimal numbers of living virulent germ spores. These " germ-free" products take the form either of the filtrate obtained by passing a good liquid culture of the black- quarter germ through a bacterial filter or the filtrate obtained by passing through a bac- terial filter the pressed juice obtained from the well developed muscle lesion of an animal that has succumbed to an artificial injection of the blackquarter germ. The latter pro- duct is often known as an " aggressin," for its efficacy is held to depend upon some pro- perty it contains in solution representing the aggressive factor that enables the microbe to obtain a foothold in the tissues, and is not related to the toxins that are afterwards elaborated by it. In fact, both kinds of products are claimed to be of very low toxicity, but much evidence has been adduced to show that in some way they contain properties that enhance very strikingly the activities of the blackquarter bacillus. However, an animal inoculated with these fluids that contain the specific " aggressins " develop after the lapse of a few days a strong active immunity against invasion with the germ22 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, been for a long time enzootic; the new product was tried by him on a small scale concur- rently with the old" pillule" vaccine, with which the young stock had been customarily inoculated in previous years. The Superintendent's annual return of the results of inocu- lation upon the farm, for 1924-25, displays evidence with regard to the relative merits of the two products which has almost the precision of a laboratory experiment, and so the table is repeated as it stands below :MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31 ST MARCH, 1925 23 Much research was done at the laboratory during the year in developing the work of producing " germ-free " filtrate. As has been stated above, the product issued in the early stages to the field was the filtrate of a specially prepared broth culture, which was very harmless even when injected in large quantities into guinea-pigs. Such cultures have the drawback that they require some considerable degree of bacteriological skill in preparation, and so, subsequently through the initiative of Mr. Haddow, the " ag- gressin " representing the filtered infected muscle juice was made on a large scale, for it could be readily prepared without the application of much skill from the numbers of dis- continued cattle available at the laboratory. This product, however, was found to possess a high degree of toxicity for small animals and sheep, when made from local strains and also from an authentic strain of Bacillus chauvoei obtained from the National Institute of Type Cultures, London,24 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, In the past, it has been difficult at the laboratory to devise methods for demonstrating the potency of a serum, but with the use of hill bulls as test animals and titrated dosages of very virulent culture the process of testing has now been found capable of systematiza- tion, and hence the optimum methods of serum manufacture may be resolved upon. In order to prolong the immunity conferred by serum alone the procedure that has to be applied is to inoculate simultaneously a culture of suitably degraded virulence, according to the method originally advocated by SOBERNHEIM, and although this method of immunization has not been practised in India it would seem a priori to be a system particularly well suited to the conditions in which protection of livestock against anthrax is presented as a problem to the veterinary authorities. There seems no difficulty now in the preparation and despatch of strains of anthrax culture of the desired virulence for inoculation. Some remarks are appended in the section dealing with Research on the work done upon vaccination at the laboratory. Some of the anthrax serum was issued from the laboratory for treatment, including the treatment of human clinical cases of the disease. (e) Mallein. The products now issued from the laboratory for testing equines for glanders are of two kinds, namely, (i) " ordinary " mallein, for the subcutaneous test and (ii) special mallein, for the " intra-palpebral " (" intra-dermo-palpebral," or, " I.D.P.") test. The latter form of test gained considerable favour with the Army Veterinary authorities during the War on account of the relative ease with which it could be applied, and has since retained to a large extent its popularity. Although the manufacture of mallein is a pursuit which has behind it the experience of first- class laboratories for many years, yet one cannot find published in connection with it much that will guide one in turning out regularly " brews " of unimpeachable efficacy. The recent investigations, notably of WATSON in Canada, would appear to show that a good deal of the mallein placed on the market is of low quality, or even useless for the purpose of testing. Following upon reports from the field that some issues of mallein did not provoke distinct signs of reaction in animals that were subsequently found to be glandered, the routine processes of manufacture were closely studied in order to ensure uniformity in the quality of the product made from time to time at the laboratory. The method of testing the various " brews " prepared for these studies was always the direct one, upon horses artificially infected with glanders (by feeding). The " brew " under test was injected subcutaneously (side of neck) and intra-palpebrally on one side of the animal, and the same quantities of a mallein manufactured by one of the foremost labora- tories in Europe on the other. It was found that the mallein prepared from cultures grown in ordinary glycerinated peptone broth gave irregular results, and although attempts were made to prepare the broth in a uniform manner, it was not always conducive to the development of the properties after growth in it of the glanders bacillus that set up un- equivocal signs of reaction on injection into glandered horses. The poor " brews" appeared to be those exhibiting a marked initial lag and relatively meagre development of the bacterial growth. It has been believed by some workers that concentration by evaporation leads to a more effective extraction of reactive substance from the bacterial bodies, presumably through the action of the higher concentration of glycerine, and that the mallein that was used for the " I.D.P." test acquired its special efficacy through concentration prior to subsequent dilution to a certain strength. Also, according to the experience of some laboratories the maintenance of a high degree of virulency, by passage through animals, is necessary in a strain of the glanders bacillus used for the preparation of mallein. The strain used at the laboratory now, isolated many years ago from a country-bred pony, is indeed passed from time to time through guinea-pigs, mainly to ensure its purity, but there is nothing to indicate that the efficacy of the mallein prepared is in any way allied to the virulence of the germ employed for making it. Again, tests failed to reveal any advantage in concentrating relatively poor cultures in order to obtain from them a better mallein. The experience of this institution now indicates that the essential requirement for the preparation of a good mallein is the employment of a good broth, in which the glanders bacillus develops with hardly any appreciable period of lag and gives rise to a rich growth which attains its maximum in two or three days at body temperature ; incubation at this temperature is necessary subsequently for about three weeks, to bring about the autolysis of a large bulk of bacterial substance, and it is this process which apparently liberates the reactive properties. After a number of trials broth made up in the manner of the culture medium used for the growth of the hæmorrhagic septicæmia organism,
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1925 25 stated on page 19, was found to give the best results. It is made up in large bulk as follows:26 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, not identical in their specific properties. These authors have shown that strains of glanders from Muktesar and Java are quite different serologically from strains received by them of British and Egyptian origin, and that the Muktesar strain was serologically identical with their whitmori strains, although it was identical with the glanders strains in cultural and pathogenic characters (Journal of Hygiene, 1925, April, Vol. 23, No. 4, pp. 347-63). In all, 88,830 doses of mallein were issued and 48,242 doses prepared during the year ; in 1923-24, 29,162 doses were issued and 52,812 doses prepared. These issues comprised 25,765 doses of " ordinary " mallein (dose=1 c.c.), and 62,070 doses of " I.D.P." mallein (dose=0.1 c.c.). In addition, a small quantity (995 doses) of concentrated mallein (dose=0.2 c.c.) was issued for the ophthalmic test. The quantities manufactured were " ordinary " mallein, 24,462 doses ; " I.D.P." mallein, 23,270 doses ; " concentrated " mallein, 510 doses. (f) Tuberculin. 960 doses of tuberculin were issued during the year, and 1,140 doses were prepared, as against 2,724 doses issued and 14,004 prepared in the preceding year. The issues comprised : " ordinary " tuberculin (dose, 3 c.c.), for the subcutaneous test for tuberculosis, 704 doses ; concentrated tuberculin (dose, 0.25 c.c.) for the intracuta- neous test for tuberculosis 220 doses ; avian tuberculin (dose=8 c.c.) for the subcutane- ous test for Johne's disease, 20 doses ; concentrated avian tuberculin (dose=0.25 c.c.) for the intracutaneous test for Johne's disease, 16 doses. The minute quantities of tuber- culin required in the country are related to the very low incidence of bovine tuberculosis. The evidence forthcoming from investigations carried out by the laboratory would appear to indicate that Johne's disease is a serious affection of certain important herds in Southern India, and work was planned at the close of the year to prosecute systematic tests with avian tuberculin on some of these herds, to determine more accurately the incidence of infection and also to obtain further information upon the value of the avian tuberculin test in the diagnosis of the disease. (g) Strangles serum and vaccine. 777 doses (dose= 15 c.c.) of an anti-streptococcic serum for the preventive treatment of strangles were issued, and 3,300 doses prepared. 501 series of doses of ordinary anti-streptococcic vaccine, composed of several strains of streptococci killed by heat, and 207 series of doses of " extracted " anti-streptococcic vaccine (extracted by Dreyer's method) were issued. In addition, for the 1924-25 strangles at the Army Remount Depôts, 886 doses of a special vaccine, in the form of a so-called aggressin, were issued for experimental trials ; this subject is dealt with later under a separate heading in discussing research work on strangles. (h) Contagious abortion vaccines. (I) 154 doses (each dose in two separate quantities of 5 and 10 c.c., to be administered at an interval of 9 or 10 days) of vaccine against the common form of contagious bovine abortion, due to Bacillus abortus Bang, were issued ; the vaccine was applied to a limited number of cattle only, on an experimental basis, and hence the small output. (II) 80 doses (dose=10 c.c.) of vaccine for the preventive treatment of the common form of contagious equine abortion, due to Bacillus abortivo- equinus, were issued, also on an experimental basis These subjects are dealt with later in discussing research projects. (i) Autogenous and specially prepared vaccines. 68 doses (at 5 c.c. per dose) were issued, as against 37 series of doses in the preceding year. V. Research. (a) Rinderpest. The various problems connected with the most important contagious bovine affection in India again constituted the prime research subject. The scope of the work undertaken upon its etiology has been outlined in the preceding Report, which was written up late during the year dealt with in the present Report, after active work upon this particular aspect of the disease was brought temporarily into abeyance. How- evre, there remain other aspects to be reported in brief that have been studied since then
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1925 27 in greater detail, and the most important studies envisaged are, (i) factors in the production of immunity, particularly in the development of a large yield of " antibodies," in the circulating blood of animals, (ii) the possibility of fly transmission of the disease, and (iii) the relationship between the disease and other complicating infections, notably coc- cidiosis and piroplasmosis. (1) Immunity researches. The conceptions entertained following upon an extensive series of experimental observations regarding the nature of the reaction of a susceptible animal to rinderpest have been stated in the preceding Report, and the practical or eco- nomic issues in the section dealing with anti-serum manufacture in the present Report. The pertinent conclusions are (i) that an animal susceptible to rinderpest elaborates free antibodies, discoverable in its circulating blood in proportion to the degree of reaction (as estimated by the pyrexia) it sets up to infection and from which it makes a good recovery, (ii) that a solid, durable immunity, is nevertheless set up subsequent to infec- tion which produces no outward clinical manifestation, or is even followed by a " symp- tomless " affection, and (iii) that the methods hitherto practised of so-called " hyper- immunization " have no real merit, as would be assumed from the name, in driving up the titre in circulating antibodies above that developed by the animal after the lapse of a certain interval from the time when the pyrexia caused by the initial infection has ceased. These conclusions would appear to apply at least most forcibly to the animal used for a number of years as a serum producer for economic reasons in the laboratory, namely, the plains buffalo of Northern India. They are not so strikingly evidenced with the hill bull. In the old routine process of "hyperimmunization," the animals destined to yield the anti-serum were treated first by injecting them simultaneously with virulent blood and a protective (but not definitely regulated) dose of serum. After an interval of three weeks they were bled for serum, and then treated with a massive inoculation of virulent blood; usually, no prolonged general disturbance followed this intervention, and the animals were bled again for serum in eight and ten days. This process of massive viru- lent injections followed after these intervals by bleedings was prosecuted indefinitely although the experience of the laboratory over three years ago had indicated that it was not profitable to repeat the treatment for a long time, partly on account of the develop- ment of extensive abscesses at the sites of injection, and the animals were discontinued from use after three months. A mixed serum obtained from these bleedings was usually found on test to be of sufficient potency to render valuable service in the preventive inoculation of susceptible animals in the field, but not infrequently" brews " were obtained which fell below the desired potency. The first bleeding was found on test to be the most valuable, but sometimes the second bleeding (after the first hyperimmunization) furnished serum which transpired to be somewhat better; thenceforward the sera obtained from successive bleedings diminished in potency. In some carefully executed tests it was found that the potency was well sustained for twelve bleeding periods, and that the potency curve showed a very occasional marked rise, due to an undiscoverable cause, during its descent. On other occasions, as during extensive manufacture at Izatnagar in 1923-24, the potency was not maintained in a satisfactory state for more than two bleeding periods; in this particular experience the staff employed had inadvertently " blocked out" the initial reaction in the buffaloes by administering an excessive dose of anti- serum simultaneously with the virus. In the series of tests upon the duration of potency at successive bleedings in which this quality was well sustained the buffaloes had mani- fested a " mild, but decided " reaction in the course of the preliminary immunization. Evidence of this kind, the practice of the Philippine authorities recently published, and the significant work of WEIL and BREINL upon the production of antibodies in guinea-pigs and rabbits following upon infection with the virus of human typhus led to the institution of experiments at Muktesar upon the relationship of the initial pyrexia to the amount and duration of development of circulating antibodies. Preliminary trials indicated that there was a close analogy between the phenomena exhibited in antibody development in rinderpest and in typhus. The Indian buffalo corresponded with the guinea-pig in behaviour towards these respective diseases, by the elaboration of antibodies quantita- tively definitely correlated with the " amount" of pyrexia. The hill bull corresponded in some measure again with the rabbit: this latter animal is stated by the authors not to have responded by the development of circulating antibodies; the hill bull certanly responds fairly well for a short time after the cessation of well defined pryexia, but in any event the period during which the presence of antibodies in the circulating blood can be well demonstrated is a fleeting one, not exceeding two or three weeks at most, even with the application of routine "hyperimmunization."
28 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, The preliminary information was then subjected to a large scale practical test at Muktesar during the warm season of 1924, under the supervision of Mr. Haddow, for it was considered wise to restrain the application of the knowledge to routine processes, with the known vagaries of biological experiment, until it had been tested out on the dimensions of current manufacturing methods. The test was conducted in the follow- ing manner :[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1925 29 Estimate of Intensity of Reaction. No. Symptoms Notation. 1 No reaction..... . 30 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, The curves (Chart III) indicating the estimated potency of the sera obtained from the two lots of buffaloes according to these tests are subjoined. CHART III. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Estimated potency of serum obtained from buffaloes treated with large and smalldoses of anti-serum and bled at intervals of a week at different rates. The crude results of the tests were that the only deaths occurred in one out of 12 bulls inoculated with serum from the 5th week bleedings, in one out of 12 bulls inoculated with serum from the 8th week bleedings, in 3 out of 12 bulls inoculated with the serum from 9th week bleedings, and in 1 out of 12 bulls inoculated with 10th week bleedings, when each serum was tested at the rate at which it is guaranteed on issue to be efficacious for preven- tive inoculation; the" control" bulls in this test, inoculated with the virus alone, suc- cumbed to acute rinderpest. The more detailed tests performed upon the sera are passed over in this brief report, for it is believed that sufficient evidence has been furnished by the above data to warrant the conclusion that a profitable yield of good serum can be obtained from buffalo producers after the mere adjustment to a certain standard of the initial pyretic reaction. It was anticipated that the reaction displayed by the buffaloes of Lot I would have been much less distinct than that shown by those of Lot II, for the serum used for the adjustment of the reaction had been tested at Izatnagar and was assumed to be capable of rendering the reaction almost" symptomless " at the rate given to Lot I. It transpired, however, that the protective action of the serum was not so wel
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1925 33 CHART VI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Test results upon sera obtained from hyperimmunized bulls treated with daily injections of zinc and magnesium. The idea was then conceived that the " secretory " phenomenon as between the animal tissues and the so-called antibodies might be allied to the phenomena of secretion by the tissues in general in so far as it is affected by the action of inorganic salts. In other words, it was not unlikely that if other salts besides those indicated as having best the non- specific property of stimulating antibody " secretion" when given in the uniform small gram-molecular dosages recommended by MADSEN were given in what may be called equivalent pharmacological dosages, the results might be similar. An experiment in which the producers were administered large dosages of sodium chloride seemed to point in this direction. Based upon this conception, a mixture was made of the chlorides of a number, nine in all, of the kations amongst those of most common occurrence in the body, and each ingredient entered into the composition of the mixture in the proportion B 2
34 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, in which it was found on test to produce toxic effects upon intravenous injection in to rabbits. The solution of the " nine-salt" mixture was thus made up as follows :MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1925 35 One group of producers (Lot M-9 buffs.) had reacted well during immunization but shown no distinct clinical symptoms ; the other group (Lot N-3 buffs.) had shown distinct clinical symptoms. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Estimated potency of serum obtained from buffaloes treated with injections of manganese chloride Experiments of this kind are liable to at least two serious forms of error, namely: (i) the irregular susceptibility of the test animals, a factor which is by no means eliminated by using numbers of bulls for testing each serum and selecting bulls of pure hill breed, and (ii) the known fluctuations in the " curve " of potency of the serum obtained from producers at regular intervals after immunization during the descent of the curve. It is difficult to comprehend the causes of such fluctuations but certain observations in which meteorological curves have been plotted parallel to the potency curves seem to indicate that it is not unlikely that they are related particularly to conditions of relative humidity, in that a depression in the potency curve corresponds with an increased relative humidity, which again is presumed to bring about a lessened metabolism in the animal producing the serum. The following experiment (No. 836 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, From the above curves it would seem that single injections of the " 9-salt " solution had a distinct stimulating effect upon antibody " secretion " while antibody secretion was active in the animal body, but that it had little effect later when the animal tissues themselves had relaxed their activities in this respect. From the results depicted for Lot I it would also appear that specific so-called " hyperimmunization " (with virulent blood) had uncertain effects at this later stage. Work upon the above lines has been prosecuted subsequently, throughout the year under report, and an attempt has been made to introduce the system of salt injection into routine practice. However, it is felt that it is still difficult to express a decided opinion upon the relative merits of the " brews " produced with and without salt, and it is beyond the compass of this brief Report to enter into discussion of the results as they stand. It is hoped that further definite knowledge on this subject will be forthcoming at the time when the next Report is prepared. (II) Possibility of fly transmission of rinderpest. The work further executed by Mr. S. K. Sen, Assistant to the Imperial Entomologist, was as follows :[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Composite chart of 10 hill bulls indicating the relationship between the degree of rinderpest infection and the number of coccidian oocysts passed in faeces.
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1925 37 Although the use of antigen of low virulence proved to suffice for the treatment of anti-serum producers, it was thought to be very desirable to study the changes undergone by the hæmorrhagic septicæmia organism outside the body of the natural host, in culture media and in other hosts. It was also thought that the study might throw some light, of comparative significance, upon the nature of the degradation believed to have been observed outside the natural host in the case of the rinderpest virus, as figured briefly in last year's Report. It has been stated elsewhere that it had been a practice in the laboratory to pass the hæmorrhagic septicæmia strain from time to time through rabbits, on the assumption that this procedure assured the retention of virulence for the natural host and further maintained the virus in a good state of preservation as regards its antigenic properties. To obtain information concerning the actual changes in patho- genic properties developed outside the natural, bovine host, a strain of organism which had just been exalted by passage through cattle to a very high pitch of virulence for these animals was subcultured on alternate days in plain broth at (i) PH 7.4 and (ii) PH 6.0. In the former medium the conditions were most favourable for growth, and hence it was believed that the pathogenicity of the organism would be maintained unimpaired for a long time. On the other hand, conditions were barely sufficient for propagation in the second medium, and hence it was thought that considerable changes would take place. The subcultured strains, i.e., the one propagated at PH 7.4, and the one at.PH 6.0, were then to be tested at the 10th, 20th, 40th, 80th, 160th generations, and at corresponding intervals subsequently if considered necessary. The test at each stage comprised passage through 10 rabbits with intermediate cultures, and the culture obtained was tested.on cattle after the 3rd and the 10th rabbit passages. Originally, the virus was pathogenic for bulls at a dose rate of 1/10 c.c. of broth culture. In the tests on bulls the animals were given doses of 1/10 c.c., 1 c.c., 10 c.c., 100 c.c., and 1000 c.c. if required. With the PH 6.0 strain, virulence for bovines was found to have dropped to a very great extent from the 10th subculture onwards. Three passages through rabbits brought the culture back to its original virulence until the. 80th subculture. Subsequently, with the 160th subculture, repeated passage through rabbits restored virulence only parti- ally. With the PH 7.4. strain, virulence for bovines was maintained until the 40th genera- tion, at what seemed to be about its original titre. At the 80th subculture, however, the strain failed to kill bulls even in massive doses. Large doses at this stage were necessary initially to produce morbid affection in rabbits and after 13 passages through rabbits, 1000 c.c. proved lethal for bulls, but 100 c.c. was harmless. At the 160th generation massive doses failed to produce any harmful effect either on cattle or rabbits. The sudden precipitation of pathogenicity in the virus maintained in the favourable artificial culture medium, as compared with its more sustained character at a rather low level in the unfavourable artificial medium,was contrary to what had been anticipated. The information may not be without significance in other pasteurelloses, notably in human plague, in which disease condition a rodent acts as the reservoir, for it would appear that provided a pasteurella has not propagated beyond a certain stage in the outside world and especially if propagation has been restricted by multiplication in an unfavourable medium it can become exalted for what may be termed its natural host by passage through the body of another host,38 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, the inoculation of massive doses of culture, traces of which proved virulent to the more susceptible animals, and no success was obtained in endeavours to exalt cultured strains for dogs. The only certain means of killing dogs was found to be by the inoculation of blood rich in anthrax bacilli from fatal cases of the disease, but inoculation with such highly virulent material overwhelmed the defences of vaccinated dogs to the same extent as those of controls. However, it is believed that the vaccination must have conferred some degree of immunity in addition to that naturally possessed by the dog, but that the virulence of the attack necessary to break down surely the natural immunity also over- whelmed the additional acquired immunity. Analogous phenomena were commonly observed at the laboratory in tests upon blackquarter vaccination, when the test animals employed were mature hill bulls. It was most difficult to demonstrate the efficacy of the protective systems under test by the use of such animals, as the doses of virulent material required to kill controls, already possessing high natural resistance, also broke down the defences of the vaccinated animals ; large doses of anti-serum were the only agents which seemed to display a real capacity for warding off such highly virulent test deses. In tests of hæmorrhagic septicæmia serum the lesson again had been that while the most conspicuous evidence of the value of good serum could be obtained by employing animals, such as hill bulls, of moderate susceptibility, care must be taken to titrate the dosages of the test virus to be employed so that it was not " overwhelming." In black- quarter tests it seems that the use of guinea-pigs, which possess a fairly uniform, and fairly high susceptibility, is the method most conducive to obtaining information in regard to the protective value of an inoculation system, and for tests of the value of the protective action of anti-serum in particular against anthrax it seems that a careful selection of host and titration of the infective virulent test material must be made. (d) Contagious bovine abortion. In the. preceding Report it was stated that attempts were made to vaccinate against this affection at one of the Government Military Dairies (Lucknow) where the herd had shown for some time a high incidence of abortion. Vac- cination, performed by the inoculation of massive doses of an English strain of B. abortus that had become greatly degraded in virulence did not prove satisfactory. Although it was fully realised that deductions drawn from the incidence of abortion before and after the application of an attempted system of preventive treatment, owing to the tendency of the affection to self-limitation, were fallacious, and that the only proper method of evaluation would be to insist upon the allotment simultaneously of untreated " controls," yet the decrease in incidence, following upon treatment in the above manner was not thought to be sufficient to warrant the assumption that distinct benefit from the practical standpoint had been conferred by it. It was hoped that the institution of a modified procedure, using the maximum safely tolerated doses of virulent cultures of the organism isolated from cases of abortion at the Dairy itself might lead to better results. Towards the end of December 1923, the new method was applied to the herd by inoculating females about two months prior to service with two successive doses (5 and 10 c.c. res- pectively, " SO 16 " agar emulsion) at an interval of 9 or 10 days. The full results of this vaccination are not yet available, but enough information has been obtained to indicate that the procedure falls short of expectations. In a communication received from the Dairy authorities in February 1925, the position regarding vaccination with the Indian strain was reported to be :MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1925 39 That vaccination with the more highly virulent type of organism represented by the Indian strains employed was not a sufficient protection against the onset of clinical abor- tion is illustrated by the following cases selected from the records. VACCINATED Name Served Aborted 1st dose 2nd dose Yankei . 9th Feb. 1924. 18th Feb. 1924. May 1924 . 18th Nov. 1924. York . 30th April 10th May July 1924 . 30th Nov 1924. 1924. 1924. Heifer No. 126 11th May 19th May 15th July 2nd Dec. 1924. 1924. 1924 1924. Heifer No. 459 11th May 21st May 5th Sept. 8th Jan. 1924. 1924. 1924. 1925. The mode of vaccination that had hitherto been considered worthy of application, judging from the published reports of eminent authorities in other parts of the world would therefore appear to lack the degree of efficacy that would commend its adoption as a practical measure in a herd faced with very virulent type of infection such as prevails in the Dairy under observation. Laboratory investigations were therefore prosecuted in order to determine in the first place some ready means of testing the various procedures susceptible of adoption in the light of existing bacteriological knowledge, for observations with regard to the efficacy of any system in natural conditions must of necessity be pro - longed and often difficult of control. Moreover, the laboratory records seemed to indi- cate that buffaloes and indigenous cattle possessed a higher degree of resistance than did cattle with a large admixture of European blood. A factor that must be considered however, in forming an estimate of individual or breed susceptibility is the probability of considerable variation in the virulence of the micro-organism to which the different herds or types of cattle are exposed. It has been stated in the preceding Report that in the course of a large number of agglutination tests carried out by Mr. Bennett upon indigenous cattle in the Punjab early in 1924 about 10 per cent. of the animals were found to be infected with the common cause of bovine contagious abortion, but none were discovered to have actually aborted due to this infection. A number of milk samples was taken from reactors and tested by inoculation of guinea-pigs ; none of these small animals subse- quently developed agglutinins, or showed any evidence of infection with B. abortus on post-mortem examination after some months' interval. It is now known that strains of very low virulence may fail to provoke any reaction when tested in this manner, so that the negative results of guinea-pig inoculation do not necessarily preclude the presence of the specific organism in the milk. It is conceivable that use might be made of the production of lesions or even death in these small animals for testing the efficacy of a vaccination procedure. However, a method was devised at the laboratory which seems capable of furnishing more reliable information. In smears from one of the cows that had succumbed at Lucknow from the effects of the virulent, Indian vaccine evidence of an acute septicæmia was observed. It was then believed that probably the intensity of invasion subsequent to infection might be gauged by the degree of septicæmia, or " blood flush " that arose. Much painstaking work was being undertaken in studying this " flush " at the laboratory in connection with the passaging of the rinderpest virus through rabbits and of the surra trypanosome through buffaloes in attempts to exalt virulence. It was then thought that blood cultivation, on the lines adopted for the isolation of the organism allied to that of bovine abortion from the blood of human subjects suspected to be affected with Malta fever, could be applied with equal facility. In the first experiment attempted the English strain of very low virulence and an Indian strain recently isolated were injected into cattle and the blood plated out daily. It was found in reality that the more virulent strain produced a dis- tinct flush for some days, while the one of low virulence produced no such flush. With the virulent strain indigenous cattle (hill bulls), cross-bred European cattle, and buffaloes were injected, and the flush estimated for several days (three weeks). It was found that a variation in the " flush " occurred comparable with what was suspected in regard to susceptibility from field operations. Moreover, various strains were tested in regard to their properties for causing the " flush " in cattle of the same species. A system was then devised for estimating the efficacy of various procedures of vac- cination on the assumption that suppression of the flush subsequent to the inoculation
40 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, of a virulent strain might be taken as indicative of the degree of resistance possessed by the animal. Groups of cattle were thus vaccinated with (i) dead avirulent, (ii) dead virulent, (iii) living avirulent, (iv) living moderately virulent, and (v) living virulent cultures of B. abortus. These animals were then to be tested at certain intervals in convenient batches up to a year by inoculation of virulent cultures, and their blood exa- mined daily by plate culture, simultaneously with " control," unvaccinated animals treated with the same test material. Until the close of the year under report one test only on the series of vaccinated animals had been completed, to test their immunity after a three months' interval. The results indicated that the system of testing was a valuable one, but unfortunately the decline in virulence after retention in the laboratory of what had been the highly virulent strain used for test purposes made the results less striking than they might otherwise have been. The work is still in progress. (e) Coccidiosis. It was stated in the preceding Report that this subject was under in- vestigation at Muktesar by Mr. Cooper, and that bovine coccidiosis seemed to be a wide- spread infection in India. Thus, out of 90 hill bulls examined during the year under report coccidia could be detected in the fæces by a floatation method (SHEATHER'S) on first examin- ation in 88 bulls, and in the remaining two on the fourth and fifth examinations. Again, it has been pointed out elsewhere in this Report that the infection is markedly resuscitated by the onset of rinderpest, and that even a relatively mild degree of this infection is apt to depress the intestinal mucosa to such an extent as to allow proliferation of and invasion by the coccidia to assume the nature of a serious complicating affection. It is of interest in this connection to note that out of a group of 199 hill bulls in which post-mortem lesions of rinderpest were discoverable, there was evidence in 73, or 36.7 per cent., that coccidiosis had been resuscitated to the status of a distinct clinical affection. Rinderpest appears to exert a pronounced special action in exciting this phenomenon as compared with the action displayed by other diseases, for in the case of 340 bulls examined post-mortem during the same period and affected with diseases other than rinderpest evidence of affection with coc- cidiosis was detected in 11 only. Infection with foot and mouth disease and large doses of the organism of bovine contagious abortion did not seem to bring about resuscitation, but certain irritant drugs, such as croton oil, appeared to possess this property. The oocysts found in " carriers " were found to display considerable variation in size, from. 15 to 55 microns in diameter, and possessed thick capsules, but with the considerable increase in numbers produced during resuscitation the size was found to become uniformly small and. the capsules very thin. Difficulties were experienced in studying the sporogonous development of the bovine oocysts, contrary to the ease with which this stage can be stud- ied with rabbit coccidia. Coccidiosis was also found to be a common infection in buffaloes, but no case of resuscitation to the state of a clinical affection was found in these animals. In the fæces of 88 rabbits examined post-mortem coccidiosis was detected in 69. The subject of bovine coccidiosis seemed to warratn study under plains conditions for the high incidence of infection among cattle used at the laboratory, derived from the Kumaon hills, might be a local phenomenon, analogous to the known wide prevalence of infection among cattle in the higher Swiss Alps ; hence, Mr. Cooper was instructed to undertake systematic investigations of the condition during a four months' tour in what was considered to be a suitable plains area, namely Assam. Infection of cattle was found by him to be very widespread in this province, and exhibited the characteristics displayed in Kumaon cattle. Cases of the natural affection were also discovered, and in five oxen coccidia of what are believed to be a new species, belonging to the class Isospora, were detected. At Muktesar, coccidia were found in specimens from sheep, goats, pigs, dogs, cats, rats, wild birds, and lizard, but none were found in an elephant, monkeys, mice, bats, or fowls. During the Assam tour, they were found, as has been stated in cattle and buffaloes, and also in sheep, goats, pigs (wild and domestic), dogs, foxes, cats (wild), mongooses, hares (wild) rabbits, squirrels, rats, fowls (wild and domestic), geese, ducks (wild and domestic), pheasants, pigeons, crows and other small wild birds, and gharials ; they were not found in elephants, horses, deer, monkeys,bears, guinea-pigs, bats, partrid- ges, snipe, wild doves, snakes, or fish (the number of some of the latter animals available for examination was not large). (f) Tuberculosis. It has been stated in the preceding Report that a preliminary experi- ment carried out in the cold weather season of 1923-24 by Dr. M. B. Soparkar seemed to point to the possession of a greater resistance towards tuberculosis by Indian cattle and buffaloes than is found in European cattle. Hence, arrangements were made with agri-
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1925 41 cultural and other authorities throughout India for a supply to the laboratory of suitable representatives of each of the most important breeds of cattle, to be submitted at the laboratory to a test to ascertain their susceptibility and controlled at the same time by the infection of a number of calves containing as large an admixture of European blood as was procurable in India. Unfortunately, pure bred European calves were not obtainable in the country for the purposes of control, and so it was hoped that reasonable control would be assured by the employment of calves containing the large admixture of European blood. The best age for testing calves is stated to be about three months, when a dose of 50 milligrams of a virulent strain of the bovine type of tubercle bacillus in the form of a young (3 weeks old) culture grown on a solid medium is almost invariably sufficient to overwhelm the defences of the animal and cause death within 3 months after subcutaneous inoculation. Unfortunately, again, it was not possible to obtain calves as young as was desired in the case of all breeds, on account of the difficulty of transporting very young calves over long distances, and in the case of some breeds and a number of the cross- breds increased resistance was undoubtedly partly attributable to age. The strain of the bovine type of tubercle bacillus employed was kindly despatched to the laboratory by the National Institute of Type Cultures, London, after recent isolation by Dr. A. Stanley Griffith. The following breeds and cross-breds were used :42 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, Cross-bred Number Source European, Pusa 12 Imperial Agriculturist Pusa European, Bangalore . 8 Imperial Dairy Expert, Bangalore. European, Lucknow . 2 Manager, Government Military Dairy, Lucknow. European, Kirkee 4 Government Military Dairy, Kirkee, Experimental inoculation of individuals from each breed commenced on 2nd October 1924 and finished on 21st December 1924. The crude results of the experiment were :MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1925 43 It is evident that before definitive information is available concerning the relative susceptibility of Indian and European cattle, calves of unmixed European descent will have to be employed as controls in further tests. However, the information such as is now available would seem to indicate that the very low incidence of bovine tuberculosis in India (about three per cent., with small localized lesions, at Ferozepore and Cawnpore slaughterhouses, but generally apparently much rarer) is attributable to the manner in which the cattle are generally maintained in the country44 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, In smears despatched to the laboratory by Major H. Allen, R.A.V. C., Remount Depôt, Saharanpur, from the liver of dog affected with advanced hepatic cirrhosis, bodies were seen in considerable numbers believed to be Encephalitozoon sp., and quite indis- tinguishable in appearance from Encephalitozoon cuniculi, as recently carefully figured and described by Theobald SMITH and Laura FLORENCE in the tissues of rabbits (Jl Exper. Med., 1925, Vol. 41, No. 1, pp. 25-36). (l) Foot and mouth disease. With good material obtained from a natural outbreak of the disease at Muktesar, careful attempts were made to repeat the work of FROSCH and DAHMEN upon the cultivation of the virus with the use of the solid media recommended by them, and although some appearances such as they described could be seen in some primary culture tubes these could not be subcultured and no evidence was obtained that the appearances actually represented growth. The method of vaccination, by the use of stored virulent serum, according to the system advocated by ROUX, VALLÉE, CARRÉ and NOCARD* was applied in the out-kraals to animals that were subsequenly exposed to natural infection, with a suitable number of uninoculated, control animals. The results of the experiment which have been recorded in detail by Mr. Haddow, who was in charge, prove that the mode of inoculation was not sufficient to prevent any of the 40 bulls so treated from developing symptoms when exposed a fortnight later to infection, and that on the whole the severity of the affection in them was only slightly less marked than in the 20 control bulls exposed to infection simultaneously. (m) Strangles. A somewhat lengthy summary was given in the preceding Report of the work done by the Institute in endeavouring to devise means of controlling strangles at the Army Remount Depôts. The results were given of the rather intensive systems of vaccination carried out during the strangles seasons of 1922-23 and 1923-24 at the Sargodha and Mona Depôts, where country-bred colts are admitted by purchase during the cold weather months of each year. It is of interest now to give very briefly the results obtained with the same methods at the Stud Farm, Ahmednagar, where foals are bred from mares entertained at the depôt for army purposes and become exposed to strangles and affected in varying degrees of severity from year to year. The system applied at the depôt during the year 1923 was the same as that adopted at Mona and Sargodha during the season 1922-23, namely, the inoculation at intervals of nine days: of three doses of increasing size of " strangles streptococci " killed by heat (five labora- tory strains entered into the composition of the vaccine used at this depôt), the first dose of vaccine being accompanied by a dose of anti-streptococcic serum. Nine days after the termination of the treatment the foals were allowed to come in contact with the natural infection; this eventuality occurred in the case of a few foals before the treatment was terminated. The results are tabulated below. Total number Remained free Became affected SEVERITY OF AFFECTION Treatment Mild, covered Severe, covered Died Vaccinated. 3 doses 36 .. 36 20 14 2 Vaccinated, 2 doses 5 .. 5 3 2 .. Vaccinated, 1 dose 1 .. 1 .. 1 .. Not vaccinated," controls " . 39 .. 39 28 9 2 The results obtained after the above mode of vaccination at Sargodha and Mona had indicated that the protection conferred was, at any rate, not a powerful one. The Ahmednagar findings furnish evidence that the method was wholly inefficacious in the face of a fairly virulent outbreak. Considering the magnitude of the doses employed and the system of treatment it must be admitted that if this form of vaccination was capable of setting up any real protection against natural attack it was given every chance of demonstrating its efficacy. The natural deduction from such evidence as is furnished * (Ref. Gén. Méd. Vét. 1922, Jan. 15, Vol. 31, No. 361.)
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1925 45 by the above data must be that intervention with a " polyvalent "vaccine composed of dead " strangles streptococci" is not worth while as a system of prophylaxis against strangles. During the year 1924, again, vaccination was carried out at Ahmednagar on the same lines as were adopted at Sargodha and Mona during the 1924-25 season, namely, by vaccinating one lot of foals with dead streptococci prepared in the " ordinary " way from several strains as described above and another lot with dead streptococci " extracted " according to DREYER'S method for preparing so-called " diaplyte " antigens. The vac- cinated animals were inadvertently exposed to infection, in a different way from the " controls ;" they were artificially infected after the termination of the treatment by smearing their nostrils with strangles pus and then transferred into the Main Depôt along with the " controls," which had not been artificially infected. Nevertheless, results of even greater value were obtained in regard to the relative effects of the " ordinary " and " extracted " vaccines than if all the animals had been exposed merely to natural infec- tion. Experimental Strangles Treatment 1924-25, Stud Farm, Army Remount Depôt, Ahmednagar. Vaccinated (O and E). Developed symptoms after artificial infec- tion before admission to main depôt DEVELOPED SYMPTOMS IN MAIN DEPÔT Remained free of all symptoms Number I. After symp- toms on artifi- cial infection II. Without symptoms on artificial infec- tion Type46 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, It was stated in the preceding Report that attempts were being made at the labora- tory to exploit further possibilities in the development of more efficacious preventive agents on the assumption that strangles was in reality streptococcic in origin. Manifold laboratory investigations indicate that the pathogenesis of strangles is associated with streptococci, for in samples of pus taken freshly from a lesion streptococci can almost invariably be isolated in large numbers to the exclusion of other types of visible micro- organisms ; sometimes no organisms can be isolated, but in such cases it is reasonable to believe that the streptococci associated with causation have been destroyed. The streptococci, however, when subjected to comparative microscopic and cultural examina- tion (especially in regard to their hæmolytic effects and capacity for fermenting sugars), do not appear to be homogeneous in type. A few colonies examined would appear to be of fæcal origin (Streptococcus fæcalis), and these may be ruled out as having any casual association with the disease. The streptococci isolated are mainly of the so-called hæmolytic type, but even among them there is some variation when they are classified according to their other cultural characteristics. Thus, among a batch of 23 " strains " among a large number examined and classified according to GORDON'S system, there were (i) Streptococcus pyogenes, 11, (ii) Str. equinus, 7, (iii) hæmolytic streptococci not classi- fiable but apparently of the same type and did not ferment any sugars, 3, and (iv) Str. fæcalis, 2. These organisms would therefore correspond largely with the ordinary strep- tococcal flora of wounds. However, the recent researches of ROSENOW in particular would appear to indicate that streptococci are capable of developing into pathogenic agents with marked specific affinities for certain tissues, in which they set up character- istic morbid processes, although these organisms are not readily distinguished from strep- tococci incriminated with other processes by laboratory tests. Further, the researches of BROCO-ROUSSEU, FORGEOT, and URBAIN upon the strangles streptococci after propaga- tion in culture media indicate that the organisms change rapidly in antigenic properties outside the affected host, as witnessed by the capacity of the organisms to " deviate complement" when tested against the sera of horses that have recovered from strangles. It would therefore seem that streptococci restored to association with equine tissues might themselves or in the form of the products elaborated by them in contact with the tissues constitute an antigen capable of becoming an efficacious " vaccine," if in reality protec- tion against streptococcic invasion signifies protection against strangles. It is apparently on an assumption of this kind that various authors have in the past adopted prophy- lactic measures based upon the injection of strangles pus, or pus produced artificially by inoculation of equines with streptococci, rendered innocuous by the action of ether or other antiseptics, for prophylaxis. The observations upon which the efficacy of such measures is proclaimed would appear, however, to be insufficiently controlled. Never- theless, in view of the success of measures undertaken against blackquarter in cattle by the use of products of this nature in the shape of so-called " aggressin," and, according to the recent statements of American workers, against hæmorrhagic septicæmia by the use of a comparable product, it seemed worth to try an analogous method for strangles prevention. Hence, three strains of strangles streptococci were taken, representing each of the three cultural hæmolytic groups noted above and exalted by passage intramuscularly in donkeys and horses. From the muscle lesion of the animals that succumbed to infection the juice was pressed out, preserved by the addition of antiseptic, and filtered bacteria- free. Some tests executed at the laboratory, though it is admitted that they were not performed perhaps sufficiently extensively, seemed to indicate that both the filtered and unfiltered products were capable of evoking enough response in inoculated animals to withstand fatal doses of virulent material, in the form of the fresh muscle juice or a mixture of the strains of streptococci used, when injected subsequently. Young donkeys seemed to be very suitable for such tests. A brief reference to the results obtained in some of these tests is worth notice, which were controlled by inoculating animals not treated with the streptococcus " aggressin " simultaneously with the animals so treated with the same test material; an endeavour was made to obtain a still larger measure of control by using for the tests in addi- tion to untreated animals, ones that had been " vaccinated " with " normal aggressin " composed of a mixture of the expressed muscle juice from a healthy donkey and a healthy pony foal, obtained in the same manner as the strangles aggressin. Test No. 1 (16th December 1924). Vaccinated on 24th November 1924 (with 20 c.c. filtered, or 10 c.c. unfiltered aggressin). Test material was virulent streptococcic muscle juice injected intramuscularlyMUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1925 47 (c) Normal, unfiltered muscle juice. One pony foal, died (in 4 days); one donkey foal recovered. (d) Normal, filtered muscle juice. One pony foal, died (in 4 days); one donkey foal, died (in 2 days). (e) Controls, untreated. Two pony foals, both died (in 5 and 12 days); two donkey foals, both died (in 3 and 6 days). Test No. 2 (20th December 1924). Vaccinated as above. Tested by inoculation intramuscularly of centrifuged deposit of virulent muscle juice. Results with donkeys were:48 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, It is known that it is very difficult to intervene successfully against streptococcal infections by the inoculations of" vaccines " made up according to the common methods employed; for example, in the form of joint-ill in foals due to streptococci it would seem that no benefit is conferred by this means. However, if, as seems indicated by the laboratory tests and such human reasoning as one can apply to the circumstances in the present state of our knowledge, the " aggressin" issued to the Depôts was capable of evoking a response on the part of the animal organism towards streptococcic invasion, then one cannot but turn to the view that natural strangles is not initiated as an invasion with this type of organism. The streptococci, according to this view, must be regarded as secondary invaders, of similar significance to the organisms found readily by ordinary bacteriological examination in the evolution of swine fever. The belief has already been expressed by certain workers that the disease is set up by an " ultra-visible virus " as the initial causal agent, with streptococci as mere secondary invaders. It might be argued that such agents as were employed in attempting to set up an immunity were not specifically capable of bringing about a response against all the types of virulent streptococci capable of producing strangles. This argument, however, cannot be sub- stantiated, for if it were true, horses would throughout their lives be susceptible to recurrent attacks of strangles through exposure to different types of streptococci capable of producing the disease; this is not what is well known to occur. The indications seem therefore that attempts should be made to combat strangles by resorting to other means than streptococcic products. Whether the morbid products of the disease can be suitably treated and still retain a " specific factor " capable of evoking an immunity response,or intervention similar to that employed in certain diseases due to ultra-visible viruses can be adopted with success remains to be examined. In undertaking immunization by the latter procedure the possibility comes to mind that a method of sero-vaccination could be readily tested, by inoculating susceptible animals with what may be a good anti-serum, obtained about seven days after the commence- ment of apyrexia from other animals that have sustained a mild but decided febrile attack of the natural or artificially communicated disease, and artificially infecting them simul- taneously with the " virus," in the manner that was carried out as explained above in the case of foals at the Ahmednagar stud. A note of appreciation must be recorded here of the splendid collaboration given in these investigations by Major G. W. Williamson, R.A.V.C., Stud Farm, Ahmednagar, Capt. J. Bell, R.A.V.C., Remount Depôt, Sargodha, and Capt. R. E. Bond, R.A.V.C., Remount Depôt, Mona. It is hoped that the privilege may be retained of enjoying their experienced clinical co-operation in endeavouring to discover a solution of the disease problem. (n) Treatment of worm infections. Hookworm disease in dogs in India appears to have a significance comparable to that of the infection in the human subject, and owing to the habits of life of canine subjects is probably even more widespread, and is un- doubtedly one of the chief factors in the causation of the anæmia and wasting prevailing commonly in this species in the country. Numerous laboratory examinations of fæces by means of one of the new floatation methods (SHEATHER'S) for the detection of worm ova have revealed an almost universal infection of dogs, particularly of pariah dogs, with anky- lostomes, and in young dogs affected with emaciation the numbers of eggs discoverable are sometimes enormous. It was therefore thought that an investigation of the possibilities of treatment along the lines which have been the subject of intensive study by HALL in America and have been productive of striking success in his hands might enable the laboratory to tender reassuring advice to dog-owners in India. The procedure adopted by HALL for estimating what is termed the anthelmintic efficacy of a drug is a simple one: the number of worms passed in the fæces after treatment are counted, the subject then destroyed, the number of worms remaining in the bowel counted, and the ratio between the number of worms passed and the number originally present in the bowel represents the anthelmintic efficacy. In the tests carried out at the laboratory a modified procedure was adopted, so that more information could be obtained from single affected subjects : a considerable number of pariah dogs were obtained from Bareilly and samples of fæces from each of them were examined systematically daily. It is known that isolated exami- nations may not give precise indications as to the degree of infection, but nevertheless it is believed that daily examination of fæces from a dog carried on in approximately the same manner for several months gives a " curve" which furnishes what may be called good practical information as to the state of infection in the bowels. After the curve had been under observation for some time in a dog showing distinct worm infection, a system of treatment was applied (after 24 hours' fasting), and the curve then watched for three weeks or longer, when the same or another system was applied if evidence of infection was again distinct.
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1925 49 The treatments which have been investigated hitherto are:50 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, APPENDIX I. Table showing a summary of results of inoculations in the field reported from the use of different products issued from the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1924-25. Province Number of outbreaks in which inoculation was undertaken NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DIED UNINOCU- LATED IN COURSE OF DISEASE NUMBER OF ANIMALS INOCULATED NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DIED AFTER INOCULATION Percentage of deaths in inoculated bovines Equines Bovines Others Equines Bovines Others Equines Bovines Others United Provinces. Rinderpest serum 356 .. 5,757 45 .. 44,537 587 .. 73 .. .. Hæmorrhagic Septicæ- mia serum. 177 .. 2,138 20 .. 19,692 .. .. 6 .. .. Blackquarter vaccine and Germ-free filtrate. 5 .. 41 .. .. 561 .. .. .. .. .. Punjab. Rinderpest serum 487 .. 7,263 .. .. 77,827 .. .. 95 .. .. Hæmorrhagic Septicæ- mia serum. 297 .. 2,945 .. .. 85,345 .. .. 19 .. .. Hæmorrhagic Septicæ- mia vaccine. 583 .. .. .. 158,661 .. .. .. .. .. Blackquarter vaccine . 80 .. .. .. 14,647 .. .. .. .. .. North-West Frontier and North Punjab. .. .. Rinderpest serum 54 .. 569 .. .. 11,090 .. .. 25 .. .. Hæmorrhagic Septicæ- mia serum. 9 .. 60 .. .. 2,019 .. .. 1 .. .. Hæmorrhagic Septicæ- mia vaccine. 10 .. .. .. .. 3,267 .. .. .. .. .. Sind and Rajputana. Rinderpest serum 44 .. 778 .. .. 4,022 .. .. 17 .. .. Hæmorrhagic Septicæ- mia serum. 12 .. 112 .. .. 936 .. .. .. .. .. Assam. Rinderpest serum 193 .. 4,940 .. .. 18,043 .. .. 240 .. .. Anthrax serum . 52 7 304 10 248 2,650 4 .. 3 .. .. Hæmorrhagic Septicæ- mia serum. 18 .. 195 .. 6 1,696 .. .. 4 .. .. Bihar and Orissa. Rinderpest serum 764 .. 5,438 .. .. 106,867 .. .. 303 .. .. Anthrax serum 12 .. 89 .. .. 1,174 .. .. 22 .. ..
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1925 51 APPENDIX I-contd. Table showing a summary of results of inoculations in the field reported from the use of different products issued from the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1924-2552 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, APPENDIX I-contd. Table showing a summary of results of inoculations in the field reporetd from the use of different products issued from the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1924-25MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1925 53 APPENDIX II. Table showing amounts of various products prepared and issued from the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during 1924-25, as compared with average amounts of the previous 5 years. DOSES PREPARED DOSES ISSUED Name of products 1924-25 Average of previous 5 years 1924-25 Average of previous 5 years Rinderpest serum .... 2,576,814 2,970,284 2,848,110 2,558,884 Anthrax serum..... 67,717 29,762 48,405 28,836 Hæmorrhagic septicaæmia serum . 456,566 116,381 279,061 170,350 Hæmorrhagic septicaæmia vaccine 247,300 160,490 212,600 160,490 Blackquarter vaccine 40,000 33,430 28,800 36,410 Mallein . . 24,462 74,500 25,765 68,487 APPENDIX III. Table showing the details concerning the nature of specimens received and examined at the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1924-25. Nature of specimens NUMBER OF SPECIMENS Positive Negative Doubtful Piroplasmosis..... 10 6 .. .. .. Blackquarter...... 3 .. Anthrax . ..... 2 1 Johne's Disease..... 1 2 .. Catarrhal pneumonia (and Madras sheep disease). 1 2 4 .. Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia ... 4 2 .. Epizootic Lymphangitis . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 15 5 Abortion (Equine abortion) . . . . . . 66 140 135 Abortion (Bovine abortion) 165 192 32 .. .. .. Strangles (streptococci) 17 1 .. Trypanosoma (evansi) .. 3 .. Tuberculosis. 4 2 .. F54 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, APPENDIX Table showing the doses of different products issued from the Imperial QUANTITY OF Products Punjab N.-W. F. P. and North Punjab South Punjab United Pro- vinces Bengal Assam Bihar and Orissa Central Pro- vinces Rinderpest serum . 115.000 87,500 61,000 140,200 204,600 71,000 343,000 235,000 Anthrax serum 67 2,000 4,000 6,000 2,000 H æ morrhagic Septicæmia serum. 25,000 22,000 54,000 26,000 11,000 2,000 76,000 8,000 Hæmorrhagic septichæmia vaccine. 62,700 4,000 137,200 .. .. .. 4,200 Blackquarter vaccine ... 2,000 1,400 .. .. .. 4,000 .. Blackquarter serum .. .. 500 .. .. Blackquarter filtrate .. ... 5,460 280 .. .. .. 600 Blackquarter filtrate aggressin. .. .. 5,820 220 .. .. .. .. Blackquarter aggressin . .. .. 4,720 .. .. .. .. .. Mallein for (subcut. test). 12 .. 10 18 100 .. 20 .. Mallein (for intra-dermo- palpebral test). .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Mallein (concentrated) . 10 .. .. .. .. ... .. .. Tuberculin (ordinary) 36 .. 6 .. .. 6 100 .. Tuberculin (concentrated) 22 .. .. .. 25 8 .. .. Avian Tuberculin (ordi- nary). .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Avian Tuberculin (con- centrated). .. .. ... ... .. .. .. .. Anti-streptococcic serum .. .. .. 24 .. .. .. .. Anti-streptococcic vaccine (ordinary). .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Extracted strangles vaccine. ... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Special strangles vaccine (aggressin). .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 100 Special vaccine .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . Abortion vaccine (bovine) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Abortion vaccine (equine) .. .. 80 .. .. .. ... TOTAL 202,847 115,500 269,696 167,242 217,725 77,014 433,320 245,700 * Includes 241,400
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1925 55 IV. Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1924-25. SERA IN DOSES Bombay Madras Sind and Rajpu- tana Balu- chistan Burma Coorg Military Depart- ment Indian States Foreign Coun- tries Im- perial Insti- tute of Veteri- nary Research TOTAL 279,500 109,200 20,000 .. 262,276 6,500 39,644 317,500 267,000 289,190* 2,848,110 1,000 4,000 .. 675 .. 970 724 13,880 4,767 8,322 48,405 8,000 20,000 1,500 .. .. .. 60 11,154 100 14,247 279,061 2,100 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,600 100 700 212,600 .. .. .. 400 .. .. .. 21,000 .. .. 28,800 5,000 1,000 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 335 6,835 1,225 1,000 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 8,565 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 6,040 .. .. .. .. .. .. 100 .. 4,820 1,725 300 .. .. .. .. 21,903 189 12 1,476 25,765 .. .. .. .. .. .. 33,525 180 5,000 23,365 62,070 .. .. .. 500 .. 485 995 20 .. 100 .. .. .. 178 .. .. 152 704 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 110 220 .. 6 6 .. .. .. .. 8 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 753 .. .. 777 .. .. .. .. .. .. . 501 .. .. 501 .. .. .. .. .. .. 207 .. .. 207 .. .. .. .. .. .. 706 .. .. .. 886 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 140 .. .. .. 154 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 298,570 135,536 21,606 1,075 262,321 7,470 97,420 367,168 277,091 338,398 3,535,699 doses discarded.
56 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, APPENDIX V. Table showing main results of the working of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1924-25. QUANTITY IN DOSES OF SERA OR ANTI-TOXIN PREPARED AND ISSUED FINANCIAL RESULTS INSTRUCTION IMPARTED RECEIPTS Name of sera or anti-toxin Opening balance Prepared during the year Re- turned serum TOTAL Issued during the year Stock in hand Depart- ment or province Imperial Officers attending class Number passed Indian Veterinary graduates Number passed Sale of sera, vaccines and other products 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 Rs. A.P. Rinderpest serum (dose 5 c. c.) 2,313,797 2,570,814 20,830 4,911,441 2,848,110 2,063,331 U. P. .. .. 3 3 Anthrax scrum (dose 15 c. c.) 16,566 67,717 ... 84,283 48,405 35,878 .. .. .. .. ... Hæmorrhaglc Septicæmia serum (dose 15 c. c). 47,389 456,566 .. 503,955 279,061 224,894 Bihar and Orissa. 1 1 3 3 Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia vaccine (dose 5 c. c.) .. 247,300 700 248,000 212,600 35,400 .. .. .. .. .. Blackquarter vaccine (dose 1 pillule) 6,600 40,000 .. 46,600 28,800 17,800 C. P. .. .. 2 2 Blackquarter serum (dose 15 c. c.) 8,928 4,686 .. 13,614 6,835 6,779 .. .. .. .. .. Blackquarter Germ-free filtrate (dose 10 c. c.) .. 8,565 .. 8,565 8,565 .. C. V. D. Bombay. .. .. 2 2 Blackquarter-filtrate aggressin (dose 5 c.c.) .. 6,040 .. 6,040 6,040 .. .. .. .. .. ..
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1925 57 Blackquarter aggressin (dose 5 c. c.) .. 4,820 .. 4,820 4,820 .. C. V. D. Burma .. .. 2 2 .. Mallein (ordinary) (dose 1 c. c.) 900 24,462 403 25,765 25,765 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Mallein (for intra-dermo- palpebral test (dose 0.1 c.c.) 30,545 23,270 8,255 62,070 62,070 .. Mysore .. .. 2 (attending course) 3 years .. Mallein (concentrated) (dose 0.2 c.c.) .. 510 485 995 995 .. .. .. .. .. .. } 6,53,313-10-6 Tuberculin (ordinary) (dose 3 c. c.) 704 704 704 Tuberculin (concentrated) (dose 0.25 c. c.) 11,280 .. .. 11,280 220 11,060 R. A. V. C. 1 1 .. .. .. Avian Tuberculin (ordinary) (dose 8 c. c.) .. 420 .. 420 20 400 .. .. .. .. .. .. Avian Tuberculin (concen- trated) (dose 0.25 c. c.) 16 .. .. 16 16 C. V. D. Madras .. 1 (attending course) .. .. 2 years .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Anti-Streptococcic serum (dose 15 c. c.) .. 21,213 3,300 ... 24,543 777 .. 23,766 Anti-Streptococcic vaccine (ordinary) (dose 5 c. c.) .. 640 .. 640 501 139 .. .. .. .. .. .. Extracted strangles vaccine (dose 15 c. c.) .. 800 .. 800 207 593 .. .. .. ... .. .. Special strangles vaccine (aggressin) (dose 20 c. c.) .. 930 50 980 886 94 .. .. .. .. .. .. Special vaccine (dose 5 c. c.) .. 68 .. 68 68 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Abortion vaccine (Bovine) (dose 15 c. c.) .. 154 .. 154 154 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Abortion vaccine (equine) (dose 10 c. c.) .. 80 .. 80 80 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. TOTAL 2,457,248 3,467,862 30,723 5,955,833 3,535.699 2,420,134 3 2 14 12 6,53,313-10-6
58 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, APPENDIX V[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31 ST MARCH, 1925 31 displayed at Muktesar. The bleeding rate of 8 c.c. per lb. body weight weekly appeared to represent a drain that was not too heavy in the animal's system, and thus from a buffalo of 700 lbs. body weight a quantity of blood amounting to over 44 litres, repre- senting over 22 litres of serum (or 4,400" doses "), could be extracted during the remunera- tive- period. After taking into consideration the initial cost of the producer (about Rs. 35), and its cost of feed and keep during its maintenance for serum production (say Re. 1 a day for 100 days), it may be safely assumed that further outlay of an expensive nature upon so-called " hyperimmunization " cannot be considered worth while in the light of the above information, and that the most economical and decidedly the most humane course would seem to be to start afresh with new buffaloes after the stock of ani- mals on hand had ceased to produce potent serum to meet current demands. The Muktesar experimental work therefore seemed to warrant fully the establishment of the system of serum production indicated from the above results as the routine method, and for the operations at Izatnagar commencing with the beginning of the cold weather season of 1924-25 a programme was laid on exactly parallel lines to the Muktesar large scale experiment. 496 buffaloes were used in all during the season for the work. The sera were returned for test to Muktesar, for storage and mixing for issue as indicated by tests upon hill bulls. (The sera from the 1st, 2nd and 3rd bleedings were placed in Barrel No. 1, from the 4th and 5th in Barrel No. 2, from the 6th and 7th in Barrel No. 3, from the 8th and 9th in Barrel No. 4, and the 10th, 11th, and 12th were designated " Barrel No. 5.") The " brew " of serum used in the Muktesar experiment was also adopted for the inoculation of the Izatnagar producers simultaneously with the virus. Some difficulty was found for some time in gauging the best dosage of this serum for administration. In the first batch inoculated, the serum was given at the rate of 30 c. c. per 600 lbs. body weight,32 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH,. with the length of postponement: with a four-day postponement, the serum control is apt to be too late to prevent fatality; with the three-day postponement, the reaction is still too severe; with the two-day and one-day delays there is a well observed and conti- nued pyrexia, much better developed with the two-day than with the one-day delay (Chart V). Bleeding is timed to start 7 days after the commencement of apyrexia; that is, from the 20th to 30th day after the virus inoculation, according to the severity of pyrexia. The animals are then bled three times on alternate days, at the rates of 6, 7, and 8 c.c. respectively per lb. body weight; next, they are rested for 9 or 10 days, and the bleedings repeated. The buffaloes are subjected to four series of bleedings in this way in all, and then discontinued. Meanwhile, the methods of feeding the animals while they are drained in this manner are subjected to careful observation, so that they retain good body condition. While " fat" condition has not been found to be a quality that improves animals as serum producers, it is distinctly advantageous to maintain the body weight without marked decrease throughout the bleeding period. In the system of feeding the producers are fed two concentrate rations, one of a mixture of rape-cake, gram, and bran, calculated to replace protein loss, and given at a fixed rate according to body weight throughout the bleeding period, and one composed of a mixture of barley and maize to provide " energy," which is varied according to the cooling effects of the weather at the time. Action of certain inorganic salts in increasing the antibody content of serum. Work upon this problem was initiated after the appearance of an article by MADSEN (Journal of State Medicine, 1923. Feb. Vol. 31, No. 2, pp. 51-73) reporting the experience gained over some years in the State Serum Institute, Copenhagen, upon the effects of repeated injections of minute quantities of certain inorganic salts into the blood stream in stimu- lating the " secretion" of specific antibodies. From the charts published it would appear that the potency of anti-diphtheria serum, obtained from horses, undergoes a gradual increase, when they are subjected after a hyperimmunizing dose of toxin to daily intravenous injection of manganese chloride, and that this increase is similar in nature to that which follows the injection of the specific antigen in that it attains a maximum on the 8th or 9th days after the commencement of salt injections and then declines. Further, the maximum " secretion " following upon the administration of a single dose of the inorganic salt would seem to be demonstrable in the blood serum withdrawn two hours after injection, declining in the serum withdrawn later. More- over, tables are published indicating a very neat relationship between efficacy in stimu- lating secretion and position of the various kations in the different groups of the Periodic System of classification of chemical elements, when a large range of these elements are tested in regard to their power of stimulating the production of antibodies in the form of specific agglutinins in rabbits. Following upon the economic advantages claimed to have been achieved by the manganese treatment of horses destined for the production of anti-diphtheria serum at the Copenhagen institute, steps were taken at once to exploit the possibilities of applying the system to the production of anti-rinderpest serum. In- vestigations have been carried out almost continuously at Muktesar upon the subject, and the results now available so far as they can be interpreted in their present state show that while it has not greatly succeeded, the system, or some modification of the system described by MADSEN, is capable sometimes of yielding encouraging results when applied in experimental conditions. The earlier investigations included tests upon hill bulls or buffaloes subjected to the routine procedure of " hyperimmunization " then followed, and treated according to MADSEN'S indications with uniform daily dosages of gram-molecular solutions of the chlorides of certain kations (manganese, zinc, magnesium, barium, copper), and also pilocarpine. Although the stimulation produced was not very marked or consistent in its occurrence in the various experiments, the effects produced by zinc and magnesium seemed at least to rival those produced by manganese, as is evidenced by the following curves (Chart VI) showing the test results upon sera from " hyperimmunized " bulls treated with daily injections of zinc and magnesium (in Expts. Nos. 1 and 2, respectively). Trials with beryllium chloride, which had been indicated as having the highest efficacy in MADSEN'S tables, proved that this salt was too toxic after intravenous injection to repeat with it satisfactorily upon cattle the process of non-specific stimulation; the ani- mals succumbed in large proportion with lesions of myocarditis. After a single intravenous injection of a salt the result usually seen was that the potency of the serum obtained increased towards the second hour after injection and then declined, but it also seemed from control tests that an increase in antibody content could sometimes be demonstrated as the result of the repeated bleeding alone.
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST, MARCH, 1925 59 Blockquarter aggresain (dose 5 .c) Mullein (ordinary) (dose 1 c.c.). Mallein (for intra-dermo- palpebral teat (dose 0.1 c. c). Mallein (concentrated) (dose 0.2 c. c.) } 2,547 8 0 520 7 3 10,545 6 8 6,66,927 0 5 2,16,912 4 0 2,61,623 6 3 58,031- 15 2 99,174 -10 -2 94,670 6 7 7,30.412- 10 -2 Tuberculin (ordinary) (dose 3 c. c.). Tuberculin (concentrated) (dose 0.25 c. c). Avian Tuberculin (ordinary) (dose 8 c. c). Avian Tuberculin (concen- trated (dose 0.25 c. c). Anti-Streptococcic serum (dose 15 c. c). Anti-Streptococcic vaccine (ordinary) (dose 5 c. c). Extracted strangles vaccine (dose 15 c. c). Special strangles vaccine (aggressin) (dose 20 c. c.) Special vaccine (dose 5 c. c.) Abortion vaccine (Bovine) (dose 15 c. c). Abortion vaccine (equine) (dose 10 c. c), TOTAL 2,547 8 0 520 7 3 10,545 6 8 6,66,927- 0-5 2,16,912- 4- 0 2,61,623 6 3 58,031- 15- 2 90,174- 10- 2 94,670- 6 7 7,30,412- 10- 2
CALCUTTA GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS 8, HASTINGS STREET
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research Muktesar For the year ending 31st March 1926 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CALCUTTA : GOVERNMENT OF INDIA CENTRAL PUBLICATION BRANCH 1927 Price As. 8 or 10d.
Government of India Publications are obtainable from the Government of India Central Publication Branch, Imperial Secretariat Building, 3, Government Place, West, Calcutta, and from the following Agents :ANNUAL REPORT OF THE Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar For the year ending 31st March 1926. I. ADMINISTRATION. Mr. J. T. Edwards held charge of the office of Director up to the 7th March, 1926, when he proceeded on 8 months' leave to England. From the 8th March, 1926, up to the end of the year under report Mr. F. Ware officiated as Director. Mr. Edwards proceeded to Simla in June 1925 to sit on the Selection Board appointed to select an Engineer for this Institute. He visited Delhi in November 1925, and again in January 1926, for discussions with Government relating to the budget of this Institute, and other matters ; with the Director General, Indian Medical Service, regarding the tuber- culosis inquiry ; and with the Chief Engineer, Delhi, in regard to build- ing projects at Izatnagar. Three short visits were paid by Mr. Edwards and one by Mr. Ware to the Branch Institute at Izatnagar. during the year. The posts of First and Second Veterinary Research Officers remained vacant throughout the year. The posts of First, Second and Third European Laboratory Assist- ants, Upper Grade, continued to be held by Messrs. D. Keiller, G. P. Goffi, and W. Mobbs, respectively, during the year under review. II. PRODUCTION. A perusal of Appendix II will show to what an unprecedented degree the demand for the products of this Institute, particularly anti-rinderpest serum, rose during the past year, and it was only by utilizing the resources of the Izatnagar Branch Laboratory to the fullest extent that it was possible to comply with the demands promptly and completely. The sera manufactured at Izatnagar were returned to Muktesar for storage, testing, and mixing, prior to issue to the field, and it is obvious that if this double journey up and down the ghaut could be avoided there would be a very great saving in time and expense.
2 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH,. The total number of doses of anti-rinderpest serum manufactured dur- ing the year was 71,41,301, of which 67,44,183 were made at Izatnagar. A feature of special interest was the manufacture of 5,33,500 doses. of a highly potent anti-rinderpest serum for the Mysore State, who under- took the active immunization of cattle against rinderpest on a large scale during the year. Approximately 45,000 c. c. of rinderpest virus for the active immuni- zation of cattle against this disease were despatched from Muktesar by post during the year, the largest consumers being the Izatnagar Branch Laboratory, Mysore State, and the Military Department. Stocks of both the anti-serum and vaccine used in the prophylaxis of hæmorrhagic septicæmia were manufactured on a large scale to meet the demands. As a result of further researches, a large quantity of the new, safe, and efficacious product known as blackquarter aggressin was made to- wards the end of the year, and there has already been a considerable demand for it. The demand for mallein and tuberculin, particularly avian tuberculin, remained high. Research work directed towards the standardization of mallein has been undertaken. III. RESEARCH. The Institute was very short-handed during the year for the prosecu- tion of research. The schemes for the additional staffing of the Insti- tute in this respect, submitted to Government in August 1925, had not materialized by the close of the year. Moreover, the extraordinary demands for the routine products of the Institute absorbed most of the time and energy of the available staff. Rinderpest. Experiments were continued amongst the animals of the experimental half-bred herd regarding the duration of immunity follow- ing upon the active immunization of cattle against rinderpest, and de- finite results have been obtained as a result of three years' observations. Experiments were continued also regarding the role played by insects in the transmission of rinderpest, and a Memoir on this work, prepared by Mr. S. K. Sen. Assistant to the Imperial Entomologist, Pusa, who was lent to this Institute for the purpose, is now in the press. In conjunction with Mr. Haddow at Izatnagar and Mr. D'Costa at Muktesar, accurate information was obtained concerning the periods during which serum-producers are capable of yielding a potent anti- serum and the gradation in potency of the serum during the period of profitable yield. Hæmorrhagic septicæmia. Research upon the factors that govern the maintenance of antigenic properties in the virus, and upon certain ad- ditional points of information required in serum manufacture were con- tinued with the result that the routine manufacture of anti-hæmorrhagic septicæmia serum is now a very simple matter.
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31 ST MARCH, 1926 3 Anthrax. A considerable amount of research work was done upon the methods of vaccinating different classes of animals in India, and an investigation of the most suitable methods of anti-serum manufacture has effected considerable economy in the production of this serum. Blackquarter in cattle. Some work was done in ascertaining the types of organism responsible for this affection in India, by comparison of the strains obtained from the field with standard types received from Europe. It would seem that the type commonly responsible for actual outbreaks in India is Bacillus chauv4 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, Five strains of tubercle bacilli were isolated from conservancy bulls belonging to the Corporation of Madras, and two of them, both obtained from the same animals but from different tissues, as a result of prelimi- nary observations, have shown the characters of avian bacilli. In the course of a tour in Bombay Dr. Soparkar examined a number of carcases at the Bandra Slaughter House for evidence of tuberculosis. Out of 1,586 carcases examined, suspicious lesions were found in 77 cases, but in only three instances was the disease confirmed by biological tests. A large number of old and debilitated cattle kept at different Pin- jarapoles in Bombay were tested by the intra-dermo-palpebral method for both tuberculosis and Johne's disease. Out of 378 animals so tested none reacted for Johne's disease, but one batch of 10 animals gave a suspicious reaction to tuberculosis. Eight debilitated horses were tested with both avian and ordinary tuberculin at the Chember Pinjarapole, near Bombay, but no reaction was detected. There appear to be no records of work on tuberculosis amongst pigs in India. Two hundred and forty-five pigs were examined at the Muni- cipal Slaughter House for Pigs in Bombay, and suspicious lesions were discovered in 98 of them. Out of these, 25 were subjected to a biological test and of these 9 gave positive results. This indicates an incidence of tuberculosis of about 4 per cent. in these animals. Johne's disease. Investigations carried out in the field by Mr. Menon and checked by laboratory examinations indicated that this disease had assumed large proportions in certain centres in Southern India. In the case of one it was decided that the large incidence of the disease precluded control by segregation, and that the alternate method of resorting to wholesale slaughter of valuable animals might be averted by having recourse to vaccination with an avian strain of tubercle bacilli, following upon the principles enunciated by von Behring, MacFadyean, and Calmette in this connection. A set-back was received by somewhat high mortality in the vaccinated animals which proved to be due to the unanticipated and surprisingly high virulence of the strain employed. Surra. Great advances were made during the year in the treatment of this disease with the German product known as Bayer 205, which has already gained conspicuous success in the treatment of the similar human affection in Africa known as sleeping sickness. There are now in the Institute several horses that have been apparently completely cured with this drug for several months. Most of the work under this head was carried out personally by Mr. Edwards with the help of Mr. R. K. Ram, Veterinary Inspector, Bihar and Orissa, and Mr. Torbas Khan, Veterinary Inspector on the staff of this Institute. Strangles. Investigations upon the control and prevention of strangles at the Army Remount Depôts were continued, and some of the results are embodied in a paper wrirten by Mr. Edwards on the subject. Minor researches. Included under this head are investigations by Mr. Cooper regarding bovine nasal granuloma and the causes of mortality
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1926 5 amongst hill bulls in the outkraals of this Institute. At Izatnagar Mr. Haddow undertook some researches upon the control of the bacterial contamination of serum, the control of piroplasmosis and trypanoso- miasis in buffalo serum-producers, and the incidence of distomiasis in buffaloes. A paper entitled " On the occurrence of Isospora and Balantidium in Cattle " by Messrs. Cooper and Amar Nath,and two papers entitled " Experiments on Treatment of Hookworms in Dogs " and " On the oc- currence of a Lung Fluke Paragonimus edwardsi, n. sp. in a Wild Cat (Palm Civet) in Kumaon Hills " by Mr. Amar Nath, were sent for publi- cation during the year. IV. INSTRUCTION. The two years' course arranged for Mr. Krishnamurthi, Professor of Pathology at the Madras Veterinary College, terminated in June 1925, and one officer of the Royal Army Veterinary Corps attended a short course during the year. Six Civil Veterinary Assistant Surgeons also attended short courses, and the two Veterinary Inspectors of the Mysore Civil Veterinary Depart- ment, who began a 3 years' course in January 1925, continued to be at- tached to the Izatnagar Branch Laboratory for training. The Govern- ment of India have now decided that elementary short-term courses are primarily the concern of Provincial Governments and should not be held. at this Institute without their special sanction. V. PATHOLOGY. Mr. H. Cooper held the post of Pathologist throughout the year. He acted as an examiner in Pathology at the Punjab Veterinary College, Lahore, in June 1925, and also visited the laboratory of the Camel Spe- cialist at Sohawa, and the Central Research Institute at Kasauli, during the same tour. He again proceeded on tour in December 1925 to attend the Meeting of the Indian Science Congress at Bombay, visiting en route Babugarh and Meerut to conduct tests for Johne's disease and tuberculosis in military animals. On his return journey he visited Poona in connec- tion with simultaneous inocluations against rinderpest, and then he pro- ceeded to Lucknow and Mona to make inquiries in regard to bovine contagious abortion and Johne's disease in military animals at those places. Attached to this section were one Veterinary Inspector for routine post-mortem and histological work and Mr. Amar Nath, M.Sc.,who carried out helminthological and protozoological examinations. The routine work of the section comprised 1,745 post-mortem and 6,834 blood smear examinations, in addition to the examination of the outside specimens and carrying out of the tests shown in Appendix III. In addition to his research work, which is referred to under that head, Mr. Cooper supervised the Library, which subscribed to 130 periodicals and purchased 59 text-books and other books of reference during the year.
6 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, VI. IZATNAGAR BRANCH LABORATORY. Mr. J. R. Haddow, third Veterinary Research Officer, was in charge of the Branch Laboratory throughout the year under report. In July he visited the experimental farm of the United Provinces Agricultural Department at Shahjahanpur in order to consult the Deputy Director on questions relating to cultivation work at Izatnagar, and in October and November he visited the Army Remount Depôts at Sargodha and Mona, respectively, in connection with the control of strangles at those depôts. In December he attended the Board of Agriculture meeting at Pusa, and thereafter most of his time was spent at Muktesar helping the Director in his administrative duties. While in past years it has been customary to carry on active work at the Branch Institute during the cold season only, during the year under review active work was in progress throughout. The demand for anti- rinderpest serum was exceptionally high and as a result of this and also the increased working period 1,614 buffaloes were purchased, as against 496 in the previous year, for the routine manufacture of anti-rinderpest, anti-hæmorrahagic septicæmia, and anti-anthrax sera. The average cost of buffaloes was Rs. 34 as compared with Rs. 36 in the previous year, and after completing their useful period of production 983 of them were sold at an average price of Rs. 12-8 and 70 of them were transferred to Muktesar. The buffaloes which were sold were for the most part in good condition and quite fit for work, and possessed the additional advantage of being completely immune to rinderpest, so that the price obtained for them was not their true value. In order to overcome the prejudices of the ryot against and increase the demand for these " discontinued " buffaloes the co-operation of the district officials was sought, and 30 of them have been distributed free amongst needy persons who suffered in the floods of the previous year. As a result of the elimination of the method of hyperimmunization in the manufacture of anti-rinderpest serum and improvements in the arrangements for the distribution of virus, it was not necessary to main- tain large numbers of hill bulls at Izatnagar as in previous years. The lease of the cultivable portion of the estate, about 700 acres, which had been granted to a contractor, expired on 30th June, 1925, and the land was then taken over by the Institute and placed temporarily under a Veterinary Inspector. The results of the cultivation under- taken by the Institute after the land was taken over were poor, but nothing more could be expected. As the result of constant cropping without replenishment the land is very unproductive ; operations could not be commenced in sufficient time for the kharif season, and lack of rain affected the rabi crop. A great deal of the land is still over-run with coarse grass, and only 436 acres were sown with kharif and 430 with rabi crops. During the year 10,528 maunds of grain and 38,855 maunds of hay and grass were consumed at Izatnagar, and of this amount 48
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1926 7 maunds of grain and 15,762 maunds of hay and grass were obtained from the area under cultivation. The animals are still housed in temporary chuppers which were renewed, during the year under report departmentally whereby a considerable saving was effected. The charge of the permanent buildings passed from the Public Works Department, United Provinces, to the Chief Engineer, Imperial Works, Delhi, in July 1925. A road was constructed during the year and one cattle shed was commenced. VIII. FIELD. In connection with military dairies, remount depôts, and dairy farms, a very large amount of testing for such diseases as tuberculosis, Johne's disease, strangles, contagious equine and bovine abortion, and also the serum simultaneous inoculation of cattle against rinderpest, is now undertaken by the staff of this Institute. Some of the work done during the past year has been referred to under other sections, but by far the greatest part of it was performed by Mr. M. B. Menon. This officer was officiating in the post of Second Veterinary Research Officer until the 11th July, 1925, after which a post of temporary Assistant Veterinary Research Officer was created for him. He was on tour at the beginning of the year, and did not return to headquarters until the middle of February 1926, and he left again for the Imperial Cattle Breeding Farm, Karnal, in the middle of March. Other places visited by him were the Imperial Institute of Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Bangalore, and its Branch Institute at Wellington, the Madras Cattle Breeding Farm, Hosur, the Dairy attached to the Madras Agricultural College, Coimbatore, and the Rayankere Dairy, Mysore. VIII. VETERINARY. This section was under the charge of Mr. J. D'Costa, Veterinary Deputy Superintendent. Being mainly concerned with routine production and the general care of animals under experiment, it does not call for much comment although its importance cannot be overestimated. In addition to routine work some preventive inoculation against rinderpest, introduced into the villages surrounding Muktesar by cattle brought from plains, was undertaken by the Veterinary Inspectors of the section. Altogether, nearly 10,000 doses of anti-rinderpest serum were used in these inoculations. The experimental work personally undertaken by Mr. D'Costa included tests to ascertain the effect of the injection of certain inorganic salts on serum-producing buffaloes, and the results of these are not yet available. IX. ESTATE. The post of Farm Manager, the officer in charge of this section, was held by Mr. A. J. Hearsey for the whole period under report., except
8 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH,. for 21 days in January 1926 when he was on leave and the Farm Overseer officiated for him. Cultivation. The area under cultivation by this section was increased during the year from 53 acres to 71 acres. The total produce consisting of Indian corn, barley, oats, mixed grasses, vegetables, etc., amounted to 6,937½ maunds. Hay. Contracts were made for the supply of 16,000 maunds of hay from without the laboratory boundary at Rs. 0-15-9 per maund, and 4,000 maunds from within the laboratory boundary at Rs. 0-12-0 per maund. In addition, 17,972 maunds of green oak leaves and 2,615 maunds of grass were obtained from the reserve forest by the Institute coolies. Grain. Arrangements were made for the supply by contract of 10,900 maunds of grain, including 3,500 maunds of oil-cake, at the average rate of Rs. 5-6-3 per maund. Forest. The reserved forest of the Institute supplied 32,376 maunds of fuel wood, 1,918 maunds of charcoal, and 100 loads of ringals, in ad- dition to the produce already mentioned. Six pounds of deodar seeds and two maunds of oak seeds were sown, and 108 deodar trees were plant- ed out in the station area during the year. Animal supplies. Two thousand three hundred and forty-eight bulls, 352 buffaloes, 26 cows and calves, 729 sheep, 11 goats, 38 ponies, 1 mule, and 32 donkeys were purchsed for experiment and production during the year. Of these, 607 bulls, 119 buffaloes, and 274 sheep died in the out- kraals before coming under experiment. The causes of this high rate of. mortality are being investigated. X. DAIRY. The management of the dairy remained in the hands of Mr. G. P. Goffi,. Second European Laboratory Assistant, during the year. This officer was also in charge of the cultivation around the Latoli outkraal, and it was therefore decided in December 1925 to move the dairy from its old site within the station to Latoli, where the experimental dairy herd was already being kept. The cows in these two herds supplied the station during the year with 38,014 lb. of milk which produced a revenue of Rs. 4,942-7-6. Under the orders of Government, since the 1st November, 1925, milk has been sold at the rate of Rs. 0-4-6 per seer, and even at that rate the demand has exceeded the supply. The amount of land under cultivation at Latoli during the year under report was 99 acres, and another 39 acres were in process of recla- mation. The produce from this area consisted of 5,313 maunds of green fodder, 1,556 maunds of hay, 212 maunds of straw, and 79 maunds of grain. XI. ENGINEERING. The charge of this section was held by Mr. P. B. Ganguly, Assistant. Engineer, until 9th November, 1925 on which date he handed over to Mr. A. Little john, newly appointed.
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31 ST MARCH, 1926 9 The engine was run for 2,524 hours and the number of units of electri- city generated during the year was 26,273. Of this number, 12,992 units were put into the storage battery and used for centrifuge driving, lighting, chlorogen manufacture, and incubators. The remainder were distributed amongst the 3 water pumps, and the dairy and farm machi- nery. The amount of gas generated by this section during the year was 4,97,164 cubic feet. This was used for the incubators and various other laboratory operations. The boilers worked for 2,258 hours, evaporating during this period 29,740 gallons of water. The steam obtained was used in the sterilizing house, and a small quantity for the purpose of distilled water. The approximate total quantity of water pumped during the year was 27,34,300 gallons. Of this quantity 5,94,000 gallons were pumped from the stream Agarpani Gadhera, and the remainder were obtained from the springs discharging into No. 1 reservoir. After a report had been re- ceived from Mr. Littlejohn in the matter, an inspection of the Agarpani Gadhera, which discharges into reservoir No. 3, was made, and it was as- certained that this stream is subject to continual contamination, which would be of considerable danger if the station were visited by an outbreak of contagious disease. The construction of a sedimentation and storage tank was commenced at the end of the year, but it is hoped that a new scheme, which has been initiated for obtaining a purer supply of drinking water, will commence to function in the current year. XII. MEDICAL. The charge of this section was held by Military Assistant Surgeon O. H. Gade, until the 15th June, 1925, when he was transferred to the charge of Chakrata Dispensary, and was succeeded at this Institute by Civil Assistant Surgeon G. S. Bhargava. No epidemic of a serious nature occurred during the year under report, except an outbreak of measles amongst the children of the staff. One case of typhoid fever, 4 cases of pulmonary tuberculosis, and one case of chicken pox were detected during the year. The total number of outdoor patients treated at the dispensary were 3,786 as compared with 3,488 in the previous year. The number of indoor patients fell from 144 in the previous year to 64 in the year under report, but the number of major operations performed rose from 2 to 5. About 24 children were born to the members of the staff, but as strict purdha is observed by the majority of them, the services of the Medical Officer were not utilized in many of the cases. The necessity for a trained midwife is, therefore, very apparent. The methods of collection and disposal of night-soil in the station are primitive, and these and other questions of sanitation are under consider- ation at the present time.
10 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, XIII. FINANCE. The financial results of the working of the Institute are shown in Appendix V. The receipts, mostly from the sale of its products, amounted to Rs. 13,09,497-15-3 as against Rs. 6,66,927-0-5 in the previous year. This amount includes Rs. 7,472-5-0 realized on account of arrears of the previous year, while for 1925-26 bills amounting to Rs. 12,194-1-4 remained outstanding at the end of the year. The total expenditure incurred during the year amounted to Rs. 8,55,815-0-6. The annual audit of the Institute was carried out during July 1925, and generally speaking a distinct improvement was noticed in the main- tenance of accounts, particularly those relating to animals and coolies. A few irregularities in other sections were discovered and necessary steps to avoid a recurrence are being taken. At the request of the Auditor- General a set of account rules has been framed by the auditors, and these are still under consideration. XIV.GENERAL. The year under review is very noteworthy in one respect. For the first time in its history the Institute showed a profit of receipts over expenditure and this to the extent of more than four and a half lakhs of rupees. In view of the opinion of the Inchcape Committee that this Institute should be self-supporting this is very satisfactory, but to some it may appear that there is more than one side to this question. In the first place it seems a moot point whether the products of the Institute should be charged at such a price that the provinces and its other customers contribute this amount to the revenues of the Govern- ment of India, after all expenditure connected not only with the manu- facture of those products, but also with pure research, has been deducted. The next point that arises is whether the amount of money available for research should depend on the varying demand that will exist for the Institute's products each year. This must be so if the Institute is to be regarded as one self-supporting whole. The question of separating research from production at this Institute has many difficulties, but they do not appear to be insuperable, and the correct policy to aim at would seem to be the making of the production section self-supporting, without being a great source of profit, and to provide the different sections coming under the head of pure research each with its own budget. It will be observed that in writing this report an attempt has been made to describe the work of the Institute under those sections into which it naturally falls. Such important sections as Bio-chemistry, Proto- zoology, Helminthology, and Entomology still remain to be formed, but even without these there are at present 9 independent sections. Up to the end of the year under report no arrangements had been made to delegate any powers to Section Officers, with the result that the amount of work in the Director's office far exceeded the capabilities of any one man, and Mr. Edwards only just escaped a serious breakdown in health.
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1926 11 Such subjects as transport, labour, and construction do not find a place in the report as now arranged, but there appears to be no necessity for referring to them, unless there are points of general interest requiring notice. The administration of the local Public Works Department staff was taken over from the United Provinces by the Imperial Works, Delhi, on 1st April, 1925. Only minor works were constructed during the year. The past year saw the retirement from the office staff of three old and valued members. Rai Sahib Pandit Krishna Nand Joshi entered the service of the Institute as an Assistant Tabulator in 1895, was appointed to the newly-created post of Office Superintendent in 1913, awarded the title of Rai Sahib in 1915, and proceeded on 20 months' leave prepara- tory to retirement on 10th November, 1925, on which date he was relieved by Mr. J. M. Bannerji, from the office of the Agricultural Adviser to the Government of India, Pusa. Pandit Buddhi Ballabh Joshi was transferred to this laboratory from the office of the Civil Surgeon, Naini Tal, in 1915 and retired as Head Clerk on an invalid pension on 14th December, 1925, after nearly 30 years' Government service. Babu Duni Chand joined the laboratory staff as an artist in 1893, and retired from the same post on a superannuation pension on 9th October, 1925. Mr. Edwards having gone on leave just before the end of the year, the question of acknowledgments to the different members of the staff is a difficult one. The writer can only say that since taking over charge he has met with the most loyal, cheerful, and efficient response from everyone to his demands, which have been many, that any ad- ministrator could desire. F. WARE, F.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., Offg. Director. 1st July 1926.
12 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, APPENDIX I, Summary of results of inoculations in the field of the different products issued from the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1925-26. Province Number of outbreaks in which inoculation was undertaken NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DIED UNINOCU- LATED IN COURSE OF DISEASE NUMBER OF ANIMALS INOCULATED NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DIED AFTER INOCULATION Percentage of deaths in inoculated bovines Equines Bovines Others Equines Bovines Others Equines Bovines Others United Provinces. Rinderpest serum 915 .. 14,044 150 .. 1,12,904 2,584 .. 227 .. .. Hæmorrhagic septicæ- mia serum. 253 .. 1,771 .. .. 30,007 .. .. 10 .. .. Blackquarter vaccine 3 .. 21 .. .. 260 .. .. 2 .. .. Blackquarter serum . 2 .. 23 .. .. 201 .. .. .. .. .. Punjab. Rinderpest serum 1,284 .. 16,493 5 .. 2,26,202 294 .. 330 .. .. Hæmorrhagic septicæ- mia serum. 324 .. 2,722 .. .. 1,05,920 .. .. 41 Hæmorrhagic septicæ- mia vaccinc. 573 .. .. .. .. 1,49,433 .. .. 2 .. .. Blackquarter vaccine . 113 .. .. .. .. 20,931 .. .. .. .. .. North Punjab. Rinderpest serum 21 .. 575 .. .. 4,095 .. .. 6 .. .. Hæmorrhagic septiæ- mia serum. 4 .. 42 .. .. 1,736 .. .. .. .. .. Hæmorrhagic septiæ- mia vaccine. 13 .. .. .. .. 2,483 .. .. .. .. .. Bengal. Rinderpest serum 533 .. 7,815 .. .. 85,994 .. .. 512 .. .. Anthrax serum . 4 4 9 .. 49 243 .. .. .. .. Hæmorrhagic septiæ- mia scrum. 83 774 .. .. 13,195 .. .. 8 .. .. Blackquarter serum . 2 20 .. .. 200 .. .. .. .. Assam. Rinderpest serum 449 12,542 .. .. 38,249 .. .. 730 .. .. Anthrax serum . 58 5 382 21 284 2,634 85 .. 11 .. .. Hæmonhagic septiæ- mia serum. 33 442 13 11 2,588 61 .. 16 .. .. Bihar and Orissa. Rinderpest serum 721 4,486 .. .. 1,07,541 .. .. 437 .. .. Anthrax serum 15 81 .. .. 1,867 .. .. 8 ..
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1926 13 APPENDIX I-contd. Summary of results of inoculations in the field of the different products issued from the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1925-2614 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH,. APPENDIX I-concld. Summary of results of inoculations in the field of the different products issued from the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1925-26-concldamp;. Province Number of outbreaks in which inoculation was undertaken NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DIED UNINOCU- LATED IN COURSE OF DISEASE NUMBER OF ANIMALS INOCULATED NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DIED AFTER INOCULATION Percentage of deaths in inoculated bovines Equines Bovines Others Equines Bovines Others Equines Bovines Others Baluchistan. Rinderpest serum . 2 5 .. 63 1 Anthrax serum . 6 981 .. 975 5 Blackquarter serum 1 .. .. 20 Burma. Rinderpest serum 743 6,589 79,922 498 Bengal Veterinary College. Rinderpest serum .. 1,334 Hissar Cattle Farm. Rinderpest serum 3 11 3,948 33 Hæmorrhagic septicæ- mia vaccine. .. 461 Blackquarter vaccine 3 6 1,734 13 Mysore State. Rinderpest serum (serum alone method). Rinderpest serum (serum simultaneous method). Anthrax serum . . 424 241 34 4,742 2,854 395 97,429 37,153 4,911 130 358 287 23 3 6 Hæmorrhagic epticæ- mia serum. Hæmorrhagic septicæ- mia vaccine. 11 82 .. 1,498 .. Blackquarter vaccine 203 801 13,405 4 Blackquarter aggressin Total. 17 72 .. 1,132 Rinderpest serum (serum alone method). Rinderpest serum (serum simultaneous method). Anthrax serum . 7,944 241 142 9 106,728 2,854 2,083 434 24 370 11,38,510 37,682 13,881 4,310 353 233 4,249 24 28 6 0.373 0.06 0.02 Hæmorrhagic septicæ- mia serum. Hæmorrhagic sepitcæ- mia vaccine. 1,376 632 10,360 75 18 11 248,090 159,063 220 181 3 1 0.073 0.002 Blackquarter serum, vaccine, Germ-free filtrate and aggressin. 383 1,216 42,941 .. 26 0.06
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1926 15 APPENDIX II. Table showing amounts of various products prepared and issued from the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during 1925-26, as compared with the average amounts of the previous 5 years. DOSES PREPARED DOSES ISSUED Name of product 1925-26 Average of previous 5 years 1925-26 Average of previous 5 years Rinderpest serum .... 71,41,301 28,47,699 52,95,829 25,65,760 Anthrax serum..... 52,669 40,132 73,018 35,390 Hæmorrhagic septicæmia serum . 5,58,000 2,47,215 4,02,953 2,02,236 Hæmorrhagic septicæmia vaccine 2,03,400 1,87,850 2,11,150 1,80,910 Blackquarter vaccine 10,000 33,520 21,500 38,143 Mallein...... 1,56,560 51,402 64,936 53,430 APPENDIX III. Table showing the details of specimens received and examined at the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1925-26. Nature of specimens. NUMBER OF SPECIMENS. Positive Negative Doubtful Equine abortion..... 182 483 144 Bovine abortion . . . 101 146 7 Johne's disease . . . 5 6 .. Tuberculosis . . . . 1 5 .. Trypanosomiasis . . . 38 15 1 Piroplasmosis . . . . 14 18 4 Hæmorrhagic septicæmia . . . . 0 0 3 Mange .... . . . 5 6 1 Bursati .... . . . 2 .. .. Sheep pox . . . .. .. 1 Rinderpest . . . 1 .. .. Pneumonia and Pleurisy . . . . 7 .. .. Tumour .... . . . 2 ... .. Strangles. . . . 31 .. .. Anthrax . . . .. 7 1 Fowl diphtheria . . . .. 1 .. Fowl cholera . . . . 1 .. .. Hæmaturia . . . .. .. 1 Glanders . . . 2 5 .. Epizootic lymphangitis . . . .. 11 .. Parasitic diarrh16 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, APPENDIX Table showing the doses of different products issued from the Imperial QUANTITY OF Products Punjab N. W. F.P. and North Punjab South Punjab United Pro- vinces Bihar and Orissa Bengal Assam Burma Rinderpest serum . 4,42,500 1,03,500 4,97,500 4,58,600 3,60,000 2,86,960 1,37,000 4,20,000 Anthrax serum .. .. .. .. 3,000 3,000 9,000 .. Hæmorrhagic septicæmia serum. 25,000 10,500 1,19,500 35,000 67,000 30,000 5,000 .. Hæmoirhagic Septicæmia vaccine. 73,800 32,000 81,800 .. 13,500 .. .. .. Blackquarter vaccine .. 2,000 .. 4,000 1,000 1,000 .. .. Blackquarter serum .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Blackquarter aggressin . .. 5.000 20,100 .. .. .. .. .. Mallein ordinary . 25 256 50 24 35 100 .. .. Mallein intra-dermo-palpe- bral. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Tuberculin ordinary 30 6 .. .. .. .. .. .. Tuberculin concentrated . 30 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Avian Tuberculin ordinary 30 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Avian Tuberculin con- centrated. 30 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Strangles serum .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Strangles vaccine . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Special strangles vaccine (aggressin). .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Special vaccine (autogen- ous). .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Abortion vaccine (bovine) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Mixed vaccine ... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Bacillus abortus serum . .. .. .. ... .. .. .. .. Rindepest virus . 120 .. .. .. .. 1,120 .. .. TOTAL 5,41,565 1,53,262 7,18,950 4,97,624 4,44,535 3,22,180 1,51,000 4,20,000 NOTE.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1926 17 IV. Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1925-26. SERA (IN DOSES) Madras Bombay Sind and Rajpu- tana Central Pro- vinces Balu- chistan Coorg Military Depart- ment Indian State Foreign Coun- tries Im- perial Insti- tute of Veteri- nary Research TOTAL. 4,99,000 1,49,700 29,150 2,75,000 .. 46,500 56,523 12,71,096 1,60,900 1,01,900 52,95,829 5,000 2,000 .. 2,000 1,350 670 .. 10,592 8,067 28,339 73,018 33,000 .. .. 10,000 2,600 .. .. 11,000 .. .. 100 .. .. 120 .. .. 14,393 13,333 26,407 4,02,953 5,200 .. 2,750 1,000 1,100 .. 2,11,150 .. .. 1,000 10,500 2,000 21,500 2,000 .. .. 5,000 .. .. .. 800 .. .. 93 7,893 2,000 5,180 4,476 36,756 200 1,275 150 .. 200 .. 22,205 1,161 10,000 5,155 40,836. .. 20 .. .. .. .. 14,780 150 5,000 4,150 24,100 30 12 .. .. .. .. 11 81 50 3,168 3,388 180 15 .. .. .. .. 50 5 100 12,945 13,325 20 .. .. .. .. .. 500 .. .. 580 1,130 120 .. .. .. .. .. 50 .. .. 4,130 4,330 .. .. .. .. .. .. 804 13 817 345 345 60 34 94. 50 200 250t .. .. .. .. .. .. 12 .. .. 12 10 9 19 10 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 10 2,220 380 .. .. .. .. 6,310 13,500 .. 20,395 44,045 5,41,780 1,68,002 31,900 2,95,000 2,550 47,270 1,00,681 13,31,366 2,00,650 2,12,885 61,81,800 virus are approximate.
18 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL ISTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, APPENDIX V. Table showing the financial results of the working of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1925-26. RECEIPTS EXPENDITURE Sale of Sera,Vac- cine and other products Sale of animals Sale of garden products and re- served forests Other miscellan- eous receipts TOTAL Salaries and travelling allowance of officers and staff Feed and keep of animals Cost of chemicals and apparatus Other miscellan- eous expendi- diture Purchase of animals TOTAL 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 RS. A. P . RS. A. P . RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. . A .P RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A. P. RS. A P. RS. A. A. P. 12,82,620- 15- 6 15,864- 12- 0 3,225- 6- 3 7,786- 13- 6 13,09,497- 15- 3 1,99,501- 3- 0 3,53,890- 13- 8 56,228- 5- 8 1,36,092- *10,059- 12- 4- 2 0 1,00,042- 10- 0 8,55,815- 0- 6 12,82,620- 15- 6 15,864- 12- 0 3,225- 6- 3 7,786- 13- 6 13,09,497- 15- 3 1,99,501- 3- 0 3,53,890- 13- 8 56,228- 5- 8 1,46,152- 0- 2 1,00,042- 10- 0 8,55,815 0- 0 * Special grant for Battery. MGIPC-M-IV-2.36-27.6.27-500.
REPORT OF THE Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research Muktesar For the year ending 31st March, 1927 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CALCUTTA : GOVERNMENT OF INDIA CENTRAL PUBLICATION BRANCH 1928 Price As. 10 or 1s.
REPORT OF THE Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research Muktesar For the year ending 31st March, 1927 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CALCUTTA : GOVERNMENT OF INDIA CENTRAL PUBLICATION BRANCH 1928 Price As. 10 or 1s.
Government of India Publications are obtainable from the Government of India Central Publication Branch, 3, Government Place, West, Calcutta, and from the following Agents :REPORT OF THE Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. For the year ending 31st March, 1927. [ J. T. EDWARDS, D.Sc. (London), M.R.C.V.S.] I. STAFF OF IMPERIAL AND GAZETTED OFFICERS. 1. Director. Mr. F. Ware, F.R.C.V.S., continued to officiate until the 12th November, 1926, when he handed over charge to Dr. Edwards, the permanent Director, on return from leave. 2. Pathologist. Mr. Hugh Cooper, M.R.C.V.S. 3. First Veterinary Research Officer. The duties of the post were largely performed during the year by Mr. J. R. Haddow, in addition to his duties as Officer-in-Charge of the Branch Institute at Izatnagar. 4. Second Veterinary. Research Officer. This post also remained vacant throughout the year, but steps were taken by Government to fill it on a temporary basis with a specially selected Indian graduate who had received a veterinary training at State expense in England. 5. Third Veterinary Research Officer. Mr. J. R. Haddow, B.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., D.V.S.M., held this appointment, and he was also placed in charge of the Branch Institute, Izatnagar, with increased emoluments for his additional responsibilities. 6. Officer deputed by Indian Research Fund Association for Tuber- culosis Enquiry. Dr. M. B. Soparkar, M.D. 7. First Laboratory Assistant (Upper Grade). Mr. D. Keiller. Granted one year's leave out of India with effect from the 18th March, 1927. Mr. Torabaz Khan, G.P.V.C., Veterinary Inspector, was appointed to officiate during his absence. 8. Second Laboratory Assistant (Upper Grade). Mr. G. P. Goffi. 9. Third Laboratory Assistant (Upper Grade). Mr. W. Mobbs. 10. First Assistant Veterinary Research Officer. Mr. M. B. Menon, G.B.V.C., appointed to the post on its creation on 18th April, 1926, following upon the occupancy of a special post created for him. 11. Second Assistant Veterinary Research Officer. Vacant.
REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH 12. Assistant Research Officer (Protozoologist). Mr. S. K. Sen, B.A., B.Sc. Appointed to the post by transfer of his services from the Imperial Entomologist's staff, Agricultural Research Institute, Pusa, and com- menced duty on the 5th October, 1926. 13. Assistant Research Officer (Helminthologist). Vacant. 14. Veterinary Deputy Superintendent. Mr. J. D'Costa, G.B.V.C. Granted leave with effect from the 3rd January, 1927 Mr. Abdul Ghani, G.P.V.C., Senior Veterinary Inspector, officiated during his absence. 15. Engineer. Mr. A. Littlejohn. 16. Farm Manager. Captain A. J. Hearsey. Granted leave from the 15th February to the 14th March, 1927. Babu Krishna Nand Joshi, Dairy Overseer, officiated during his absence. 17. Medical Officer. The post was held successively by the following three officers :MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1927 3 demonstrate the processes of manufacture to Major H. Brassey-Edwards, Deputy Chief Veterinary Officer, Kenya, and accompanied him then on consultation to Agra. Thence, he proceeded to Delhi to obtain the opinion of the Accountant-General, Central Revenues, on the merits of candidates for the post of Head Accountant at the Institute and con- sult the Public Works Department authorities, and stayed three days at Bareilly, to inspect Izatnagar, on his way back, reaching Muktesar on the 3rd April, 1927. II. INTERNAL ECONOMY. (a) Fodder and grain. The supply of hay delivered by a contractor at Muktesar amounted to 20,000 maunds. The grain supplies, delivered also by contract, amounted to 9,070 maunds ; the total cost of the con- tract, including transport, came to Rs. 46,317. At Izatnagar, the progress of cultivation undertaken by the staff on the estate, amounting to 261 acres for the kharif crop and 256 acres for the rabi crop, contributed very largely towards the fodder require- ments, and in future years it is hoped that the expenditure on the purchase of fodder there will be very small. It is estimated that 24,687 maunds of grass and hay and 1,105 maunds of grain were obtained from the estate during the year. (b) Animal supplies. The number of animals purchased for the work at Muktesar was 1,400 hill bulls, 12 buffaloes, 142 sheep, and 84 goats. The number of bulls that died in the outkraals before they were admitted into the inner sheds was 272. The high mortality occurring among these animals in the outkraals had been the subject, during the preceding year, of an extensive special investigation, which unfortunately failed to reveal clearly its origin. However, with the adoption of a more stringent system of supervision, the mortality was appreciably reduced. The intensive research which has led to the institution of the present system of manufacture of anti-rinderpest serum by the " immune " method has considerably simplified the problem of hill bull supply for Muktesar by eliminating the cause of resentment which used to be aroused in the Hindu population in the days of the formerly practised method of so-called " hyper-immunization " and which demanded the exercise of special tact towards potential suppliers. A number of sheep and goats were also obtained for use, and the developments in research towards the close of the year raise hopes that before long these small ruminants will supplant hill bulls in the propagation of the rinderpest virus. The animal supplies of the Branch Institute at Izatnagar consisted almost entirely of buffaloes which numbered 1,619. These were specially used for the massive production of rinderpest and hæmorrhagic septi- cæmia sera. Two hundred and seventeen buffaloes were transferred to the cultivation work of the estate at the Branch Institute, and 113 (including 68 new) buffaloes were also transferred to Muktesar for
4 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, experiments, manufacture of blackquarter aggressin and the local culti- vation work. (c) Forest supplies. The Reserved Forest at Muktesar yielded 29,371 maunds of fuel wood, 1,524 maunds of charcoal, 3,227 maunds of grass, 2,166 maunds of green leaves, 222 loads of ringals, and 1,238 maunds of pine needles for bedding. The demands for firewood have been steadily increased, however, beyond the anticipation of the working plan laid down some years ago, and steps have now been taken to have this plan revised and, if necessary, to procure our additional require- ments outside our Reserved Area. The fuel supplies for Izatnagar were obtained from the grain contrac- tor ; 870 maunds of fuel wood were consumed, as against 1,643 maunds in the preceding year. (d) Labour. The daily average number of coolies employed under the Farm Manager was 120.3, the number being much curtailed, as compared with previous years, with the transfer of the charge of the outkraals to the Veterinary Deputy Superintendent, from the 1st May, 1926. The average number of cattle attendants employed under the latter officer was 194.3. The average number of men employed on the Latoli estate was 76. The average cost of labour, including daily labour supervisors, was Rs. 12-1 a head per mensem. There was no outbreak of disease among the men, except a few cases of small-pox and mumps among the outkraal cattle attendants. The average number of men employed at Izatnagar daily was 254, including 133 on estate cultivation work. The average cost of the labour, including daily labour supervisors, was Rs. 11-8 a head per mensem. The health of the staff remained good, and special arrange- ments were made for the treatment of the sick by securing the part- time services of a medical officer from the Central Jail, Bareilly. (e) Transport. Despite the difficulties in the transport of material to and from Muktesar and the exceptionally heavy demands for products received during the year under report and the preceding year, consign- ments have been cleared from Muktesar after the lapse of an average period of 5 days after the receipt of orders. There were sent from Muktesar during the year 8,125 standard rail cases, as compared with 8,280 cases in the preceding year. The cost of transport incurred by the remoteness of Muktesar forms in reality only a minute proportion of the total expenditure upon the manufacture and issue of our products, and this cost is probably much less than what would be entailed other- wise by the installation of suitable storage accommodation on the plains. (f) Laboratory appliances and technical equipment. The budget allot- ment for the year under the head " Purchase of Chemicals and Appara- tus " was Rs. 40,000, of which Rs. 33,954 was actually spent. A large proportion of the expenditure under this head is entailed in the purchase of packing material for the despatch of laboratory products, for which Government has now sanctioned the imposition of fixed charges to cover its cost in the bills forwarded to our customers, and the allotment of
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1927 5 credit for such material as is returned to the laboratory in a serviceable condition. The total sum charged to customers during the year for packing material amounted to Rs. 30,814, and credit to the extent of Rs. 27,000 was given for returned material. (g) Farm cultivation and Dairy. The land under the supervision of the Farm Manager, including the Ritani garden, was extended from 71 to 74 acres. The financial state of this concern as represented by a previously scheduled costing system was : expenditure (excluding super- vision), Rs. 8,486-4; revenue, Rs. 8,813-1-3. The Latoli estate, the reclamation of which was commenced under special supervision (Mr. Goffi) in 1923, furnished 143½ acres of land for actual cultivation, as compared with 99 acres in the preceding year. The estimated financial presentation of the working of the estate during the year was : expenditure, Rs. 17,615-15 ; receipts, Rs. 11,199-9-9. It is estimated that the estate will become a remunerative undertaking, according to the scheduled paper system of displaying accounts, in three years, and, in addition, an estate of considerable capital value will have been added to the assets of the Institute. The quantity of milk sold in the Institute Dairy was 37,324 lb.; the value of the milk was Rs. 3,741-4-6. The experimental herd of breeding cattle and their progeny have been maintained for over four years as part of the ordinary stock of the Institute, for certain researches, among which are the experiments upon the duration of immunity in young animals following upon the serum-simultaneous inoculation against rinderpest. The Izatnagar estate was taken over for cultivation by the staff of the Institute at the commencement of 1925, and its development for the purposes of supplying the local needs in fodder was approved by Govern- ment, who, in April, 1926, sanctioned the special appointment of a Farm Superintendent to supervise the work. Mr. W. Mather was appointed to this post in July, 1926, relieving a veterinary inspector of the staff who had been carrying on the work temporarily. During the year under report, 261 acres were planted with the kharif crop, and 256 acres with the rabi crop, as compared with 436 and 441 acres in the preceding year. This short experience had shown that it was economically advisable to restrict the extent of cultivation, as the state of the land was too poor to yield two crops successively within a year, until much effort had been expended in tilling and manuring. Hence, a good deal of the expenditure entailed on the estate during the year was incurred in such improvement, in the purchase of new implements, and in cleaning up much waste land that hindered easy cultivation. The estimated expenditure and income during the year was Rs. 34,692-3-2 and Rs. 26,254-4-3, as compared with Rs. 35,109-4-5 and Rs. 19,067-4, respectively, in the preceding year. This rate of progress is believed to be very satisfactory, and with the completion of the Sarda canal scheme for artificial irrigation in the neighbourhood, we may also look forward to the conversion of the estate
6 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, into a highly profitable undertaking. The average daily attendance of coolies was 124, as against 114 in the preceding year. (h) Laboratory Engineering Department. At Muktesar, the quantity of water pumped by the Power House Staff was 3,040,800 gallons. A sedimentation and storage tank for the purification of the water supply was constructed during the year, but has not yet been brought into use as it still lacks some fittings. The number of units of electricity generated was 24,143. For incubator heating and other laboratory operations, 479,620 cubic feet of gas were generated. The steam boilers worked very satis- factorily, evaporating 26,536 gallons of water during 2,039 working hours for transmission mainly to the steam autoclaves, and partly for condensa- tion for the needs of the laboratory in distilled water. A new sterilizing house was constructed during the year, and so some of the autoclaves had to be erected temporarily elsewhere. With the transference of mass production of serum to Izatnagar, the electric centrifuges at Muktesar have fallen into a state of relative disuse. Only 3,750 litres of blood were centrifuged, for the production of anti-anthrax and anti- blackquarter sera mainly, and with the employment of buffaloes for yielding these sera, centrifugation has ceased to be essential, although a somewhat increased yield of serum can be obtained by means of it. (i) Building construction. This work was undertaken, as in the pre- ceding year, by the Public Works Department, Imperial Works Division, Delhi, who maintain a trained subordinate and staff in the station. The chief items of construction were :MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1927 7 (j) Medical and sanitary arrangements. The numbers of patients treated at the Muktesar dispensary were :8 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, Until the calendar year 1924 was drawing to a close, the income derived from the sale of products had always been annually considerably below the budgeted recurring expenditure of the Institute, despite the fact that from the commencement of the financial year 1922-23 the prices charged for these products were raised 50 per cent. to close up the gap between income and expenditure. The Inchcape Committee reported early in 1923 that steps should be taken with effect from the commence- ment of the following financial year to place the Institute on a self- supporting basis, as it saw no reason why the Central Government should produce sera and vaccines for the use of local Governments at a financial loss. With the verified figures before them of a number of lean years (1923-24 and preceding years), the authorities at the Government of India were undoubtedly much perplexed to find a solution to this prob- lem of self-support, and after considering various expedients, such as a limited expansion of the Izatnagar Institute, to effect economies in manu- facture, resolved, in June, 1925, to prevent, at any rate, a very marked departure from it by issuing instructions that for three years the annual budgeted expenditure of the Institute should be limited to Rs. 7 lakhs, except in years of unusually high demand for serum, when a supple- mentary grant would be sanctioned, the amount of which would naturally be covered by the increased receipts. There was every reason, however, at that time to believe that a solution to the problem would be found in the steps already taken in technical administration at the laboratory. The causes of the decline in revenue over the lean years have already been analysed in preceding Reports, wherein it has also been explained that a close study of the incidence and severity of rinderpest in India over several years showed that the disease underwent periodic fluctua- tions in gravity, approximately three-yearly periods of intensification alternating with three-yearly periods of abatement. The reserve stock of anti-rinderpest serum at the Institute at the commencement (April 1st) of the financial year 1919-20 in reality only amounted to 1,87,437 doses, even though at this time of the year the quantities in reserve were usually highest, after the close of the season of manufacture then undertaken on a relatively limited scale on the plains, at Kurgaina, near Bareilly, to supplement the Muktesar produc- tion. Moreover, the capacity of the laboratory to manufacture rinder- pest serum at the time was not deemed to exceed approximately 30 lakhs of doses annually, and to meet exceptionally heavy demands throughout the country negotiations were set afoot in 1921 to open up a branch laboratory in Southern India to manufacture serum for that part of the country. Following upon this period of high demand, covering roughly the years 1919 to 1921, there followed a period of considerable natural abatement in rinderpest lasting until towards the end of 1924, with corre- spondingly low demand, and coincidently a time when administrative authorities throughout India were much exercised with financial strin- gency, and when the veterinary authorities in some Provinces were dis- turbed by the delegation of powers to finance in large part measures for combating disease to district and municipal boards. Hence, although
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1927 9 steps had been taken to balance expenditure, by raising the price of serum with effect from the commencement of 1922-23, there followed a period of years during which no endeavour at the laboratory could raise the income for that time. Much time was devoted to intensive economic research upon the methods of manufacturing sera and to exploring the possibilities of expanding the capacity of the laboratory for manufacture, and accu- mulating stocks of good sera in time to meet the period of anticipated high demand following upon a period of depression. In the Report of the Institute for the financial year 1924-25, there is given in some detail an account of the efforts made and the success obtained in cheapening the costs of production of sera for issue to combat rinderpest and hæmorr- hagic septicæmia. The knowledge obtained justified the laboratory in abandoning the expensive procedure of " hyper-immunization " for the production of anti-rinderpest serum, and the substitution of the rela- tively cheap " immune " system, which, however, needs a considerable degree of expert supervision to execute it most economically. Again, it was found that a highly potent hæmorrhagic septicæmia serum could be obtained speedily from the animals that had been discontinued from the rinderpest work, at a cost that was very low indeed compared with the former system of progressive hyper-immunization that had to be carried out in close contact with the headquarters laboratory at Muktesar. The Izatnagar tributary plains station was definitely reclaimed for use in 1922, and employed for serum production during the following cold weather. Previously, it had not been anticipated that a subsidiary plains station could be used for serum manufacture except during the cold weather months. With its ample surface area and favourable situation, the Izatnagar site clearly showed possibilities; the extent to which the new processes of mass production devised at Muktesar could be unloaded on to it was carefully investigated, and, eventually, from October, 1924, onwards this cruder work has been undertaken nearly completely, and throughout the year, at Izatnagar, thus relieving Muktesar for the more delicate work for which it is naturally admirably adapted by its situation, such as the standardization of the sera prior to issue, the manufacture of products requiring closer expert supervision and a cooler environment, and special research projects. The succeeding period of high demand actually commenced, as anticipated, towards the end of 1924 ; there were available ample stocks to meet it. In spite of the continued high demands these stocks have been maintained and even increased, although during the course of the year 1925 this involved a great strain upon the direction of the laboratory, especially as unusually high demands were coming in also at that time for highly potent serum for use in the serum-simultaneous inoculation against rinderpest. However, after this initial period of stress, the initial processes of manufacture devised became familiar to the manufacturing staff, and experience showed early that our resources for manufacture in bulk were very elastic
10 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, This position is reflected by the stocks of rinderpest serum held in reserve in recent years on the 1st April, as compared with those of 1919 (given above):MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1927 11 alarming cattle diseases of India could not be obliterated within a measurable space of time ; what is lacking mainly now is the means of applying this knowledge. Until the means have been provided for dealing completely and adequately with outbreaks at their seat of origin, it cannot be said that the research worker has had an opportunity to display the extent to which he is fully prepared already to render assist- ance. In any event, in so far as the Muktesar Institute has been able now to comply fully with all the demands made upon it by the field workers in executing their most important functions, it must be adjudged that its conduct and policy have been completely successful. During recent years the amount of research work undertaken to achieve this end has been very large, and it has been mainly of the " applied " kind that does not lend itself readily to publication. It has needed the concerted endeavour of all members of the staff. The duties of all the higher members of the staff must necessarily converge in the attainment of what the field services most cogently demand. As the demand, whether addressed directly to the Institute of implied, takes for the most part the form of a series of products which they are prepared to purchase, the endeavours of the laboratory staff must be turned in that direction, and even in the case of a worker such as the Pathologist, who is given a special designation, his endeavours have been turned mainly towards the minute study of the disease for which the demand of protective agents is largest and of the several com- plicating factors that arise in our endeavours to secure a high degree of protection against this disease. The laboratory workers are also not unmindful of the necessity of investigating disease for which the appro- priate treatment is likely to be some agent that is not saleable by the laboratory, and the progress of the researches undertaken upon the treatment of surra is illustrative of this aspect of its activities. During the year under report, upon the advice given to Government by the Officiating Director, a total quantity of 8,41,000 doses of anti- rinderpest serum was issued at a nominal rate of payment, three annas per 90 c.c., to the veterinary authorities of the United Provinces Govern- ment to combat extensive outbreaks of rinderpest in districts neighbour- ing Muktesar (Garhwal, Almora, Naini Tal) which are the sources of its hill bull supply. This concession represented a diminution in price below that which would be charged ordinarily for the serum amount- ing in all to Rs. 1,48,927-1-0, so that if this sum were also added to the revenue of the Institute for the year, it would amount to Rs. 12,55,120-1-0. III. MANUFACTURE AND ISSUE OF SERA AND VACCINES. (A summary of the results reported to have been obtained in the field after the use of these products is given in Appendix I.) The mode of manufacture of the principal products of the laboratory has been somewhat fully described in the Report of the Institute for the
12 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, financial year ending March, 1925. Since that year, the revised methods of production, standardization and issue have been developed upon the same lines, so that for some time they have become standard processes. Anti-rinderpest serum is now made wholly, or wholly save for some small quantities resulting from experimental work, at the Izatnagar Branch Institute, whence it is despatched, in consignments designated according to the produce of the various stages of manufacture, to Muktesar, for storage, careful testing of the variously designated consign- ments, mixing for issue according to the potency indicated by the tests, bottling, packing, and issue. The serum is made entirely by the " immune " method, which requires careful expert supervision to obtain the largest yield of dependable serum. Manufacture is undertaken throughout the year, but experience has shown that it is made most satis- factorily during the cooler months of the year; hence the rate of manu- facture is greatly increased in the cold weather. The aim has been to issue regularly a serum of uniform potency for the preventive inoculation, by the " serum-alone " method, and very large brews are now mixed together, the constituents of which have been subjected to rigorous tests. In former years, when the reserves maintained were low, the custom was to prepare relatively minute brews, some of which were undoubtedly of very high potency, but a large number of which were probably of low and certainly of irregular potency. The present policy seems to have succeeded very well, judging from the fact that complaints regarding the reported inefficacy of the serum are not received. For the serum-simultaneous inoculation, an endeavour is made to prepare separately a serum of very high potency, representing the yield of the buffalo producers during the earlier stages of extraction. Serum destined for this treatment is submitted to somewhat exhaustive tests for its potency and safety when employed in large doses. When the Mysore authorities undertook to carry out this treatment on a large scale in 1925, the resources of the Institute were hard pressed to deliver guaranteed supplies in the large quantities required, con- currently with the heavy demands that were coming in for serum for the preventive inoculation, for which a large proportion of serum of the highest potency is also necessary for admixture. However, the requisite serum was successfully issued, and the results reported by the Mysore staff are most encouraging. In a communication received in February, 1927, 49,244 cattle were reported to have been immunized, with a morta- lity of 344 (=0.69 per cent.). This mortality would appear to be the lowest of which there is authentic record. The Egyptian veterinary authorities have had experience of the method as their standard method of protection over several years, and among 5,14,452 cattle immunized by them during the years 1912 to 1921 the mortality was 4,688 (=0.91 per cent.). It would therefore seem that for indigenous Indian cattle the serum-simultaneous method of protection against rinderpest is strongly indicated both from the known durability of its effects and its relative safety. It is likely that a necessary means of ensuring its
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1927 13 propagation will be the institution of some form of co-operative insurance to cover the anticipated losses among the animals subjected to it. The serum for use against hæmorrhagic septicæmia is now also made entirely at Izatnagar from buffaloes discontinued from rinderpest production, by means of the simple processes described in the 1924-25 Report. Sera against anthrax and blackquarter are still made at Muktesar' and all the vaccines and other biological products (mallein, tuberculin). The demand for blackquarter serum has become much larger than was anticipated and the demand for blackquarter aggressin, the new safe product made for preventive inoculation against this disease, has been very high. The efficacy of the aggressin may be estimated from the following extract from a letter, dated 27th May, 1927, from the Live- stock Expert to the Government of the Punjab and Superintendent, Government Cattle Farm, Hissar :14 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH. (5) Blackquarter serum. Issued 28,928 (15 c.c.) doses, as compared with 7,893 doses in 1925-26. Manufactured 18,216 doses, as against 12,698 doses in the previous year. Stock in hand at the commence- ment of the year, 11,584 doses ; at close, 872 doses. (6) Blackquarter vaccines. (a) Issued 50,500 doses of the " pillule " vaccine as compared with 21,500 doses in 1925-26. Manufactured 44,200 doses, as against 10,000 doses in the previous year. Stock in hand at the commencement of the year 6,300 doses; at close nil doses. (b) Issued 79,600 (5 c.c.) doses of the " aggressin " vaccine, as compared with 36,756 doses in 1925-26. Manufactured 60,510 doses, as against 57,496 doses in the previous year. Stock in hand at the commencement of the year, 20,740 doses; at close, 1,650 doses. (7) Mallein. (a) Issued 16,663 (1 c.c.) doses of mallein for the ordinary, or subcutaneous, test for glanders, as compared with 40,836 doses in 1925-26. (b) Issued 23,415 (0.1 c.c.) doses for the intra-palpebral (I. D. P.) test, as compared with 24,100 doses in 1925-26. There were in stock 10,864 doses ordinary, and 80,980 doses I. D. P. mallein at the commencement of the year, and 22,781 doses for the subcutaneous test were manufactured during the year as against 51,550 doses in the previous year. (8) Tuberculin. (a) Issued 310 (3 c.c.) doses of ordinary (human) tuberculin for the subcutaneous test for tuberculosis, and 3,130 (0.2 c.c.) doses of concentrated (human) tuberculin for the intra-palpebral test for the disease, as compared with 3,888 and 13,325 doses, respectively, in 1925-26. (b) Issued 48 (8 c.c.) doses of ordinary avian tuberculin for the subcutaneous test, and 2,865 (0.25 c.c.) doses of concentrated avian tuberculin for the intra-palpebral test, for Johne's disease, as compared with 1,130 and 4,330 doses, respectively, in 1925-26. None of these pro- ducts were prepared during the year under report, as there were suffi- cient stocks in hand at the commencement of the year [3,319 doses ordinary (human) tuberculin, 2,790 doses concentrated (human) tuber- culin, 1,395 doses ordinary avian tuberculin, and 17,270 doses concen- trated avian tuberculin]. (9) Strangles serum and vaccine. Issued 13,146 (15 c.c.) doses of anti-streptococcic serum and 3,394 series of doses (1, 2, 3) of anti-strep- tococcic vaccine, as against 817 doses of serum and 345 doses of vaccine in the preceding year. A quantity of serum and vaccine was discarded. These products were issued on request; the researches of former years, however, have failed to demonstrate their efficacy, and their use there- fore has not been advised. 4,032 doses of the vaccine were prepared during the year. (10) Contagious abortion (equine) vaccine. Issued 200 doses of this vaccine (Bacillus abortivo-equinus), as against none in the preceding year. (11) Autogenous and specially prepared vaccines. Issued 10 doses of autogenous and 20 doses of " mixed " vaccine, as compared with 250 doses of autogenous and 10 doses of mixed vaccine in the previous year.
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1927 15 (12) Rinderpest virus. Issued 34,640 (1 c.c.) doses of virulent rinder post blood for the active immunization of cattle by the serum-simul- taneous method against rinderpest, as against 44,045 doses in 1925-26. Over one-half of this quantity was despatched to the Branch Institute at Izatnagar for the immunization of buffaloes in the manufacture of anti-rinderpest serum. A perusal of the above figures indicates that the total issues of 1926-27 were approximately equal to those of 1925-26 (63,18,758 total doses, as against 61,81,800 total doses), and yet the income of the year under report was distinctly lower than that of the previous year (Rs. 10,88,346-9-11, as against Rs. 12,82,620-15-6). The reasons for this reduction in income, by Rs. 1,94,274-5-7, are :16 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, August to the 15th October, 1926. In addition, the three years' special training, which commenced in January 1925, was continued for the two Veterinary Inspectors deputed by the Mysore Civil Veterinary Depart- ment to the laboratory; their progress has been very good. V. RESEARCH. The research work undertaken at the Institute is only touched upon cursorily in the present Report, as it seems to be the wish of Government that information upon such work should be communicated in original papers. The following are very brief notes upon the principal items of research:MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1927 17 several months, both by direct passage, and by alternate passage through goats and bulls. The goat virus also possesses a high degree of virulence for sheep It retains its affinity for the small ruminants even though after the initial implantation it is maintained by direct passage in bovines. The morbid changes observed in these animals are principally pneu- monic, and not alimentary as in bovines. Lung changes are constant, while in animals that succumb rapidly no lesions may be clearly observed in the alimentary tract. The disease is readily transmitted by contact. We suspect that some outbreaks of so-called pleuro-pneumonia in sheep and goats in India are in reality rinderpest. The blood of artificially infected goats is virulent as early as the second day after infection, and by the fourth day has reached a high degree of virulence, when quantities as low as one-hundredth to one-ten thousandth of a cubic centimetre may convey the disease to susceptible bulls. The severity of the disease produced by the goat virus seems to be generally lower than that conveyed by the bovine virus. Means have therefore been found to overcome the distressing complica- tion often observed after the serum-simultaneous inoculation caused by the unwitting introduction of virulent piroplasms with the rinderpest blood that has to be injected simultaneously with the serum. The piro- plasms are parasites that are highly specific for their particular hosts, and so by diverting the rinderpest virus to hosts other than cattle it becomes completely separated from the bovine piroplasms. The question of how to obtain a rinderpest virus that is not accompanied with the parasites of virulent redwater has therefore now been solved. The goat is a convenient animal for use as a virus producer; the rabbit was too small for convenient work and too prone to other diseases (rabbit septicæmia, coccidiosis) when maintained in large numbers. Researches are in active progress to discover additional means of extending the longevity of the virus, and it is hoped that methods will be found within the next two or three years for distributing rinderpest virus in good condition to all parts of India so that when field workers employ serum for the protection of cattle they can with little more trouble and with little or no risk inject some virus at the same time, and extend the resultant immunity against rinderpest from one of a few days' duration to one of some years. Researches were continued upon methods of economic production of serum. The results of a large test conducted on ou customary producers (buffaloes) indicated that there was no advantage in resorting to ' hyper- immunization ", the serum obtainable by the " immune " method being equally good. A batch was put on concurrently and repeatedly treated with small quantities (10 c.c.) of virulent blood mixed with minute quantities of tapioca grains, to ascertain whether what has been dis- covered recently by a French authority concerning the properties of such particles in hindering absorption and hence increasing anti-toxin production, applied also to rinderpest anti-body production. The result was not decisive.
18 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, Work has been done upon the best method of preserving sera and the most appropriate time intervals for bleeding for serum, as anti- body exhaustion appears to take place at certain stages unless the intervals are properly spaced. Also the efficacy of intravenous " salting " prior to bleeding has been subjected to more research. Surra. The work undertaken upon this disease is described in a somewhat lengthy Memoir (now in the press). The treatment recom- mended for equine surra, that has progressed to a moderately advanced clinical stage is :MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1927 19 test (cross-agglutination, absorption tests) have been found to vary in " type," so that on direct comparison at the laboratory with the four serological types differentiated by MEYER among Bacillus abortus- melitensis strains there have been found types to correspond with each. This finding, in the light of what is known regarding the differential properties of types among other micro-organisms (e.g., pneumococcus), is considered to be of significance in the preparation of cultures for vaccination. The vaccine now issued from the laboratory comprises representatives of each type, which have lost their virulence completely through long sojourn in artificial media. The mixed culture is grown on agar slopes, to be emulsified for use as a live vaccine immediately prior to use by the field workers. Abortion in mares. Research upon this affection has also been noticed in previous Reports. Large numbers of agglutination tests for the diag- nosis of the common causal organism (Bacillus abortivo-equinus) have been undertaken during the last six years at the laboratory, and an attempt made to control the disease in certain important studs by the periodical testing of all equines and the segregation of infected animals. This work has been difficult, on account of the considerable gradation in the intensity of the reactions observed among animals in infected studs, so that it is difficult to distinguish always with certainty animals that are infected from those that are healthy. The tendency to per- sistence and considerable spread of the affection seems to vary very much with the locality upon which brood animals are kept: in certain establishments where there is much close grazing the tendency is for the disease to persist in a virulent form: on others where the animals are well scattered or are largely fed with cut fodder the proportion of infection observed is often very high, with a low incidence of actual abortion. The policy of segregation has been persevered in on one large establishment (the Hissar Farm) for five years, but the results have been disappointing. Some animals have been noticed to carry infection for as long as two years, and afterwards become re-infected shortly after they have been declared clean. It is also likely that organisms of the Bacillus coli type are frequent concomitant or additional causes of infectious abortion, as has been demonstrated in other parts of the world. Vaccination prior to service with dead B. abortivo-equinus has not been entirely successful. With the knowledge that the immu- nity conferred after a single vaccination with members of the para- typhoid group of bacilli does not much exceed two months and the indi- cations published by such authorities as MIESSNER on this affection, it has now been resolved to treat the brood mares on heavily infected estab- lishments by repeated vaccination, once every two months, throughout the period of gestation, except during the latter months. Strangles. Attempts at prophylactic vaccination against this disease were continued during the strangles season covering the cold weather of 1925-26 at the Army Remount Depôts, Mona and Sargodha. The incoming batches of young stock were divided into three lots:20 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, serum from animals that had recently suffered from a febrile attack indicating the onset of strangles, and then to be exposed to natural infection as early as possible ; (c) to be left untreated, as controls. The results on analysis indicated that pyo-vaccination did not set up any certain prophylactic effect, and the system was also useless as a means of therapeutic treatment. The results forthcoming from the serum- infection treatment were vitiated for a number of reasons and further observations upon the efficacy of the method are being continued. Tuberculosis. Dr. Soparkar continued his researches with the financial aid of the Indian Research Fund Association. The relative value of methods of applying the tuberculin test upon cattle in India was inves- tigated. The double intradermal test would appear to be distinctly superior to the subcutaneous test for the reason that with the latter method thermal reactions are not infrequently observed in animals in which no visible signs of tuberculosis can be seen post-mortem. Dr. Soparkar examined the carcases of a number of slaughtered cattle at the Ferozepore and Lahore abattoirs, and at Ferozepore found by close search the lesions of tuberculosis in 100 out of 614 cattle examined (16 per cent.) and in 87 out of the 100 affected cases tubercle bacilli were demonstrated. At Lahore, out of 91 animals examined, eight (9 per cent.) were found tuberculous. These findings would seem to call for a drastic revision of the generally current views regarding the rarity of bovine tuberculosis in India. So-called surgical tuberculosis of human beings, of the kind that is known in Europe to be caused in ascertained high degree by bovine tubercle bacilli, is disturbingly frequent in India, and, both in interests of progress in human and animal pathology, it would seem clear that investigations upon bovine tuberculosis in India ought to be vigorously prosecuted. Researches upon the identity of strains of tubercle bacilli isolated from pigs in India were continued by Dr. Soparkar, and of 11 strains studied, one was found to belong to the bovine type and eight to the human type, while two are under further study. These findings are in marked contrast to those recorded in Europe, where the majority of porcine strains have been found to belong to the bovine type, while in America a very large proportion belongs to the avian type. Camels of the 41st Camel Transport Corps, Lahore, were examined by the tuberculin test (intrapalpebral method), with both ordinary and avian tuberculin. Out of 802 camels, seven gave a decided and four a suspicious reaction with ordinary, and two a decided and one a suspicious reaction with avian tuberculin. Two of the reacting camels were des- troyed for examination, but no tuberculous lesions were found in them; exhaustive laboratory tests on material taken from one of them revealed, however, the presence of tubercle bacilli. Tuberculous material taken from bullocks belonging to the Madras Corporation disclosed on examination tubercle bacilli of the bovine type ; in material from one animal, however, infection was found to be caused by a mixture of bacilli of the avian and bovine types.
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1927 21 Some further work was done by Dr. Soparkar upon the resistance of indigenous cattle to virulent infection and the results obtained confirmed his earlier findings that these animals showed great variability in their resistance to infection. A considerable amount of work was done by Dr. Soparkar and other members of the staff in estimating the virulency of strains of organisms of the avian type, particularly by intravenous infection in cattle. It was found by Dr. Soparkar that preliminary subcutaneous infection with minute doses of the avian organisms rendered cattle subsequently highly resistant to intravenous infection with large doses of organisms of this type, and also gave partial immunity against infection in the same way with organisms of the human and bovine types. Mr. Menon in the course of his tours tested the cattle of five large Military Dairy herds for tuberculosis. At Quetta and Bagerje, there was a high proportion of reactors. The reacting animals were destroyed, and tuberculosis confirmed readily in all of them. Johne's disease. Work upon the system of preventive treatment is in active progress at Muktesar; the method of safe administration having been discovered, researches are in course of execution to obtain further light upon its reliability. Fowl diseases. Tick-fever, or fowl spirochætosis, was investigated by Mr. Cooper, assisted by Mr. Sen: experiments were carried out on the transmission of the disease, its diagnosis, and treatment. Fowl ticks procured from Lahore, Lucknow, and Bhim Tal were proved in- fective. The efficacy of a specific anti-serum and a series of arsenical drugs was tested: the results are not yet conclusive. A specific anti- serum was made against fowl cholera on the same lines as that made against bovine hæmorrhagic septicæmia. In a paper already submitted for publication, a trichomonad parasite found in the circulating blood of fowls has been described by Messrs. Cooper and Amar Nath Gulati. Miscellaneous. Other researches were carried out on:22 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, and blood smears) was 75. The number of blood smears received was 123. The number of samples of serum received for examination by the means of the agglutination test was 947 (bovine abortion 313, equine abortion 634). VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. From the brief survey given of the work accomplished during the year, it will be ascertained that the various members of the staff have worked splendidly, and accomplished a great deal. In fact, the de- mands made on members engaged in several duties are undoubted- ly excessive, especially on the higher technical staff and the accounts side of the office, and these portions of the staff ought to be strengthened. It may not be out of place at this stage in the history of the labora- tory to pay a deserving tribute to the distinguished man of science Dr. A. LINGARD, to whom the conception of Muktesar and the develop- ment of an organization capable of expansion to its present dimensions are due. Himself a scholar and a medical man, without veterinary qualifications, and highly trained in the methods of disease investiga- tion as they were known in his day, he held sway from the date of his appointment as Imperial Bacteriologist in 1890 until his retirement in 1907. Muktesar, with its tributary laboratory, whether it be deemed successful or not, owes its present position to his persistent efforts ex- tending over 17 years. Criticism of its position and work will naturally be forthcoming most readily from a kind of professional public who have not seen the place or who are ignorant entirely of the methods of executing the work for which the place was founded. It is held that the progressive direction of the Institute must be followed upon the lines which LINGARD had surely established.
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1927 23 APPENDIX I. Table showing a summary of results of inoculations in the field reported from the use of different products issued from the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during 1926-27. Province Number of outbreaks in which inoculation was undertaken NUMBER OF ANI- MALS WHICH DIED UNINOCULATED IN COURSE OF OUT- BREAKS NUMBER OF ANIMALS INOCULATED NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DIED AFTER INO- CULATION Percentage of deaths in inoculated bovines Equines Bovines Others Equines Bovines Others Equines Bovines Others United Provinces. Rinderpest serum . 978 .. 17,303 338 .. 125,846 8,376 .. 539 4 .. Hæmorrhagic septictæ- mia serum. 184 .. 1,371 .. .. 24,826 .. .. 10 .. .. Blackquarter serum . 4 .. 42 .. .. 894 .. .. .. .. Punjab. Rinderpest serum . 1,141 .. 13,156 3 .. 214,171 90 .. 337 .. .. H. S. serum . . 371 .. 3,103 .. .. 98,223 .. .. 55 .. .. H. S. vaccine 747 .. .. .. .. 204,271 .. 4 .. .. B. Q. vaccine 124 .. .. .. .. 25,239 .. .. .. .. .. N. W. F. P. & N. Punjab. Rinderpest serum 23 .. 393 151 .. 5,307 1,180 .. 4 7 .. H. S. serum 14 .. 92 .. .. 3,059 .. .. .. .. .. Sind and Rajputana. Rinderpest serum 98 .. 653 .. .. 8,815 .. .. 51 .. .. H. S. serum 38 .. 271 .. .. 3,564 .. .. 2 .. .. Assam. Rinderpest serum 525 .. 14,546 .. .. 40,367 .. .. 743 .. .. H. S. serum 14 .. 143 .. .. 1,072 .. .. 6 .. .. Anthrax serum . 26 6 83 .. 213 761 .. .. 3 .. .. Bihar and Orissa. Rinderpest serum 409 .. 2,266 .. .. 64,177 .. .. 166 .. .. H. S. serum 341 .. 1,377 .. .. 73,061 .. .. 28 .. .. H. S. vaccine 15 .. 57 .. .. 3,875 .. .. .. .. .. Anthrax serum . 19 .. 93 .. .. 3,367 .. .. 1 .. ..
24 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, APPENDIX I -contd. Table showing a summary of results of inoculations in the field reported from the use of different products issued from the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during 1926-27MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1927 25 APPENDIX I-concld. Table showing a summary of results of inoculations in the field reported from the use of different products issued from the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during 1926-2726 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, APPENDIX II. Table showing amounts of various products prepared and issued from the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during 1926 27, as compared with average amounts of previous 5 years. DOSES PREPARED DOSES ISSUED Name of products 1926-27 Average of previous 5 years 1926-27 Average of previous 5 years Rinderpest serum . . 56,57,201 35,49,572 53,80,187 29,99,698 Anthrax serum. . . 83,434 46,542 29,047 41,017 Hæmorrhagic septicæmia 3,85,231 3,15,559 3,63,709 2,61,521 serum. Hæmorrhagic septicæmia 3,13,400 2,03,290 2,88,350 1,97,900 vaccine. Blackquarter vaccines . 1,04,710 50,904 1,30,100 47,515 Mallein .... 22,781 65,205 40,078 48,711 APPENDIX III. Table showing the details concerning the nature of specimens received and examined at the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during 1926-27. SUMMARY OF EXAMINATION OF SPECIMENS RECEIVED FROM OUTSIDE SOURCES DURING 1926-27. (Summary to 31st March, 1927.) A. Tissues. Disease Positive Doubtful Negative Diphtheroid pneumonia . . . 5 .. .. Johne's disease . . . 5 1 10 Blackquarter . . . . 3 .. .. Fowl spirochætosis . . . . 1 .. .. Tuberculosis . . . . 12 2 3 Fowl pox . . . 1 .. .. Anthrax in hides. . . . . 1 .. 1 Canine filariasis . . . 1 .. 1 Glanders . . . 1 .. 1 Carcinoma . . . 2 .. .. Melanotic sarcoma . . . . 2 .. .. Melanosis . . . 1 .. .. Actinomycosis . . . .. .. 1 Inflammatory lesions . . . 2 .. .. Parasitic lesions . . . 2 .. .. Adeno-carcinoma . . . 1 .. .. Cirrhosis of liver . . . 2 .. .. No diagnosis arrived at . . . .. .. 12 Equine pneumonia . . . . 1 .. .. TOTALS 43 3 29 Total tissues examined 75 specimens.
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1927 27 APPENDIX III-concld. B. Smears. Disease Positive Negative Bovine piroplasmosis (B. bigemina) .... 5 }58 Do. do. (Theileriasis) .... 2 Canino piroplasmosis....... 19 3 Equine piroplasmosis...... .. 4 Canine leishmaniasis....... .. 1 Anthrax......... .. 1 Hæmorrhagic septicæmia...... 1 4 Surra.......... 8 .. Tuberculosis........ .. 1 Johne's disease ........ 2 5 Epizootic lymphangitis....... .. 8 Marc abortion swab....... 1 .. TOTAL 38 85 Total smears examined 123 C. Samples of fæces. Results. Bovine coccidiosis .... 3 Worm infection ... 4 Negative .... . 1 TOTAL 8 D. Parasites identified, total 70 specimens. E. Agglutination tests. Disease Positive Doubtful Negative Cow abortion...... 92 5 216 Mare abortion ...... 86 240 308 TOTAL 178 245 524 Total sera tested 947 samples.
28 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, APPENDIX Table showing the doses of different products issued from the Imperial QUANTITY OF Products Punjab N.W. F. P. and North Punjab South Punjab United Pro- vinces Bihar and Orissa Bengal Assam Burma Rinderpest serum 3,43,000 74,000 5,92,000 11,71,000 2,05,000 3,86,000 1,73,200 3,45,000 Hæmorrhagic septicæ- mia serum. 35,000 21,000 73,500 35,000 84,000 10,000 .. .. Anthrax serum . .. .. 1,000 .. 7,000 .. .. .. Blackquarter serum .. .. .. .. 1,000 250 .. .. Strangles serum . Hæmorrhagic septicæ- mia Vaccine. 85,400 48,300 1,34,100 .. 12,500 .. .. .. Blackquarter vaccine (pillule). .. 5,000 400 .. .. .. .. .. Blackquarter aggressin .. 2,600 24,600 5,000 1,000 50 Strangles Vaccine ordinary. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Strangles Vaccine extracted. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Abortion vaccine equine .. .. 100 .. .. .. .. .. Autogenous vaccine .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Mixed Vaccine . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Virulent blood . . 100 .. .. .. .. .. 200 Mallein (subcutaneous test). 150 .. .. .. 50 400 .. .. Mallein (for intra-dermo- palpebral test). .. .. .. .. .. 5 .. .. Tuberculin ordinary . .. .. 6 .. .. .. 9 50 Tuborculin concentrated .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Avian tuberculin ordinary. .. .. .. .. ... .. .. .. Avian tuberculin concentrated. ... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. B. abortus Bang serum .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. TOTAL 4,63,650 1,50,000 8,25,706 12,11,000 3,10,550 3,96,705 1,73,409 3,45,050
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1927 29 IV. Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1926-27. SERA IN DOSES Madras Bombay Sind and Rajpu- tana Central Pro- vinces Balu- chis- tan Coorg Military Depart- ment Indian States Foreign Coun- tries Im- perial Insti- tute of Veteri- nary Research Total 8,55,550 58,400 35,000 1,10,000 900 28,000 64,737 5,88,756 2,32,300 1,17,344 53,80,187 43,000 10,000 6,000 29,000 .. .. 1,792 13,000 667 1,750 3,63,709 3,000 2,000 .. 2,500 1,550 300 420 9,400 1,267 610 29,047 21,000 2,000 .. 3,500 .. .. .. 60 100 18 28,928 .. .. .. .. .. .. 10 510 .. 12,626 13,146 6,000 200 325 1,525 2,88,350 45,100 50,500 2,000 8,000 .. 18,000 .. 50 .. 6,200 100 17,000 79,600 3,394 3,394 593 593 .. .. .. 100 200 .. .. .. 10 .. .. 10 20 20 2,040 60 .. .. .. .. 6,700 6,060 .. 19,480 34,640 200 1,500 100 24 .. .. 12,541 680 1,018 .. 16,663 .. .. 20,725 605 2,000 80 23,415 145 15 85 310 130 .. .. .. .. .. 30 .. .. 2,970 3,130 .. 18 .. .. 30 48 165 .. .. .. .. .. 40 .. .. 2,660 2,865 3 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 9,27,088 83,960 41,100 1,63,024 2,450 28,350 1,07,488 6,74,105 2,37,452 1,76,771 63,18,758
30 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, APPENDIX V. Table showing main results of the working of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1926-27 QUANTITY IN DOSES OF SERA AND OTHER PRODUCTS PREPARED AND ISSUED Name of sera or anti-toxin Opening balance Prepared during the year Returned serum Total Issued during the year Stock in hand 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Rinderpest serum . 39,35,883 56,57,201 7,250 96,00,334 53,80,187 42,20,147 Hæmorrhagic septicæmia serum. 3,79,941 3,85,231 .. 7,65,172 3,63,709 4,01,463 Anthrax serum 15,529 83,434 400 99,363 29,047 70,316 Blackquarter serum 11,584 18,216 .. 29,800 28,928 872 Strangles serum . 22,949 .. 47 22,996 13,146 9,850 Hæmorrhagic septicæmia vaccine. 27,700 3,13,400 .. 3,41,100 2,88,350 52,750 Blackquarter vaccine (pillules) 6,300 44,200 .. 50,500 50,500 .. Blackquarter aggressin 20,740 60,510 .. 81,250 79,600 1,650 Strangles vaccine ordinary 24 4,032 296 4,352 3,394 958 Strangles vaccine extracted . 593 .. .. 593 593 .. Abortion vaccine equiue . 476 .. .. 476 200 276 Autogenous "special vaccine" .. 10 .. 10 10 .. Mixed vaccine .. 20 .. 20 20 .. Virulent blood .. 34,640 .. 34,640 34,640 .. Mallein ordinary . 10,864 22,781 400 34,045 16,663 17,382 Mallein (for intra-dermo-palpe- bral test). 80,980 .. 70 81,050 23,415 57,635 Tuberculin ordinary 3,319 .. .. 3,319 310 3,009 Tuberculin concentrated 12,790 .. .. 12,790 3,130 9,660 Avian tuberculin ordinary 1,395 .. .. 1,395 48 1,347 Avian tuberculin concentrated 17,270 .. .. 17,270 2,863 14,405 B. abortus Bang serum . .. 3 .. 3 3 .. TOTAL 45,48,337 66,23,678 8,463 1,11,80,478 63,18,758 48,61,720
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1927 31 APPENDIX VI. Table showing main results of the working of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1926-27. FINANCIAL RESULTS RECEIPTS EXPENDITURE Sale of sera, vaccines and other products Sale of animals Sale of garden produce and reserved forests Other mis- cellaneous receipts Total Salaries travelling allowances of officers and staff Feed and keep of animals Cost of chemicals and apparatus Other miscellaneous expenditure Purchase of animals Total 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. 10,88,346-9-11 10,323-2-0 358-8-0 7,164-6-3 11,06,192-10-2 2,04,568-7-0 2,18,629-0-0 33,954-3-11 1,12,582-11-8 89,755-6-0 6,59,489-12-7 MGIPCREPORT OF THE Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research Muktesar For the year ending 31st March, 1928 [NLS note: poor quality text appears here and has been omitted REPORT OF THE Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research Muktesar For the year ending 31 st March, 1928 [NLS note: poor quality text appears here and has been omitted Government of India Publications are obtainable from the Government of India Central Publication Branch, 3, Government Place, West, Calcutta, and from the following Agents :REPORT OF THE Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research Muktesar. For the year ending 31st March, 1928. [ J. T. EDWARDS, D.Sc. (London), M.R.C.V.S. ] I. STAFF OF IMPERIAL AND GAZETTED OFFICERS. 1. Director. Dr. J. T. Edwards, D.Sc. (London), M.R.C.V.S., was on duty throughout the year. 2. Pathologist. Mr. H. Cooper, M.R.C.V.S., the permanent incum- bent of the post, was on leave out of India from the 16th April to the 15th December 1927. During his absence, Mr. M. B. Menon, Assistant Veterinary Research Officer, held charge of the duties of the post from the 16th April to the 11th May, and Major R. F. Stirling, F.R.C.V.S., D.V.S.M., F.Z.S., Second Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Central Provinces, officiated as Pathologist from the 12th May to the 15th December 1927. 3. First Veterinary Research Officer. This post remained vacant throughout the year. 4. Second Veterinary Research Officer. The Government of India have decided that this post should remain vacant until the constitution of the new Central Veterinary Service is decided, and that subsequently the incumbent of the post of Temporary Veterinary Research Officer which was created during the year shall be appointed, if his services prove satisfactory, to such post in the Central Service as may be created in its stead. 5. Third Veterinary Research Officer. Mr. J. R. Haddow, B.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., D.V.S.M., held this appointment throughout the year, and remained, as during the preceding year, in charge of the Branch Institute at Izatnagar. 6. Temporary Veterinary Research Officer. This post was created during the course of the year for a period of three years on the scale of pay, Rs. 350-50-450 per mensem, with free quarters, and it was decided to select for appointment to it the most suitable of the three State
2 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, scholars who had recently returned to India after completing the prescribed R. C. V. S. course of training in the United Kingdom. Mr. P. G. Malkani, B.Sc. (London), M.R.C.V.S., was accordingly appointed by the Government of India, and he took up the duties of the post on the 15th July 1927. 7. Officer deputed by the Indian Research Fund Association on special duty for the Bovine Tuberculosis Enquiry. Dr. M. B. Soparkar, M.D., continued his investigations. He left Muktesar for Kasauli on the 29th March 1928 in accordance with the decision of the Advisory Com- mittee of the Association to close the enquiries at Muktesar and to divert his attention entirely from that date to the human side of the problem under enquiry. 8. First Laboratory Assistant (Upper Grade). Mr. D. Keiller, the permanent incumbent of the post, who had been granted leave out of India for one year with effect from the 18th March 1927, returned to duty on the 17th March 1928. Mr. Torabaz Khan, G.P.V.C., continued to officiate during his absence. 9. Second Laboratory Assistant (Upper Grade). Mr. G. P. Goffi. He was transferred to the Branch Institute, Izatnagar, on the 15th October 1927, to strengthen the technical staff there. 10. Third Laboratory Assistant (Upper Grade). Mr. W. Mobbs. 11. First Assistant Veterinary Research Officer. Mr. M. B. Menon G.B.V.C. 12. Second Assistant Veterinary Research Officer. Vacant. 13. Assistant Research Officer (Protozoologist). Mr. S. K. Sen, B.A., B.Sc., F.E.S., the permanent incumbent, was on leave from the 13th February to the 18th March 1928. Mr. V. R. Rajagopalam officiated for him during this period. Mr. Sen was on deputation to Pusa from the 13th December 1927 to the 12th February 1928. 14. Assistant Research Officer (Helminthologist). Vacant. 15. Veterinary Deputy Superintendent. Mr. J. D'Costa, G.B.V.C. 16. Engineer. Mr. A. Littlejohn. 17. Farm Manager. Captain A. J. Hearsey, V.D. 18. Medical Officer. Dr. S. L. Mittal, M.B., B.S. Tours undertaken by Staff. Director. Left headquarters on 22nd October to visit the Branch Institute, Izatnagar, to check manufacturing processes and returned on the 24th October 1927. Then toured from the 28th November to the 20th December 1927, for the following purposes:MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1928 3 India; (iii) Patna, halted from the 10th to the 12th December to obtain information from the Director, Civil Veterinary Department, Bihar and Orissa, on suitable construction of cattle sheds; (iv.) Delhi, from the 13th to the 16th December, to assist the Public Services Commission in the examination of candidates for the posts of Second Assistant Veteri- nary Research Officer and Helminthologist; (v) Izatnagar, from the 17th to the 19th December, to inspect the Branch Institute. Pathologist. Mr. Hugh Cooper, prior to proceeding on leave was on tour from the 1st to 15th April 1927 :4 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, of preceding year. The causes of this mortality have been under investigation and have been dealt with briefly in previous Annual Re- ports. In addition, during the year under report, rinderpest broke out on five occasions in the outkraals, with a mortality from the disease and its after effects amounting to 128 bulls. The outbreaks were quickly suppressed each time by the use of anti-rinderpest serum, and the inocu- lated bulls then used for the manufacture of blackquarter aggressin, as they could not be employed with confidence for the rinderpest virus propagation and serum testing. The cause of the appearance of this disease was the continuance of outbreaks of the natural rinderpest in the districts through which animals passed on their way to the laboratory. Foot and mouth disease also appeared among the animals on three occa- sions, but the actual mortality from it was negligible. Great care was taken during the year to reduce mortality attributable to inanition by adequate supervision and feeding of the animals. It is noteworthy that a considerable number of goats were purchased for the work, mainly in connection with the propagation of the rinderpest virus in these animals and in new researches upon rinderpest. Fifty-four sheep and 89 goats died before they were used for experiment, mainly from an enzootic respiratory condition. A small number of bulls (50) were sold after they had been discontinued from use, at a price of Rs. 245. Small laboratory animals (484 rabbits, 315 guinea pigs) were also purchased for the work at Muktesar. At the Branch Institute at Izatnagar 1,763 buffaloes (average price Rs. 34-15-9) were purchased for the production of anti-sera (rinderpest and hæmorrhagic septicæmia); towards the end of the year a consi- derable number, amounting to 327, were employed for the manufacture of crude blackquarter aggressin. In addition, 178 small buffaloes (average price Rs. 7 per head) were obtained for the work from the Government Lymph Depot, Patwa Dangar. It was hoped that a superior grade of serum could be prepared from these animals, but it was found on test of the serum that it was no better than that derived from the large buffaloes. Again, 395 buffaloes, 3 bulls, and 21 horses, ponies and foals were purchased for immediate despatch to Muktesar, and 504 small animals (20 rabbits, 300 guinea pigs) and 184 fowls were reared for the purposes of the Muktesar laboratory; 362 discontinued buffaloes were sent to Muktesar. The number of buffaloes sold after they had been discontinued from work at Izatnagar was 876, at an average price of Rs. 17-8-0 per head. It was clearly shown that the present system of purchase was decidedly advantageous to Government. Except for one mild out- break of foot and mouth disease, there was no intercurrent out- break of disease among the animals at Izatnagar. The mortality among buffaloes before they were used amounted to only .05 per cent.; the mortality in the course of anti-rinderpest serum production was 16 per cent., and in the course of subsequent anti-hæmorrhagic septicæmia production 6.3 per cent.
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1928 5 No difficulty was experienced in obtaining suitable animals, with the system of direct purchase by trained staffs. (c) Forest supplies. The Reserved Forest at Muktesar yielded 21,081 maunds of fuel wood, 2,168 maunds of charcoal, 3,000 maunds of grass, 704 maunds of green leaves, 67 loads of ringals, and 1,050 maunds of pine needles (for bedding). The system was adopted of obtaining the supplies of fuel wood by firm contract, after consultation with the Forest authorities, so that wood was purchased only immediately prior to use, after it had been stored by the contractor in special depots within the station for a period of at least three months to avoid shrinkage and loss due to evaporation. The rate of working of the forest resources had exceeded in recent years the schedules laid down in the Working Plan drawn up in 1918, and hence steps were taken to obtain the services of the Forest authorities to draw up a revised plan during the year, and further all means were explored of economizing the consumption of our resources as it was apprehended that they were becoming gradually used at a rate which would bring about exhaustion before proper regeneration had taken place. Hence, it was decided to obtain charcoal supplies in future from sources outside our Reserved Forest. Further, during the year, the oak forest suffered serious depredations from the attacks of defoliating caterpillars prior to the onset of the monsoon and from the grazing of sambhar in the regeneration compartments. The fuel supplies at Izatnagar were obtained from the grain con- tractor ; 1,888 maunds of fuel wood were consumed, as compared with 870 maunds in the preceding year. (d) Labour. At Muktesar, the daily average number of coolies employed under the Farm Manager and in miscellaneous duties was 137.7. The daily average number of cattle attendants employed under the Veterinary Deputy Superintendent was 223.8. The daily average number of men employed on the Latoli cultivation estate was 72.9. The average cost of labour, including daily labour supervisors, was Rs. 6,483-11-2 per mensem. There was no serious outbreak of conta- gious disease among the men and no labour trouble. The average number of men employed at Izatnagar daily was 261, including 130 on estate cultivation work. The average cost of the labour, including daily labour supervisors, was Rs. 11-11-2 a head per mensem. The health of the staff remained good. (e) Transport. Arrangements were made with a contractor for the despatch from Muktesar to railhead (Kathgodam, Rohilkhand and Kumaon Railway) during the year of 6,286 standard rail cases, as com- pared with 8,125 cases in the preceding year, and these cases were des- patched promptly as stated in the preceding Report to comply with demands from customers. In addition, 1,659 cases of crude serum were transported from Izatnagar to Muktesar for further treatment prior to issue. The quantities of other goods despatched to and from railhead amounted to 11,580 maunds.
6 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, (f) Laboratory appliances and technical equipment. The budget allotment for the year under the head "Purchase of Chemicals and Apparatus " was Rs. 40,000 of which Rs. 34,955-2-3 was actually spent; the amount expended was less than anticipated, partly through the shortage of higher technical staff during the year and the amount of returned material from customers. Of this expenditure, Rs. 24,527 was incurred on bottles and other material for the despatch of sera and vaccines. The sum of Rs. 3,140-8-7 was recovered from customers during the year for packing material, and credit to the extent of approxi- mately Rs. 23,554 was given to them for material returned in serviceable condition, by deduction of this amount from the annual bills sent to them. (g) Farm cultivation and Dairy. The area of land under cultivation at Muktesar, excluding the Latoli estate, but including Ritani garden, remained at 74 acres, and it yielded produce valued at Rs. 10,754-10-6, at an expenditure of Rs. 7,619-10-3 (excluding supervision). The area of land at Latoli under cultivation also remained at 143½ acres: it yielded 5,969 maunds of produce, namely, 5,204 maunds of green fodder, 671 maunds of dry roughage and 93 maunds of grain; this yield is considerably less than in the preceding year and the decrease is largely attributable to destruction of crops by locusts and late sowing owing to unavoidable circumstances and to a partial extent to depredations by sambhar. Towards the end of the financial year, a revised programme of cultivation was drawn up, so as to economize costs of working of the estate, while at the same time to yield for Muktesar essential fodder crops at the seasons when experience has taught us we are always likely to suffer from shortage. On the Izatnagar estate 262 acres were planted with kharif crop and 253 acres with rabi crop, as compared with 261 and 256 acres, respec- tively, in the preceding year. The year proved a bad one for the crops, particularly in view of the present poverty of the soil and lack of irriga- tion. The estate must be regarded as still under reclamation, and the question of improving it is under investigation. It yielded 116 maunds of grains and 25,648 maunds of hay and grass, the estimated value of the products amounting to Rs. 20,849-8-0. The expenditure was, however, estimated to amount to Rs. 31,356-1-5. The financial condition of the Dairy at Muktesar for the period from 1st July 1927 to 31st March 1928 has been worked out carefully by the Auditors: the expenditure was Rs. 3,231-3-11, and the income, Rs. 4,287-11-0, leaving a profit of Rs. 1,056-7-1. The total quantity of milk sold to the inhabitants during the period in question was 12,555 seers. The present satisfactory condition of the dairy is due mainly to the maturation of a policy initiated in 1922, to breed cross bred heifers locally for milk by crossing indigenous cows with an imported Holstein bull. There is an experimental dairy herd also at Muktesar, consisting of dry cows and calves, which has yielded recently results of immense
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1928 7 value in ascertaining certain facts upon the duration of immunity of cattle in India towards rinderpest. (h) Laboratory Engineering Department. At Muktesar, the quantity of water pumped by the Power House Staff was 2,786,208 gallons. A Patterson Patent Pulser type chloronome was installed in No. I Pump Shed for the chlorination of the whole water supply. The number of units of electricity generated was 28,972. Work was commenced on the erection of the new 25 kilo watt generating set in the Power House, but the work was not completed at the end of the year. For incubator heating and other laboratory operations 409,250 cubic feet of gas were generated. The quantity of water evaporated in the steam boilers, during 2,276 working hours, was 30,105 gallons; this was used mainly for steriliza- tion purposes in the large autoclaves and also partly for condensation for the needs of the laboratory in distilled water. The new sterilizing house was completed and the large steam auto- claves were installed in it. A small steam-heated autoclave was instal- led in the mallein laboratory, to replace an old gas-heated one. (i) Building construction and repairs. This work was undertaken, as in the preceding year, by the Public Works Department, Delhi Pro- vince. The immediate supervision was transferred, during the course of the year, from the Executive Engineer, Imperial Works Division, Dehra Dun, to the Executive Engineer, 9th Project Division, New Delhi. On the departure of the Public Works Department sub- ordinate stationed at Muktesar, on 23rd October 1927, Mr. A. Littlejohn (the Laboratory Engineer) took over charge of works in addition to his own duties. It was considered that it would be advantageous to place the charge of all engineering works, both mechanical and civil, under one individual, and hitherto this arrangement has worked very satisfactorily. The chief items of construction during the year were (A) "Major Works, nil; (B) "Minor Works," (1) Constructing quarters for two additional clerks (estimated cost Rs. 10,044) and (2) Certain Improvements to the Veterinary Graduates' Quarters (estimated cost Rs. 4,072). The comprehensive scheme for the provision of suitable permanent buildings for the Izatnagar Branch Laboratory still awaits the adminis- trative sanction of Government. (j) Medical and sanitary arrangements. The number of patients treated at the Muktesar dispensary were:8 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, Arrangements were made with the Inspector-General of Prisons. United Provinces, for the deputation of the Provincial Subordinate Medical Service Officer attached to the Bareilly Juvenile Jail for the medical supervision of the staff at the Izatnagar Branch. (k) Library. In addition to the periodicals received annually, 34 reports and 54 pamphlets were received during the year. The number of text books added to the Library was 149. The number of free issues of laboratory publications has been considerably curtailed, with the commercialization of the Central Publication Branch. (l) Finance. The general financial results of the working of the Institute are displayed in Appendix VI. The actual expenditure within the budget grant for the year was Rs. 6 92,316. This sum does not include capital expenditure, depreciation, and ordinary repairs, but it contains an item of Rs. 26,325 for the new oil engine and dynamo, which, if regarded as capital expenditure, leaves a recurring expenditure of Rs. 6,59,991. The income of the laboratory, derived mainly from the sale of sera and vaccines, with some miscellaneous items of revenue, amounted to Rs. 12,25,550. This would leave a gross profit on the working o the year amounting to Rs. 5,33,234. In the event of the scheme of commercialization, mooted in consultation with the auditors during the year, being adopted, it will be interesting to ascertain the net profit. The expenditure represented above covers all costs of research, which, however, are mainly directed to a quasi-commercial or economic end, and instruction. The accounts of the Institute are now audited by the Director of Commercial Audit. The Assistant Director of Commercial Audit (Rao Sahib A. Rangaswami Iyer, B.A.) and his staff inspected the accounts at Muktesar and Izatnagar from 17th April to 31st May 1928, and we are much indebted to him for his guidance. A trained accountant was appointed to the staff of the Institute for the first time on 25th June 1927, to the post of Head Accountant, and a separate Accounts Section has now been formed in the staff. This organization has afforded the administration a considerable degree of relief. The financial state of the Institute since its inception, as regards recurring income and expenditure, is displayed on Chart I. It will be observed that the income has considerably exceeded expenditure for the past three years. It was anticipated, however, that there would be a noteworthy diminution in the income after the three years of inflated receipts, brought about by the natural periodic decline in the most prevalent diseases against which the Institute manufactures products. No certain indication of such decline is yet evident. This may be attributable in part to persisting high prevalence of disease, as indeed appears to be happening in certain Provinces, but another weighty factor seems to be the growing confidence of the field veterinary services in the uniformity of the products supplied to them and the promp- titude with which they are despatched to them on request.
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1928 9 III. MANUFACTURE AND ISSUE OF SERA AND VACCINES. (A summary of the results reported to have been obtained in the field from the use of these products is given in Appendix I.) (1) Rinderpest serum. Issued 4,860,758 (5 c.c.) doses, as against 5,380,187 in the preceding year. Of the quantity issued, 390,297 doses were for the serum-simultaneous inoculation. The quantity manufac- tured was 3,875,978 doses, as against 5,657,201 doses in 1926-27. The whole of this quantity in the crude form was prepared at Izatnagar. The total stock (crude, and tested and passed for issue) in hand at the commencement of the year (at Muktesar and Izatnagar) was 4,220,147 doses, and at the close, 3,271,165 doses. (2) Hæmorrhagic septicæmia serum. Issued 467,072 (15 c.c.) doses, as compared with 363,709 doses in 1926-27. The quantity manufac- tured (at Izatnagar) was 266,440 doses, as compared with 385,231 doses in the preceding year. The stock in hand (at Muktesar and Izatnagar) at the commencement of the year was 401,463 doses, and at the close 200,911 doses. The reason why large stocks of this product are accumu- lated towards the close of the financial year is that large demands are made for it with the outbreak of the monsoon. (3) Hæmorrhagic septicæmia vaccine. Issued 448,153 (5 c.c.) doses, as compared with 288,350 doses in 1926-27. Manufactured 556,900 doses, as compared with 313,400 doses in the previous year. Stock in hand at the commencement of the year, 52,750 doses; at close, 161,697 doses. (4) Anthrax serum. Issued 48,155 (15 c.c.) doses, as compared with 29,047 doses in 1926-27. Manufactured, nil, as compared with 83,434 doses in the preceding year. Stock in hand at the commencement of the year, 70,316 doses; at close, 22,321 doses. (5) Blackquarter serum. Issued 38,669 (15 c.c.) doses, as compared with 28,928 doses in 1926-27. Manufactured 69,506 doses, as against 18,216 in the previous year. Stock in hand at the commencement of the year, 872 doses; at close, 31,989 doses. (6) Blackquarter vaccines. (a) The old "pillule" form of vaccine has now become completely supplanted by "aggressin." (b) Issued 133,401 (5 c.c.) doses of the " aggressin," as compared with 79,600 doses in 1926-27. Manufactured 139,600 doses, as against 60,510 doses in the previous year. Stock in hand at the commencement of the year, 1,650 doses; at close, 8,249 doses. (7) Mallein. (a) Issued 38,469 (1 c.c.) doses of mallein for the ordinary, or subcutaneous, test for glanders, as compared with 16,663 doses in 1926-27. (b) Issued 51,660 (0.1 c.c.) doses for the intrapal- pebral (I. D. P.) test, as compared with 23,415 doses in 1926-27. There were in stock 17,382 doses of ordinary and 57,635 of I. D. P. mallein at the commencement of the year, and 1,417 doses of ordinary and 40,055 doses of I. D. P. mallein at the close. Manufactured 24,500 doses for the ordinary and 33,310 doses for the I. D. P. test, as against 22,781 and nil, respectively, in the previous year.
10 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, (8) Tuberculin. (a) Issued 893 (3 c.c.) doses of ordinary (human) tuberculin for the subcutaneous test for tuberculosis, and 5,150 (0.25 c.c.) doses of concentrated (human) tuberculin for the intrapalpebral and double-intradermal tests for the disease, as compared with 310 and 3,130 doses, respectively, in 1926-27. (b) Issued 36 (8 c.c.) of ordinary avian tuberculin for the subcutaneous test, and 6,085 (0.25 c.c.) doses of concentrated avian tuberculin for the intrapalpebral and double- intradermal tests for Johne's disease, as compared with 48 and 2,865 doses, respectively, in 1926-27. Manufactured 675 doses of concentrated (human) tuberculin, and 73 doses of ordinary (avian) tuberculin; also prepared 28,000 doses crude (i.e., untested) concentrated avian tuber- culin. At the commencement of the year there were available 3,009 doses of ordinary (human) tuberculin and 14,405 doses of concentrated (avian) tuberculin. (9) Strangles serum and vaccine. Issued 1,118 (15 c.c.) doses of anti-streptococcic serum and 561 doses of anti-streptococcic vaccine, as against 13,416 doses of serum, 3,394 doses of vaccine (ordinary) and 593 doses of vaccine (extracted) in 1926-27. 796 doses of vaccine were prepared during the year. These products are still issued on request, though there is no evidence that they are actually efficacious against strangles. (10) Contagious abortion (equine) vaccine. Issued 356 doses of Bacillus abortivo-equinus vaccine, as against 200 in the preceding year. 570 doses were prepared as against 476 in the preceding year; 506 doses were discarded for technical reasons. (11) Contagious abortion (bovine) vaccine. 272 doses were prepared and issued during the year, as compared with none in the preceding year. (12) Autogenous and specially prepared vaccines. Issued 10 doses of autogenous and 10 doses of " mixed " vaccine, as compared with 10 doses of the former and 20 doses of the latter in 1926-27. (13) Rinderpest virus. (a) Issued 32,000 (1 c.c.) doses of virulent rinderpest blood for the active immunization of cattle by the serum- simultaneous method against rinderpest, as against 34,640 doses in 1926-27; about one-third of this quantity was despatched during the earlier part of the year to the Branch Institute at Izatnagar for the immunization of buffaloes destined for the production of anti-rinderpest serum, where it was supplanted later by the use of goat virus. (b) 175 ampoules (each 5 c.c.) of goat virus were issued during the year, from Muktesar, of which 129 were sent to the Branch Institute; the regular manufacture of this product for issue was commenced in October 1927. NOTES. (a) The total issues during 1927-28 were somewhat lower than those of 1926-27, namely, 6,133,509 as against 6,318,758 total doses. The income for the year under report was, however, appreciably higher than that of the preceding year, namely, Rs. 11,98,357-15-11, as against Rs. 10,88,346-9-11. The anomaly is accounted for in part by the larger issue of products other than anti-rinderpest serum during the year
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1928 11 under report, and also to the concessions in the price of anti-rinderpest serum made to certain authorities in the preceding year (United Provinces Government for hill cattle; Persian Government). (b) The technique of manufacture remained substantially the same as in the preceding two years, prior to which a complete overhaul of nearly all the systems of manufacture had been made. The new systems have now settled down to a routine order. The main innovations during the year were :12 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, veterinary officers of the Military Department upon the new methods of surra treatment. The two officers of the Mysore Government deputed to the Institute for a three years' course of training completed their studies and returned to their State on 3rd January 1928. Two officers were deputed by the Mysore Government to the Institute for a short course of study, but unfortunately had to depart prior to the termination of their course. Three officers of the Royal Army Veterinary Corps and one officer on the staff of a Provincial Veterinary College visited the laboratory for short periods. The full course was also attended by an officer of the Civil Veterinary Department, Bihar and Orissa, and by a Laboratory Assistant from the same department. One Veterinary Assistant Surgeon from the United Provinces Civil Veterinary Department attended for three months. One Veterinary Assistant Surgeon from Coorg attended for 2½ months. Two dressers from the Nepal Government were deputed to the labora- tory for training in serum inoculation, from 9th January to 5th February 1928. They were handicapped by imperfect acquaintance with any language by means of which they could be properly taught. A senior Veterinary Inspector in the employ of His Exalted High- ness the Nizam's Government arrived for a six months' course of training on 11th February 1928. Much credit is due to Major Stirling for the enthusiasm displayed by him in teaching and the discipline maintained by him among the students and the organization undertaken by Mr. S. K. Sen, in making our efforts at systematic instruction successful during the year. V. RESEARCH. The various subjects taken up for research are only briefly noticed here. They will be treated at proper length in technical publications when the separate subjects are deemed ripe for recording. (a) Rinderpest. This livestock disease of paramount importance in India again formed the major subject of study, and much time was devoted to studies upon its etiology, particularly by comparative studies of presumably analogous viruses of certain other diseases. In the last Annual Report, brief allusion was made to the success of our endeavours in " fixing " the virus on animals other than cattle, and notably goats. In this way it was hoped to obtain virulent material for use in the serum- simultaneous method of inoculation that would not be attended with the risks following upon the use of virus of bovine origin. Researches into the properties of the goat virus were pressed forward, with the result that we were able to recommend confidently the substitution of the goat virus for ordinary field use. The printed circular directions issued from the laboratory have been modified accordingly, to give field workers in simple terms the system we now recommend for carrying out this inoculation. The goat virus is now used entirely for the immunization of serum producing buffaloes at Izatnagar.
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1928 13 Again, on four large establishments in Northern India 1,119 cattle have been inoculated by the serum-simultaneous method involv- ing the use of locally " manufactured " goat virus; the mortality among the inoculated cattle following upon the effects of the inoculation was nil, and, moreover, the animals subsequent to treatment have been immunized with a degree of assurance that they have actually acquired the desired immunity that was seldom obtainable previously, when "bull virus " was forwarded for direct inoculation from the laboratory to the centres where operations were undertaken. Again, the virus possesses, it seems, a factor of safety which commends it for use parti- cularly on indigenous cattle. At one centre, three young cattle were injected with the goat virus alone, and although they all developed an undoubted attack of rinderpest they emerged from the affection un- scathed. The figures given above are too small to attach to them any statistical meaning, but they are significant, especially as they were obtained in field conditions by trained observers from the staff. Figures which might otherwise be taken from the records for comparison are :14 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, line on the addition of the preservative and while the serum was fresh, allowed of the formation of protective colloid particles for the lodgement of the organisms. With suitable adjustment of the reaction immediately the serum was extracted phenol and orthocresol acted equally well, and their efficacy was greatly enhanced by the incorporation with them of one of the acridine dyes (flavine). (c) Surra. The measures now recommended for trial in the curative treatment of equine surra as the result of our laboratory investigations were given in the last Report. The treatment has since been tried in the field, and a favourable opportunity was given for estimating its efficacy in the scene of a formidable natural outbreak at the Army Remount Depôt at Mona. The outcome of the treatment is still under observation, and although the results hitherto obtained have not indicated a " cent. per cent. " efficacy, yet they make us sanguine that real cures have been obtained in the great majority of the animals treated. Upon the advice of the Institute, treatment was adopted in a natural outbreak of surra in foxhounds (Delhi Hunt), by the adminis- tration of" Bayer 205 " intravenously alone, in half-gramme doses (5c.c. of 10 per cent. solution), on two occasions at 3 to 4 weeks interval. The ten affected hounds have been under observation at Muktesar for three months, and have hitherto shown no sign of relapse. (d) Tick fever in dogs. The tick fever of dogs so prevalent in India is now well known to be attributable to infection with two entirely different kinds of piroplasms, namely, Babesia canis, the large piroplasm, which is also responsible for the so-called malignant jaundice in other parts of the world, and Babesia (?) gibsoni, the small piroplasm, which appears to be far the more important cause of disease in India. Both infections have also been discovered here simultaneously in the same dogs. Whereas the former infection is readily amenable to treatment with trypanblue, the latter is intractable, but has been found to yield to some degree to repeated injection with some of the organic arsenical preparations, though unfortunately there appear to be relapses some- times at prolonged intervals, when the parasites become relatively " drug-fast" to a repetition of the original treatment. In the course of the year an excellent opportunity was afforded to try out certain lines of treatment of this affection in a large number of valuable dogs belong- ing to some kennels in the vicinity. The mode of treatment under- taken by Major Stirling and found to give highly satisfactory results was repeated injection of the arsenical drug, tryparsamide. The method and results of the treatment have been reported upon by him in a technical paper (see below). (e) A new fowl disease. There was brought to our attention in July 1927 for investigation an exceptionally deadly outbreak of disease among a valuable flock of fowls at Ranikhet, the nature of which proved entirely perplexing. The " Ranikhet disease", as it was provisionally called, was characterized mainly by the almost entire absence of lesions
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1928 15 and any organisms which could be demonstrated to be the cause of the disease. Later work conducted by the Officiating Pathologist brought to his mind the very considerable similarity between this disease and a new disease which had just been studied by Doyle (see Jl. Comp. Path. and Ther., Vol. XL, Part 2, June 1927, pp. 144-169) in England under the name, " Newcastle disease"; this disease bore some res- emblance to fowl plague, but differed from it in that the virus was not transmitted with the blood but could be readily conveyed with filtrates of mouth washings. So far as our investigations went, the Ranikhet disease appeared similar, but subsequent investigation became difficult on account of the wide diffusion of the disease throughout the Kumaon Hills. This disease has since been found to cause very high mortality among fowls in other parts of India, and it has also been brought to our attention in other parts of the East (Java). It is unfortunate that even with our more intimate knowledge of its nature we are entirely powerless to deal with the disease. (f) Johne's disease. A good deal of large scale work was done at the laboratory (by the Officiating Pathologist) on this disease, and field observations upon it were continued (by Mr. Menon). Owing to the difficulty of transmitting the disease artificially in the laboratory for purposes of experimentation, an indirect method was sought of ascertain- ing what may be termed the vaccinating relationships between the bacilli of Johne's disease and the avian type of tubercle bacilli, by inoculating, intravenously, groups of cattle with strains of Johne's bacilli from various parts of the world, and subsequently, after an appropriate interval, with what was estimated to be a lethal dose of a highly virulent strain of avian tubercle bacilli. The experiment was not quite conclusive. Experiments were carried out on groups of cattle also to determine the relative virulence and reciprocal vaccinating effects of strains of avian tubercle bacilli obtained from various sources; considerable differences in virulence were manifested among them. Field vaccination with strains of avian bacilli of low virulence was com- menced on request in an important herd where Johne's disease had developed an alarming morbidity in recent years. The preliminary work was done safely, but an estimate of the efficacy of the treatment must need observation for a period of years in the case of this exceptionally chronic disease. A curious finding was made by Major Stirling, of tuberculosis of the intestinal mucous membrane of an Army horse setting up macroscopic and microscopic lesions closely resembling those of Johne's disease in cattle, with no lesions elsewhere. It is hoped to prepare the material for detailed description. Hitherto, there is only one similar case on record (see McFadyean, Jl. Comp. Path. and Ther. 1918, Vol. 31, No. 4, pp. 225-256). (g) Bovine tuberculosis enquiry. The work of the enquiry was brought to a close at the request of the Scientific Advisory Board of the
16 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, Indian Research Fund Association at the end of the financial year, and Dr. M. B. Soparkar changed his headquarters to Kasauli. Dr. Soparkar's own report of his work during the year is as follows :MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1928 17 indigenous cattle (16.28 per cent.) found at Ferozepur and Lahore reported previously. If the results are judged according to the standard recommended by McFadyean and Sheather, 36 out of 67 or nearly 54 per cent. would be taken as reactors ; and in 11 out of these reactors or nearly 30 per cent. definite tuberculous lesions were demonstrated. Taking into consideration the fact that even a slight infection with tubercle bacilli which may or may not produce a visible lesion is sufficient to give rise to a positive reaction to tuberculin test and the difficulty of detecting on post-mortem examination in an animal weighing 400 to 600 lb. a minute lesion which may be situated in any part of its body, it may reasonably be assumed that the proportion of infected animals was in reality greater than what has been possible definitely to demonstrate. The subject is of con- siderable importance and is worthy of further exhaustive investigation. Standardization of tuberculin. A method of standardization of tuberculin of unknown potency was developed and it appeared to be simple and reliable. The method consists in comparing the degree of reaction developing after intradermal test with different dilutions of the unknown with the standard tuberculin performed on a tuberculous bovine, either a bull or a buffalo, all injections for the test being done with corresponding doses at the same time and in an identical manner. The reaction develop- ing in the buffalo after the intradermal test is very often much more marked than in the case of the bull. Several dilutions of the tuberculins are made and the test with each dilution is made at a different spot preferably on the skin of the side of the neck at a distance of a few inches. The maximum dilution of the sample under test which gives a definitely positive reaction is then compared with a similar maximum dilution of the standard tuberculin and further comparison is also made between the degrees of reac- tion resulting from other dilutions. In a few preliminary tests made by this method it was found to be more suitable than one in which guinea pigs are employed. Some experiments were done with Calmette's B. C. G. on previously infected animals. Nine animals previously infected with different types of bacilli were inoculated intra- venously with 200 mg. of B. C. G. No untoward effect of this inoculation was noticed. When test inoculations were made intravenously two months later with 5 mg. of virulent bovine bacilli, 7 out of 9 animals died of acute generalized tuberculosis, 6 in 2 to 10 weeks after inoculation and one after 8 months. In the case of these previously infected animals, therefore, B. C. G. did not confer the same immunity as is said to be produced in unin- fected animals." (h) Contagious abortion. Work was continued on the common specific contagious abortions of mares and cattle in India, and much information has been added to our somewhat voluminous records on these diseases. Vaccination as mentioned in preceding reports was under- taken in certain studs and herds. (i) Minor researches. These comprise, (i) standardization work on mallein and tuberculin; (ii) further work on the pathogenic coccidia, resuscitation of bovine coccidia with croton oil ; (iii) continued observa- tions on the bovine piroplasms, with notably changes in morphology of B. bigeminum during active proliferation in the course of acute infec- tions, and some observations on the natural exaltation in virulence of the common Theileria mutans; (iv) strangles, observations continued at the Remount Depots ; (v) isolation of B. viscosum equi from equine lesions closely resembling those of glanders; (vi) pleuro-pneumonia of goats, studies of lung lesions, similarity with rinderpest in these animals. (j) Miscellaneous. The total number of post-mortem examinations carried out at Muktesar was 1,529. The number of blood smears from experimental and other animals examined at Muktesar was 3,416. The number of specimens received from outside sources (excluding sera for agglutination tests and blood smears) was 50; the number of blood
18 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, smears received was 218; the number of samples of serum received for examination by means of the agglutination test was 190 (bovine abortion 34, equine abortion 156). VI. PUBLICATIONS. Cooper, Hugh. Coccidiosis with Particular Reference to Bovine Cocci- diosis and Its Significance as an Infection of Cattle in India. Agri. Jl. India, Vol. XXII, pt. II, pp. 92-97; March 1927. Cooper, Hugh, and Gulati, Amarnath. Occurrence of Trichomonad Flagellates in the Blood Stream of Fowls. Pusa Bulletin, No. 173. Edwards, J. T.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1928 19 Sen, S. K. Bursati, Summer Sores or Cutaneous Habronemiasis: A Short Review of the Literature. Agri. Jl. India, Vol. XXII, pt. IV, pp. 281-286; July 1927. Soparkar, M. B. Virulence of Tubercle Bacilli Isolated from Cattle in India. Paper read at the 7th F. E. A. T. M. Congress. (Abstr. in Abstracts of Papers published by the Congress.) Stirling, R. F.20 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, APPENDIX I. Results of Preventive Inoculation. District Number of outbreaks in which inoculation was undertaken NUMBER OF ANI- MALS WHICH DIED UNINOCULATED IN COURSE OF OUT- BREAK NUBER OF ANIMALS INOCULATED NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DIED AFTER INO- CULATION Equines Bovines Others Equines Bovines Others Equines Bovines Others United Provinces. Rinderpest . . . 1,465 .. 22,865 194 .. 173,085 10,908 .. 184 .. Hæmorrhagic septicæmia . 523 .. 1,686 .. .. 35,630 .. .. 5 .. Blackquarter . . . 16 .. 122 .. .. 2,590 .. .. .. .. Anthrax . . . . 3 .. 15 .. .. 436 .. .. .. .. Punjab. Rinderpest . . . 903 .. 9,046 ... .. 148,669 .. 155 .. H.S. serum . . . 409 .. 2,821 .. .. 113,159 72 .. H. S. vaccine . . . 1,032 .. .. .. .. 290,511 .. .. 1 .. Blackquarter vaccine . 139 .. .. .. .. 31,169 .. .. .. .. Sind and Rajputana. Rinderpest . . . 128 .. 1,118 .. .. 12,404 .. .. 92 .. H. S. serum . . . 22 .. 176 .. .. 2,989 .. .. 4 .. Assam. Rinderpest . . . 252 .. 5,189 .. .. 15,308 .. .. 163 .. H. S. serum . . . 2 .. 18 .. 4 110 .. .. .. .. Anthrax S. A. . . . 33 4 147 22 220 1,251 194 .. .. .. Bihar and Orissa. Rinderpest . . . 587 .. 3,141 .. .. 92,182 .. .. 338 .. H. S. serum . . . 565 .. 2,433 .. .. 114,145 .. .. 72 .. H. S. vaccine . . . 18 .. 75 9,357 . .. 8 .. Blackquarter . . . 106 .. 364 .. .. 21,639 .. .. .. .. Anthrax serum . . . 64 .. 264 .. .. 11,509 .. .. 10 .. Bengal Veterinary College. Rinderpest S. A . . . 23 .. 50 .. .. 2,062 .. .. .. .. H. S. serum A . . . 2 .. 2 .. .. 23 .. .. .. .. Bombay. Rinderpest . . . 99 .. 1,443 217 .. 12,659 2,086 .. 16 9 H. S. serum . . . 116 .. 1,229 .. .. 11,962 .. .. 19 .. H. S. vaccine . . . 51 4,653 .. .. 1 .. Blackquarter . . . 79 .. 421 .. .. 5,392 .. .. 9 .. Anthrax S.A. . . . 12 .. 94 64 .. 833 155 .. 3 2
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1928 21 APPENDIX I-contd. Results of Preventive Inoculation22 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, APPENDIX II. Table showing amounts of various products prepared and issued from the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during 1927-28, as compared with average amounts of previous 5 years. DOSES PREPARED DOSES ISSUED Name of products 1927-28 Average of previous 5 years 1927-28 Average of previous 5 years Rinderpest serum . . . 38,75,978 41,37,001 48,60,758 27,55,576 Anthrax serum . . . Nil 53,788 48,155 32,529 Hæmorrhagic septicæmia 2,66,430 3,71,103 4,67,072 1,86,328 serum. Hæmorrhagic septicæmia 5,56,900 2,42,960 4,48,153 1,63,025 vaccine. Blackquarter aggressin . . 1,39,600 49,462 1,33,401 35,593 Mallein . . . . 55,810 55,577 90,129 79,182 APPENDIX III. Table showing the details concerning the nature of specimens received and examined at the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during 1927-28. SUMMARY OF EXAMINATION OF SPECIMENS RECEIVED FROM OUTSIDE DURING 1927-28. A.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1928 23 APPENDIX III24 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, APPENDIX Table showing the doses of different products issued from the Imperial QUANTITY OF Products Punjab N. W. F. P. Pesha- war North Punjab South Punjab United Pro- vinces Bihar and Orissa Bengal Assam Burma Anti-Rinderpest serum 3,10,000 36,000 90,000 4,05,040 6,32,611 3,40,000 1,02,400 96,400 7,30,000 Anthrax serum . . 100 .. .. .. 2,000 21,000 3,000 2,000 .. Hæmorrhagic septicæ- mia serum. 33,000 .. 24,000 91,500 66,200 1,37,000 18,000 .. .. Blackquarter serum . .. .. .. 200 2,000 16,000 .. .. .. Strangles serum .. .. .. 50 .. .. .. .. .. Hæmorrhagic septicæ- mia vaccine. 1,22,000 .. 89,000 1,87,600 810 6,000 .. .. 50 Blackquarter aggressin .. .. 13,500 33,250 500 15,000 .. .. Strangles vaccine . .. .. .. 54 .. .. .. .. .. Abortion vaccine, .. .. .. 100 .. .. .. .. .. equine. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Abortion vaccine, bovine. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Autogenous vaccine . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Mixed vaccine . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Mallein, ordinary . 650 100 100 36 .. 200 .. 130 Mallein, I. D. P. .. .. .. .. 35 .. .. .. Tuberculin, ordinary . .. .. .. 53 26 .. .. .. 70 Tuberculin, concent- rated. .. .. .. .. 5 .. ... .. 125 Avian tuberculin, ordinary. .. .. .. .. 6 .. .. .. .. Avian tuberculin, con- centrated. .. .. .. .. 40 .. .. .. 80 Virulent blood . . .. .. .. .. .. .. 240 .. .. Goat virus . . .. .. .. .. 5 .. .. 3 .. TOTAL 4,65,750 36,100 2,16,500 7,17,947 7,04,274 5,35,000 1,23,840 98,403 7,30,455
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1928 25 IV. Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1927-28. SERA IN DOSES Madras Bombay Sind Raj- putana Central Pro- vinces Balu- chistan Coorg Military Depart- ment Indian States Foreign Coun- tries Imperial Institute of Veteri- nary Research TOTAL 10,06,440 30,500 87,000 1,64,000 1,000 24,800 44,359 3,07,576 1,36,500 3,16,132 48,60,758 .. 1,000 .. 9,800 1,100 950 480 5,640 667 418 48,155 10,000 18,400 2,500 20,200 .. 120 560 4,505 200 40,887 4,67,072 11,000 5,000 .. 2,900 .. .. .. 1,100 .. 469 38,669 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,014 .. 54 1,118 .. 10,000 .. 23,500 .. .. 85 3,000 .. 6,108 4,48,153 3,000 4,000 .. 18,300 .. .. .. 45,500 .. 351 1,33,401 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 459 .. 48 561 .. .. .. .. .. .. 240 .. .. 522 862 .. .. .. .. .. .. 272 .. .. .. 272 .. .. .. .. .. .. 10 .. .. .. 10 .. .. .. .. .. .. 10 .. .. .. 10 200 950 125 .. .. .. 31,365 462 2,004 2,147 38,469 15 .. .. .. .. .. 20,685 900 20,010 10,015 51,660 .. 12 .. .. 100 78 92 100 .. 362 893 .. 15 .. 25 .. .. 85 500 .. 4,395 5,150 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 29 36 .. .. .. .. .. .. 396 400 .. 5,169 6,085 5,260 470 .. .. .. .. 9,430 7,300 .. 9,300 32,000 6 .. .. .. .. .. 29 .. .. 132 175 10,35,921 70,347 89,625 2,38,725 2,200 25,948 1,08,099 3,78,456 1,59,381 3,96,538 61,33,509
26 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, APPENDIX V. Table showing main results of the working of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1927-28. QUANTITY IN DOSES OF SERA AND OTHER PRODUCTS PREPARED AND ISSUED Name of sera or anti-toxin Opening balance Prepared during the year Returned serum TOTAL Issued during the year Stock in hand 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Rinderpest serum . . . 42,20,147 38,75,978 35,798 81,31,923 48,60,758 32,71,165 Anthrax serum . . . 70,316 Nil 160 70,476 48,155* 22,321 Blackquarter serum . . 872 69,506 280 70,658 38,669* 31,989 Strangles serum . . . 9,850 .. 40 9,890 1,118 8,772 Hæmorrhagic septicæmia serum 4,01,463 2,66,440 80 6,67,983 4,67,072 2,00,911 Hæmorrhagic septicæmia Vaccine. 52,750 5,56,900 200 6,09,850 4,48,153 1,61,697 Blackquarter aggressin . . 1,650 1,39,600 400 1,41,650 1,33,401 8,249 Strangles vacciue . . . . 958 796 40 1,794 561 1,233 Abortion vaccine, equine . . 276 570 16 862 862* .. Abortion vaccine, bovine . . .. 272 .. 272 272 .. Autogenous vaccine . . .. 10 .. 10 10 .. Mixed vaccine . . . .. 10 .. 10 10 .. Mallein, ordinary . . . 17,382 22,500 4 39,886 38,469 1,417 Mallein, I. D. P. . . . 57,635 33,310 770 91,715 51,660* 40,055 Tuberculin, ordinary . . 3,009 .. 10 3,019 893* 2,126 Tuberculin, concentrated . . 9,660 4,675 20 14,355 5,150* 9,205 Avian tuberculin, ordinary . 1,347 73 4 1,424 36 1,388 Avian tuberculin, concentrated 14,405 .. 160 14,565 6,085* 8,480 Virulent blood . . . .. 32,000 .. 32,000 32,000 .. Goat virus . . . . .. 175 .. 175 175 .. TOTAL . 48,61,720 50,02,815 37,982 98,96,517 61,33,509 37,69,008 * Includes wastage in mixing, bottling and testing, etc.
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1928 27 APPENDIX VI. Table showing main results of the working of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1927-28. FINANCIAL RESULTS RECEIPTS EXPENDITURE Sale of sera vaccines and other products Sale of animals Sale of garden produce and Reserved Forest Other mis- cellaneous Receipts Total Salaries and travelling allowance of Officers and staff Feed and keep of animals Cost of Chemicals and apparatus Other miscellaneous expenditure Purchase of animals Total 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs A. P. Rs. A.P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. 11,98,357-15-11 15,612-8-0 183-8-0 11,396-3-3 12,25,550-3-2 2,11,634-5-0 2,10,182-15-3 34,955-2-3 1,26,070-2-7 1,09,473-3-9 6,92,315-12-10
28 REP. OF IMPL. INSTITUTE OF VETY. RESEARCH, MUKTESAR FOR 1928 APPENDIX VII. List of officers who came to Muktesar for training during the year 1927-28. Arrived on Left on (1) Mr. P. U. Nair, Inspector, Civil Veterinary Depart- ment, Mysore State . . 3rd January 1925 . 3rd January 1928. (2) Mr. K. R. Rao, Inspector, Civil Veterinary Depart- ment, Mysore State . . Ditto . . Ditto. (3) Dr. P. Parthasarathy, Civil Veterinary Department, Mysore State . . . 24th April 1927 . 15th June 1927. (4) Mr. S. D. Achar, Civil Veteri- nary Department, Mysore State . . . . Ditto . . Ditto. (5) Mr. Mohd. Ismail Malik, Special Officer, Civil Veterinary Department, Bihar and Orissa, Patna . 25th April 1927 . 17th October 1927. (6) Mr. J. N. Mukerjee, Civil Veterinary Department, Orissa Range, Cuttack 15th June 1927 . . 15th December 1927. (7) Captain J. J. Clune, R.A.V.C. 7th August 1927 . 30th September 1927. (8) Mr. C. B. Somanna, Veterinary Assistant Surgeon, Coorg . 17th August 1927 . 29th October 1927. (9) Captain R. S. Simpson, R.A.V.C. 3rd September 1927 . 13th October 1927. (10) Mr. Udham Singh, Veterinary Assistant Surgeon, Agra . 30th September 1927 . 30th December 1927. (11) Jamadar S. M. Yaqub, I.A.V.C. . . . 9th October 1927 . 8th November 1927. (12) Jamadar Abdul Majid Khan, I.A.V.C. . . . . Ditto . . 24th November 1927. (13) Jamadar Mohd. Alam Khan. I.A.V.C. . . . Ditto . . Ditto. (14) Jamadar Harbans Singh, I.A.V.C . . . . Ditto . . 17th November 1927, (15) Jamadar Veterinary Inspector Abbas Khan, A.R.D. . Ditto . . 24th November 1927. (16) Veterinary Assistant Surgeon Mohd. Said Shab, A.R.D. . Ditto . . Ditto. (17) Veterinary Assistant Surgeon Mohd. Moshim, A.R.D. . Ditto . . Ditto. (18) Veterinary Assistant Surgeon Abdul Aziz, A.R.D. . . Ditto . . Ditto. (19) Dresser Balu Ram, Doti, Nepal . . . . 9th January 1928 . 5th February 1928. (20) Dresser Kara Narain, Nepal . Ditto Ditto. (21) Major J. Mullani, R.A.V.C. . 10th February 1928 . 22nd April 1928. (22) Mr. N. D. Dasan, Civil Veteri- nary Department, H. E. H. the Nizam's Govt., Hydera- bad . . . . 11th February 1928. . MGIPC-M[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
REPORT OF THE Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research Muktesar For the year ending 31st March, 1929 CALCUTTA: GOVERNMENT OF INDIA CENTRAL PUBLICATION BRANCH 1929 Price Re. 1-4-0 or 2s.
REPORT OF THE Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research Muktesar For the year ending 31st March, 1929 CALCUTTA : GOVERNMENT OF INDIA CENTRAL PUBLICATION BRANCH 1929
Government of India Publications are obtainable from the Government of India Central Publication Branch, 3, Government Place, West, Calcutta, and from the following Agents :REPORT OF THE Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. For the year ending 31st March, 1929. [ HUGH COOPER, M. R. C. V. S. ] I. STAFF OF IMPERIAL AND GAZETTED OFFICERS. 1. Director. Dr. J. T. Edwards, D. Sc. (Lond.), M. R. C. V. S., was on duty throughout the year. He resigned the post and handed over charge on the afternoon of the 31st March, 1929. 2. Pathologist. Mr. Hugh Cooper, M. R. C. V. S., was on duty throughout the year. He took over charge temporarily as Officiating Director on the afternoon of the 31st March, 1929. 3. First Veterinary Research Officer. This post remained vacant throughout the year. 4. Second Veterinary Research Officer. The Government of India have decided that this post shall remain vacant until the new Central Veterinary Service is constituted, when a post in this Service will be created in its stead. In the meantime a post of Temporary Veterinary Research Officer has been created against this vacancy. 5. Third Veterinary Research Officer. Mr. J. R. Haddow, B. Sc., M. R. C. V. S., D. V. S. M., the permanent incumbent of the post, was on leave out of India from the 24th April, 1928, to the 23rd December, 1928, and during his absence Mr. P. G. Malkani, Temporary Veterinary Research Officer, was appointed to hold charge of the Branch Institute at Izatnagar. 6. Temporary Veterinary Research Officer. This post was held by Mr. P. G. Malkani, B. A. (Hons.), B. Sc. (Lond.), M. R. C. V. S., from the 1st April to the 23rd April, 1928, and again from the 24th December, 1928, to the 31st March, 1929. Mr. M. B. Menon, G.B.V.C., First Assistant Veterinary Research Officer, officiated as Temporary Veterinary Research Officer from the 11th July, 1928, to the 23rd December, 1928. 7. First Laboratory Assistant (Upper Grade). Mr. D. Keiller was on duty throughout the year.
2 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, 8. Second Laboratory Assistant (Upper Grade). Mr. G. P. Goffi was on duty throughout the year. 9. Third Laboratory Assistant (Upper Grade). Mr. W. Mobbs proceeded on leave out of India for eight months with effect from the 20th February, 1929. Mr. P. C. Banerjee, G. B. V. C., was appointed to officiate during his absence. Mr. Banerjee took charge on the 22nd February, 1929. 10. First Assistant Veterinary Research Officer. Mr. M. B. Menon, the permanent incumbent, officiated as Temporary Veterinary Research Officer from the 11th July, 1928, to the 23rd December, 1928. Mr. Tor- abaz Khan, G.P.V.C., officiated as First Assistant Veterinary Research Officer from the 4th August, 1928, to the 7th October, 1928, and Mr. P. C. Banerjee, G. B. V. C., from the 8th October, 1928, to the 23rd December 1928. 11. Second Assistant Veterinary Research Officer. Mr. R. N. Naik of the Bombay Civil Veterinary Department, who had been selected for appointment to this post by the Public Service Commission on probation for a year, reported for duty on the 13th August, 1928. 12. Assistant Research Officer (Protozoologist). Mr. S. K. Sen, B. A., B. Sc., F. E. S., the permanent incumbent, proceeded on leave for four months from the 11th March, 1929, and Mr. P. R. Krishna Iyer, G. M. V. C., was appointed to officiate in his stead. 13. Assistant Research Officer (Helminthologist). Mr. G. D. Bhalerao, M. Sc., who had been selected for appointment to this post by the Public Service Commission on probation for two years, reported for duty on the 15th August, 1928. He relinquished charge of the post on the 29th March, 1929, on obtaining employment elsewhere. 14. Assistant Research Officer (Bio-Chemist). This post, a newly created one, remained vacant throughout the year. 15. Veterinary Deputy Superintendent. Mr. J. D'Costa, G. B. V. C., the permanent incumbent, was on leave from the 8th October, 1928, to the 21st February, 1929. Mr. Torabaz Khan, G. P. V. C., officiated from the 8th October, 1928, to the 4th February, 1929, and Mr. P. C. Banerjee, G. B. V. C., from the 5th February, 1929, to the 21st February, 1929. 16. Engineer. Mr. A. Littlejohn resigned on the 26th August, 1928, and Mr. P. R. Ganguly, Assistant Engineer, has been officiating in the post since that date. 17. Farm Manager. Capt. A. J. Hearsey, V. D., the permanent incumbent, was on leave from the 21st August, 1928, to the 18th September, 1928, and Mr. J. D'Costa, Veterinary Deputy Superinten- dent, held charge of the post, in addition to his own duties, from the 14th to the 18th September, 1928. 18. Medical Officer. Dr. S. L. Mital, M. B.,B. S., was on duty throughout the year.
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1929 3 Tours undertaken by the Staff. Director. (i) Lahore, from the 18th November, 1928, to the 5th December, 1928, accompanied by Mr. P. R. Krishna Iyer, Veterinary Inspector, conducting investigations into an outbreak of disease among Holstein stud bulls imported by the Military Department from South Africa. The work is referred to under " Section V.4 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, towards the end of the year. The main reason was lack of rain during the year. Steps will have to be taken to improve the conditions of supply in future, which will probably necessitate increased expenditure. At Muktes , the total quantity of grain supplied by contract amounted to 9,162 man ds at a total cost of Rs. 46,462-14-6 ; the quantity of hay received by contract was 8,701 maunds, at a cost of Rs. 6,915-11-6; and the quantity of green grass 4,606 maunds at a cost of Rs. 3,454- 11-9. In addition, certain fodder was obtained from the estate to supple- ment the shortage in fodder [see (g) Farm cultivation]. At Izatnagar, the total quantity of grain purchased by cantract for the animals amounted to 10,655 maunds at a cost of Rs 44,223-12-1. A considerable amount of fodder and grazing was also obtained from the estate [see also (g)]. (b) Animal supplies. The number of animals purchased for the technical work at Muktesar was 1,344 hill bulls, 169 sheep and 1,006 goats. In addition, 40 " discontinued " buffaloes and six buffalo calves were received from Izatnagar, mainly for blackquarter aggressin manu- facture. There were 250 deaths in all among hill bulls in the outkraals prior to admission to the inner sheds for use; this is appreciably less than the mortality of the preceding year. The causes of this morta- lity have been dealt with in previous annual reports. Some casual- ties were also due to the unusually severe cold weather that prevailed during the winter months and to foot-and-mouth disease. Thirty-three sheep and 151 goats died prior to expriment. The main cause of this mortality was a form of pleuro-pneumonia which formed the subject of an investigation during the year. The work is referred to again in "Section V.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1929 5 99 guinea pigs and 78 rabbits were transferred to Muktesar. The num- ber of buffaloes sold after they had been discontinued from work at Izatnagar was 1,568, at an average price of Rs. 14-1. There were no important outbreaks of intercurrent disease among the animals at Izatnagar. The mortality among buffaloes in the course of anti-rinderpest serum production was 12 per cent. and in the course of subsequent anti-hæmorrhagic septicæmia production 3.5 per cent. (c) Forest supplies. The Reserved Forest at Muktesar yielded 16,783 maunds of fuel wood, 5,520 maunds of grass, 8,887 maunds of green leaves, 3 loads of ringals, and 2,305 maunds of pine needles (for bedding). The system adopted during the preceding year of obtaining supplies of fuelwood by contract was continued and gave satisfaction. Supplies of charcoal were obtained through a contractor from the Civil Forest. Hitherto no forest produce has been sold but a beginning was made during the year under report with the sale of lichen. One hundred and seventy-three maunds 20 seers were extracted from the forest by a contractor who paid a royalty of As. 8 per maund. The fuel supplies at Izatnagar were obtained from the grain con- tractor; 2,708 maunds of fuelwood were consumed, as compared with 1,888 maunds in the previous year. (d) Labour. At Muktesar, the daily average number of coolies employed under the Farm Manager in miscellaneous duties was 114.5. The daily average number of cattle attendants employed under the Veterinary Deputy Superintendent was 205.5. The daily average num- ber of men employed in the Latoli cultivation estate was 66.9. The average cost of labour, including daily labour supervisors, was Rs. 6,403 per mensem. The average number of men employed at Izatnagar daily was 272 including 115 on estate cultivation work. The average cost of labour, including daily labour supervisors, was Rs. 2,923 per mensem. (e) Transport. Arrangements were made with a contractor for the despatch, from Muktesar to railhead (Kathgodam R. & K. Railway) during the year, of 6,914 standard rail cases, as compared with 6,286 cases in the preceding year. In addition, 2,117 cases of crude serum were transported from Izatnagar to Muktesar for further treatment prior to issue. (f) Laboratory appliances and technical equipment. The budget allotment for the year under the head " Purchase of Chemicals and Apparatus " was Rs. 44,000, of which Rs. 35,838 were actually spent. Of this expenditure, Rs. 19,277 were incurred on bottles and other material for the despatch of sera and vaccines. The technical equip- ment for research and instructional purposes was considerably improved and added to. The sum of Rs. 58,382 was recovered from customers during the year for packing material, and credit to the extent of approxi- mately Rs. 9,099 was given to them for material returned in serviceable condition, by deduction of this amount from the annual bills sent to them.
6 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, (g) Farm cultivation and Dairy. The area of land under cultiva- tion at Muktesar, excluding the Ritani garden, remained at 74 acres, and it yielded produce valued at Rs. 14,186-7-9 at an expenditure of Rs. 11,278-5-2 (excluding supervision). The area of land at Latoli under cultivation also remained at 143½ acres : it yielded 11,208 maunds of produce (namely, 10,050 maunds of green fodder and 1,158 maunds of dry roughage); this yield is nearly double that of the preceding year and would probably have been still greater had not 66 acres lain fallow during the winter owing to stortage of funds. This area, if seeded with barley and oats, as originally intended, would have yielded an apprecia- ble rabi crop. On the Izatnagar estate 250 acres were planted with kharif crops and 174 acres with rabi crops, as compared with 262 and 253 acres, respectively, in the preceding year. The yield was 1,055 maunds of grains and 37,549 maunds of hay and grass. The estimated value of the products was Rs. 34,549-3-3 and the expenditure Rs. 33,216-9-3. The question of improving the estate is still under consideration and, with this end in view, Mr. G. S. Henderson, N. D. D., N. D. A., Imperial Agriculturist, Pusa, inspected it towards the end of January 1929 to advise upon its development. The financial condition of the Dairy at Muktesar for the period from the 1st April, 1928, to the 31st March, 1929, has been worked out as follows :- The expenditure was Rs. 4,183-15-10, and the income Rs. 5,484- 13-7, leaving a profit of Rs. 1,300-13-9. The total quantity of milk sold during the year was 16,277½ seers. The Gov- ernment of India have now passed orders that the dairy and the experimental herds should be amalgamated under the designation of the "dairy herd". The new system will be put into operation and will be reported upon after trial. The Imperial Agriculturist, Pusa, Mr. G. S. Henderson, N. D. D., N. D. A., visited Muktesar in January 1929 to make recommendations regarding the dairy cattle and these recommendations are now receiving consideration. (h) Laboratory Engineering Department. At Muktesar the quan- tity of water pumped by the Power House Staff was 2,868,120 gallons. The erection and test of the new 25 kilo watt generating set was completed in May 1928 and since then it has been in regular operation. For incubator beating and other laboratory operations 421,275 cubic feet of gas were generated. The quantity of water evaporated in the steam boilers during 2,530 working hours, was 32,920 gallons ; this was used mainly for steriliza- tion purposes in the large autoclaves and also partly for condensation for the needs of the laboratory in distilled water. In July 1928, the Institute was declared to be a factory and since then it has been working under the provisions of the Indian Factories Act of 1911.
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1929 7 The Government of India have sanctioned the replacement of one of the existing electric pumps, which has become worn out, by a multistage centrifugal pump. When the new pump has been installed it is hoped that the problem of providing an adequate water supply to cope with the increasing needs of the station will be a step nearer to solution. (i) Building construction and repairs. This work was undertaken, as in the preceding year, by the Public Works Department, Delhi Province. Mr. A. Littlejohn (the laboratory engineer) continued in immediate charge of the works at Muktesar until his resignation on the 26th August, 1928. Since the departure of Mr. Littlejohn, a Public Works Department subordinate has again been placed in charge of the work. The chief items of construction at Muktesar during the year were (A) " Major Works " (1) constructing quarters for the Power House staff (estimated cost Rs. 23,500 ; (B) " Minor Works " (1) installation of incubator room and minor additions and alterations to the culture media storage and serum-mixing block (estimated cost Rs. 14,400), (2) constructing sedimentation storage tanks (estimated cost Rs. 10,484), (3) providing Paterson patent chemical supply gear (estimated cost Rs. 9,100), (4) constructing 3 Dutch barns (estimated cost Rs. 8,060), (5) certain additions and alterations to the dispensary buildings (estimated cost Rs. 5,830), (6) constructing Stenographer's quarters (estimated cost Rs. 6,965), (7) constructing a timber shed (estimated cost Rs. 8,000), (8) certain protective works to the quarters for the 2nd Veterinary Deputy Superintendent, the Assistant Surgeon, the Librarian, the Sanitary Inspector and additional clerks (aggregate estimated cost Rs. 12,620), and (9) construction of a P. W. D., coolie line (estimated cost Rs. 19,611). The comprehensive scheme for the provision of suitable permanent buildings for the Izatnagar Branch Laboratory is in abeyance pending the consideration of the more urgent recommendations of the Royal Commission on Agriculture by the Government of India. The Officer in charge reports that little real development can now take place until suitably equipped buildings are erected. (j) Medical and sanitary arrangements. The number of patients treated at the Muktesar dispensary were :8 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, and drainage at Muktesar and devise a comprehensive scheme for their improvement. It is understood that the experts have submitted their report and it is now before the Government of India. The declaration of inhabited tracts adjoining the Muktesar estate as a Notified Area, which is interdependant with the improvement of sanitation within the estate, is still under the consideration of the Government of India. Two thousand, nine hundred and thirty nine patients were treated at the dispensary at the Branch Institute, Izatnagar. The general health of the staff of the branch continued good throughout the year. (k) Library. In addition to the periodicals received annually, 103 reports and 47 pamphlets were received during the year. The number of text-books added to the library was 130. (l) Finance. The general financial results of the working of the Institute are displayed in Appendix VI. The actual expenditure within the budget grant for the year was Rs. 7,14,727 and the income Rs. 14,68,42i. These figures represent a gross profit on the year's working of Rs. 7,53,694, as compared with Rs. 6,59,991 in the previous year. III. MANUFACTURE AND ISSUE OF SERA AND VACCINES. A summary of the results reported to have been obtained in the field after the use of these products is given in Appendix I. (1) Rinderpest serum. Issued 49,32,954 (5 c. c.) doses, as against 48,60,758 in the preceding year. Of the quantity issued, 8,10,655 doses were used for serum simultaneous inoculations as compared with 3,90,297 doses in the preceding year. The large increase in the use of this method of immunization represents a highly satisfactory progressive step, indicating greater appreciation of the value of the method, and greater confidence in its safety. The quantity manufactured was 55,65,568 doses, as against 38,75,978 doses in 1927-28. The whole of this quantity in the crude form was prepared at Izatnagar The total stock (crude, and tested and passed for issue) in hand at the commence- ment of the year (at Muktesar and Izatnagar) was 32,71,165 doses (bottled 13,77,632 doses; crude 18,93,533 doses), and at the close 40,80,760 doses (bottled 6,32,614 doses ; crude 34,48,146 doses). (2) Haemorrhagic septicaemia serum. Issued 4,80,648 (15 c. c.) doses, as compared with 4,67,072 doses in 1927-28. The quantity manufactured (at Izatnagar) was 5,72,220 doses, as compared with 2,66,440 doses in the preceding year. The stock in hand (at Muktesar and Izatnagar) at the commencement of the year was 2,00,911 doses (bottled 1,69,548 ; crude 31,363 doses), and at the close 2,61,850 doses consisting solely of bottled serum. (3) Haemorrhagic septicaemia vaccine. Isssued 4,90,780 (5 c. c.) doses, as compared with 4,48,153 doses in 1927-28. Manufactured 4,97,950 doses, as compared with 5,56,900 doses in the previous year, Stock in hand at the commencement of the year 1,61,697 doses ; at close 1,68,867 doses.
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1929 9 (4) Anthrax serum. Issued 40,033 (15 c. c.) doses, as compared with 48,155 doses in 1927-28. Manufactured 37,507 doses, as compared with nil doses in the preceding year. Stock in hand at the commencement of the year 22,321 doses; at close, 19,795 doses. (5) Blackquarter serum. Issued 83,953 (15 c. c.) doses, as compared with 38,669 doses in 1927-28. Manufactured 1,02,400 doses as against 69,506 doses in the previous year. Stock in hand at the commencement of the year 31,989 doses ; at close, 50,436. (6) Blackquarter aggressin. Issued 2,22,419 (5 c. c.) doses of " aggressin ", as compared with 1,33,401 doses in 1927-28. Manufac- tured 2,34,200 doses as against 1,39,600 doses in the previous year. Stock in hand at the commencement of the year, 8,249 doses; at close, 20,030 doses. The large increase in this relatively newly introduced product is a cause for considerable satisfaction, indicating its efficacy and the confidence of consumers in its use in the " field ". (7) Mallein. (a) Issued 18,089 (1 c. c.) doses of mallein for the ordinary subcutaneous test for glanders, as compared with 38,469 doses in 1927-28. (b) Issued 16,220 (0.1 c.c.) doses for the intrapalpebral (I. D. P.) test, as compared with 51,660 doses in 1927-28. There were in stock 1,517 doses of ordinary and (40,055 doses of I. D. P. mallein at the commencement of the year, and 25,389 doses of ordinary and) 1,13,570 doses of I. D. P. mallein at the close. Manufactured 42,061 doses for the ordinary and 89,735 doses for the I. D. P. test, as against 22,500 and 33,310 doses, respectively, in the previous year. (8) Tuberculin. (a) Issued 338 (3 c. c.) doses of ordinary (human) (tuberculin for the subcutaneous test for tuberculosis, and 985 doses 0.25 c. c.) of concentrated (human) tuberculin for the intrapalpebral and double-intradermal tests for the disease, as compared with 893 and 5,150 doses, respectively, in 1927-28. (b) Issued 403 (8 c. c.) doses of ordi- nary avian tuberculin for the subcutaneous test, and 540 (0.25 c. c.) doses of concentrated avian tuberculin for the intrapalpebral and double- intradermal tests for Johne's disease, as compared with 36 and 6,085 doses, respectively, in 1927-28. Manufactured 540 doses of concentrated (human) tuberculin, and 400 doses of concentrated (avian) tuberculin. At the commencement of the year there were available 2,126 doses of ordinary (human), 9,205 doses of concentrated (human), 1,388 doses of ordinary (avian) and 8,480 doses of concentrated (avian) tubercul- in ; and at the close 1,788, 9,010, 985 and 8,600 doses, respectively. (9) Strangles serum and vaccine. Issued 1,239 (15 c.c.) doses of anti- streptococcic serum and 1,133 doses of anti-streptococcic vaccine, as against 1,118 doses of serum and 561 doses of vaccine in 1927-28. One thousand one hundred and fifty-two doses of vaccine were prepared during the year. Since these products have been found, as the result of extensive research work, to be of no value in the protection of equines against the specific disease strangles, it is proposed in future to discon- tinue the manufacture and issue of anti-streptococcic serum entirely. There is still a small demand, however, for anti-streptococcic vaccine. (10) Contagious abortion (equine) vaccine. One hundred and 20 doses of Bacillus abortivo-equinus vaccine were prepared and issued during
10 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, the year as against 570 doses prepared and 356 doses issued in the pre- ceding year. (11) Contagious abortion (bovine) vaccine. One hundred and sixty- four doses were prepared and issued during the year, as compared with 272 doses in the preceding year. (12) Autogenous and specially prepared vaccines. Prepared and issued 50 doses of autogenous and 220 doses of " mixed " vaccine, as compared with 10 doses of the former and 10 doses of the latter in the preceding year. (13) Rinderpest virus. (a) Issued 15,295 (1 c. c.) doses of virulent rinderpest blood for the active immunization of cattle by the serum- simultaneous method, as against 32,000 doses in 1927-28; about two- thirds of this quantity was despatched during the earlier part of the year to the Branch Institute at Izatnagar for the immunization of buffaloes destined for the production of anti-rinderpest serum, where it was supplanted later by the use of goat virus. (b) 246 ampoules (each 5 c. c.) of goat virus were issued during the year from Muktesar, of which 87 were sent to the Branch Institute. The issue for the preceding year was 175 ampoules. (14) Fowl cholera serum. 450 doses of the product were issued during the year as against nil in the previous year. The manufacture of this product will be continued in future only if a sufficient demand for it is received. NOTE.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1929 11 The total number of lectures given was 64, of which the Director gave 43, the Pathologist 6, and the Protozoologist and some other technical members of the staff the remainder. In addition, a very large number of practical demonstrations and exercises were given to the class by the above-mentioned officers. Veterinary Assistant Surgeon, Mr. N. N. Banerji, of the Bengal Civil Veterinary Department, attended for a course of practical training for three months. Veterinary Inspector, Mr. Abdulla Khan, from the office of the Camel Specialist, Sohawa, Punjab, attended for ten days for instruction in the technique of the intrathecal injection for surra. An officer, Mr. P. S. Nair, of the Provincial cadre of the Central Provinces Civil Veterinary Department, arrived on the 15th November, 1928, for an eight months' course of training. All the officers under training spent some period at the Branch. Institute at Izatnagar, and received there instruction concerning the technical processes in progress from the officer in charge. Mr. S. K. Sen, Protozoologist, carried out the duties of Secretary in connection with all instruction given during the year. V. RESEARCH. (a) Rinderpest. The intensive work, initiated by Dr. Edwards upon his advent to the Institute, mainly with a view to the isolation and cultivation of the causal organism, was prosecuted again as the main item of research during the year, and very marked progress was made. The use of the " goat virus " method of serum-simultaneous inocula- tion introduced by Dr. Edwards was applied by trained officers of the Institute staff in the " field " at seven establishments, namely, Welling- ton, Bangalore and Karnal farms under the Imperial Department of Agriculture, a dairy farm under the charge of the Civil Veterinary De- partment, Bihar and Orissa, the Mona Remount Depôt and a dairy farm at Rawalpindi under the Military Department, and the Allahabad Agricultural Institute. One thousand three hundred and seventy cattle were immunized by this method without a single casualty. The utility of goat "strains" of rinderpest virus maintained at the Institute was compared with the hill bull " strain "; and research work in other directions upon the routines processes of serum manufacture was continued. (b) Surra. The application in a field trial of the curative treatment of equine surra, by intrathecal intravenous injections of " Bayer 205 ", devised by Dr. Edwards, was briefly referred to in the preceding annual report. A total number of 57 naturally infected cases in equines oc- curring at the Mona Remount Depôt was submitted to the treatment. Six animals (or 10.53 per cent.) died or were destroyed as a result of accidents in the application of the treatment, or from causes other than surra, and three animals (or 5.88 per cent.) of the remaining number (51 animals) showed a re-appearance of trypanasomes 78, 90 and 97
12 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, days, respectively, after the last injection. Careful consideration of all the available facts leads to the conclusion that these three cases almost certainly represent re-infections and not relapses. One of the three- animals was re-treated by the same method and is reported to be cured. If the three cases of recurrence of the disease are included, however, then the trial resulted in cure in 48 cut of 51 animals, or 94.11 per cent. Eighteen couple of the Delhi Hunt Hounds were accommodated at Muktesar from the 18th March to the 18th October, 1928. Ten of the hounds had been diagnosed as affected with surra during the previous winter and had received treatment by injections of" Bayer 20.5", as recorded in the previous annual report of this Institute. The hounds were kept under close observation during the whole period of their stay at Muktesar and no recurrence of the disease took place. The treat- ment devised by Dr. Edwards thus proved adequate to cure the disease in the hounds. (c) Piroplasmosis. An investigation of much importance was con- ducted by Dr. Edwards upon acute Theileriasis affecting Holstein stud bulls imported by the Military Department into India from South Africa. Nineteen bulls arrived at Bombay on the 27th October, 1928, and twelve of them, which were distributed to the Northern Circle Dairy Farms, became affected with the disease during the period the 11th to the 24th of Novemver 1928. These bulls were probably sub- jected to heavy tick infestation very shortly after their arrival in India, and also during transit before distribution, resulting in a sudden and massive infection with Theileria parasites. Six of the remaining bulls were drafted to the Southern Circle Dairy Farms and did not become affected with the disease during the period cited, al- though it has since been confirmed that one of these bulls died of the same disease shortly afterwards. The disease in the 12 bulls resulted in three deaths; one bull was very severely affected but recovered; while eight were markedly affected and two of them suffered from a relapse some five months later. The opportunity afforded by this investigation enabled Dr. Edwards to place on record a complete summary of the disease. The symptoms described are very briefly as follows. The disease starts with a sudden- ly occurring and prolonged fever, during which the temperature remains constantly very high (105° to 107°F.). No other symptoms are exhi- bited, however, until the parasites (T. mutans) make their appearance in the blood. The temperature then fluctuates, falling and rising ir- regularly and the parasites increase rapidly in number to a maximum of about 70 per cent. of invaded red blood corpuscles. From 1 to 10 parasites were seen in single corpuscles. Other symptoms also begin to be exhibited, the most striking and charateristic being profuse lacri- mation, and a watery discharge from the nostrils. Depraved appetite and a harsh "staring" coat are observed. Loss of condition occurs in spite of the fact that the animal may feed quite well. Symptoms of marked respiratory disease, with particularly painful respiration, resembling "pleuritic pain", were noticed in one fatal case. These symptoms may be attributed to extreme anæmia exhibited, and
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE- 31ST MARCH, 1929 13 consequent oxygen starvation. Anæmia was a marked lesion and some icterus was seen in the visible mucous membranes in the later stages of the disease. Methods of medicinal treatment applied appeared to have no noticeable beneficial effect, so that very careful nursing of affected animals is the only treatment available for the disease at the present time. Two very noticeable and characteristic post-mortem lesions are de- scribed. Briefly stated they consist of localized patches of necrotic appearence in the liver substance, and well-defined small umbilicate ulcers in the abomasum. A similar lesion of the abomasum has been noted and recorded in the disease East Coast Fever of Africa, It is believed that recovery from the disease leaves no immunity, the animals remain ''carriers" of the disease, and are probably liable to serious relapses at any time. Relapse, as noted above, has already been recorded in two of the bulls imported last year. The histological findings have not yet been fully worked out or described, but they appear to consist essentially of lymphocyte " blocks " in the smaller arteries of the principal organs, corresponding, it seems, with the description of the histology of East Coast Fever recently given by Steck (Union of South Africa, 13th and 14th Reports, Director of Veterinary Education and Research, Part I, 1928, pp. 243-280). A feature of the investigation of great importance is that the bulls had been submitted to blood inoculation in Souh Africa before export, with the object of immunizing them again t the African "piroplasms ", namely. Babesia bigemina and Theileria (or Gonderia) mutans. The fact that a large number of the bulls became affected at one time shortly after their arrival in India, in spite of the inoculation carried out in South Africa, shows that the Theileria parasites of India differ markedly in their pathogenecity from the Theileria of South Africa. On the other hand records of " serum-simultaneous " inoculation against rinderpest upon fifteen of the bulls since their arrival in India are available, and these records show no evidence of any disturbance attributable to affection with B. bigemina. This evidence supports the view that this parasite (B. bigeminum) is identical in the two countries. An observation of interest in connection with the diagnosis of " red water" (B. bigeminum affection) of cattle in India made during the course of routine post-mortem examinations, by Veterinary Inspector, P. R. Krishna Iyer, is that the capsule of the kidneys of affected animals exhibits a distinct and characteristic blue sheen, which is easily distin- guishable from any putrefactive changes. (d) Foot-and-mouth disease. Preliminary experimental work upon the transmission to and maintenance of the virus in guinea pigs, in accordance with the work of Waldmann and Pape (1920), was carried out during the year with virus obtained from natural outbreaks in cattle at Muktesar. One hundred and forty-two passages carried out between the period the 5th June, 1928, and the 28th March, 1929, using 195 guinea pigs, showed that the virus readily became " fixed," resulting in regular vesicle formation upon the plantar pads in from 24 to 30 hours. Reabsorption of the contained lymph took place rapidly, within 48 hours,
14 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, yet the epithelium overlying the lesion remained infective. Seventy-one of the guinea pigs apparently died directly from the effects of foot-and- mouth disease. They exhibited profuse buccal discharge during life, and in a few cases minute ulcers were detected on the buccal mucous membrane post-mortem. Thirty-six of the animals died without showing salivation, and 88 survived. (e) Johne's disease. A further large scale experiment was planned by Dr. Edwards, in continuation of the indirect method, referred to in the last annual report of this Institute, of ascertaining the vaccinating relationships between the bacilli of Johne's disease and the avian type of tubercle bacilli, in order to confirm the inconclusive results obtained during the previous year. The results of the experiment should become known during the current year. An incidental finding of interest occurring in connection with the experiment was that the four strains of Johne's disease bacilli, obtained for this work from America and France, all multiplied and became disseminated through the organs upon inoculation into small laboratory animals, rabbits and guinea pigs. In many cases the bacilli were apparently responsible for abnormal enlargement of organs, and in a few guinea pigs tubercle-like lesions resulted. The organisms were recoverable in culture and appeared to have retained the usual cultural characteristics of Johne's disease bacilli. (f) "Ranikhet" fowl disease. This disease is referred to in last year's annual report and it appears to have spread widely throughout India during the year under report resulting in enormous losses among poultry. A strain of the virus was obtained at the Institute from an outbreak in the Garhwal District of the United Provinces and was maintained for study in fowls by passage from the 1st of November, 1928, until the end of the year. Passage was carried out without difficulty using mouth washings injected subcutaneously, after filteration through a fine bacterial filter. Symptoms were shown, consisting of a sudden fall in temperature and loss of appetite only, about the fourth day at first, but after a number of passages the incubation period became reduced to 3 or even to 2 days. Death occurred from six to twelve days after injection. About 5 per cent. or less of the fowls experimented upon proved to be fully resistant to the disease, and about 15 per cent. became affected and recovered. Serum drawn from a few fowls which had recently recovered from the experimental disease, gave distinctly promising results, when tested upon other fowls, as a prophylactic against the virus. Experiments are now in progress in regard to the manufacture for issue, if possible, of a preventive serum against the disease. The studies carried out upon the disease so far indicate that it is probably identical with the disease called "Newcastle disease" by Doyle in England, as already suggested in the annual report for the preceding year. (g) Tetanus. Experimental work was taken up for the production of anti-tetanic serum and is still in progress.
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1929 15 (h) Kumri. Some preliminary work was started in connection with an experimental method of treatment devised by Dr. Edwards. The treatment is analogous to that recently adopted with success in the curative treatment of human subjects affected with general paralysis of the insane, by artificial infection with malaria. It consists of infecting kumri-affected horses with surra trypanosomes, and their subsequent treatment with the intrathecal-intravenous injections of "Bayer 205", already referred to under paragraph V (b). The work is still in progress. (i) Glanders. A completely avirulent culture of the glanders bac llus was obtained by repeated subinoculation, extending to consider- ably over a thousand passages, upon plain agar slopes. Preliminary experiments were then carried out with this organism in order to ascertain (i) if mallein of equal potency to that prepared from a virulent culture could be manufactured; and (ii) if an anti-serum could be obtained against the disease. The results obtained are not yet conclusive, but it appears that the mallein produced is only slightly inferior to the stock product, and that the anti-serum has some slight effect in delaying the course of the disease in guinea pigs. (j) Equine contagious abortion. Vaccination consisting of repeated injections of killed culture made from a number of strains of B. abortivo- eguinus has been applied in a Military breeding stud since early in 1927. Preliminary results, now becoming known, have not been encouraging in that, in more than one case, the specific organism has been isolated from aborted foetuses from vaccinated mares. Research work in this connection is, however, still in progress, and it is still too early for definite conclusions to be drawn. (k) Pneumonia in animals. Work upon this subject started in 1923 in connection with a lung lesion occurring in a number of cattle which died during the course of the disease rinderpest. Dr. Edward first drew attention to the very striking resemblance of this lesion to that found in the specific disease contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia, Bacteriological examination of the lesion at this time showed what appeared to be a causal relationship with Coryne bacteria. In the year 1927, following upon the "fixation " of the rinderpest virus in goats, it was noticed that a large number of these animals also were dying during the course of the work, and not, apparently directly from rinderpest, but from a pleuro-pneumonia having identical naked-eye characters to the lesion observed in cattle. Bacteriological examination of this lesion revealed the presence of a pasteurella organism, often in pure culture, and it was concluded that the pleuro- pneumonia was a secondary, complicating affection of rinderpest in the goat probably due to this organism. In the winter season of 1928 a large number of "healthy" goats awaiting experiment, were attacked by a suddenly occurring outbreak of pleuro-pneumonia apparently identical with that already observed in connection with rinderpest in these animals, and bacteriological examination was again taken up. In this outbreak also the responsible organism appeared to be a pasteurella. A vaccine, analogous to that
16 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, prepared for use against haemorrhagic septicaemia in cattle, was prepared, and 76 goats received in four separate consignments of healthy animals purchased at Muktesar were divided into two equal parts. One-half of them were vaccinated, and the other half kept unvaccinated as controls. The vaccine, however, proved to be of no value in prevent- ing the pneumonic lesion, for both the vaccinated and the control goats alike continued to exhibit the same lesion, some before they were used for rinderpest work, and others during the course of this disease. A complete bacteriological study was then made upon 50 con- secutive cases of pneumonia detected in the post-mortem rooms at Muktesar irrespective of the species of animal or its history. The lungs of the following animals were thus examined:MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1929 17 APPENDIX I. Summary of results of inoculations in the field of the different products issued from the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1928-29. District Number of outbreaks in which inoculation was undetaken NUMBER OF ANI- MALS WHICH DIED UNINOCULATED IN COURSE OF OUT- BREAK NUMBER OF ANIMALS INOCULATED NUMBER OF ANIMALS WHICH DIED AFTER INOCULATION Equines Bovines Others Equines Bovines Others Equines Bovines Others United Provinces. Rinderpest .... 631 ... 7,876 3 ... 88,324 2,734 ... 55 37 Hæmorrhagic septicæmia 665 ... 2,658 ... 1 51,725 30 ... 6 ... serum. Hæmorrhagic septicæmia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... vaccine. Blackquarter serum . . 134 1,072 ... ... 19,698 ... ... 4 ... Anthrax .... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Punjab. Rinderpest .... 401 4,071 ... 75,003 ... ... 83 ... Hæmorrhagic septicæmia 472 ... 2,797 ... 91,141 ... ... 21 ... seram. Hæmorrhagic septicæmia 1,058 ... 27 ... ... 6,232 ... ... ... ... vaccine. Blackquarter serum . . 123 ... ... ... ... 28,100 ... ... ... ... Anthrax .... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... N.-W.F. Province. Rinderpest .... 21 ... 399 ... ... 5,657 ... ... 6 ... Hæmorrhagic septicæmia 28 ... 313 ... ... 6,717 ... ... ... .. serum. Hæmorrhagic septicæmia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... vaccine. Blackquarter . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Anthrax ... ... ... ... ... ... .... ... ... ... ... Sindh and Rajputana. Rinderpest .... 207 2,153 ... ... 16,534 ... ... ... 264 ... Hæmorrhagic septicæmia 25 ... 201 ... ... 2,266 ... ... 23 ... serum. Hæmorrhagic septicæmia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... vaccine. Blackquarter . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Anthrax . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
18 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, APPENDIX IMUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1929 19 APPENDIX I20 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, APPENDIX II. Table showing amounts of various products prepared and issued from the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during t year 1928-29, as compared with the average amounts of the previou 5 years. DOSES PREPARED DOSES ISSUED Name of product 1928-29 Average of previous 5 years 1928-29 Average of previous 5 years Anti-Rinderpest serum . . 4,167,550 4,512,064 4,932,954 4,074,257 Anthrax serum . . 37,507 40,764 40,033 45,692 Hæmorrhagic septicæmia serum 572,220 383,846 480,648 346,794 Hæmorrhagic septicæmia vaccine. 497,950 299,720 490,780 267,571 Blackquarter aggressin . . 234,200 204,782 222,419 70,880 Mallein .... 131,796 62,483 34,309 50,014 TOTAL 5,641,223 5,503,659 6,201,143 4,855,208
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1929 21 APPENDIX III. Table showing the details of specimens received and examined at the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1928-29. NUMBER OF SPECIMENS Nature of specimens Positive Negative Doubtful Abortion, bovine..... 14 43 2 22 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, APPEN Table showing the doses of different products issued from the Imperial QUANTITY OF Products Punjab North Punjab South Punjab N.-W. F.P. United Pro- vinces Bihar and Orissa Bengal Assam Burma Anti-Rinderpest Serum 1,60,000 38,000 1,52,600 39,000 2,67,211 5,44,800 2,43,600 ... 9,28,600 Anthrax serum ... ... ... ... 2,200 7,000 3,000 6,008 ... H. S. Serum 50,140 30,000 31,000 9,800 45,000 1,74,000 39,200 1,000 800 R. S. Serum ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... B. Q. Serum ... ... ... ... 12,000 30,000 4,500 ... ... Strangles Serum ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Fowls Cholera serum ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Blackquarter Aggressin ... 8,400 32,450 ... 5,000 12,000 500 ... ... H. S. Vaccine 50,000 84,500 2,25,200 ... 450 9,000 ... ... ... Strangles Vaccine ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Auto-genous Vaccine ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Special Vaccine ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Equine Abortion Vac- cine. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Bovine Abortion Vac- cine. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Mallein, ordinary . ... ... 24 100 5 6 506 ... 800 Mallein, I. D. P. . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Tuberculin Subcut ... .. ... ... 30 5 6 ... 50 Tuberculin, concentra- ted. 100 ... ... ... 450 10 ... ... ... Avian Tuberculin ordi- nary. ... ... ... ... ... 12 ... ... Avian Tuberculin, con- centrated. 20 ... ... ... 420 ... ... ... ... Bull Virus . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Goat Virus . ... ... 3 ... 6 6 12 3 ... TOTAL 2,60,260 1,66,900 4,41,277 48,900 3,32,772 7,76,839 2,91,324 7,071 9,30,250
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1929 23 DIX IV Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1928-29. SERA IN DOSES Madras Bom- bay Sind and Raj- putana Central Pro- vinces Balu- chistani Coorg Military Depart- ment Indian States Foreign Coun- tries Imperial Institute of Veteri- nary Research TOTAL 14,51340 22,200 77,200 3,59,600 16,000 21,400 22,297 1,29,367 3,79,100 80,739 49,32,954 ... 3,025 ... 4,200 5,000 1,560 534 5,585 ... 1,861 40,033 5,000 39,100 3,900 37,560 ... 590 400 6,343 2,001 4,814 4,80,648 126 126 7,000 13,000 14,000 50 ... ... 17 ... ... 3,217 ... ... 169 83,953 ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,239 ... 1,239 ... 450 450 3,000 34,000 49,770 ... 50 250 76,600 ... 399 2,22,410 50 ... ... ... 19,000 ... ... ... 96,960 ... ... ... 168 6,050 2,000 1,402 4,90,780 ... ... ... ... 1,117 16 1,133 ... ... ... ... 50 50 220 220 ... ... ... ... 120 120 164 164 200 1,170 ... ... ... ... 14,724 523 10 21 18,089 14,785 1,380 50 5 16,220 ... 12 50 ... ... ... 51 108 ... 26 830 260 15 ... ... ... ... 135 5 ... 10 985 ... ... ... ... 250 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 30 1 20 90 403 20 20 20 40 540 2,195 ... ... ... ... ... 3,020 60 ... 10,020 15,295 69 15 ... ... ... ... 45 ... ... 87 246 14,69,114 1,31,537 81,400 5,62,440 21,000 23,650 56,810 2,30,596 3,83,201 1,01,064 63,06,405
24 REPORT OF THE IMPERIAL INSTITUTE OF VETERINARY RESEARCH, APPENDIX V. Table showing the main results of the working of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during 1928-29. QUANTITY IN DOSES IN SERA AND OTHER PRODUCTS PREPARED AND ISSUED Name of sera or anti-toxin Opening balance Prepared during the year Returned serum TOTAL Issued during the year Stock in hand 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Anti-rinderpst serum . 1,377,632 4,167,550 20,386 5,565,568 4,932,954 632,614 Anthrax serum..... 22,321 37,507 ... 59,828 40,033 19,795 Hæmorrhagic septicæmia serum . 169,548 572,220 730 742,498 480,548 261,850 Rabbit septicæmia serum . ... 4,516 ... 4,516 126 4,390 Blackquarter serum . 31,989 102,400 ... 134,389 83,953 50,436 Strangles serum . 8,772 ... ... 8,772 1,239 7,533 Fowl cholera serum .... ... 450 ... 450 450 ... Blackquarter aggressin 8,249 234,200 ... 242,449 222,419 20,030 Hæmorrhagic septicæmia vaccine 161,697 497,950 ... 659,647 490,780 168,867 Strangles vaccine . . . . 1,233 1,152 ... 2,385 1,133 1,252 Autogenous vaccine . ... 50 ... 50 50 ... Special abortion vaccine ... 220 ... 220 220 ... Equins abortion vaccine . ... 120 ... 120 120 ... Bovine abortion vaccine ... 164 ... 164 164 Mallein, ordinary. .... 1,417 42,061 ... 43,478 18,089 25,389 Mallein, I. D. P. 40,055 89,735 ... 129,790 16,220 1,13,570 Tuberculin, subcut .... 2,126 ... ... 2,126 338 1,788 Tuberculin, concentrated . 9,205 540 250 9,995 985 9,010 Avian tuberculin, ordinary . 1,388 ... ... 1,388 403 985 Avian, tuberculin concentrated . 8,480 400 260 9,140 540 8,600 Rinderpest bull virus .... ... 15,295 ... 15,295 15,295 ... Rinderpest goat virus . ... 246 ... 246 246 1,844,112 5,766,776 21,626 7,632,514 6,306,405 1,326,109 1. The opening balance of A. R. serum has been shown 1,377,632 instead of the closing balance of 3,271,165 shown in Appendix No. V to the Annual Report for 1927-28. The latter balance included crude unbottled stocks which were separated from stocks (bottled and passed for issue) at the commencement of the year 1928-29. 2. The opening balance of H. S. serum has been shown as 159,648 instead of the closing balance of 2,00,911 shown in Appendix No. V of the annual report for 1927-28. 3. Excludes crude unbottled stock of 3,448,146 doses. 4. No crude stock.
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1929 25 APPENDIX VI. Table showing the financial results of the working of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1928-29. RECEIPTS EXPENDITURE Sale of sera. vaccine and other products Sale of animals Sale of garden pro- ducts and reserved forests Other miscellaneous receipts Total Salaries and travelling allowance of officers and staff Feed and keep of animals Cost of chemicals and apparatus Other miscellaneous expenditure Purchase of animals Total 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. 14,22,481-8-7 25,022-3-0 135-8-3 20,781-6-1 14,68,420-9-11 2-30,226-7-3 2,22,560-9-6 35,838-5-6 1,21,842-15-1 1,04,259-0-0 * 7,14,727-5-4 * Excludes expenditure to be adjusted by the A. G. C. R. in accounts for March 29, supplementary.
26 RE. OF IMPL. INSTITUTE OF VETY. RESEARCH, MUKTESAR, FOR 1929. APPENDIX VII. List of officers and subordinates who came to Muktesar for training during the year 1928-29. Name Arrived on Left on (1) Major G. K. Shaw, R. A. V. C., Jubbulpore. 15th May 1928 31st July 1928. (2) Lt. J. S. Kingston, R.A.V.C., Risalpur. 16th May 1928 31st July 1928. (3) Major H. Allen, R.A.V.C., Remount Depot, Mona. 16th May 1928 29th July 1928. (4) Lt. J. F. L. Taylor, R.A.V.C., Secunderabad. 17th May 1928 31st July 1928. (5) Mr. N. D. Dasan, C.V.D., H.E.H. The Nizam's Government, Hyderabad, Deccan. 11th February 1928. 10th August 1928. (6) Mr. M. James, S.V.I., C.P., Nagpur. 7th April 1928 9th October 1928. (7) Lt. Ramchandra Misra, G.B.V.C., Rewa State, C.I. 9th June 1928 31st August 1928. (8) Mr. N. N. Banerji, C.V.D., Calcutta. 16th August 1928 . 16th November 1928. (9) Mr. Abdulla Khan, V.I., Sohawa Laboratory. 3rd October 1928 . 13th October 1928. (10) Mr. P. S. Nair, V.D.S., C.P., Nagpur 15th November 1928 ...... MGIPC-S2-III-I-88-29-11-29-300.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research Muktesar For the year ending 31st March, 1930. CALCUTTA GOVERNMENT OF INDIA CENTRAL PUBLICATION BRANCH 1931 Price Re. 1-6 or 2s. 3d.
Government of India Publications are obtainable from the Government of India Central Publication Branch, 3, Government Place, West, Calcutta, and from the following Agents :ANNUAL REPORT OF THE Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research Muktesar For the year ending 31st March, 1930. CALCUTTA: GOVERNMENT OF INDIA CENTRAL PUBLICATION BRANCH 1931 Price Re. 1-6 or 2s. 3d.
Government of India Publications are obtainable from the Government of India Central Publication Branch, 3, Government Place, West, Calcutta, and from the following Agents :TABLE OF CONTENTS. . . . . . . . PAGE. A.[ ii ] PAGE. D.Annual Report of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, 1929-30. REPORT OF THE DIRECTOR. (MR. F. WARE, F.R.C.V.S., Officiating.) I.2 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, No other changes of importance occurred amongst the gazetted staff during the year under report. II.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31 ST MARCH, 1930. 3 At the instance of the Government of India every endeavour was made during the year to replace dotial by kumaoni labour, but it did not prove very successful owing to the aversion of the latter, on religious grounds, to the performance of a large part of the duties which ordinarily fall to the lot of gwallas in the Veteri- nary Section. There is a very limited demand for labour solely for duties to which kumaonis have no objection, e.g., collecting pine needles for bedding, cleaning sheds, etc. The kumaonis engaged on the farm only worked for short periods and then left. This is due to the fact that they are mostly cultivators and only take service during the slack periods in their cultivation work. Moreover, the majority of the local inhabitants do not live in the district all the year round but migrate to the warmer region of the bhabar during the winter months and to employ them in large numbers would, therefore, disorganize our labour arrangements. (e) Transport.4 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, vation of these areas, however, is a necessity, even though on paper it may appear to be done at a loss for a few years, in order to provide types of fodder which are not otherwise procurable at Muktesar and in order to make an outlet for the manure, which is available in large quantities, and for reasons of sanitation must be removed from the station area. All the cultivation areas are now. administered as one unit, and it is hoped that by thus being able to make a better distribution of labour and by improved methods of cultivation the annual loss will be gradually reduced. (h) Dairy.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH , 1930. 5 (3) Quarters for the Office Superintendent (estimated cost = Rs. 12,808). (4) Replacement of present pipe line leading from main tank towards Mohan Bazaar (estimated cost = Rs. 9,629). (5) Quarters for the Scientific Record Clerk (estimated cost = Rs. 7,600). (6) Cement slab drain round certain buildings (estimated cost=Rs. 4,828). The above works, except No. 2, had not been completed by the end of the year. The Provincial Public Works Department Overseer's quarters at Muktesar were purchased at a cost of Rs. 9,928 during the year for the accommodation of the Head Accountant of the Institute. In addition several other minor works of less importance were completed during the year by the Pubilc Works Department. (1) Medical and Sanitary Section.6 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH III.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1930. 7 favourable for serum production, a brew of Anti-Rinderpest serum was prepared from some carefully selected buffaloes at Muktesar in June but nothing better than a Class II serum was obtained. The help of the newly appointed Bio-Chemist was also invoked in this matter and he commenced some experiments to determine the protein content of Anti-Rinderpest serum at different times of the year. He also investigated the discrepancies which have been observed in estimating the Hydrogen-ion concentration of the same serum at Muktesar and Izatnagar, and from his results it appears that the discrepancies have been due almost entirely to variations in reading, according to the reagent used. Owing to complaints having been received from the Army Department concerning the potency of the Mallein issued from this Institute, steps were taken to examine the position, and a great deal of experimental work was done on this subject and was still in progress at the end of the year. As anticipated in last year's Annual Report the issue of strangles vaccine has been discontinued, and this product has been replaced by a mixed Anti-Streptococcic polyvalent vaccine, which is designed for more extended use. There was a small demand for Anti-Fowl Cholera serum during the year, and some experimental work on this product was also undertaken. IV.8 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, V.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1930. 9 The question of Theileriasis in imported bulls continued to be one of great interest and importance, both to this Institute and the Army Department, and in view of the necessity for a closer study of this and other Protozoal conditions occurring in domestic animals in this country. the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research has been approached to provide the funds for a Veterinary Protozoologist to be attached to this Institute for a period of 5 years in the first place. In spite of the recognised importance of Contagious Abortion to cattle and horse-breeders in this country, it was found impossible to undertake any new research work into these conditions as they occur in these animals, and the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research were therefore approached to sanction the funds for another specialist officer for 5 years to study this condition in the different domestic animals. An interesting outbreak of the condi- tion amongst goats on the Hissar Cattle Farm was reported during the year. As a result of a visit to the Institute of Colonel Olver, now Ex- pert Adviser in Annual Husbandry to the Imperial Council of Agri- cultural Research, a fresh impetus was given to the study of strangles, the so-called " Paddock fever " and other respiratory diseases of the horse, and as a result a scheme has been placed before the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research to recruit an officer on special duty for three years to study these equine diseases. Mr. Cooper, assisted by Mr. Menon, continued his intensive study of the condition known as " Ranikhet Fowl disease " and had the satisfaction of reaching a definite stage in his investigations, enabling him to show the identity of this disease with both " Newcastle disease " of fowls in England and " Avian Pest " in the Philippines. The virus of both the English and Philippine forms of the disease were very kindly supplied to this Institute by Dr. E. A. Rodier, Pathologist, Veterinary Research Laboratory, Manila. During the course of his duties as routine Pathologist, Mr. Malkani, Temporary Veterinary Research Officer, discovered a large number of larvæ of the Warble fly, Hypoderma lineatum, in the submucosa of the 10 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, of the specimens are given in Appendix IV, and their origin was as follows:MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1930. 11 which was sanctioned in order to enable the Institute to comply with a. large order for special Anti-Rinderpest serum received from the Madras Government towards the end of the year. The total amount of extra serum made as a result of this supplementary grant was not distributed, however, until after the close of the year. As a result of complaints received from some of the provinces regarding the price charged for certain of our products the question of revising these has been under consideration, but it has been found very difficult to arrive at any decision regarding the actual cost of production of any product, while the processes of manufac- ture and research are so intimately bound up together, as at present. In order to obviate this difficulty it is intended to transfer as much as possible of the processes of manufacture and distribu- tion, at least of our most important products, as early as possible, to the Imperial Veterinary Serum Institute at Izatnagar, where it is proposed to introduce a system of commercial and cost accounts during the coming year. Within a short time, therefore, it should be possible to state the actual cost of those products which are manufactured at Izatnagar, and the question of revising their sale prices can then be taken up, if necessary. VIII.12 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, the year he ran the whole of the administrative and technical work of the Institute singlehanded, and it is no exaggeration to say that this must have required an almost superhuman effort on his part. Mention must also be made of the great assistance the Institute has received from Mr. Rajagopal, Personal Assistant. His vast experience of accounts matters and the energetic and cheerful manner in which he has taken his place in the administration have been of the greatest help to the Director. To many at Muktesar the year will be remembered by the sad event of the death of the late Captain A. J. Hearsey, V.D., Farm Manager, from pneumonia, following a chill contracted during the severe weather in December 1929. Before joining this Institute in 1916 he had served for six years in the United Provinces Opium Department, so that for nearly 20 years he had been a loyal and faithful servant of the Government of this country. It may be said of Captain Hearsey that he left no enemies behind him in Muktesar, for his kindness of heart, straight- forwardness, and sportsmanship appealed to everyone with whom he had to deal. He was buried in a piece of consecrated ground in the Reserved Forest in which he had laboured so long. REPORT OF THE VETERINARY RESEARCH OFFICER, MUKTESAR. (MR. H. COOPER, M.R.C.V.S.). I.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1930. 13 months, respectively, by the injection of virulent hill bull virus and the immunity in both pairs proved to be solid and complete. (4) Infection by contact.14 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, ceptible as sheep when tested by inoculating them with potent seed material. IV.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1930. 15 V.16 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, the condition described by BALDREY (1906) under the name " Gillar ". It appears from the examination conducted so far that the disease is probably due to invasion of the intestinal mucous membrane by immature forms of amphistomes. The work is still in progress. (2) We were approached to assist in an important investigation upon a disease in transport goats in Northern Garhwal, by the Director, Civil Veterinary Department, United Provinces. The disease, known locally as " Athela ", is a contagious form of pleuro- pneumonia and it is believed that it should be capable of control by preventive inoculation measures. It is said to cause very great economic losses annually to the people employed in transport- trading in the district. The United Provinces Government ap- proached us to undertake an investigation into the same condition as long ago as in 1916, but owing to shortage of staff we have been unable to comply with the request up till now. VIII.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1930. 17 IX.18 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, quent treatment of that disease by intrathecal-intravenous " Bayer 205 " was carried out upon 5 horses during the year, but no benefi- cial results are yet apparent. XIII.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1930. 19 4. The incubation period in the artificially produced disease is ordinarily from 3 to 5 days, but may be as short as 2 days or delay- ed until the 6th or 7th, and, exceptionally, even the 14th day. 5. The duration of recognisable illness in the artificially pro- duced disease is usually extremely short, averaging only 1½ days, but the period may extend to ten days. 6. Ninety-five per cent. of Indian country bred fowls used in transmission experiments proved to be susceptible to the virus and only ten per cent. of the affected animals survived. 7. Except for the occurrence of petechiæ in the submucosa of the proventriculus, post-mortem lesions of diagnostic value are almost entirely absent. 8. Emulsions of internal organs stored unpreserved in a refri- gerator have been proved to retain their infectivity for periods extending to 155 days. 9. Serum obtained from recovered fowls is protective against the disease, but serum produced from donkeys proved to have no pro- tective value. 10. A few attempts were made to prepare a vaccine suitable for employment against the disease, but they were unsuccessful. 11. The disease has been shown to be immunologically identical by cross-immunity tests with both " Newcastle disease" in England and " Avian pest " in the Philippine Islands. Subsequent to the submission of the above paper, the three viruses have been studied further by inoculation into pigeons, and with each virus a very definite and exactly similar train of symptoms was set up, which is quite different to that exhibited by fowls. Whereas fowls show progressive weakness of the limbs during the course of the disease, pigeons exhibited a definite paralysis of the wings and legs. A controlled filtration experiment was executed where each strain of virus was mixed with a culture of Bacillus pyocyaneus and passed through an L3 bacterial filter candle. The filtrate proved to be sterile upon cultural examination, but was still fully infective for fowls in the case of each virus. XVI.20 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, with some degree of fever at the outset of the infection. Both the buffaloes showed a relapse some six months later, but at this time showed no evidence of fever or other departure from normal health. A few transmission experiments were attempted with negative results. XVII.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1930. 21 (c) A collection of Ixodes japonensis (Neumann, 1904), from a barking deer, Cervulus aureus. These were kindly identified by Professor Warburton of Cambridge. XIX.22 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, (5) Foot-and-mouth disease occurred several times in outkraals, but it did not assume unusual proportions. XX.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1930. 23 (2) Fuel.24 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, One buffalo, declared to be stolen property by the Court, was handed over to the Police, and the matter with regard to recovery of its cost is still under correspondence. During the year under report 130 hill bulls were received from Muktesar for the manufacture of Blackquarter Aggressin. III.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1930. 25 The daily attendance of coolies was 148 against 115 in the previous year. The average daily sick was 0.4. A part of the estate was supplied with a " gul " from the Sarda canal during the latter part of the year, but it was found that sufficient water was not obtained, and the Executive Engineer, Rohilkund Canals Division, has prepared an estimate of Rs. 436 for the construction of another " gul " for the Institute. As noted above, the failure of this anticipated supply was the cause of very considerable loss. V.26 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, VII.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1930. 27 APPINDIX I. Table showing the main results of the Production sections of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, and Imperial Veterinary Serum Institute, Izatnagar, during 1929-30. Quantity of sera and other products prepared and issued. Names of Products. Passed Return- ed serum. Total. Issued Average Opening for issue during issues of Stock in balance. during the previous 5 hand. the year. year. years. Doses. Doses. Doses. Doses. Doses. Doses. Doses. Anti-Rinderpest serum. 644,744 5,771,254 11,383 6,427,381 6,068,051 4,663,568 359,330 Anti-Anthrax serum . 19,795 67,141 1,600 88,536 43,901 47,732 44,635 Hæmorrhagic Septicæ- 261,850 540,618 400 802,868 706,989 398,689 95,879 mia serum. Hæmorrhagic Septicæ- 168,867 257,200 .. 426,067 385,057 330,207 41,010 mia vaccine. Blackquarter serum 50,436 84,080 .. 134,516 83,179 33,256 51,337 Blackquarter Aggressin 20,030 203,450 50 223,530 218,026 95,399 5,504 Strangles serum 7,533 .. .. 7,533 7,533 .. .. Strangles (anti-strep- 1,252 .. .. 1,252 1,252 1,187 .. tococcic vaccine). Fowl Cholera serum . .. 400 .. 400 400 .. .. Bovine Abortion vaccine .. 109 .. 109 109 .. .. Mallein, ordinary 25,389 11,424 200 37,013 19,086 27,964 17,927 Mallein, I. D. P. . 1,13,570 5,770 .. 119,340 26,590 35,493 92,750 Tuberculin, subcut 1,788 .. .. 1,788 398 1,127 1,390 Tuberculin, concentrated 9,010 240 .. 9,250 835 4,562 8,415 Avian tuberculin, ordi- 985 .. .. 985 19 327 966 nary. Avian tuberculin, con- 8,600 200 .. 8,800 380 2,767 8,420 centrated. Rinderpest Goat virus . .. 196 ampoules. .. 196 ampoules. 196 ampoules. .. .. Rinderpest Bull virus . .. 21,095 c. c. .. 21,095 c. c. 21,095 c. c. .. .. Autogenous vaccine .. 60 .. 60 60 .. .. Rabbit septicæmia 4,390 .. .. 4,390 47 4,343 serum. Bacillus X anatoxin . .. 2,760 .. 2,760 2,760 .. .. Strangles anti-virus . .. 188 .. 188 188 .. .. TOTAL 1,338,239 6,966,185 13,633 8,318,057 7,586,151 5,642,278 731,906
28 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, APPEN Table showing the number of doses of products issued to the different Muktesar, and the Imperial Veterinary Serum Products. Punjab. North Punjab. South Punjab. N.-W. F. Provin- ce. United Provin- ces. Bihar and Orissa. Bengal. Assam. Burma. A. R. serum 266,400 83,000 125,000 37,100 548,120 608,000 201,000 150,000 600,950 Anthrax serum . 200 .. .. .. 2,350 15,600 .. 3,067 .. H. S. serum . . 70,000 69,040 15,500 5,000 81,400 146,000 33,400 5,000 .. H. S. vaccine . 107,100 106,700 54,100 .. 400 5,000 650 500 .. B. Q. serum .. .. .. 10,000 31,000 4,000 .. .. B. Q. Aggressin. 8,500 12,000 300 2,000 .. 7,000 120 300 .. Strangles serum. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Strangles (anti- .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. streptococcic vaccine). Fowl Cholera .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. serum. Bovine Abortion .. .. .. ... .. 99 .. .. .. vaccine. Mallein, ordy. . 250 .. .. 50 25 .. .. .. .. Mallein, I. D. P. .. .. .. .. Tuberculin, sub- 3 .. .. .. 2 .. cut. .. . Tuberculin, con- .. .. .. .. .. 265 .. .. cen. Avian tuber, ordy. .. .. .. .. .. Avian tuber, .. .. .. .. .. 220 .. .. concen. Rinderpest Goat 3 .. .. .. 6 12 24 virus. ampou- les. ampou- les. ampou- les. ampou- les. Rinderpest Bull 350 .. .. .. .. .. .. 75 .. virus. c. c. c. c. .. Autogenous vac- .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. cine. Rabbit septi- .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. cæmia serum. Bacillus X ana- .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. toxin. Strangles X anti- .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. virus. TOTAL 452,806 270,740 194,900 44,150 642,303 813,196 239,194 158,942 600,950 * Includes 306,533 doses unbottled stock.
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1930. 29 DIX II. Provinces, States, etc., from the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Institute, Izatnagar, during the year 1929-30. Madras. Bombay. Sind and Rajpu- tana. Central Provin- ces. Coorg. Military Depart- ment. Indian States. Foreign Coun- tries. I. I. V. R., Mukte- sar and I. V. S. I., Izat- nagar. Total. Remarks. 2,115,000 191,500 31,000 384,000 25,000 39,900 132,686 156,400 372,925* 6,068,051 2,000 1,000 .. 4,000 2,190 404 7,241 5,84930 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, APPENDIX III. Summary of results of inoculations in the field of the different products issued from the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1929-30. Number of outbreaks in which inoculation was undertaken. Number of animals which died uninocu- lated in course of outbreak. Number of animals inoculated. Number of animals which died after inoculation. District. Equine. Bovine. Others. Equine. Bovine. Others. Equine. Bovine. Others. United Provinces. Rinderpest. 1,335 .. 18,121 134 .. 164,994 2,325 .. 194 2 Hæmorrhagic Septi- 394 .. 2,625 .. .. 46,510 139 .. 17 .. cæmia serum. Blackquarter 45 .. 255 .. .. 5,708 .. .. 4 .. Anthrax 10 .. 53 .. .. 1,766 .. .. 8 .. Punjab. Rinderpest . 523 .. 4,035 38 .. 99,531 .. .. 99 Hæmorrhagic Septi- 488 .. 3,784 .. .. 116,223 .. .. 51 .. cæmia serum. Hæmorrhagic Septi- 1,222 ... .. .. .. 207,565 .. .. 12 cæmia vaccine. Blackquarter 140 .. 43 .. .. 19,436 7 .. .. .. Anthrax . 3 .. 6 .. .. 34 .. .. 2 .. N.-W.F. Province. Rinderpest . 31 .. 366 .. .. 6,547 .. .. 17 .. Hæmorrhagic Septi- 13 .. 196 .. .. 4,831 .. .. 2 .. cæmia serum. Sind and Rajputana. Rinderpest . 88 .. 840 .. .. 4,906 .. .. 407 .. Hæmorrhagic Septi- 11 .. 148 .. .. 739 .. .. .. .. cæmia serum. Assam. Rinderpest. 429 .. 17,624 .. .. 36,301 .. .. 778 .. Hæmorrhagic Septi- 31 1 236 3 8 2,741 .. .. 2 .. cæmia, serum. Anthrax . . 43 8 365 57 166 3,035 14 .. 5 .. Blackquarter . . 1 .. 1 .. .. 66 .. .. .. ..
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1930. 31 APPENDIX III-contd. Summary of results of inoculations in the field of the different products issued from the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1929-3032 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, APPENDIX III-contd. Summary of results of inoculations in the field of the different products issued from the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1929-30MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1930. 33 APPENDIX IV. Table showing the details of specimens received and examined at the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1929-30. Nature of specimens NUMBER OF SPECIMENS. Positive. Doubtful. Negative. Abortion34 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, APPENDIX IV-contd. Table showing the details of specimens received and examined at the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1929-30MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1930. 35 APPENDIX V. Table showing the financial results of the working of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1929-30. RECEIPTS. EXPENDITURE. Sale of sera, vaccines and other products. Sale of animals. Sale of garden pro- ducts and reserved forests. Other miscellaneous receipts. Total. Salaries and travelling allowances of officers and staff. Feed and keep of animals. Cost of chemicals and apparatus. Other miscellaneous expenditure. Purchase of animals. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. 15,20,793-0-0 23,784-0-0 1,161-15-8 14,497-13-0 15,60,236-12-3 2,50,770-0-0 2,29,524-3-8 35,548-4-0 1,42,353-5-10 1,19,124-12-0 7,77,320-9-6 NOTE.36 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, APPENDIX VI. Price list of sera, vaccines, and other products manufactured at the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, and conditions governing their sale. 1. GENERAL. (a) All communications intended for this Institute should be addressed as below:MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1930. 37 the refund due credit is afforded for the cost of packing material (except caps) received intact from customers supplied at inland rates in bills for subsequent supplies issued to them by this Institute. (b) The cost of products supplied to Government Departments is adjusted by book transfer through their respective Account Officers. The bills issued by this office should be returned duly accepted within a month from the date of receipt showing :38 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, APPENDIX VI-contd. List of products issued from the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, and current prices as sanctioned by the Government of India. Serial No. Name of product. Inland rates. Foreign rates. Remarks. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. 1 Anti-Rinderpest serum (5 c. c. dose). 0 3 0 0 4 0 2 Anti-Anthrax serum (15 c. c. dose). 0 6 0 0 9 0 3 Anti-Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia serum (15 c. c. dose). 0 6 0 0 9 0 4 Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia vaccine (5 c. c. dose). 0 3 0 0 4 6 5 Mallein, ordinary (1 c. c. ampoule) 0 4 0 0 6 0 6 Mallein, I. D. P.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1930. 39 APPENDIX VI-concld. List of products issued from the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, and current prices as sanctioned by the Government of IndiaANNUAL REPORT OF THE Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. For the year ending 31st March 1931. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CALCUTTA: GOVERNMENT OF INDIA CENTRAL PUBLICATION BRANCH 1931 Price Re. 1-10-0 or 2s. 9d.
NOTICE. On application to the Director, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, copies of the Annual Reports of that Institute for 1930-31 and onwards can be had, free of charge, by the Heads of Veterinary Departments and Institutes in foreign countries in exchange for technical reports of their Department or Institute.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. For the year ending 31st March 1931. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CALCUTTA : GOVERNMENT OF INDIA CENTRAL PUBLICATION BRANCH 1931 B 2
Government of India Publications are obtainable from the Government of India Central Publication Branch, 3, Government Place, West, Calcutta, and from the following Agents :TABLE OF CONTENTS A.-Report of the Director. PAGE. I Staff . . . . . . . . . . . 1 II. Supplies and Services, at Muktesar . . . . . . 2 III. Production . . . . . . . . . 7 IV. Instruction. . . . . . . . . . . 8 V. Researeh . . . . . . . . . . 9 VI. Publications . . . . . . . . . . 10 VII. Finance . . . . . . . . . . 11 VIII. General . . . . . . . . . . 12 B.ii PAGE. D.ANNUAL REPORT OF THE Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, and its sub-station the Imperial Veterinary Serum Institute, Izatnagar, 1930-31. Report of the Director. (Mr. F. WARE, F.R.C.V.S.) I.2 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, Mr. Abdul Ghani, Senior Veterinary Inspector, was promoted to the newly created post of Veterinary Deputy Superintendent at the Imperial Veterinary Serum Institute, Izatnagar, with effect from 30th May 1930. Sheikh Nasir Ahmed, L. Ag., joined duty as Estate Manager at Muktesar on 7th November 1930, relieving Mr. K. O. Stiffle, who reverted to his substantive post of Farm Overseer. Dr. K. C. Sen, Biochemist, was granted leave from 3rd October 1930, to enable him to proceed to England for post-graduate training, and Mr. A. C. Roy, M.Sc., was appointed to officiate for him. Mr. S. K. Sen, Protozoologist, was granted leave for 2 months and 15 days from 12th January 1931, and Veterinary Inspector P. R. Krishna Iyer officiated in his place. Mr. R. N. Naik, Assistant Veterinary Research Officer, was granted leave for 2 months from 26th January 1931 and Veterinary Inspector Balwant Singh officiated in the post during this period. Mr. J. D'Costa was on leave from the beginning of the year until 7th June 1930 and left Muktesar again on 23rd September 1930 on transfer to Izatnagar as Temporary Deputy Director. During his absence on both occasions Veterinary Inspector P. C. Banerji officiated in the post of Veterinary Deputy Superintendent, Muktesar. The remaining gazetted posts at the two Institutes were filled as in the previous report. II.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1931. 3 connection with Nasal Granuloma, and the Agricultural Department, Bihar and Orissa, supplied the Institute with 9 cows, 1 calf and 2 bullocks, which were infected with Johne's disease. One riding pony met with an accident and had to be destroyed, and 452 bulls, 25 buffaloes, 42 goats, 30 sheep and 2 cows were sold by auction and realised a total sum of Rs. 1,756. (c) Forest Produce.4 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, caps to the value of Rs. 24,160 were purchased through the Director General of Stores, London, during the year. A sum of Rs. 49,840-5-4 was recoverable from customers for packing material supplied, but of this amount a credit of Rs. 23,001-10-0 is due to them for material returned in a serviceable condition. (g) Cultivation.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1931. 5 have also been made, by carrying out extensive switch board alterations, to run the two engines and batteries in parallel. Other improvements included a new method of filtering used lubri- cating oil and it is estimated that the sum total of them all is that the cost of consumable stores used in the generation of each unit of electric current has been reduced by 37 per cent. A much needed addition to the water supply has been obtained by tapping the Surmani stream just above the Ritani garden and running it by gravitation into Dam No. 3. The water channel is as yet only a "Kutcha" one, but the innovation has proved so successful already that for the first time for many years a 24 hours supply of water has been available throughout the hot weather. Proposals for making this a permanent addition to the water supply of Muktesar will be sub- mitted. after it has been investigated by the officers of the Public Works Department. Other improvements to the water supply made during the year included alterations to the Chlorinator, by which the water is chlori- nated as it is pumped to the main tanks, a thorough overhaul of the Ritani Dam, and better arrangements for keeping out polluted water from the Rinderpest side. The multistage centrifugal pump arrived towards the end of the year and arrangements were made with the Public Works Department for the Institute Engineer to erect this. The pump did not commence work until after the year had closed, but it may be stated that it is capable of pumping 116 gallons per minute, and with the improvements which have been made in the Power House, enabling the 3 pumps to be run together, it is now possible to maintain a delivery of 50 gallons per minute at the main tanks. Owing to leakage in one of the gas holders and inferior quality of wood available during the year, considerable difficulty was experienced in maintaining the supply of gas for use in the laboratories. With the object of reducing the consumption of gas, therefore, the gas radia- tors in the incubator room in the main building were removed and electric heaters, made in the Power House, were installed and are prov- ing very satisfactory. The vacuum drying apparatus was in demand during the year for the concentration of serum and other products, but the steam heating arrangement did not work satisfactorily. This was, therefore, dis- mantled and replaced by an electric heating element, which was more satisfactory and permitted continuous use during both day and night. The old telephone system, which previously existed for the Engi- neering Section only and had fallen into disuse, was overhauled and extended to include other sections, out-laboratories, library, etc. It has proved a great boon and a saving of time, and the exchange is in con- stant use throughout the day. (k) Construction and Repairs.6 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, (2) Additions and alterations to the grain godown costing Rs. 2,197. (3) Painting the iron roofs of certain buildings at a cost of Rs. 6,138. (4) Providing water installations to certain buildings on the eastern side of the Estate (estimated cost Rs. 2,300). (5) Construction of stone drains at the sides of certain roads (estimated cost Rs. 5,840). (6) Additions and alterations to room No. 10 in the main build- ing (estimated cost Rs. 3,500). No major works were constructed at Muktesar during the year. (l) Medical and Sanitary Section.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1931. 7 III.8 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF. VETY. RESEARCH, result it was decided to abandon the meat digest broth, which had been used for the production of the Mallein, about which complaints were received, and revert to the old method of using peptone glycerine broth. A new product, Fowl Cholera vaccine, was prepared during the year and added to the list of products available for sale. The production of both bull and goat Rinderpest virus, for use in Serum-simultaneous inoculations and immunising purposes at Izat- nagar, was continued at Muktesar. Of 196 lots prepared, only 5 or less than 2.5%, had to be discarded on account of bacterial contamina- tion. IV.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1931. 9 (6) Mr. Gurbaksh Singh, Veterinary Assistant Surgeon, Punjab. (7) Mr. Ram Lal Kaura, L.V.P., Hissar Cattle Farm. (8) Mr. V. R. Gopal Krishnan, Veterinary Assistant Sur- geon, Central Provinces. (9) Mr. N. S. Jawade, Veterinary Assistant Surgeon, Central Provinces. Mr. Muhammad Yakub, L.V.P., a research scholar from the Pun- jab, joined this Institute on 16th March 1931, for a 2 years' course of training. V.10 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, As usual, a large amount of research work was undertaken during the year in connection with Rinderpest, and it is hoped that the results obtained will be made available for publication in the near future. No doubt, those connected with the preservation of cattle in this country are anxiously awaiting an announcement from this Institute regarding the issue of a Rinderpest vaccine, which appears to have been introduc- ed successfully in other countries afflicted with this disease. A vaccine would, of course, be a much simpler and cheaper method of protecting animals than methods involving the use of serum or serum and virus, but, so far, the experiments carried out at this Institute have not proved that the vaccines used in other countries are as safe or efficient as the Serum-simultaneous method, as practised in this country. As soon as an experienced Serologist is appointed, however, experiments with a Rinderpest vaccine will be continued on a larger scale. A total of 463 consignments of material from outside sources was received, as compared with 276 similar consignments in 1929-30. The details of the specimens are given in Appendix IV and their origin was as follows:MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1931. 11 Publications in other journals include :12 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, representing a gross profit in the year's working of Rs. 3,70,972-6-0, compared with Rs. 7,82,916-2-9 in the previous year. The reduction in profit is due, as previously explained, to the smaller demand for the products of this Institute, particularly anti-Rinderpest serum, which occurred during the latter half of the year. For the first time, it is possible to show the expenditure of the two Institutes separately, and it will be seen that the expenditure incurred at Muktesar was rather more than 5½ lacs of rupees, whereas that at Izatnagar was just over 2½ lacs. It must not be supposed, however, that this represents the difference between expenditure on Research and on Production, for several products are still made at Muktesar, where the testing of Izatnagar products also takes place. VIII.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1931. 13 REPORT OF THE VETERINARY RESEARCH OFFICER (MR. H. COOPER, M.R.C.V.S.). I.14 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, This is a strong argument in favour of the wholesale introduction of the " serum-simultaneous" method of immunisation of cattle in India, since it can easily be understood from the results of this experi- ment that control of rinderpest by " serum-alone " must at best be a very prolonged and therefore tedious and expensive procedure. (4) Irregular temperature reactions.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1931. 15 of using much reduced doses of anti-rinderpest serum, or even goat virus alone as a protective agent against natural Rinderpest. Before issuing advice in this connection to Bengal a test using 60 average "plains" cattle purchased in the Bareilly and surrounding districts was carried out at Izatnagar under the supervision of Mr. D'Costa. Much reduced doses of serum, both Protective and Class II, were given to different lots using also a large proportion of controls where no serum at all was injected. Only extremely mild reactions were exhibited in a small proportion of the animals, and not a single death occurred directly ascribable to Rinderpest. Experience gained in two "plains" districts in Bengal and the United Provinces, indicates, therefore, that it may be possible to use goat virus as a vaccine, or with only extremely small doses of serum. Even a small reduction in the present quantity of serum advised for field use in serum-simultaneous inoculations would result in very great saving of money, and a much larger number of animals could then be immunised in India as a whole at the present cost. In spite of these results, however, it is still not possible for this Institute to advise any drastic change in method in view of the grave risks that are involved, for a tract in which the animals are considerably more susceptible is liable to be encountered suddenly at any time. (6) Natural outbreaks in protected cattle.16 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, time of treatment already almost in extremis. Further extensive trials of the drug in uncomplicated cases of Rinderpest, however, unfortunately resulted in the exhibition of no curative properties. (c) It was reported to us by Mr. W. Harris, Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Assam, that the use of Iodine and Iodides given at the height of the fever in Rinderpest had proved to be an effective cure of the disease in field practice. At his request a small experimental trial was carried out at Muktesar, but no beneficial effect could be demonstrated from their use. (8) Bio-chemical Research.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31 ST MARCH, 1931. 17 bulls used in the potency tests of anti-Rinderpest serum at Muktesar is only 262 lbs. it means that these potency tests err on the side of being too severe a test of the serum. During the past year work has been taken up to put this theory into practice in the testing of anti-Rinderpest serum, and it is hoped that the results obtained will be available for publication in due course. II.18 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, These samples were examined and put in order during the year under report and after discarding useless specimens, the collection now consists of 55 samples. Since this material has been collected from a large number of different districts all over India it forms an extremely valuable basis upon which to start research work. V.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1931. 19 1930). It is of interest to record that in two calves under two months old, which died recently after 24 hours illness in the dairy herd at Muktersar, the organisms responsible for pneumonia causing death was found in each case to be a diphtheroid organism Bacillus pyogenes. VIII.ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, obtained by this method, a positive one can in a large pro- portion of cases still be obtained by the use of a "bowel- washing" method of examination that has been described by Krishnamurti, working in Madras. (c) Further evidence of the hitherto unsuspected wide distribution of Johne's disease in dairy herds in India, which has already been referred to in early reports from this Institute, was obtained during the year, by the detection of its pre- sence in four more herds where examinations were made. (3) Relationship between the bacillus of Johne's disease and the Avian Tubercle bacillus.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1931. 21 Of the batch of bulls imported in 1929 our records to date indicate the following position in continuation of the table published in last year's report :- Acute heileriasis affection. Affected. Doubtfully affected. Died. Recovered. Not affected. South African bulls .. 2 5 2 3* Dutch bulls .... 0 3 1 2 * NOTE :22 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, the disease after arrival in India, it appears that further evidence is accumulating to indicate that, although Babesia bigemina of Africa and India are probably identical, the forms of Theileriasis in the two countries are different, as no immunity is set up by the African parasite T. mutans, to the Indian form of Theileriasis. (2) Drug treatmentMUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1931. 23 a "continuous feeder", whereas examination of a collection kindly sent by the Veterinary officer at Mhow revealed the fact that both B. australis and Hyalomma aegyptium, an "interrupted feeder", were present upon that farm. Incidentally a special consignment of ticks sent in a sepa- rate bottle was received from the Mhow farm, together with blood smears from the animal, from which these particular ticks had been collected since it, a country-bred bull, was at the time exhibiting fever. These ticks proved to be B. australis and the blood smears showed a relatively rich infection with B. bigemina. IX.24 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST OF VETY. RESEARCH, at present at Muktesar under observation. It is intended to try the less irritant compounds of antimony as prepared by the Bayer Company, and used with success in the treatment of Kala Azar of the human subject, and a supply of two products Antimosan and Neostibosan, has been kindly placed at our disposal by this firm for this purpose. Work has already been taken in hand and the preliminary indications are that the curative dose of these drugs is likely to be so large as to exclude their use in veterinary practice on account of the high cost. According to the work of Krishnamurti, and his conclusion is arrived at largely from a histological study, the disease is caused by a streptothrix, and this finding has been confirmed during the past year by Mr. Rajagopalan, who has recovered repeatedly streptothrix organ- isms from each of the six affected animals. Other organisms grown commonly consist of diphtheroids, staphylococci, bacillii of the B. subtilis group, and a few yeast-like organisms. Since the disease is definitely amenable to treatment with tartar emetic, and this drug is of great value also in the treatment of some protozoan affections, such as Kala Azar and Surra, it is reasonable to suppose that bovine nasal granuloma may be due in reality to a protozoan organism. In 1927 Krishnamurti detected cases of nasal granuloma in cattle which were definitely due to Rhinosporidium, regarded by some as a member of the Protozoa, and certain facts have recently been collected by us indicating that it may yet be possible to correlate all the lesions found in cattle, including those at present believed to be due to streptothrix organisms, with Rhinosporidia as their cause. X.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1931. 25 relationship between sterility in cows and organisms of the Brucella group, but no definite results are available for publication at the present time. An incidental finding of some interest was the isolation in culture by Mr. Naik of an organism almost identical with B. viscosum equi from uterine washings of a sterile cow. (b) Streptococcic mastitis.26 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, were found infested, the maximum number of warble-grubs recovered from a single bull being eleven. Between 27th February and 13th April 1931 about 130 bulls were examined, all with negative results. This work, as also observations on the bionomics of the larvae, is being continued. Through the courtesy of Mr. P. N. Nanda, Assistant Superinten- dent, Hissar Cattle Farm, two consignments of warble grubs recovered from Chinkara (Gazella bennetti) at Hissar were made available for study at this Institute during the year. (4) Pathological conditions. (a) On analogy with the known transmissibility of papillomata of the buccal mucous membrane of the dog, Mr. Malkani transplanted a papillomatous growth removed from the under surface of the tongue of a bull at Muktesar into the tongues of other cattle. Some evidence was obtained that such growths may be transmissible also, but the work requires repeating before any definite conclusion is arrived at. (b) The occurrence of Teratomatous growths in connection with the eyeballs of new-born calves at the Military Dairy Farm, Quetta, was again brought to our notice during this year. An examination of simi- lar specimens sent from the farm in 1924 had previously been made at Muktesar, when it was diagnosed to be Atresia palpebrarum, and thought to be definitely heriditary in origin. (5) Mineral deficiency.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1931. 27 results of a large number of agglutination tests carried out with samples of serum from affected animals. (3) " Phet " or "Pitto " disease in Sind.28 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, found that the organisms were effectively killed even in two-litre flasks by the addition alone of 0.5 per cent. carbolic acid. (d) The maintenance of ponies infected with glanders suitable for potency tests upon mallein has been the subject of much research during the last two years. It has been found that the most suitable method of infection consists in the intravenous injection of a small dose of living culture of B. mallei, although as many as 20 per cent. of the ponies may die before they can be used. Infection by rubbing living cultures into the scarified skin of the nostrils of ponies is also a suitable method, but it leads to "open " infected lesions in many cases, which is obviously objectionable. (4) Equine Contagious AbortionMUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1931. 29 " Work on this was commenced on 15th July 1930, a sample of blood from a case of P. gibsoni infection being obtained on this date from the Jind State Kennels, at Bhim Tal. The total number of subinoculations performed with this strain amounted to 18, the incuba- tion period in the experimental animals ranging from 9 to 31 days (average 14.6 days). The animals subinoculated were 16 dogs and 2 foxes; one of the latter, however, died shortly after receiving the viru- lent blood. A noticeable feature of the disease in artificially infected dogs was that the presence of the parasites in their circulation was not associated with any elevation in their body temperature, although immediately after the appearance of the parasites they went down appreciably in condition, which, however, they regained a short time afterwards. Thereafter the dogs apparently remained in good health, in spite of the fact that the parasites, as also pronounced anaemic changes, were noticeable in their blood for at least 6 months from the date of the first appearance of the parasites. An interesting observation in this connection was that six pups (two still-born) born of infected parents showed rare P. gibsoni in their circulation immediately after birth. The four surviving pups died within 3 days without showing the organisms, but a dog inoculated with the heart blood of three of these pups developed anaemic changes with the presence of P. gibsoni in its blood. This part of the work was carried out by Mr. Krishna Iyer." " In connection with transmission experiments with Rhipicephalus sanguineus, the preliminary work was directed to evolving a suitable technique for feeding larval and nymphal ticks on dogs. Experience- showed that the method as recommended by various workers, of libera- ting the ticks in cages containing the experimental animals was not suitable for feeding the larvae or the nymphs. An assortment of cup- shaped receptacles was therefore tested as to their suitability for enclo- sing the ticks over a limited area of the skin of the host by means of a good adhesive, e.g. " Chatterton's compound", the procedure being modified from day to day in the light of fresh experience." (2) Canine Typhus.30 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, XV.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1931. 31 (e) A number of serum tests were carried out during the year, which proved that an anti-serum could be produced from fowls using each of the strains, and each serum was pro- tective against all the four viruses. Attempts to produce serum from geese and ducks, however, failed. (2) Fowl Typhoid.32 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, XVII.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1931. 33 Etiological diagnosis arrived at included Rinderpest in 920 cattle and goats, or nearly 68 per cent. of the total number; "Redwater" (B. bigemina) in 64 cases or nearly 7 per cent. of the cattle, and Bovine Coccidiosis in 83 cases or over 9 per cent. of the cattle. Both the last named diseases occurred almost entirely as complicating affec- tions resuscitated by Rinderpest. It has already been mentioned above that 495 or nearly 24 per cent. of all animals were found with pneu- monia post-mortem. (3) Routine Paethology.34 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, REPORT OF THE DEPUTY DIRECTOR, IMPERIAL VETERINARY SERUM INSTITUTE, IZATNAGAR. (MR. J. D'COSTA, G.B.V.C., Temporary.) I.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1931. 35 In addition 310 buffalo calves were purchased at Rs. 8 per head from the Government Lymph Depot, Patwa Dangar, for the manu- facture of Blackquarter Aggressin against 418 obtained from this source in the previous year. After completing the period of productive yield 1,898 buffaloes were sold at an average price of Rs. 16-4-3 against Rs. 14-10-0 in the previous year. 104 buffaloes discontinued from serum-making were transferred from the Veterinary Section to the Farm Section for cultivation. Two buffaloes declared to be the stolen property were handed over to the police and their cost was recovered. 60 plains bulls were purchased for Anti-Rinderpest serum testing and 458 bulls36 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, IV.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1931. 37 ferred to Muktesar, as compared with 6,17,409 doses manufactured and 4,57,200 doses transferred in the previous year. The issue of Anti- Haemorrhagic Septicaemia serum was undertaken from Izatnagar during the year under report for the first time, and 3,01,243 doses were issued to the field. (c) Anti-Blackquarter Serum.38 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, (b) Johne's Disease. (1) Testing the Farm animals with Avian Tuberculin to deter- mine the presence of Jobne's disease infection. VIII.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1931. 39 APPENDIX I. Table showing the main results of the Production sections of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, and Imperial Veterinary Serum Institute, Izatnagar, during 1930-31. Quantity of Sera and other products prepared and issued. Name of Products. Opening balance. Passed for issue during the year. Return- ed. Total. Issued during the year. Average issue of previous 5 years. Stock in hand. Doses. Doses. Doses. Doses. Doses. Doses. Doses. Anti-Rinderpest Serum40 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, APPEN Table showing the number of doses of products issued to Products. Punjab. N.-W. F. Province and Baluchis- tan. United Pro- vinces. Bihar and Orissa. Bengal. Assam. Burma. Madras. Anti-Rinderpest Serum- Special . . 2,000 ... 3,550 2,000 28,620 3,500 1,00,000 1,300,000 Preventive . . 332,500 44,000 492,260 135,000 75,000 100,600 425,000 30,000 Anti-Anthrax Serum . , 1,000 717 107 1,200 ... 2,034 ... ... Anti-Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia Serum. 135,800 8,000 60,007 14,000 10,000 ... ... 16,000 Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia Vaccine. 267,700 ... 1,000 ... 1,000 500 300 ... Anti-Blackquarter Serum . 250 3,000 14,120 ... ... ... ... 22,000 Blackquarter Aggressin . 25,300 ... 1,300 1,700 200 250 ... 10,000 Strangles (anti-Streptococcic vaccine). ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Fowl Cholera Serum 320 200 26 ... ... ... ... 240 Fowl Cholera Vaccine . . 720 ... 55 ... ... ... ... 240 Bovine Abortion Vaccine . ... ... ... 46 ... ... ... ... Equine Abortion Vaccine 100 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Mallein, ordinary . . ... ... 140 6 ... ... ... 200 Mallein, I. D. P. . . . ... ... ... 5 ... ... ... ... Tuberculin, subcutaneous ... ... ... 100 ... ... ... ... Tuberculin, concentrated . 15 ... 550 ... ... ... ... ... Avian tuberculin, ordinary ... ... ... 800 ... ... ... ... Avian tuberculin, concentrated ... ... 350 60 ... ... ... ... Rinderpest Goat Virus . ... ... Am- poules 9 Am- poules 6 Am- poules 12 Bottles Am- poules 3 ... ... Rinderpest Bull Virus . . 120 c. c. ... ... 15 c. c. 5 ... ... ... ... Autogenous Vaccine . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Rabbit Septicæmia Serum . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Strangles Anti-Virus . ... .. ... ... ... ... ... ... TOTAL 765,825 55,917 573,474 154,438 114,837 106,887 525,800 1,878,680 * Excluding 166 doses of serum issued free.
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1931. 41 DIX II. the different Provinces, States, etc., during the year 1930-31. Bom- bay. Sind and Rajpu- tana. Central Pro- vinces. Coorg. Military Depart- ment. Indian States. Foreign coun- tries. I. I. of V. R., Mukte- sar and I.V.S.I., Izat- nagar. Total. Remarks. 13,000 ... 87,000 ... 40,588 20,140 200 1,904 ... 287,0 0 58,000 208,000 20,800 964 112,640 93,700 *2,336 4,520,302 1,000 ... 4,500 3,630 ... 14,911 ... 17 29,116 35,000 5,400 27,000 ... ... 26,865 1,717 ... 339,789 1,000 ... 50,250 ... ... 7,300 400 ... 329,950 ... 900 10,000 100 ... 11,884 ... ... 62,254 55,000 1,750 15,800 ... 220 87,600 ... 770 199,890 ... ... ... ... ... 897 ... ... 897 ... ... ... ... ... 100 ... ... 886 ... ... ... ... ... 100 ... ... 1,115 ... ... ... ... 41 1 ... ... 88 ... ... ... ... 120 ... ... ... 220 900 300 10 ... 15,008 1,025 1,500 17,970 37,959 50 ... 31,570 450 7,000 97,225 136,300 ... 150 10 1 70 39 ... 7 377 ... 15 70 ... 215 400 ... 620 1,885 ... ... ... ... ... 4 ... 1 305 ... ... 100 ... 50 400 ... 750 1,710 ... ... Ampo- ules 36 ... Ampo- ules 153 Ampo- ules 9 ... Ampoules Bottles 228 5 1,110 c. c. ... 40 c. c. ... 200 c. c. 1,260 c. c. ... 26,770 c. c. 29,515 c. c. ... ... ... ... 10 ... .. ... 10 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4,343 4,343 ... ... ... ... 3,000 c. c. ... ... ... 3,000 c. c. 394,010 66,515 402,866 24,531 92,209 286,935 104,517 152,713 5,700,144
42 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, APPENDIX III. Summary of results of inoculations in the field of the different products of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, during the year 1930-31. Name of diseases and provinces. Number of outbreaks in which inoculation was undertaken. Number of animals which died,unino- culated in course of outbreak. Number of animals inoculated. Number of animals which died after inoculation. Equine. Bovine. Others. Equine. Bovine. Others. Equine. Bovine. Others. United Provinces. Rinderpest 1,438 ... 12,637 35 ... 1,31,524 1,950 ... 176 ... Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia . 374 ... 2,146 ... ... 50,057 ... ... 11 ... Blackquarter 70 ... 401 ... ... 11,342 ... ... ... Anthrax .... 3 ... 11 ... ... 130 60 ... ... ... Punjab. ... Rinderpest 379 3,126 ... ... 89,719 45 ... 92 ... Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia Serum. 509 ... 3,765 ... 1,17,869 ... 118 ... Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia vaccine. 932 14 .. ... 1,97,589 ... ... ... Blackquarter 87 ... ... ... ... 18,138 ... ... ... N. W. F. Province. ... ... Rinderpest 12 ... 91 ... 2,021 ... 1 ... Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia 22 ... 107 ... 4,357 ... ... ... Blackquarter 2 ... ... 1,240 ... ... " Ranikhet disease " 3 ... 9 32 ... 500 130 6 Sind and Rajputana. Rinderpest 103 ... 1,993 ... ... 10,055 1 ... 205 4 Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia 30 ... 364 ... ... 3,240 ... ... 50 ... blackquarter . . 4 ... 60 ... ... 848 ... 3 ... Assam. Rinderpest 301 ... 8,632 ... ... 21,743 ... ... 503 ... Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia 12 ... 182 ... ... 994 1 ... ... Anthrax . . , 26 11 161 2 218 1,183 1 2 ... ... Blackquarter . 3 ... 12 ... ... 148 ... ...
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1931. 43 APPENDIX III44 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, APPENDIX IIIMUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1931. 45 APPENDIX IV. Table showing the details of specimens received and examined at the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1930-31. Number of specimens. Disease suspected. Positive. Doubtful. Negative. Abortion, equine, f46 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, APPENDIX IV-contd. Table showing the details of specimens received and examined at the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1930-31MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1931. 47 APPENDIX V. Table showing the financial results of the working of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, and the Imperial Veterinary Serum Institute, Izatnagar, during the year, 1930-31. RECEIPTS. EXPENDITURE. Sale of sera, vaccines and other products. Sale of animals. Dairy. Other Miscellanous receipts. Total. Salaries and travelling allowances of officers and staff. Feed and upkeep of animals. Cost of chemicals and apparatus including English charges. Other miscellaneous expenditure. Purchase of animals. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. 11,49,922- 8- 0 1,604- 12- 9 4,685- 6- 9 9,335- 6 -0 11,65,548- Izatnagar. 1- 6 2,41,137- 0- 0 1,39,702- 0- 0 36,781- 0- 0 1,02,874- 0- 0 48,969- 0- 0 5,69,464- 0 -0 ... 34,464- 4- 0 ... 369- 0- 6 34,833- 4- 6 62,026- 0- 0 99,955- 0- 0 3,995- 0- 0 28,797- 0- 0 65,063- 0- 0 2,59,945- 0 -0 Total 11,49,922- 8- 0 36,069- 0- 9 4,685- 6- 9 9,704- 6- 6 12,00,381- 6- 0 3,03,273- 0- 0 2,39,658- 0- 0 40,776- 0- 0 131,671- 0- 0 1,14,031- 0- 0 8,29,409- 0 -0
48 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, APPENDIX VI. Conditions governing the sale of sera, vaccines, and other products manufactured at the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, and the Imperial Veterinary Serum Institute, Izatnagar. 1.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1931. 49 4.50 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST OF VETY. RESEARCH, APPENDIX VII. List of products issued from the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, and the Imperial Veterinary Serum Institute, Izatnagar, and current prices, as sanctioned by the Government of India. Serial No. Name of product. Inland rates. Foreign rates. Minimum supplied. Rs. a. p. Rs. a. p. 1 Anti-rinderpest serum (5 c. c. dose) 0 3 0 0 4 0 50 doses. 2 Anti-anthrax serum (15 c. c. dose). 0 6 0 0 9 0 20 doses. 3 Anti-Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia serum (15 c. c. dose). 0 6 0 0 9 0 20 closes. 4 Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia vaccine (5 c. c. dose). 0 3 0 0 4 6 50 doses. 5 Mallein ordinary (I c. c. ampoule) 0 4 0 0 6 0 1 dose. 6 Mallein, I. D. P.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1931. 51 APPENDIX VIIANNUAL REPORT OF THE Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar For the year ending 31st March 1932. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CALCUTTA : GOVERNMENT OF INDIA CENTRAL PUBLICATION BRANCH 1932 Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 6d.
NOTICE On application to the Director, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, copies of the Annual Reports of that Institute can be had, free of charge, by the Heads of Veterinary Departments and Institutes in foreign countries in exchange for technical reports of their Department or Institute.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar For the year ending 31st March 1932. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CALCUTTA: GOVERNMENT OF INDIA CENTRAL PUBLICATION BRANCH 1932 Price Re. 1-8 or 2s. 6d.
Government of India Publications are obtainable from the Government of India Central Publication Branch, 3, Government Place, West, Calcutta, and from the following Agents :TABLE OF CONTENTS. PAGE. A.(ii) D.ANNUAL REPORT OF THE Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, and its sub-station, the Imperial Veterinary Serum Institute, Izatnagar, for the year ending 1931-32. REPORT OF THE DIRECTOR. (Mr. F. WARE, F.R.C.V.S.) I.2 Dr. S. K. Mehta reverted to service under the United Provinces Government on the afternoon of 29th February 1932, and was succeeded in the post of Medical Officer by Dr. F. B. Caleb. Mr. S. K. Sen, Protozoologist, was granted 3 months leave from 15th March 1932, and Veterinary Inspector Balwant Singh was appointed to officiate for him. Veterinary Inspector P. C. Banerji officiated in the post of Veterinary Deputy Superintendent, Muktesar, throughout the year, vice Mr. D'Costa. II.3 made to replace dotial labour with kumaonis, but for reasons advanced before, these did not meet with much success. (b) Estate Section.4 in regard to burning the undergrowth under the trees appears to have had a very beneficient effect. Another improvement effected in Forest conservation during the year was to stop the denuding of oak trees of their young leaves for use as cattle fodder. This is a common practice all over the Kumaon hills and the year under report was the first for many years in which this Institute was not compelled to adopt it. In order to provide for the supply of butter, cheese and other dairy products to the station, it was decided to transfer the Institute Dairy from the Veterinary to the Estate Section, and the transfer took place on 16th September 1931. A very satisfactory beginning has been made under the new manage- ment and as a result of the economies which have been effected first, by improving the average milk yield of the cows by disposing of unpro- fitable animals and paying very close attention to the care and feeding of those retained, and, secondly, by utilizing any surplus milk for butter and cheese making, it has been possible to recommend a reduction in the price of milk, first to a flat rate of Re. 0-4-6 per seer and later to Re. 0-3-0 per seer, with correspondingly low rates for other dairy products. As a result of this, for instance, pure cow's butter is now obtainable in Muktesar at Re. 1-10-0 per lb. The average number of animals in the combined Dairy and Experi- mental young stock herd was 45.4, of which 16.2 was the average number of cows in milk. The average daily milk yield of the cows was 4.75 seers. Six cows were cast and sold during the year by public auction for Rs. 190 as against a book value of Rs. 425. Seven calves died during the year of an outbreak of disease, which was diagnosed but not confirmed as calf Diphtheria, and one cow died of Johne's disease. No new purchases were made from outside, but 23 calves were born during the year. The financial results of the Dairy show a profit of Rs. 325-10-4 on the year's working, as compared with an estimated loss of Rs. 333-14-3, if the accounts had been run on the same basis in the previous year. The average daily attendance of coolies was 160 as compared with 201.5 in the previous year. Of this number 85 were engaged in cultiva- tion work. Every endeavour was made to replace dotial by Kumaoni labour when opportunities occurred and there were 50 kumaonis on the rolls of this section at the end of the year. (c) Engineering Section.5 been inspected and approved by officers of the Public Works Depart- ment, and estimates for making them permanent are awaited from that department. The abnormal conditions referred to above were the main cause of the large increase in output which took place in this section during the year, and the following table shows the extent of this compared with the pre- vious year :6 of the Government of India he also installed electric lighting in the Muktesar Club, at the latter's expense. (d) Medical and Sanitary Section.7 (h) Small Animals.8 The decline in the demand for the main products of the Institute is reflected in the year's work of the Imperial Veterinary Serum Institute, Izatnagar, all the figures of which show a decrease, as compared with those of the previous year. On the other hand the demand for such products as Haemorrhagic Septicaemia vaccine, anti-Anthrax serum, Mallein and Tuberculin, which are still produced at Muktesar under the supervision of the Head Laboratory Assistant, was well maintained. IV.9 not be curtailed ", but at the same time its budget was subjected to the general 10 per cent. cut and further reductions, many of which were recommended by the Retrenchment Committee, were carried out re- sulting eventually in a reduction of Rs. 1,91,000 on a sanctioned budget of Rs. 8,27,000. It was inevitable that this should lead to some curtailment of the research activities of the Institute, particularly those for which large experimental animals, the purchase of which was reduced to a minimum, are required. On the other hand the demands made on the Institute from outside sources did not decrease and the amount of routine work performed in the research sections was as great as ever. With the departure on leave of Mr. Cooper, who had supervised all the technical work at Muktesar in the previous two years, it became imperative to introduce, as an internal arrangement, the reorganisa- tion of the research staff into three large sections of Pathology, Serology and Protozoology, referred to in last year's report, and the effect of this has been very gratifying. There has been very much smoother running of the technical side of the Institute, with expeditious disposal of routine matters and much greater opportunities for personal research on the part of the senior members of each section. The most notable advance made during the year was the discovery by Capt. Datta, on 23rd December 1931, of sections of a Schistosome worm in material removed from cases of Bovine Nasal Granuloma, a condition which is widespread in India. Although a good deal more work remains to be done, before the whole story of this disease is understood, yet the above discovery makes a very important addition to our knowledge regarding it, and it is considered advisable to place the exact date of this discovery on record. In regard to Rinderpest, further experiments with vaccines prepared from different tissues and organs were continued, but with no greater success than in previous years, and this work has, therefore, been dropped for the time being. Mr. Haddow, however, took up several questions connected with the properties of the Rinderpest virus in bulls and goats and correspondence was continued with the authorities in Bengal in regard to using a reduced dose of serum with bull virus or goat virus alone as an improved method of immunising cattle against Rinderpest. Since the close of the year under review, information has been received that goat virus alone is being used as a vaccine on a large scale in the field in the Central Provinces and steps have already been taken by this Institute to aid in the extension of this experiment to other parts of India. The position in regard to Theileriasis in this country was rendered more confused during the year by the outbreak at Kirkee in imported bulls referred to in Mr. Sen's report, and it seems that no finality will be reached on the question of the identity of the parasite responsible until the Protozoologist, to be supplied by the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research for a period of 5 years, is appointed. Attention
10 may also be called to the interesting condition of Anaplasmosis, cases of which were reported from outside Muktesar for the first time during the year. For the numerous other conditions dealt with by the technical staff during the year, a reference may be made to the reports of the three sections of Pathology, Serology and Protozoology, which are printed separately for the first time. Altogether 1,536 specimens in 467 consignments were received from outside sources and dealt with by the above three sections during the year, as compared with 923 specimens in 463 consignments in 1930-31. The details of the specimens are given in Appendix IV and their origin was as follows :11 Mr. R. N. Naik. (1) Agglutinability of Homologous and Heterologous strains of Brucella organisms during the course of B. abortus, Bang, infection. (2) Tuberculosis in a cow-buffalo with a review of the disease in India. (3) Agglutination of different strains of B. mallei. (4) Agglutination reaction due to Mallein injected in horses. (5) A simplified method of rapid agglutination test for bacterial diseases. Mr. S. K. Sen. (1) Prophylaxis against Equine Surra by means of " Bayer 205 " (Naganol). (2) The Control of Blood-sucking insects in India. (3) Further instalments of " A Veterinary Entomology for India " (in collaboration with the Imperial Entomologist, Pusa). Capt. S. C. A. Datta. (1) Double caecum in a goat12 VII.13 administered the Engineering, Veterinary and Estate Sections respec- tively, with marked success during the year. The holding of a monthly meeting of all technical gazetted officers on the staff, to discuss and criticize the work of each research section, was instituted during the year, and it already holds forth the promise of proving of considerable value in co-ordinating the work of the Insti- tute, on the elucidation of problems connected with the diseases of livestock in this country, into a homogeneous whole. The following distinguished officers visited Muktesar during the year under review :14 REPORT OF THE PATHOLOGY SECTION. (Capt. S. C. A. DATTA, B.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., Temporary Veterinary Research Officer.) I.15 III.16 of kidneys and urinary bladder removed from hæmaturia cases. Further work to obtain confirmation of the above findings is in progress. V.17 a helminthic granuloma of the equine skin to be recorded in India. Mr. Bhalerao, the Helminthologist, who has now been entrusted with these studies in connection with Bursatee, examined serial sections from the other specimens received during the year, but no further worms were seen. Interesting information on allied conditions, such as Swamp Cancer in Australia and Esponja in the Argentine, was collected from the respective countries. VIII.18 XI.19 growths were found on the subparotideal and retropharyngeal regions on both sides of the neck of a buffalo heifer, 18 months old, in a Sindh village. (2) Sterility in animals.20 appeared to act quite efficiently on this mollusc. Satisfactory results in the treatment of buffaloes were obtained with Danistol. (2) Certain Trematode parasites, which were hitherto supposed to affect horses only, were found in Indian Elephants. The worms are Pseudodiscus collinsi and Gastrodiscus secundus. (3) A detailed study of the parasites of the goat and sheep at Muktesar was made and a new round worm was discovered in about 90 per cent. cases of goat pneumonia. Interesting studies on the struc- tural variations of Haemonchus contortus in goats and cattle were also made. (4) Recent work at Muktesar in connection with Nasal Granuloma, Bovine Hæmaturia and certain diseases of sheep have brought the Schistosome group of worms to the forefront. As certain interesting facts have come to light during these investigations, a modification of the old description of the group would seem to be indicated and work on this subject is in progress. (5) A monograph on the helminth parasites of the domesticated animals in India, which has taken several years to compile, was com- pleted during the year by Mr. Bhalerao and handed over to the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research for publication. This contains valuable keys for the identification of all the worm parasites which have been hitherto recorded from the domestic animals in India, and all the important species are profusely illustrated, in most cases with the author's own drawings. XVII.21 (2) Routine Pathology.22 REPORT OF THE SEROLOGY SECTION. (MR. J. R. HADDOW, B.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., D.V.S.M., Officiating 1st Veteri- nary Research Officer.) BOVINE DISEASES. I.23 4. Purification of Virus from Protozoan Parasites.24 quent rinderpest infection, but later work on a larger scale upon normal, infected, and recovered animals failed to confirm this finding. It was noted that, in confirmation of Hartley's results at this In- stitute, where the disease ended fatally there was practically always a marked decrease in total protein. Although considerable fluctuation of the different fractions was noted in the three classes of animals studied, no definite differences of practical use in the estimation of immunity were observed. (b) With a view to concentrating serum for economy in transport and for standardisation of potency, attempts were made to precipitate the protein fraction or fractions with which the immune bodies are associated. On the basis of the original observations of Hartley at this Institute and of more recent workers in this field of research the total globulin and the euglobulin fractions of several sera obtained by precipitation by ammonium sulphate were tested and it was found that although the euglobulin fraction contained a very large proportion of the anti-bodies the globulin fractions were appreciably more potent. The technique described by Felton (1925 and onwards) in connection with the concentration of the anti-bodies in anti-pneumococcal serum was also applied and it was found that the water insoluble fraction obtained by this method was more potent than the euglobulin fraction obtained by the ammonium sulphate precipitation method. Preliminary results with sera of high and low potency appear to indicate that concentration and standardisation by these methods is practicable, and further work for their introduction on a larger scale will be undertaken. (c) Examinations to determine the presence of toxic metallic salts derived from metal containers were also carried out. 9. Serum dose rates based upon Active Protoplasmic Tissue Units.25 case, but while in sheep a high degree of immunity was produced, no immunity was observed in the case of the goats. The experiments upon the treatment of anthrax in cattle by in- travenous injections of arsenic reported last year were repeated on a larger scale, but the satisfactory results recorded last year could not be confirmed. It is probable that the methods of test adopted were too severe to be comparable to natural conditions. The several strains of anthrax maintained at this laboratory have been found to fall into two groups in accordance with their sugar re- actions, and it is interesting to note that strains of known Indian origin fall into one group while strains of known extra-Indian origin comprise the other group. III.26 VII.27 of view of the owner of the stud the sterility which is associated with this disease appears to be of greater economical importance than the actual losses by abortion. The study of imported American Donkey Stallions by means of the agglutination test was continued with results similar to those al- ready reported. It is interesting to note that in the case of five animals in a batch of 16 newly imported stallions a rapid rise in the agglutina- tion titre was coincident with the appearance of a severe orchitis. Un- fortunately material from these animals was not available for cultural examination. IX.28 gical and biochemical laboratories in connection with the testing and standardisation of the products issued from the laboratory and in the examination of specimens received for diagnosis or opinion. Seventy- six samples of Anti-Rinderpest serum were tested during the year, necessitating for this purpose alone the use of 385 hill bulls. 2. Routine Bacteriology :29 REPORT OF THE PROTOZOOLOGY SECTION. (MR. S. K. SEN, B.A., M.Sc., F.E.S., in charge). PROTOZOOLOGY. I.30 tries that are free from this disease. A detailed programme of work has now been drawn up in this connection and arrangements have been made to house the experimental animals in specially constructed fly- proof stables. The problem, however, is one that will call for sustained observations extending over some years before definite conclusions can be arrived at. Mention was made in last year's Report (p. 25) of two buffaloes having been infected (on 29th April 1930) with Trypanosoma evansi, one of these having been later treated with " Bayer 205 " and the other left untreated. The two animals have now been under observation for a further period of one year, but in neither of these cases during this period has any evidence of infection been obtained. Curiously, contrary to the experience of last year, the untreated animal appears to have steadily gained in weight, so that it would seem that the ani- mal has got over the infection without the need of drug intervention. II.31 presented by him at the Eleventh International Veterinary Congress held in 1931. (2) Drug Treatment.32 in large numbers was encountered in blood smears taken from an im- ported Ayrshire bull at Delhi and forwarded to this Laboratory for examination, and this perhaps constitutes the first record of the occur- rence of anaplasmosis in India outside Muktesar. An attempt was made at Muktesar to reproduce the disease in rabbits and guinea-pigs by blood inoculation, but the results were negative. In regard to the bodies known as " Anaplasmata ", some doubt would appear to exist as to whether these represent actual parasites or they are in the nature of blood products or are merely artefacts. Dias and Aragao (1914) claimed to have brought about the production of these bodies in cattle and dogs by the simple injection of certain poisonous substances, such as trypanblue, but their findings in the case of dogs have been disputed by the South African workers who contend that these bodies did not represent true anaplasmata but are merely " jolly bodies ". It has been further maintained by du Toit (1928) that the production of true anaplasmata in cattle by repeated injections of trypanblue can only be brought about when these (the cattle) are " carriers " of the disease, this being ascribed to the fact that the injections cause a breakdown in their immunity, with the appearance of the parasites in their blood. For reasons already mentioned, the hill bulls at Muktesar were regarded as being mostly " carriers " of anaplasmata and seemed suitable sub- jects upon which to test du Toit's hypothesis. Accordingly, eight animals were each given a series of trypanblue injections ; of these, four exhibited fairly large numbers of anaplasmata in their blood after receiving 5 to 22 grammes of trypanblue. It is now proposed to test the possibility of bringing about the production of these bodies in " clean " animals maintained, since birth, in tick-free stables, and if the results of these trials turn out to be positive, then the conclusion would, at any rate, be provisionally warranted that the so-called " anaplasmata " are in the nature of blood products. IV.33 An attempt was made to transmit the disease to healthy buffaloes by means of the mosquito, Aëdes (Stegomyia) albopictus bred out in the laboratory, but the results of these trials were negative. It is needless to mention that in inquiries of this kind one cannot lay too much stress on analogy, and the fact that human malaria is transmitted by anophe- lines need not preclude the possibility of buffalo malaria being conveyed by non-anopheline species of mosquitos. V.34 The absence of any pronounced clinical symptoms being a charac- teristic feature of P. gibsoni infection in indigenous dogs, some experi- ments were carried out to test the possibility of resuscitating the disease by setting up artificially an intercurrent P. canis infection and later curing the latter by one or more trypanblue injections. The results of these trials, however, were negative. (2) Drug Treatment.35 from Bhim Tal, but these proved entirely non-infective when fed on healthy fowls or when crushed in normal saline and the emulsion injected subcutaneously into fowls. IX.-MISCELLANEOUS. (1) Trypanosoma lewisi infection.36 and for certain types of biological investigation relative to the ovula- tion phenomenon in mosquitos. Hitherto, specimens of this mosquito had to be bred out from eggs periodically obtained from Pusa through the courtesy of the Imperial Entomologist. (2) Rhipicephalus sanguineus.37 sites including a number of ovigerous females. The finding is of in- terest in view of the comparative rarity with which the clinical form of the disease is known to occur in equines in this country. V.38 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE DEPUTY DIRECTOR, IMPERIAL VETERINARY SERUM INSTITUTE, IZATNAGAR. (MR. J. D'COSTA, G.B.V.C., Temporary). I.39 vailing conditions and market rates, and also to supervise the purchases made by the Dressers. The average cost of buffaloes purchased departmentally was Rs. 30-0-9 per head, including feed and keep en route, in comparison with Rs. 32-4-0 in the preceding year. In addition to the above, 202 buffalo-calves were purchased at Rs. 8-0-0 per head from the Government Bovine Lymph Depôt, Patwa Danger, for the manufacture of Black-quarter Aggressin, as compared with 310 buffalo-calves obtained from this source in the preceding year, and 202 hill bulls were transferred from Muktesar for the same purpose against 454 in the previous year. After completing the period of productive yield 595 buffaloes were sold at an average price of Rs. 14-11-0, as compared with 1,898 buffaloes sold at an average of Rs. 16-4-3 in the previous year. 105 buffaloes discontinued from serum-making and 1 bull were transferred from the Veterinary Section to the Farm Section for culti- vation purposes, as against 104 discontinued buffaloes and 7 bulls trans- ferred in the previous year. (5) Library.40 which will not be seen for some time, and to the fall in price of agri- cultural produce. About 66 acres of land under rabi crop were irrigated by canal water during the year as against 40 acres during the preceding year. Al- though pacca partabandi has now been effected and a new gul construct- ed, yet the villagers cut outlets in it and interfere with the supply of water. Steps are being taken to put an end to this malpractice. The Executive Engineer, Rohilkhand Canals Division, Bareilly, states that sanction of the Superintending Engineer to increasing the supply of water in our gul is still awaited, but until then the supply will be supplemented by giving temporary outlets whenever neces- sary. The mango crop on the Estate was sold by public auction for Rs. 131, as compared with Rs. 35 which was obtained in 1930-31. IV.41 6. A wire fence was erected around the Hay stacks in the Farm Section. 7. Repairs were carried out to the Wire fence in the Black-quarter area. 8. Temporary bhurra grass chuppers were constructed as usual to house the serum-making animals. 9. Several improvements, such as planting of shade trees and hedges alongside the roads and near certain buildings and filling up of the pond near the main Laboratory building, were carried out. V.42 VII.43 APPENDIX I. Table showing the main results of the Production sections of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, and the Impreial Veterinary Serum Institute, Izatnagar, during the year 1931-32. Name of Products. Quantity of Sera and other products prepared and issued. Opening balance. Passed for issue during the year. Returned. Total. Issued during the year. Average issue of previous 5 years. Stock in hand. Doses. Doses. Doses. Doses. Doses. Doses. Doses. Anti-Rinderpest Serum- Special 4,79,936 44 APPEN Table showing the number of doses of products issued to the Products. Punjab. N.-W. F. Pro- vince. United Pro- vinces. Bihar and Orissa. Bengal. Assam. Burma. Madras. Bombay. Anti-Rinderpest Se- rum45 DIX II. differrent Provinces, States, etc., during the year 1931-32. Sind and Rajpu- tana. Central Pro- vinces. Coorg. Balu- chistan. Military Depart- ment. Indian States. Foreign coun- tries. I. I. of V. R., Mukte- sar, and I. V. S. I., Izat- nagar. Total. Remarks. 7,150 30,000 .. 2,400 79,750 4,950 3,100 *2,71,536 15,82,586 *Including 2,53,880 doses transferred to Preventive Serum. 46 APPENDIX III. Summary of results of inoculations in the field of the different products of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, during the year 1931-32. Name of disease and Province. Number of outbreaks in which inoculation was under- taken. Number of animals which died unino- culated in course of outbreak. Number of animals inoculated. Number of animals which died after inoculation. Equine. Bovine. Others. Equine. Bovine. Others. Equine. Bovine. Others. United Provinces. Rinderpest . 1,739 .. 23,482 142 .. 1,71,371 2,970 .. 385 12 Hæmorrhagic Septicæ- mia47 APPENDIX III-contd. Summary of results of inoculations in the field of the different products of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, during the year 1931-3248 APPENDIX III-contd. Summary of results of inoculations in the field of the different products of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, during the year 1931-3249 APPENDIX IV. Table showing the details of specimens received and examined at the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1931-32. Number of specimens. Disease suspected. Positive. Doubtful. Negative. Abortion Bovine Agglutination tests . . . . . . 40 .. 40 50 APPENDIX IV-contd. Table showing the details of specimens received and examined at the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1931-3251 APPENDIX V. Table showing the financial results of the working of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, and the Imperial Veterinary Serum Institute, Izatnagar, during the year, 1931-32. Re ceipts. Expenditure. Sale of Sera, Vaccines, and other products. Sale of animals. Dairy. Other Miscellaneous receipts. Total. Salaries and travelling allowances of officers and staff. Feed and upkeep of animals. Cost of chemicals and apparatus including English charges. Other miscellaneous expenditure Purchase of animals . Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. MUKTESAR. 3,15,776 0 0 1,026 11 6 4,989 13 0 15,241 7 6 3,37,034 0 0 2,30,312 0 0 78,553 0 0 39,372 0 0 99,723 0 0 36,808 0 0 4,84,768 0 0 IZATNAGAR. 6,72,348 0 0 9,903 0 0 736 0 0 6,82,987 0 0 62,183 0 0 21,796 0 0 10,814 0 0 42,489 0 0 24,976 0 0 1,62,258 0 0 9,88,124 0 6 10,929 11 6 4,989 13 0 15,977 7 6 10,20,021 0 0 2,92,495 0 0 1,00,349 0 0 50,186 0 0 1,42,212 0 0 61,784 0 0 6,47,026 0 0
52 APPENDIX VI. Conditions governing the sale of Sera, Vaccines, and other products manufactured at the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, and the Imperial Veterinary Serum Institute, Izatnagar. I.53 4. PROCEDURE REGARDING PAYMENT OF BILLS. (a) The products of this Institute are charged for according to the rates sanctioned by the Government of India. On receipt of bills from them for the refund due credit is afforded for the cost of packing material (except caps) received intact from customers supplied at inland rates, in bills for subsequent supplies issued to them by this Institute. (b) The cost of products supplied to Government Departments is adjusted by book transfer through their respective Account Officers. The bills issued by this office should be returned duly accepted within a month from the date of receipt showing:54 APPENDIX VII. List of products issued from the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Mukte- sar, and the Imperial Veterinary Serum Institute, Izatnagar, and current prices, as sanctioned by the Government of India. Serial No. Name of Product. Inland rates. Foreign rates. Minimum supplied. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. 1 Anti-rinderpest serum (5 c. c. dose) 0 3 0 0 4 0 50 doses. 2 Anti-anthrax serum (15 c. c. dose) . 0 6 0 0 9 0 20 doses. 3 Anti-H æ morrhagic Septic æ mia serum (15 c. c. dose). 0 6 0 0 9 0 20 doses. 4 H æ morrhagic Septic æ mia vaccine (5 c. c. dose) 0 3 0 0 4 6 50 doses. 5 Mallein ordinary (1 c. c. ampoule) . 0 4 0 0 6 0 1 dose. 6 Mallein, I. D. P.55 APPENDIX VII-contd. List of products issued from the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, and the Imperial Veterinary Serum Institute, Izatnagar, and current prices, as sanctioned by the Government of IndiaN.V.B.NOTICE. On application to the Director, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, copies of the Annual Reports of that Institute can be had, free of charge, by the Heads of Veterinary Departments and Institutes in foreign countries in exchange for technical reports of their Department or Institute.
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar For the year ending 31st March 1933. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] DELHI: MANAGER OF PUBLICATIONS 1933
Government of India Publications are obtainable from the Manager of Publications, Civil Lines, Delhi, and from the following Agents :TABLE OF CONTENTS. PAGE. A.ii PAGE. D.ANNUAL REPORT OF THE Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, and its sub-station, the Imperial Veterinary Serum Institute, Izatnagar, for the year 1932-33. Report of the Director. (Mr. F. Ware, F.R.C.V.S.) I.2 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, Veterinary Inspector P. C. Banerji continued to act as Veterinary Deputy Superintendent, Muktesar, vice Mr. J. D'Costa employed as Temporary Deputy Director, Imperial Veterinary Serum Institute, Izatnagar, throughout the year. Veterinary Inspector P. R. Krishna Iyer continued to act as Assistant Veterinary Research Officer, Muktesar, vice Mr. Naik, on other duty, throughout the year. Khan Sahib Wazir Mohammed, Senior Veterinary Inspector, Izatnagar, proceeded on leave on average pay for four months, prepa- ratory to retirement, on 13th January 1933. II.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1933. 3 From the above it will be observed that, taking all the cultivation work of this Section together, the receipts and expenditure almost balance themselves, a result which has been obtained more quickly than was anticipated. This Section supplied the Institute with 10,747 mds. and 21 seers of fodder during the year, and in addition 8,773 mds. and 30 seers of green grass at 12 annas per md., and 11,175 mds. and 34 seers of hay, most of which was obtained for 13 annas per md., were purchased through Contractors. Contractors also supplied 8,871 mds. of grain at a cost of Rs. 24,345-8-9. The produce of the Reserved Forest consisted of 17,792 mds. and 25 seers of firewood, 2,426 mds. and 10 seers of charcoal, 2,953 mds. of green fodder, 4,781 mds. and 14 seers of leaves, 925 mds. and 7 seers of pine needles, 24 bundles of ringals and 1,414 posts. Ninety-eight mature trees were sold to employees of the Institute during the year, resulting in an income of Rs. 256-3-0. The prices at which firewood and charcoal were sold during the year were Re. 0-7-0 and Re. 1-3-6 per md. respectively, as compared with Re. 0-7-6 and Re. 1-4-0 per md. in the previous year. In his capacity as Conservator of Forests, the Director dealt with 21 offences under the Forest Act, for the compounding of which a sum of Rs. 30-4-0 was collected. Tenders were called for the extraction of 80 mds. of lichen, but only 16 mds. and 35 seers were extracted. Royalty, amounting to Rs. 30 at 6 annas per md., was, however, recovered on the full amount. The pro forma accounts maintained for the Reserved Forest show an expenditure of Rs 2,879-2-6 and receipts amounting to Rs. 4,316- 11-0, which includes grazing fees of Rs. 1,727. The net profit is thus Rs. 1,437-8-6, as compared with one of Rs. 1,561-3-2 in the previous year. The average number of animals in the Dairy Herd was 42, of which the number of milch cows was 15.5, as compared with 16.2 in the previous year. The average daily milk yield per cow rose from 8.15 lb. to 14.6 lb. during the year. Twelve animals were sold during the year for Rs. 423, against a book value of Rs. 570, and 5 cows were trans- ferred permanently to the Veterinary Section for experimental pur- poses. One cow died during the year as a result of an accident, and 3 bull and 2 hiefer calves died from various causes. No new purchases were made from outside, but 15 calves were born during the year, as compared with 23 in the previous year. The financial results of the Dairy show a profit of Rs. 935-13 3 on the year's working, as compared with one of Rs. 325-10-4 in the previous year, and the cost of produc- tion of milk dropped from Re. 0-4-8.65 to Re. 0-2-8.7 per seer. The average daily attendance of coolies in the Estate Section was 186, of which 100 were employed on cultivation work, as compared with 160 and 85 respectively in the previous year. Forty-four Kumaonis were engaged during the year, and the present strength of this sect in this Section is 49.
4 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, (c) Engineering Section.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1933. 5 died out. Only one death occurred amongst hospital patients and this was from Pulmonary Tuberculosis. A systematic examination was made of the subordinates in the Sections where this disease has been most troublesome in the past, but no further cases were discovered. It is hoped, therefore, that the steps which have been taken to prevent the further spread of this disease may prove successful. (e) Construction and repairs.6 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, III.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1933. 7 With the better accommodation provided by the new buildings at Izatnagar, it was possible to effect considerable improvements in the technical processes connected with routine serum production, and, as a result, most of the serum prepared during the year under review was of high quality. Although it has not yet been possible to obtain absolute sterility, which is a matter of the greatest difficulty when dealing with serum in such enormous quantities as is usually the case at Izatnagar, yet in every brew of anti-Rinderpest serum prepared during the year the bacterial content was so low as to be entirely negligible. IV.8 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, V.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1933. 9 of Schistosome worm, while he was able to confirm, what has been suspected before but never proved, that Burs ti is due to the blocking of capillaries with the larvae of one of the species of Habronema, a worm which is commonly found in the stomach of the horse. In the Section of Protozoology, a definite advance in the subject of Theileria infection in cattle can be recorded, and this achievement Mr. S. K. Sen, who has carried on the work of this Section under considerable difficulties for the last two years, deserves the greatest credit. The identity of the parasite responsible for the acute cases of Theileriasis, which have been recorded at this Institute and amongst imported animals from time to time in the past, is still a matter for conjecture, but in view of the regularity with which hill bulls, which are known to be carriers of Th. mutans, can now be fatally infected with it, it seems probable that the parasite now under study is a species which has not previously been recorded in this country. Unfortunately experimental treatment of this parasite has not proved successful, and so far no drug has been shown to exert any curative effect. Mr. Sen has also collected, both from the field and as a result of experimental work at this Institute, a considerable amount of information in regard to the much disputed point as to whether the intravenous injection of any drug will effect a permanent cure of Surra in the horse, and it seems from the evidence now available that, if Bayer 205 be selected as the curative agent, the answer to this question is definitely in the affirmative. Altogether 1,237 specimens is 602 consignments were received from outside sources and dealt with in the research sections during the year, as compared with 1,536 specimens in 467 consignments in 1931-32. The details of the specimens are given in Appendix IV and their origin was as follows :10 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, (4) Preliminary note on the life history of the common fluke in India, Fasciola gigantica. (5) On a new species of Gongylonema (Nematoda) from the domestic fowl. (6) On two unreported Nematodes from the abomasum of cattle in India. (7) On a few Nematodes parasitic in goats. Captain S. C. A. Datta. (1) Diagnosis and treatment of sterility in the stallion and the bull. (2) Congenital blindness in calves in IndiaMUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1933. 11 Mr. H. Cooper. (1) Rinderpest.12 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, Amongst the Section officers, however, apart from those already named special praise must be accorded to Mr. J. D'Costa, Deputy Director, Imperial Veterinary Serum Institute, Izatnagar, and Sheikh Nasir Ahmed, Estate Manager, Muktesar, whose efforts in connection with the commercial activities of the two Institutes with which they are concerned, have proved so successful. The following distinguished gentlemen visited Muktesar during the year under review:MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1933. 13 REPORT OF THE PATHOLOGY SECTION. (CAPT. S. C. A. DATTA, B.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., Temporary Veterinary Research Officer.) I14 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, A finding of considerable singnificance was recorded by Soparkar in 1927 when he was able to isolate fully virulent tubercle bacilli from material of an apparent reactor to the subcutaneous tuberculin test, although a thorough post-mortem examination failed to reveal macro- scopic lesions. Two more such cases of a typical or ' no-lesion ' tuberculo- sis have been encountered recently at this institute. IIIMUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1933. 15 recorded. Correspondence was carried on with the Military autho- rities in Jubbulpore, concerning a large-scale field trial of the drug Antimosan in this disease, but for various reasons the results were not available till the close of the year. At the request of Prof. J. H. Ashworth of Edinburgh, Dr. M. Khalil of Cairo, and the U. S. A. Bureau of Animal Industry, samples of preserved growths and stained sections of this disease were forwarded to them. From the last mentioned source, the interesting information that a " Snoring disease ", resembling the Indian condition in its clinical features, has been reported in dairy animals belonging to the Bureau at Jeanerette, Louisiana, was obtained. Through the courtesy of the Imperial Bureau of Animal Health, Weybridge, England, a précis of the only available report of a human case of Nasal Schistosomiasis by E. Moras (1921), in a Brazilian publication, inaccessible in India, was obtained. V.16 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, camels. The whole composite picture of the disease and its micros- copic lesions in the various organs have been described in a detailed article, which is being published in the Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry. Some snails were collected from enzootic areas of the disease from time to time during the year, and Dr. B. Prashad, Superintendent, Zoological Survey of India, was kind enough to identify them, but further work is necessary before the natural intermediate host of S. indicum is determined. VII.- NON-SWEATING IN HORSES. Pieces of skin from half a dozen horses affected with non-sweating, on histological examination, revealed varying degrees of atrophy of the sweat glands and fibrosis of the blood vessels supplying these glands. Of these cases, the thyroid gland from one case only showed an abnor- mality, consisting of a distinct congestion and increase of fibrous connective tissue. An attempt was made to confirm the work on " Dry Coat", as it is called in Malaya, recorded by Tull and Wright in the Veterinary Journal of 1925, but contrary to their findings, no micro- organism could be isolated by cultural methods from samples of blood collected from two clinical cases at Muttra. VIII.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1933. 17 animals concerned, 12 were of the mild type, and 7 of the severe type. One of the acute cases was kept up on its legs by improvised slings and it is noteworthy that this animal continued in this state for about 70 days without any further developments until it was destroyed. The beneficial results of slings in this condition were recorded by Poyser in 1885. Although in the earlier stages, the disease appeared to be purely a spinal affection, there is little doubt that in at least the acute cases the brain is also affected, for varying periods of excitement and coma were seen. Judging from the records, the occurrence of this condition has been noted on many occasions since about 1872 in several places in India, and sometimes at least it seems to have been confused with Kumri. Actual enzootics of Kumri have also been described from time to time, and in future it will be necessary to distinguish carefully between the two conditions, if this is possible, but there is, of course, the possibility that these conditions are merely different manifestations of one and the same infection. At present however the evidence is that they are different, the most striking difference being the more sudden onset and the septicaemic con- dition of the carcase, as has been observed in the course of two autopsies, resembling cases of Enzootic Encephalomyelitis or Borna disease, de- scribed in France by Moussu and Marchand in 1924. As on previous occasions, laboratory examination of various material from these cases, as also attempts at experimental transmission by feed- ing, and inoculation through different routes into both small animals and horses failed to produce any significant results. There was no evidence of any anaerobic infection in any of the material examined. X.18 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, XIII.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1933. 19 indicum and Ornithobilharzia turkestanicum. It has also been suggested that S. mattheei, Veglia and Le Roux, and S. curassoni, Brumpt, should be considered as synonyms of S. bovis. Sonsino. (3) Through the courtesy of Dr. P. A. Maplestone of the Tropical School of Medicine, Calcutta, an opportunity was also afforded to study some specimens of S. japonicum collected from a pig in Calcutta. As there has been no previous record of the occurrence of S. japonicum in this country, these specimens have an unusual interest. (4) Many Nematodes obtained from domestic animals and poultry were studied in detail, and, as a result of this, several forms new to science have been described and others recorded for the first time in this country. XVIII.20 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, REPORT OF THE SEROLOGY SECTION. (MR. J. R. HADDOW, B.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., D.V.S.M., Officiating 1st Veterinary Research Officer.) I.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1933. 21 out 6 months after the original vaccination and it is interesting to observe that all the calves which reacted to the first vaccination, or in which an infection was proved by sub-inoculation, failed to react to the second inoculation, while of the five calves which failed to react and of which the blood sub-inoculations were negative, four reacted more or less severely to the second vaccination while one remained negative throughout. The duration of immunity in these animals will be tested after the lapse of several years. In order to test the duration of immunity in adult animals after vaccination with goat virus a number of hill bulls used in connection with the production or testing of this virus have been selected for test at yearly intervals. All these animals have had pronounced or severe reactions. The first group (8) have already been tested after an interval of one year and all proved to be solidly immune. 2. Purification of Virus from protozoan parasites.22 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, 4. Viability of virus in blood.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1933. 23 satisfactory separation was obtained at 0° C. with concentration of alcohol ranging from 15 to 30 per cent. The antibody content of the precipitated fraction increased with the concentration of alcohol used for precipitation. The alcohol precipitates were found to be more readily soluble and stable than the ammonium sulphate precipitates, and, as they can be dissolved in considerably less (usually about 1-5th) bulk than that of the original serum, concentration could be readily achieved. A series of experiments with sera concentrated in this manner have been commenced. II.24 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, on the lines of that used by Mr. V. Krishnamurti Ayyer in Madras has been issued and the preliminary report suggests that its application has been attended with a certain measure of success in early cases. Further work upon this condition is contemplated. VII.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1933. 25 (c) A number of tests were carried out with tuberculins made from human and avian strains for the detection of Tuberculosis and Johne's disease in the Muktesar Dairy Herd. One case of Johne's disease was detected during the year. IX.26 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, a further suggestion has been received that the most suitable name for this condition would be Doyle's disease, and the matter still awaits a decision. Research on this disease has been directed to the preparation of a vaccine. Formalinised tissues prepared in a manner similar to those used for rinderpest in cattle have been tried, but the results were not satisfactory. Tissues rapidly dried at 0°C. in vacuo were also tried and although the first batch of vaccine appeared to be satisfactory these results could not be repeated. XIII.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1933. 27 REPORT OF THE PROTOZOOLOGY SECTION. (MR. S. K. SEN, B.A., M.Sc., F.E.S.,in charge.) PROTOZOOLOGY. I.28 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, (3) Trypanosomiasis of sheep.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1933. 29 treatment of this condition, it does not seem necessary to replace this with any of the newer drugs for the treatment of Redwater, unless it can be conclusively shown that such a course would be justified, at any rate, on grounds of economy, if not of efficacy. (2) Theileriasis of Cattle.30 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, (d) Drug Treatment.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1933. 31 all. In this last case, the injections had to be discontinued on account of falling away in the condition of the animal. It is of interest that only rare anaplasmata, but frequent Theileria mutans, with the cross- forms of this parasite, appeared in the blood of one animal that had received 41 grammes of Trypanblue in 19 injections and these persisted for three weeks till it died. An opportunity occurred to observe the effect of drug treatment upon an acute natural case of anaplasmosis complicated with Redwater in a bull aged about 2½ years. In the absence of any drug of known efficacy (except sodium cocodylate of doubtful value) for this condition, it was decided to subject the animal to a course of treatment with Sulfarsenol, after the circulation had been cleared of Babesia bigemina by means of Trypanblue. The animal received a total of 2.26 grammes of the drug in two injections, but it died in spite of the treatment. IV.32 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, V.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1933. 33 (2) Anaplasmata in Goats.34 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, ENTOMOLOGY. I.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1933. 35 in captivity and a number of trials were carried out to determine the optimum conditions requisite at the altitude of Muktesar for the development of the young stages of these flies in captivity. Curio- usly, none of the larvae had attained the pupal stage at the close of the year under report, although they had been under observation for a period of about one year and had readily fed upon earth-worms provided them from time to time. In compliance with a request from Lt.-Colonel Argyle, D. S. O., R. A. V. C. (retired), for a supply of Tabanid larvæ, a consignment of these was forwarded to him to his address in London. (2) Phorid36 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, The problem of the warble-fly, including the question of its regional distribution, is one that calls for immediate investigation in this country and a detailed scheme for a special staff for work in this connection has been submitted. V.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1933. 37 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE DEPUTY DIRECTOR, IMPERIAL VETERINARY SERUM INSTITUTE, IZATNAGAR. (MR. J. D'COSTA, G.B.V.C., Temporary). I.38 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, production was 4.2 per cent. against 7.5 per cent. in the previous year, and in the course of subsequent anti-Haemorrhagic Septicaemia serum production it was 4 per cent. against 1.8 per cent. in the previous year. All the above buffaloes were purchased departmentally from local cattle fairs, which were inspected periodically by the Veterinary Deputy Superintendent and the Deputy Director, in order to examine the prevailing conditions and market rates and also to supervise the purchases made by the Dressers. The average cost of buffaloes purchased departmentally was Rs. 30-10-5 per head including feed and keep en route in comparison with Rs. 30-0-9 per head in the previous year. In addition to the above, 160 buffalo-calves purchased at Re. 0-0-6 per lb. body weight at an average cost of Rs. 11-2-6 per head through a contractor and 8 discontinued buffaloes were utilized in the manufac- ture of Blackquarter Aggressin, as compared with 202 buffalo-calves at Rs 8 per head purchased from the Government Bovine Lymph Depôt, Patwa Dangar, in the previous year. The buffalo-calves were not purchased from Patwa Dangar this year as the condition of those purchased during the previous year through this source was not satisfactory. Out of 121 bulls transferred from Muktesar in 1932-33, as compared with 202 hill bulls transferred for this purpose in the previous year, 2 died unused, 2 were transferred to the Farm for Cultivation purposes, and the remaining 117 were used for the manufac- ture of Blackquarter Aggressin. Twenty-seven buffaloes discontinued from anti-Rinderpest serum were used for the manufacture of anti-Blackquarter serum and 20 for anti-Anthrax serum. The mortality among the buffaloes in the course of anti-Blackquarter serum and anti-Anthrax serum production was 7.4 per cent. and 5 per cent. respectively. After completing the period of productive yield, 787 buffaloes were sold at an average price of Rs. 13-11-6, as compared with 595 buffaloes sold at an average price of Rs. 14-11-0 in the previous year. The work of transporting serum boxes and miscellaneous stores, etc., which had, in the past, been carried out by the Farm Section, was made over to the Veterinary Section in October 1932. Fourteen bulls and 8 carts were accordingly transferred from the former to the latter section, and one four-wheeled wooden lorry costing Rs. 135 was also purchased locally to facilitate transport work. (5) Library.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1933. 39 dotial labourers remained at 3 throughout the year on the Muster Roll of the Veterinary Section. The health of the daily labour staff was good throughout the year. The average daily number of sick was .76 against .7 in the preceding year. III.40 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, 3. Construction of approach road in front of the Main Laboratory Building. 4. Fixation of a Myer's hand water pump in the well in the Healthy Kraal. 5. Construction of kutcha drain and masonry culverts for drainage of residential quarters. 6. Shifting of two latrines from the Dresser's Line to the Deputy Director's and Head Laboratory Assistant's outhouses. 7. Construction of two Turn-stiles. 8. Construction of a courtyard for the Veterinery Deputy Superin- tendent's bungalow. 9. Fixation of wooden punkhas in the Main Laboratory Buildings. 10. Special repairs to the Head Laboratory Assistant's residence, Head Clerk's and the Artist's quarters. The following works and repairs were carried out departmentally :MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1933. 41 (b) Anti-H42 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, The following distinguished officers visited the Institute during the year under review :MUKTESAR, FOR THR YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1933. 43 APPENDIX I. Table showing the main results of the Production sections of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, and the Imperial Veterinary Serum Institute, Izatnagar, during the year 1932-33. Quantity of Sera and other products prepared and issued. Name of Products. Opening balance. Passed for issue during the year. Returned. Total. Issued during the year. Average issue of previous 5 years. Stock in hand. Doses. Doses. Doses. Doses. Doses. Doses. Doses. Anti-Rinderpest Serum44 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, APPEN Table showing the number of doses of products issued to the Products. Punjab. N.W.F. Pro- vince. United Pro- vinces. Bihar and Orissa. Bengal. Assam. Burma. Madras. Bombay. Anti-Rinderpest SerumMUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDIMG THE 31ST MARCH, 1933. 45 DIX II. different Provinces, States, etc., during the year 1932-33. Sind and Rajpu- tana. Central Pro- vinces. Coorg. Balu- chistan. Military Depart- ment. Indian States. Foreign coun- tries. I. I. of V. R., Mukte- sar, and I. V. S. I., Izat- nagar. Total. Remarks. .. 500 .. 96,500 11,400 21,400 *12,41,150 16,77,150 *Including 12,25,250 doses transferred to Preventive Serum. 75,500 3,20,000 .. 8,000 4,400 85,371 10,700 46 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, APPENDIX III. Summary of results of inoculations in the field of the different products of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, during the year 1932-33. Number of Number of animals which died uninoculated in course or outbreak. Number of animals inoculated. Number of animals which died after inoculation. Name of disease and Province. Product or method used. outbreaks in which inoculation was under- taken. Equine. Bovine. Others. Equine. Bovine. Others. Equine. Bovine. Others. United Provinces. Rinderpest . Serum alone Serum simultane- 1,649 .. 25,212 24 .. 1,76,853 531 741 414 Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia ous. Serum Vaccine 361 25 13 .. 2,816 120 4 11 40,164 625 3,929 2 24 Blackquarter Anthrax . Serum Serum .. 130 .. 1,325 .. Punjab. Rinderpest . Serum 786 .. 7,070 2,575 .. 1,40,181 78,306 100 285 45 3 Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia Serum 363 .. 2,42,732 .. 2 Vaccine . 1,280 26,349 .. .. Blackquarter . Vaccine Serum Aggressin . 163 4 .. 23 7 3 2,728 851 8 200 35 4 Fowl Cholera .. 1 North West Frontier Province. Rinderpest . Serum . . 37 .. 345 .. .. 7,551 .. .. 6
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1933. 47 Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia Serum . Vaccine 54 .. 323 .. .. 9,773 5,960 .. .. 4 .. Blackquarter Serum 1 .. 16 .. .. 340 .. .. .. .. Sind and Rajputana. Rinderpest .... Serum 151 .. 2,805 .. .. 13,153 .. .. 83 .. Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia Serum 5 .. 26 .. .. 436 .. .. 1 .. Assam. .. .. .. .. .. .. 281 .. Rinderpest . ... Serum 312 .. 7,752 .. .. 17,332 .. .. 3 .. Anthrax .... Serum 32 8 235 16 227 1,227 1 1 2 .. Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia . Serum 26 .. 329 30 .. 1,343 20 .. 271 .. Bihar and Orissa. Rinderpest . Serum 622 .. 5,325 .. .. 1,06,471 .. .. 1 .. Goat Virus Serum simultane- ous. .. .. .. .. .. 64 114 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia Serum Vaccine 197 6 .. 949 10 .. .. 39,224 6,606 .. .. 15 .. Anthrax .... Serum 28 3 245 .. 72 5,188 .. 1 8 .. Blackquarter Serum 12 .. 62 .. .. 2,599 743 .. .. .. .. Aggressin . 1 .. 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. Serum and Aggres- sin simultane- ously. 15 .. 77 .. .. 3,223 .. .. .. .. Bombay. Rinderpest .... Serum 974 .. 18,238 .. .. 1,40,036 34 .. 212 10 .. Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia Serum 143 .. 1,471 .. .. 10,625 .. .. .. Vaccine 10 .. .. .. 905 .. .. .. Blackquarter Aggressin . 207 .. 917 .. .. 11,431 .. .. 10 .. Anthrax .... Serum 2 .. 25 .. .. 180 .. .. .. Fowl Cholera Serum and Vaccine 2 .. 50 .. .. 25 .. .. ..
48 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, APPENDIX IIIMUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1933. 49 Blackquarter . Serum and Aggres- sin. 2 .. 7 .. .. 116 .. .. .. .. Bovine Lymphangitis . Vaccine .. .. .. .. .. 107 .. .. .. .. Anthrax . Serum 14 .. 141 3 4 2,520 .. 1 28 .. Baluchistan. Rinderpest . Serum 32 .. 268 .. .. 4,891 18 .. 8 .. Anthrax . Serum 2 .. 96 .. .. 157 .. .. 3 Central Provinces. .. .. .. .. .. Rinderpest . Serum 2,208 .. 11,354 .. .. 2,52,906 .. .. 69 .. Serum simultane- ous. 3 15 .. .. 191 .. .. .. Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia Serum Vaccine 155 116 .. 851 15,329 15,548 294 1 .. Serum and Vaccine (simultaneous). 67 339 5,969 4 .. Blackquarter Serum Aggressin . 44 21 266 2,769 29,335 .. .. Serum and Aggres- sin (simultane- ously). 27 .. 63 1,481 .. Anthrax . . Serum 17 .. 164 .. .. 1,618 .. .. .. Goat Virus .... Vaccine .. .. .. .. 943 .. .. .. Tetanus .... Tetanus anti-toxin .. .. .. 18 3 .. .. .. Tuberculosis . . Double Intrader- mal. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. Fowl Cholera . . Serum 4 .. 5 74 .. 38 279 .. .. Burma. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Rinderpest . Serum 1,255 .. 232 .. .. 1,91,704 1,488 .. 1,036 .. Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia . Vaccine 28 .. 459 .. .. 3,847 .. .. .. .. Anthrax . . . . Vaccine . 8 8 77 .. 279 1,497 306 .. ..
50 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, APPENDIX IV. Table showing the details of specimens received and examined at the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar,during the year 1932-33. Disease suspected. Number of specimens. Positive. Suspicious. Negative. Abortion Bovine agglutination test . . . . . . 10 .. 26 MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1932. 51 APPENDIX IV-contd. Table showing the details of specimens received and examined at the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, during the year 1932-3352 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, APPENDIX V. Table showing the financial results of the working of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, and the Imperial Veterinary Serum Institute, Izatnagar, during the year 1932-33. Receipts. Expenditure. Sale of sera, vaccines and other products. Sale of animals. Dairy. Other Miscellaneous receipts. Total. Salaries and travelling allowance of officers and staff. Feed and upkeep of animals. Cost of chemicals and apparatus including English charges. Other miscellaneous expenditure. Purchase of animals. Total. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. MUKTESAR. 93,756 0 0 572 0 0 6,131 0 0 13,240 0 0 1,13,699 0 0 2,06,292 0 0 81,808 0 0 33,354 0 0 98,552 0 0 27,692 0 0 4,47,698 0 0 IZATNAGAR. 7,96,779 0 0 11,883 0 0 .. 444 0 0 8,09,106 0 0 60,883 0 0 28,901 0 0 6,430 0 0 59,143 0 0 31,401 0 0 1,86,758 0 0 8,90,535 0 0 12,455 0 0 6,131 0 0 13,684 0 0 9,22,805 0 0 2,67,175 0 0 1,10,709 0 0 39,784 0 0 1,57,695 0 0 59,093 0 0 6,34,456 0 0
MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1933. 53 APPENDIX VI. Conditions governing the sale of Sera, Vaccines, and other products manufactured at the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, and the Imperial Veterinary Serum Institute, Izatnagar. I.54 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, (c) Requisitions are complied with, except during heavy rain and snow-fall, within 5 days of the date of their receipt at the latest. Urgent orders are complied with as early as possible. 4.MUKTESAR, FOR THE YEAR ENDING THE 31ST MARCH, 1933. 55 APPENDIX VII. List of products issued from the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Re- search, Muktesar, and the Imperial Veterinary Serum Institute, Izatnagar, and current prices, as sanctioned by the Government of India from 1st April 1933. Serial No. Name of product. Indian Rates. Foreign Rates. Minimum supplied. Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P. 1 Anti-Rinderpest Serum special (class 1 and 2) (5 c.c. dose). 0 2 0 0 4 0 50 doses. 2 Anti-Rinderpest Serum preventive 5 c.c. dose). 0 1 6 0 3 0 50 doses. 3 Anti-Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia serum (15 c.c. dose). 0 4 0 0 9 0 20 doses. 4 Hæmorrhagic Septicæmia vaccine (5 c.c. dose). 0 2 0 0 4 0 50 doses. 5 Anti-anthrax serum (15 c.c. dose) . 0 4 0 0 9 0 20 doses. 6 Anti-Blackquarter serum (15 c.c. dose). 0 4 0 0 9 0 20 doses. 7 Blackquarter Aggressin (5 c.c. dose). 0 3 6 ... 50 doses. 8 Fowl Cholera serum (5 c.c. dose) . 0 2 0 0 3 0 2 doses. 9 Fowl Cholera vaccine (1 c.c. dose) 0 0 6 ... 5 doses. 10 Bovine Abortion vaccine 1 tube. 0 4 6 ... 5 doses. 11 Mixed Streptococcic vaccine (5 c.c. dose). 0 3 0 0 4 0 10 doses. 12 Autogenous vaccines 50 c.c . . 6 0 0 ... Autogenous vaccines (repeat order for 50 c.c). 3 0 0 ... } 50 c.c. Autogenous Vaccines (each extra 50 c. c. or part). 1 0 0 ... 13 Mallein-Subcutaneous (1 c.c. dose 0 4 0 0 6 0 1 dose. Do. I. D. P. 5 dose tubes (0.1 c.c. dose). 0 9 0 0 13 0 5 doses. Do. I. D. P. 10 dose tubes (0.1 c.c. dose). 0 12 0 1 2 0 10 doses. 14 Tuberculin-Subcutaneous (3 c.c. dose). 0 4 0 0 6 0 1 dose.
56 ANNUAL REPORT OF THE IMPL. INST. OF VETY. RESEARCH, APPENDIX VII