NCAG-VSI 3/33 Vol. III 1933 THE Indian Journal of Veterinary Science AND Animal Husbandry Issued under the authority of The Imperial Council of Agricultural Research [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Published for The Imperial Council of Agricultural Research BY MANAGER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI. PRINTED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, NEW DELHI. 1935. Price annas 4 or 5d.
List of Agents in India from whom Government of India Publications are available. (a) PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENT BOOK DEPOTS. MADRAS :PLATE I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] (× ¾th Natural size) For explanation see page 26.
ORIGINAL ARTICLES SCHISTOSOMA INDICUM, MONTGOMERY, 1906, AS THE CAUSE OF A PERSISTENT DEBILITY IN EQUINES IN INDIA, WITH A DESCRIPTION OF THE LESIONS BY CAPT. S. C. A. DATTA, B.Sc. M.R.C.V.S., Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on 9th November 1932.) (With Plates I to VI.) INTRODUCTION. Apart from cases of hepatic cirrhosis in man, where the ill effects of alcohol or syphilis can be traced, the pathogenesis of hepatic lesions is largely obscure, but a perusal of veterinary literature shows that hepatic cirrhosis of the horses has been described from several parts of the world. The occurrence of what is termed ' Schweinsberger disease ' [ McFadyean, 1889 ] in parts of Germany is known, but the cause has not yet been ascertained. A form, commonly known as ' Bottom disease ', has also been described as occurring on the marshy side of the Missouri, in which a species of Crotalaria (C. sagitlalis) has been incriminated [ Schroeder, 1892 ]. Gilruth [ 1903 ] has described another form as ' Winton disease ' due to Ragwort poisoning (Senecio jacobca), and an enzootic form of liver cirrhosis, Dun- ziekte, has been described from various parts of South Africa, where a similar plant is considered to be the toxic agent [Hutcheon, 1903, Robertson, 1906, Verney, 1911, and Theiler, 1917 and 1918]. Craig and Kehoe [1921] have recorded the occurrence of cirrhosis of the liver in the horse in parts of Ireland which has also been attributed to plant poisoning. Excepting possibly the cases of Oreste and Ercolani, which will be referred to below, no records are available, however, from other parts of the world of cases of liver cirrhosis which resemble in any great degree the peculiar type to be considered in this paper. Of the many problems which have engaged the Veterinary Scientist in India, nodulated portal cirrhosis of the horse's liver, associated with intractable debility, has been one of the most difficult to solve. In first describing the condi- tion as " Calcareous degenerations in the horse ", Smith [ 1885 ] stated that it had A 2
2 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I been encountered in a very large number of postmortem examinations extending over several years and that the condition was interesting as an undescribed feature in animal Pathology. Further he considered that the tissues and organs were liable to this degenerative change in varying degrees in the following order :PLATE II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. (× 4) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. (× 32) For explanation see page 26. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. (× 6) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. (× 3.2)
SCHISTOSOMA INDICUM, MONTGOMERY, IN EQUINES 3 were some which were scarcely visible. Oreste and Ercolani were of opinion that these nodules contained as a nucleus the ovum of a distoma, but according to Mazzanti they are produced by the embryos of nematodes carried by the blood." Another statement of Lingard should be quoted here in connection with the filarial theory of origin mentioned above:4 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I The complete clinical picture of this condition, from the initial infection to the final culmination, has yet to be described and it is unfortunate that clinical cases of the disease were not available at Muktesar prior to the preparation of this article. Further it has not been possible to undertake a tour to the enzootic areas for studying the clinical aspects at first hand. In view of the above difficulties, it seems advisable to reproduce a small number of reports of representative cases, as supplied by field workers with actual experience of the disease, for the benefit of readers, and it must be made clear that only such cases have been chosen as have been confirmed by macroscopic and histological features to be due to schistosome infection. CASE REPORT NO. 1. Two specimens of liver were received from Rawalpindi on 7th February 1922. The covering letter stated that about twelve months earlier (on 31st January 1921) the mules and horses which constituted the 17th Pack Battery proceeded to the Murree Hills and retained good condition up to June. From the moment the rains set in, however, the animals as a whole fell away rapidly in condition and remained so in spite of the strictest supervision and veterinary treatment of about 15 of the very worst cases. The animals retained excellent appetites and were lively through- out, having exhibited no other symptom excepting debility. A negative reaction to the Mallein test was obtained and no organisms could be demonstrated in the blood stream. A post-mortem examination on mule No. 144, destroyed on 30th January 1922, showed a Habronema tumour in the stomach. Large intestine contained strongyles and encysted worms in the bowel walls. Liver was apparently of normal size but was dotted throughout with fibrous nodules. Another animalSCHISTOSOMA INDICUM, MONTGOMERY, IN EQUINES 5 migrated into the liver probably through the peritoneal cavity, from the stomach or intestines. CASE REPORT NO. 2. Specimens of liver and intestine of a mule destroyed for chronic debility were received from Mhow on 29th June 1923. Liver was very enlarged and weighed 36 lbs. The consistence was cartilaginous. The nodules in the rectum and large intestines were thought by the Veterinary Officer in charge of the Hospital to be due to Habronema megastoma but no habronemic abscess was detected in the stomach. The laboratory report was as follows:6 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I liver in other animals, notably sheep, but that one was not acquainted with this type of lesion occurring in the horse. It was not unlikely that the invasion was a migration of Habronema worms from the stomach, where two small tumours resem- bling those commonly caused by H. megastoma were found. No bacterial micro- organisms were detected in the liver tissue. CASE REPORT NO. 4. Portions of liver and intestine of a mule which was destroyed for debility were received on 19th September 1924 from the Military Veterinary Hospital, Lucknow. Naked eye examination of the intestinal mucous membrane showed certain minute black patches, direct smears from which were examined by Mr. Amarnath, M.Sc, then Zoological Assistant to the Director of this Institute, and he found spined ova resembling those of Schistosoma indicum, but on an extensive examination of the specimens of liver and intestine from this and other previous cases, this finding was not confirmed. On this being intimated to the Veterinary Officer concerned, the following detailed history was forwarded :SCHISTOSOMA INDICUM, MONTGOMERY, IN EQUINES 7 tive results. Tonics containing strychnine were prescribed. The following post- mortem findings were recorded:8 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I CASE REPORT NO. 7. Liver, lung, spleen and mesenteric gland, collected from mule No. 10, 2nd Indian Divisional Signals, Quetta, were received on 28th November 1929. Veterinary History Sheet. Dark Brown Gold Mule No. 10. Date of admission. Date of discharge. Number of days. Disease. Result. 17-5-24 10-7-24 54 Debility ..... Duty. 22-6-25 30-6-25 8 Ulcer, Bursati .... Duty. 30-5-27 6-8-27 68 Ulcer, Bursati .... Duty. 15-11-27 5-12-27 20 R. eye Pedal Ostitis O. F. . Duty. 27-9-29 18-11-29 52 Entozoa ..... .. For the last two years of its life, this mule had been in poor condition, no muscles on back, pot-bellied, with obvious signs of ascites. During training that year he proved to be of no use. Being unable to do his work he was admitted to the Veterinary Hospital and treated for Entozoa, although no eggs or parasites were found on fæcal examination. He was destroyed on 22nd November 1929 and the post-mortem examination showed the following lesions :SCHISTOSOMA INDICUM, MONTGOMERY, IN EQUINES 9 bad. This horse had apparently been in good health until August 1931, the only diseases of importance previous to this were colic in 1926, and influenza in February-March 1931. She was treated for intestinal parasites in August- September and for colic twice during September and October 1931. Admitted to hospital on 5th January 1932 in poor condition and treated for intestinal para- sites. As there was no improvement in condition, the animal was tested with Mallein and afterwards with Tuberculin, in each case with a negative result. She was destroyed on 27th February 1932. Post-mortem examination showed the following:10 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I as simulate the cases now under consideration, viz., Schistosomiasis of the Far East (Katayama disease, due to S. japonicum) and Egyptian Schistosomiasis, due to S. mansoni, it is easy to understand why the earlier symptoms of the equine disease have failed to be recorded. The cercarial infection may take place in one of two ways, viz., either through the cutaneous route or through the digestive tract, and the latter seems more probable. The early stages of the disease may be characterised by lesions involving the integument of the limb or the gastro-intes- tinal tract. Whichever it is, there is little that is significant in an urticarial rash, a papular lesion or a transitory gastro-intestinal catarrh to suggest the possibility of a schistosome infection having been contracted. Occasional loose fæces asso- ciated with some inappetence can be interpreted as mere indigestion, and premoni- tory symptoms such as an intermittent high temperature are likely to be dismissed with a palliative or symptomatic treatment. The occurrence of such minor ail- ments will scarcely be recalled at the time when the disease has made good headway, and when the affected animals (of which generally there are several) begin to show signs of lethargy and unthriftiness for no apparent reason, examination of fæces or of stomach contents collected by lavage is usually carried out. Nematode worms or their ova in varying numbers may be detected and anthelminthic or vermifuge measures adopted accordingly. Although some transitory benefits may be seen, it is soon realised that the progress of unthriftiness has not been checked. Icterus and anaemia develop gradually but the suspicion of biliary fever is not confirmed by blood smear examination. Chronic insidious conditions like subacute glanders or tuberculosis are also ex- cluded as a result of tests with appropriate biological reagents. A vigorous tonic treatment and liberal allowance of nutritious rations are prescribed but the animal is found to be getting worse in spite of all human efforts to the contrary. Vary- ing amounts of dropsical transudation common to conditions of debility may accumulate in the dependent parts and this explains the entry of attacks of lymphangitis or swollen legs made in the Veterinary History sheets of some of these cases. Exudation of fluid into the peritoneal cavity also takes place but in the normally obese abdomen this escapes notice. Part of it undergoes reabsorption but increased exudation continues and with the progressive enlarge- ment of the liver abdomen becomes pendulous. This appearance becomes more pronounced because of advancing general emaciation. The enlarged liver may be palpated per rectum and found to occupy considerable portions of the abdominal cavity. On manipulation the animal may evince pain. The back muscles are greatly atrophied and when the liver has undergone enormous enlargement, the patient has the appearance of a gravid mare, to employ the expression used by Williams [1914]. With the extension of the malady, circumscribed multiple foci of
SCHISTOSOMA INDICUM, MONTGOMERY, IN EQUINES 11 the disease affect various internal organs, e.g., intestine, liver, lung, spleen, pancreas, etc. The pressure exerted by the enlarged liver and the reduced functional acti- vity of the affected organs lead to metabolic disturbances; interfering with the absorption and digestion of food respiration and circulation. A cough of varying intensity and recurring attacks of diarrh12 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I Numerous minute greyish white or chalky white nodules resembling miliary tubercles can be seen immediately beneath the transparent capsule (Plate I, specimen Nos. 1532 and 562 iii). These nodules are more or less calcified, as large as a sago grain, but rarely, they may attain the size of a split pea. Palpation of the surface gives a slightly irregular feel, but the organ is never characteristically ' hobnailed ' even in an extreme case. Occasionally several advanced nodules may be seen crowded together over the surface of the organ (Plate I, specimen No. 750-B). In rare cases elevated nodular areas of induration may also be seen protruding in a like manner (Plate I, specimen No. 993). Degenerative softening of the nodules has never been seen to be associated with the condition. The organ cuts with a gritty or cartilaginous feel, and then will be seen many more minute nodules which are red in the early stages but vary from greyish or greyish white to pearl white in colour as the disease advances (Plate I, specimen No. 1558 left). If an individual nodule is removed with the point of a knife and a caustic potash preparation of the crushed material be examined under the microscope one or two oval, spined eggs may be seen. The cut surfaces present a coarse net-work of grey or greyish white bands of fibrous tissue of varying breadth, enclosing in each mesh rounded islets of yellow or yellowish brown hepatic tissue. When the disease has advanced further, the linear tracts of connective tissue become so thickened and prominent as to present a marbled appearance or a " claypipe stem " picture due to thickened bile ducts as delineated by Symmers [1903] in cases of Egyptian Schistosomiasis (caused by S. mansoni). The liver may be so densely packed with the nodules in varying stages of calcification and organisation that very little true liver tissue can be recognised by the naked eye. The old nodules may be so highly calcified that they readily become enucleated on the slightest dis- turbance with the knife (Plate II, Fig. 1). The development of the lesion in this equine affection takes place in the same manner as in the case of other forms of schistosomiasis. There are certain differences, of course, but they may be ascribed to the different degrees of patho- genicity of the species of the parasite concerned and probably also due to the varying powers of resistance possessed by the invaded equine tissues. The essential lesion of the disease is a nodulated cirrhosis, practically restricted to the portal tract in the initial stage (Plate III, Fig. 4). The nodule in its earliest stage is mainly cellular in character, being composed of a heavy accumulation of mono- nuclear neutrophile cells and rare polymorphonuclears which again are loosely surrounded by a few delicate fibrils of connective tissue (Plate III, Fig. 2). With regard to the origin of these fibrils careful examination of sections has shown that they are merely the normal supporting tissue which has become arranged around the irritant in order that it may be phagocytised in situ. The offending
PLATE III. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. (×68) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. (×480) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. (×100) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. (× 14) For explanation see page 27.
PLATE IV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. (× 55) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. (× 330) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. (× 240) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. (× 55) For explanation see page 27.
SCHISTOSOMA INDICUM, MONTGOMERY, IN EQUINES 13 ovum lies quite free in the centre and it may be mentioned here that during these studies sections of the female worm also have been seen in the centre of these nodules in one sample of tissue only (Plate IV, Fig. 4). With the infiltration of eosinophile leucocytes becoming denser in the surrounding areas, the formation of rings of younger connective tissue takes place from the periphery inwards, the earlier formed strands having attained maturity in the meantime. As the nodule proceeds to further development, the ovum may still continue to lie freely in a central cavity of the nodule or a kind of fibrinous, eosinophile, degeneration ' lymph' may accumulate around it. In the latter case, a varying number of wandering cells with pyknotic and fragmented nuclear material is recognisable in this pale reddish mass (Plate III, Fig. 3). The amount of the degenerated cellular debris lying in the eosinophile substance may be considerable depending upon the extent of toxic material elaborated by the developing embryo from inside the egg-shell and this amorphous substance generally forms an irregular area around the ovum. Some eosinophile leucocytes may reach this area of degenerated material and a few others are seen lying in between the circular rings of more or less developed fibrous connective tissue, but the densest eosinophile concentration continues to be in the immediate proximity of the fibrous capsule of an individual nodule, but always outside the latter (Plate III, Fig. 2). Phagocytic activity around the central amorphous mass manifests itself and fibrin-like threads are seen radiating out in a loose manner. The phagocytic cells are then seen to assume a radial arrangement, with the broader parts of the cells directed outside (Plate IV, Fig. 3). In some nodules the. arrangement may be so well developed as to suggest a relationship with the classical " ray fungus ". In the opinion of Shafi Mohammad [1931] these radiating and nucleated filaments are giant cells which have been flattened out and elongated due to the pressure and counterpressure exerted by the formation of concentric rings of fibrous tissue and this view is in conformity with the findings recorded here. With further organisation, the radial arrangement of elongated cells is lost and more or less successful attempts at giant cell formation become manifest. Commencement of calcification begins immediately around the ovum, the cellular contents of which seem to have lost the character of viability, the egg-shell having undergone a partial crenation and blackening. Lime salts have been seen to be deposited in the concentric rings of connective tissue (Plate IV, Fig. 1). [It may be parenthetically mentioned here that the same degree of predisposition to calcareous degeneration of the liver has not been observed in similar bilharzial conditions which occur among human beings in Egypt and the Far East]. The deposition of lime salt progresses with further organisa- tion, fibrosis and giant cell activity (Plate IV, Fig. 2) until in the completely fibrosed nodule, nothing excepting a part of the disrupted egg-shell can be seen
14 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I (Plate IV, Fig. 1). The whorls of connective tissue thus formed become hyalinised with very little cellular, nuclear contents then discernible (Plate III, Fig. 1). There seems to be little doubt that the ova are usually transported by the portal vessels into the organ, but very early lesions have been traced to the hepatic vein, and no satisfactory explanation is forthcoming to throw light on the simul- taneous involvement of the portal vein and the hepatic artery as seen in some sections. The veins are more or less dilated. More marked changes are seen around the larger veins but the smaller portal canals are not exempt. Brown haematin-like pigment may be present in the endothelial cells of the organ or it may lie free in the endothelial spaces. Apart from the nodular lesions, the portal spaces reveal a considerable increase of newly formed, tortuous bile ducts and connective tissue. It is interesting to note that in a very chronic case of the disease, actual columns of liver cells in different stages of regeneration with the provision of a fine system of capillary circulation in between the rows of hepatic cells have been seen in the centre of a nodular lesion, the outer rings of the fibrous capsule being completely absorbed (Plate VI, Figs. 3 and 4). This is presum- ably an instance of a regenerating nodule attempting to set up liver function after the toxic products and irritant ovum have been completely removed. In parenthesis, it may be said that retrogressive changes in the capsule itself have also been described by Theiler [1918], who states "Finally the capsule had completely disappeared whilst the necrotic centre had increased and the nodule was surrounded by a thin fibrillar envelope ". It has already been stated that the initial lesions are practically restricted to the portal tract, the lobules themselves being singularly free from any abnormality. However, lobular changes may be seen at a very advanced stage of the disease. In this, a single ovum generally is seen lying at some distance from the larger veins or an occasional egg may lie near a small vein. Careful examination of these lobular lesions fails to reveal any evidence of the muscular remnants of a broken down vessel. From this, it seems reasonable to suppose that the lobular nodules usually originate in the finer capillaries and that the delicate walls of these are not recognisable because of the changes which are brought on by the pathological process. Nevertheless, it is not unlikely that now and again an ovum does pierce through the vessel wall by means of its sharp spine and finds itself in a perivascular situation. It may be mentioned here that no ovum has been detected as actually piercing its way through the wall of a blood vessel in spite of a careful examination of a very large number of stained sections. The inter-lobular lesions may extend both in size and number and thus come to occupy the position of the lobules, so much so that when the disease process is severe, whole lobules may be altogether obliterated due to atrophy of liver cells and their replacement by inflammatory tissue and proliferated bile ducts. But it is remarkable that the liver
SCHISTOSOMA INDICUM, MONTGOMERY, IN EQUINES 15 cells generally remain healthy for an extremely long period. It has been seen earlier that the liver undergoes a very pronounced hypertrophy in size but in the strict sense, the term hypertrophic cirrhosis would scarcely apply to this condition since an actual hypertrophic increase of liver cells has not been detected in these studies. In seeking to find an explanation for the presence of the most advanced and the earliest lesions side by side in the same liver, one is inclined to the view that the ova have been carried to the liver at different times from larger veins supplying other viscera, in particular the intestines. The obliteration and occlusion of the majority of the portal vessels, the extent of which can be appreciated from Plate II, Fig. I, would scarcely afford sufficient room for a migratory gravid female to lay eggs in situ and then to escape. As regards the ovum which is found in these lesions, it is a typical Schistosome ovum, with a terminal spine, and as will be seen later it agrees in size with the limits laid down for the ova of S. indicum, Montgomery. The egg-shell is composed of a peculiar chitinous material, which is highly resistant to the phagocytic action of body cells but the developing miracidium is readily destroyed by the phagocytes, which appear to have no difficulty in obtaining entrance into the shell-cavity. Although the egg-shell is soft enough to lose its characteristic shape or contour, the persistence of disrupted remnants with a betraying spine in the centre of an altogether fibrosed nodule, is a very striking and common occurrence (Plate IV, Fig. 1). Another remarkable finding has been the persistence of a couple of eggs side by side in a centre of dense calcification, there being no change in the shape of the eggshells, contrary to the usual crenation or disruption that is generally met with. Of the dozen or more ova that have been measured from sections of the liver, the largest was found to have 0.128 × 0.040 mm. as the dimensions, whereas the length of a number of eggs varied from 0.084 to 0.094 mm. and the width from 0.031 to 0.041 mm. The eggs seen in sections of intestine were of similar sizes but a few small eggs, having dimensions like 0.031× 0.012 mm. or 0.069×.021 mm. have been seen. The small sizes probably refer to the angle at which they were cut. An egg in a lung section measured 0.85× 0.033 mm. and one from the mesenteric gland was .079 × 027 mm. The length of the ova of S. indicum measured by Montgomery varied from 0.092 to 0.10 mm., the width from 0.042 to 0.044 mm. Intestines.16 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, I particularly free from the lesions (Plate II, Fig. 2), though in very early cases the venules in the submucous coat are the only seats where the pseudotubercles are produced. In so far as the stomach is concerned, one must remember that certain species of Habronema worms are quite frequently encountered there either lying free on areas of superficial ulceration or embedded in fistulous tumours. As has been seen already, the initial lesions start in the submucous bed of blood vessels of the large intestines and it is the distal portions, namely, the large colon and the rectum which reveal the earliest gross lesions, which again may easily be overlooked unless one is particularly careful. Unless one is familiar with the minor lesions, commonly associated with the early stages of a bilharzial enteritis, such as slight congestion or petechial hæmorrhage, the proper significance of the picture may not be understood. The intestinal contents may be semisolid or soft, coated with mucus and slightly streaked with blood. As with other diseased conditions the character and the extent of the lesions depend upon the duration and the severity of the infection but neoplastic growths and tendency to malignancy, as are commonly associated with certain forms of intestinal bilharziosis, are not seen in this equine disease. The lesions on the mucous membrane manifest themselves as a special type of ulcer, which is generally minute and discrete with a sharply circumscribed margin. The individual ulcers are rarely larger than the size of a big pinhead but occasionally when neighbouring ulcers coalesce they may be a little larger. Another peculiarity of the ulcers is that their surface is covered with a black deposit, due probably to extravasated blood. The pigmented surface when present makes detection easier and it is through these peculiar and characteristic ulcers that the worm ova are extruded into the outside world (Plate I, Specimen No. 909), The character of the lesions, as seen from an examination of the peritoneal covering of the gut is singular in that exceedingly hard nodular masses stand out from the bowel wall, the lesions showing varying degrees of fibrosis and calcification. The nodules may be discrete or appear as conglomerate excrescences, the size of the individual nodules averaging that of a pea (Plate I, Specimens 562 ii & 1931). In such portions of the colon as are not excessively thickened and where the margins of the individual nodules are still recognisable, it will be found that the lesions are generally restricted to the colic vessels. Other very noticeable lesions of the peritoneal surface of the gut are the thrombosed veins which stand out as rigid linear elevations and contain an almost black antemortem thrombus. Smith [1891] stated that arteries of the colon were converted into rigid tubes due to lime deposit in their coats and that the change was not the result of parasitic action. This view is not supported by the facts since lime salts are deposited around the parasitic ovum in the centre of a thrombosed vessel, and to start with, the rigidity of the arterial tubes is due to thrombosis only. The thickening of the intestinal wall due
PLATE V. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. (× 45) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. (× 57) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG.3. (× 27) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. (× 21) For explanation see page 27.
SCHISTOSOMA INDICUM, MONTGOMERY, IN EQUINES 17 to chronic inflammatory changes may be so great that the bowel loses most of its pliability and scarcely any light can pass through it. Individual pseudotubercles, which may be situated anywhere between the mucous and peritoneal surfaces, show two or three sharply defined circles. (Plate II, Fig, 2). The outer circle is fibrous and the central one contains a core of degenerated and calcareous material. If a portion of the bowel showing early lesions is examined against a strong light, one should be able to detect commencing vascular lesions from the centre of some of which, the worm may be enucleated without much difficulty. The mucous membrane of the intestine shows a marked mucoid degeneration in a considerable portion of its length and this is associated with a profound infil- tration with eosinophile leucocytes. It is strange that very few ova or none at all are detected in the mucosa and from this, it seems probable that an extensive diffusion of parasitic toxin must be responsible for these evenly distributed changes. Small localised areas of inflammatory exudate or actual abscess formation may be seen to have originated around half a dozen or more ova. The miracidium can be seen inside the egg-shell which has undergone an irregular crenation. Actual ulceration takes place by the desquamation of the epithelial cells, leading to the formation of the peculiar minute ulcers described above and a varying amount of blood pigment is deposited here and there. The muscular layer of the mucosa is in tact practically throughout excepting for small gaps due to the dilation of the arterioles which run between the mucosa and the submucosa (Plate VI, Fig. 1). Actual breach of the muscularis mucosa takes place as a result of the disease process advancing from the submucosa upwards and thus allowing the ova with the enclosed maturing miracidia to be extruded into the outside world (Plate V, Fig. 1). As has been seen before, the essential pathological lesions of the disease are found around the ova. In early cases, it is the submucous coat only which provides the seat for the production of the well known pseudotubercles [Fairley, 1920] and in an advanced case, this layer is again the seat of the largest number of these nodular lesions. The lesions extend to the subserosa (Plate V, Fig. 3) or in an extreme case may be seen anywhere, but their formation is generally restricted to those situations which have the most luxuriant blood supply. The nodules have been seen in between the longitudinal layers of the muscular coat, these having been formed inside the capillaries and venules which lie in strands of supporting intramuscular connective tissue (Plate V, Fig. 4). The nodular lesions in the intestine follow the same sequence of developmental stages as is seen in the case of similar lesions of the liver. The blood vessels situated either in the submucosa or deeper are more or less engorged and dilated. Now and again extremely dilated areas, rounded or oval in shape, bounded by very thin walls and containing small round cells are seen im- mediately below the muscularis mucosa. With regard to the origin of these, it B 2
18 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I seems that the majority are capillaries or venules which have been abnormally dilated but these may include occasional dilated lymph spaces. Apart from certain large sized vessels which reveal a marked thinning and disruption of the muscular coat, the most interesting lesions are presented by the endothelium of the smaller vessels. The lesions consist of varying degrees of exudation into the endothelial lining so that a sector of the vessel may become swollen to form a blunt finger-like process filling a major portion of the lumen, whereas the endothelium of the other sectors is very severely mutilated or are even actually shed (Plate VI, Fig. 2). Where the vessel is seen to contain a plug of inflammatory exudate, portions of the desquamated endothelium may be recognisable as forming a part of it. With regard to the probable mechanism by which the bloating of the endothelium takes place, one notices polymorphonuclear leucocytes and masses of eosinophiles inside the stumpy finger-like process. The fact that the immediate vicinity of the vessel wall at the affected sector is heavily crowded with eosinophile cells suggests that a factor such as an excessive lowering of blood pressure may have determined the endothelial disruption, particularly when the parasitic toxin had already affected the susceptible intima. Fairley [1920] has failed to confirm the finding of an endophlebitis of the mesenteric veins as described by Letulle [1905] in his comprehensive article on intestinal bliharziosis. The other prominent lesion of the blood vessels is represented by degrees of endarteritis obliterans. Apart from the pathological changes in the blood vessels supplying the intes- tine, which have been referred to above, it must be remembered that the majority of the nodular lesions in the submucosa or the subserosa originate in the embolic eggmasses which form in the vessels of the place (Plate V, Fig. 2). It may be mentioned here that the writer has encountered more than once up to 20 ova in a single embolic focus in the intestine but although hundreds of liver sections like- wise have been examined, he has never been able to find more than one ovum in an individual nodule in the liver. Another remarkable fact is that in the equine intestine, the large majority of Schistosome ova have been seen to be wholly restricted to the layers of tissue situated below the mucosa (Plate II, Fig. 2), whereas in the histological sections prepared from the intestine of natural cases of S. indicum infection in the sheep and in the bull of both the plains and hill breeds, the ova have been found almost exclusively in the mucous membrane with practi- cally no tendency to nodule formation, the actual lesion being more cellular than fibrous and not calcareous at all. Montgomery [1906] states that the large intes- tine of equines is the only organ where ova of S. indicum could be found present in any numbers. He found the ova in the mucosa only and thought that they must occupy the submucous tissue or the capillary at some time.
PLATE VI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. (×105) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. (×166) For explanation see page 27. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. (× 21) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. (× 32)
SCHISTOSOMA INDICUM, MONTGOMERY, IN EQUINES 19 Mesenteric and other lymphatic glands.20 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I is now known that the lungs may be the seat of lesions caused by the migration of the larvæ of Ascaris megalocephala [Hobmaier, 1925], of Strongyles [Olt, 1910 and Theiler, 1918] and of Habronema [Dieulouard, 1927], but the possibility of Schisto- somes playing a role in the production of lung lesions, the importance of which in human affections has been emphasised by Turner [1909], has not so far been con- sidered in Veterinary Pathology. During the investigation under report, lesions on the pleura and the lung parenchyma have been detected quite frequently. Patches of chronic pleuritis, gram-sized sub-pleural nodules (Plate 1, specimen 1481) or highly calcareous, nodular aggregations on the pleura (Plate I, specimen 750-A) have been seen. The anterior lobes of the lung may be united along their borders. Lung parenchyma may show patches of consolidation, with organised and very sharp- ly defined nodules of rounded shape distributed throughout. Their size may reach that of a green pea (Plate I, specimen 1562) and they never show any caseous softening. Examined under the microscope, the lung shows the same characteris- tic features in the organised nodules, as seen in the other organs. The nodules consist of an inner area of degenerated cell debris with or without calcification, surrounded by a more or less strong fibrous fortification (Plate II, Fig. 3). The nodules appear to form in the vessels of the intervesicular septa and from the smallest to the largest the nodules maintain a perfectly rounded shape in the different stages of fibrosis. A chronic catarrhal type of pneumonia, in which the air vesicles are seen to contain eosinophiles and some undifferentiated coagulum probably serum, may affect only portions of the parenchyma or may involve the whole organ. In passing, it may be mentioned here that the lung lesions of a ne- matode infection can be distinguished without much difficulty from the specific lesions of bilharziosis in the majority of instances. The former is usually a bron- chial or peribronchial affection and the lesion covers a much larger area. This is understandable since the causative agent is a worm larva, which according to Theiler [1918], reaches its place by way of the bronchi. In this connection, it will be remembered that a reference has been made already in the introductory remarks concerning the two types of lesions of the lungs encountered by Lingard [1905]. He noticed that the larger variety of lung lesions was less frequent and this finding is in accord with those of the writer. Nematode lesions are generally few and they are seldom organised when small. Even in a larger lesion, the concentric arrange- ment is not so well developed, for there may be only a few rings of irregularly circular connective tissue. The bilharzial lesions, on the other hand, are generally uniformly distributed, being formed as a result of an embolism in the capillaries of the interalveolar septa. As the lesion is generally formed around a single Schisto- some ovum in a capillary, the resulting nodule or the degenerated eosinophile debris in its centre is much smaller and yet the rings of fibrosis are well developed.
SCHISTOSOMA INDICUM, MONTGOMERY, IN EQUINES 21 There may be little or no bronchial or peribronchial reaction. In order to explain why the bilharzial lesions in the lung are not more numerous, it seems justifiable to presume that some of the developing lesions abort prematurely due to the rupture of the interalveolar septa which are structurally very fragile. Nematode lesions again do not appear to be so predisposed to the deposition of calcareous salts. But the most easily recognisable difference in the character of the two types of lesions is the very definite and abrupt margin which invariably encircles the indi- vidual lesion of bilharzial origin, whereas the boundary of a nematode lesion can scarely be deciphered by the naked eye since there is a very gradual transition from the obviously diseased to the suspiciously healthy zones. A rare nematode lesion may resemble one of bilharzial origin, but the latter is so definite that a microscopic examination is seldom necessary for the purpose of distinguishing it from the former (Plate II, Fig. 3). This remark holds true for lesions in any organ. Spleen.22 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I the miscroscope or if the smear shows a considerable amount of animal matter, a couple of drops of 5 per cent. caustic potash may be added to the smear to facili- tate examination. A microphotograph of ova of S. indicum is to be found in Plate II, Fig. 4 and this has been taken from a coverslip preparation obtained from a sample of bovine fæces. The appearances to be expected at post-mortem examination have already been referred to, and for those who have not the opportunity of studying microtome sections, the following methods of obtaining confirmation of a Schistosome infection may be adopted :SCHISTOSOMA INDICUM, MONTGOMERY, IN EQUINES 23 DISCUSSION. It will be noticed that in considering the morbid lesions of this form of equine Schistosomiasis precedence has been given to the liver. The extreme form of hypertrophy which the organ undergoes under action of the disease and its easily recognisable gross changes have been noted. The condition has been designated as a nodulated portal cirrhosis since those are the typical histological features of the lesions. From the strict scientific standpoint, however, the disease is an intestinal schistosomiasis, since it is by the involvement of the bowels only that the parasite is enabled to attain the fulfilment of its life-history. In regard to the liver lesions, it is of interest to note that Manson [ 1902 ] records the occasional presence of small numbers of schistosome ova in the liver of men., but refers to no pathological lesions caused by them, and Scheube [ 1903 ] records the finding of ova in a man's liver with slight cirrhosis. Credit is due to Symmers [ 1903 ] for being the first to record the finding of china-white nodules of sizes varying from a pin- point to a split pea, periportal fibrosis and for describing extensive lesions of " claypipe stem " cirrhosis of the liver. Miliary tubercle-like nodules were encoun- tered by Katsurada [1905] and since then the specific liver lesions of schistosomiasis have received considerable attention in the publications of Wooley [ 1906 ], Phalen and Nichols [ 1908 ], Letulle and Nattan-Larrier [ 1909 ], Houghton [ 1910], Jouveau-Dubreil [ 1913 ], Lampe [ 1925 ] and others. Reference must also be made to Montgomery [ 1906 ] who obtained the majority of his collection of S. indicum from the equine liver after its removal from the body, from the pancrea- tic veins in two cases and from the mesenteric vessels of all the eight cases examined. Although he noticed the liver to be enlarged and, in nearly all instances, to be studded with small pearl-like calcareous nodules, sometimes as large as a pea, well defined by a fibrous capsule and easily enucleated, he considered them to be different from those described by Symmers [ 1903 ] but possibly of the same origin as Mazzanti's filarial lesions, referred to by Lingard [1905]. With regard to "pipe stem" cirrhosis, Montgomery went on to say that '' in equines this does not appear to be present, though in one case a similar naked eye condition existed, but in the lesions ova could not be found." An explanation of the persistent failure of the writer to find adult schistosomes in the histological sections (excepting a single notable case mentioned already) would seem to be that the worms inhabit the larger branches of the portal trunk whereas the nodules were situated in the finer ramifica- tions only and further that the worms may have escaped with the portal blood during post-mortem examination. As regards the consistent failure of Montgomery to record any definite lesions, in spite of the presence of numbers of the parasite, his own view that the animals examined had but recently become
24 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I affected is probably partly true, and in other cases there may have been some resistance on the part of the host. The occurrence of a severe intractable debility as a prominent symptom in this equine schistosomiasis has been emphasised earlier in this paper. Hodgkins [1920], Sewell [1921], Allen [1923] and Steevenson [1924 and 1930] have recorded certain experimental data obtained by them in their attempt to elucidate the problem of persistent debility amongst army horses in India and there is little doubt that a number of these cases are due to habronemiasis or strongylosis, but on the other hand, it has been shown above that on further investigation a number of such cases occurring amongst army horses are in reality a schistosomia- sis. It is not possible to say with certainty at this stage what proportion of the cases of persistent debility are due to each of these three causes, but a preliminary survey of the samples of outside specimens collected at Muktesar since 1921 has revealed only but half a dozen cases of lesions in the liver and lungs which can be ascribed to nematode larvæ, as compared with a large number of cases now proved to be bilharzial. With regard to gastric habronemiasis. however, the worms and the stomach lesions caused by them are so commonly found in equine subjects in India that probably it would not be wrong to state that as many as 95 per cent. of animals harbour these parasites, but it is probable that in the majority of those cases without stomach lesions little harm results. This statement would seem warranted in view of the findings in Egpyt by Knowles and Slocock [ 1931 ] that 86 per cent. of animals infected with Habronema were in good or fair condition. On the whole, therefore, it appears that the conditions described in this paper, due to infection with S. indicum, apart from malnutrition, are the most important factor in the causation of persistent debility of equines in India. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. The author's thanks are due to Mr. G. D. Bhalerao, M. Sc., Helminthologist, for confirming the specific identity of the worm ova ; to Mr. J. Sunder Rao, Artist, for the prompt execution of the photographic illustrations. Further the author is greatly indebted to his chief Mr. F. Ware, F.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., for evincing keen interest and for granting every facility for the present investigation. REFERENCES. Allen, H. (1923). Treatment of persistent debility in Australian horses due to habronemiasis and strongylosis by means of the single stomach tube. Vet. J. 79, 24-27. Angeloff (1907). Inaugural DissertationSCHISTOSOMA INDICUM, MONTGOMERY, IN EQUINES 25 Baldrey, F. S. H. (1906). J. Trop. Vet. Sc. 1, 387-395. Burke, R. W. (1880). Vet. J. 11, 258. 26 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I Sewell, E. (1921). Agri. J. Ind. 16, 152-155. Shafi Mohd., A. (1931). Ann. Trop. Med. & Parasit. 25, 215. Smith, F. (1879). Vet. J. 9, 304. SCHISTOSOMA INDICUM, MONTGOMERY, IN EQUINES 27 Fig. 3.28 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I Fig. 3.PLATE VII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Sections of ova showing the contained miracidia. Note the shape of the ovum in longitudinal section. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Cross section of an ovum showing " Actino " body and the radial arrangement of cells to form a sleeve. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Longitudinal section of ovum showing " rays " of " Actino " body into the plasmodial mass. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. Longitudinal section of ovum showing giant cell formation. Note the clearing of " Actino " body by phagocytes.
BOVINE NASAL SCHISTOSOMIASIS IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY WITH A DESCRIPTION OF THE PARASITE BY M. ANANT NARAYAN RAO, Lecturer in Parasitology, Madras Veterinary College. (Received for publication on 7th November 1932.) (With Plates VII30 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I an adjoining village, which was also visited. In this village over 62 cases were seen consisting mostly of cows, bullocks and about a dozen calves between one and two years of age. The history of the introduction of this disease in Nammian- dal is very interesting. One man purchased an animal having this disease about the middle of 1930 and brought it to the village, and in the course of about 18 months over 62 animals contracted the disease. The nasal washings of those animals also showed ova of schistosomes. From the cases that were brought to the Veterinary Hospital at Tiruvannamalai and from those in Nammiandal, large pieces of growths were removed for examination and these were found to contain schistosomes. During Michaelmas holidays in September last, the author again visited Nammiandal village to collect material for work and he was shown a sheep having nasal schistosomiasis. The villagers said that occasionally sheep also get the disease. It was then learnt that nasal schistosomiasis existed in an endemic form in Bandarlapalli and Kothakota villages in Chittoor District. On 30th September 1932 both the villages were visited and a large number of cattle was found to be infected. It is interesting to note that in Kothakota the people hold a belief that cattle contracted the disease if they drank water from a nullah close by, which happens to be one frequented by cattle and through which they have to wade while they are driven out to graze or brought back to the village. Among the positive cases examined at Bandarlapalli, one happened to be a buffalo with typical lesions. The history of this case showed that it has had the disease for the past six months. The villagers said that there were some more infected buffaloes in the neighbourhood. This is of particular interest inasmuch as no buffalo has been known to be affected with this disease, and an opportunity has now arisen to put on record the finding of a buffalo and a sheep with a natural attack of this disease. With this in view, it is perhaps premature to say. at the present time, what kind of animals possess a true species immunity against this schisto- some. Another interesting point is that the buffalo mentioned above showed ova of S. Spindalis in its faeces and Fairley and Mackie [1926] believe that the buffalo is the definitive host for this parasite. SYMPTOMS OBSERVED. These have been fully described by other workers and only a few words will be said here about them. The first noticeable symptom is sneezing, which becomes more pronounced while at work later. There is a fairly thick mucus discharge from the nose when the lesions are few and small, and as the sessile granulations get enlarged and abundant, the discharge becomes mucopurulent, often tinged with
BOVINE NASAL SCHISTOSOMIASIS 31 blood. The enlargement of the growths is accompanied by a snoring noise during respiration. ETIOLOGY. Datta [1932] has shown that these granulations are due to schistosomes and their ova and the author's findings are in agreement. PERIOD OF INCUBATION AND THE SEASON WHEN FIRST SYMPTOMS APPEAR. Hitherto only Oxspring [1931] has opined that it may take one year before recognisable lesions can be detected in nostrils of cattle. From the history of cases in Nammiandal village it would appear that the period of incubation is about three months and the first symptoms, in fresh cases, appear during the cold season of the year, viz., November to March. Oxspring's seven cases, in the Government Military Dairy Farm at Jabbalpore, occurred in January 1930, and by April he found no less than 45 animals affected. If this is of any significance it would appear to correspond with the seasonal incidence of Schistosome cercariæ. Manson-Bahr and Fairley [1920], Sewell [1922], and Fairley and Jesudasan [1930] have shown definitely that the infective rates of Schistosome cercariæ is highest in the cooler months of the year, viz., November to March. Rao [1932] has also observed a similar seasonal variation of Schistosome cercariæ in the Spur Tank, Egmore, Madras. Mr. K. Ranganatha Rao, Assistant Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Depart- ment, Bangalore, in a private communication says that he recently saw two villages in Bangalore District where animals imported into these villages developed the disease in about two months or so. Lesions.32 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I Histopathology.PLATE VIII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG.1. Ovum in a tiny abcess. Note the fully developed miracidium. Note the giant cell at a distance. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Ovum in abcess near the periphery of growth. The internal structure of the miracidium is seen. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Section showing an abcess open on nasal mucus membrane. Note the " Actino " body on the ovum in the pus. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. Section showing a nest of ova in an abcess that has burst open. Note the ova do not show " Actino " bodies. Note the shape of the almost full ovum.
BOVINE NASAL SCHISTOSOMIASIS 33 where fibrosis is a marked feature. These growths, evidently, are older compara- tively than those not showing such nodules. In this disease the succession of events in the formation of a bilharzial pseudo-tubercle, and the migration of the contained ovum in an abscess, to the free surface, can be conveniently divided into four stages for study, and an attempt is made to describe each stage in what follows. A recently laid ovum attracts large mono-nuclear cells perhaps endothelial in origin, small round cells partly from the tissues evidently, and Eosinophiles. A few which appear to be polymorphonuclear leucocytes are also present. The large mono-nuclear cells close up on the ovum and in so doing they become elongated and arrange themselves radially round the shell of the ovum (PL. VII, fig. 2). The nucleus of this type of cell is oval and vesicular in structure. At the same time the miracidium is developing or has developed to a considerable extent. (PL. VII, figs. 1, 2, 3 and PL. VIII, fig. 1). This may be called the first stage. These cells now coalesce partly or completely to form a sleeve of plasmodial mass round the ovum and the nuclei of the cells appear to have receded from the vicinity of the shell towards the periphery. At this time the absorption of the toxic substance thrown out by the miracidium causes degeneration in that portion of the plasmodial mass of cells that is in immediate contact with the shell of the ovum. This degeneration, in most cases, is not of uniform thickness, and depends upon the range of penetration of the toxic substance, causing rays of " streamers " of degenerated substance in the plasmodial mass giving the whole egg a morular appearance. These processes or " streamers " have either blunt ends or fine fibrillar ends. (PL. VII, figs 3 and 4), At the same time the affected portions of the plasmodial mass seem to retract with the contained nuclei and appear as "giant cells ". Pembrey and Ritchie [1913] say that majority of the giant cells are Plasmodia which arise by the fusion of many mono-nuclear cells, comparable to the Plasmodia found in lower animals around foreign bodies. The giant cells described above appear to form in that way. In PL. VII, figs. 2, 3, 4, and PL. VIII, fig. 1 such giant cells are in evidence. This may be called the second stage. An interesting feature in this stage is the degenerated plasmodial substance, or the " actino " body as designated by Datta [1932], which stains uniformly pink with eosin. This " actino " body round about the ovum may act, perhaps imperfectly, as a protection against the out-flow of the toxic substance, from the miracidium, into the surrounding tissue. In any case, a large number of small mono-nuclears, poly- morpho-nuclears and eosinophiles is attracted to the place and these get between the " actino " body and the so-called foreign body giant cells, in between the C 2
34 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I streamers of the " actino " bodies and the destruction of this substance begins. These phagocytes ultimately destroy the so-called " actino " bodies with their " clubs " and " rays " almost to the egg shell and the proteolytic ferments present there bring about the formation of an abscess round the egg. In PL. VII, figs. 3 and 4 this destruction is visible particularly at the end of the ova. In PL. VIII, figs. 1 and 2 the phagocytes have cleared the whole of the " actino " body almost to the shell and the ova are enclosed in a little purulent matter. Some of the mono-nuclear cells are fibroblastic in nature. This may be called the third stage. Now the ovum is in a small abscess and the development of the abscess brings about tissue tension which helps it in burrowing through, towards a place of least resistance and ultimately it comes up to the surface and bursts open (PL. VIII, figs. 3 and 4). The ovum now escapes with the pus and it may sometimes have a little of the " actino body " still sticking on. In PL. VIII, fig. 3 this substance is in evidence on the ovum, and in PL. VIII, fig. 4 it is not seen. In PL. IX, fig. 2 there are many small abscesses, each showing an ovum in its centre, and below there is plenty of granulation tissue due to the reparative process in the wake of these abscesses. This can be called the fourth stage. DESCRIPTION OF THE WORMS. Pieces of growths obtained from cases at Tiruvannamalai and at Nammiandal were dissected fresh in Ringer's solution. One entire male, one pair of adult worms in copula and some pieces of mature males and ovigerous females were collected from these and some from the growths received from other places. The description is based on the material thus collected, and the measurements given are of worms fixed in 70 per cent. alcohol. MALE WORM. The length of a full adult male worm is about 7.2 mm. The length of worms reconstructed from pieces varied from 6.5 mm. to 7 mm. This parasite appears to be smaller than most of the schistosomes found in cattle in India. It is creamy white in colour. The cuticle is tuberculated on the dorsal surface from behind the ventral sucker to the posterior end. The tubercles bear spines and they are arranged in irregular longitudinal rows 18 or 20 in number. Those tubercles nearer the gynecophoral canal are smaller than those on the mid-dorsal line. The cuticle of the oral and ventral sucker is lined with fine spines and also the whole surface and margins of the gynecophoral canal. The ventral sucker is a fairly large pro- trusible organ and is infundibular in form with its margin more or less wavy. It has a diameter of 0.12 mm. The alimentary system consists of an oral sucker and
PLATE IX. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Note sections of worms in blood vessels; a few blood clots are seen in the blood vessels. Note the mucus glands near the worms. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Section showing abcess containing ova. Note the fibrous tissue formation. (Low magnification.) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Ovum of S. spindalis Mongomerry 1906, in fæces. (Scale marked.) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. Ovum of Schistosome in nasal washings. (Scale marked.)
MALE [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Text fig.1. Schistosome from Nasal Granuloma.
FEMALE [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Text-fig. 2. Schistosome from Nasal Granuloma.
BOVINE NASAL SCHISTOSOMIASIS 35 paired intestines with a common caecum. The oral sucker is subterminal, bowl shaped and has a diameter of 0.1 mm. It opens into an 36 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I about the common caecum. The follicles terminate some little distance in front of the posterior extremity. The ova are boomerang shaped, one side being convex and the other concave. The fresh ova measured 380 BOVINE NASAL SCHISTOSOMIASIS 37 3. There are two to four testes in the male, whereas in S. bovis there are three to six and in S. spindalis there are six or seven. 4. The length of the common caecum of the female is shorter than in other species of schistosomes found in cattle in India. 5. The ova are boomerang shaped and appear to be longer than in other species found in cattle in India. Thus it would appear that there are enough points of difference between the worm described in this paper and any allied species described hitherto to warrant one to consider this as a new species. It is therefore proposed to name it " SCHISTOSOMA NASALIS ". MODE OF INFECTION. The cause of the disease being a Schistosome, it is inferred, that the mode of transmission is similar to the one that obtains in the spread of other Schistosomes in cattle. It is said that the disease is seldom found in calves under eight months of age. The reason for this appears to be that these have no chance of drinking water from a tank or pool which is usually the source of infection in Schistosomiasis in cattle. The adult cattle of the village are driven out for grazing and they are all watered together in a tank or pool near the village, hence the disease can spread easily, provided the particular kind of snail38 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I Department, mention has been made about the efficacy of antimony tartarate in this disease. Now that the causal agent is definitely known, treatment could be taken with certainty. At the same time it should be possible to devise ways and means to prevent infection and reinfection. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. My thanks are due to Mr. F. Ware, F.R.C.V.S., Director of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, for very kindly confirming my findings of Sections of Schistosomes in growths and their ova in nasal washings. I am grateful to Mr. P. T. Saunders, O.B.E., M.R.C.V.S., Director of Veterinary Services, Madras, and to Mr. T. J. Hurley, M.R.C.V.S., D.V.S.M., Principal, Madras Veteri- nary College, for the facilities afforded in carrying out this piece of work. My thanks are also due to Messrs. K. P. Doraiswami, A. Ramaswami Ayyar, Veterinary Assistant Surgeons, Tiruvannamalai and Chittoor, respectively, for their enthusiasm in obtaining cases for examination in the villages and to Messrs. L. S. Parameshwara Ayyar and S. Vaidynatha Mudaliar for their help in the routine examination of nasal washings and other materials received from the mofussil. REFERENCES. Datta, Capt. S. C. A. (1932). The Etiology of Bovine Nasal Granuloma, Ind. Jour. Vety, Sc. and Animal Husbandry. 2, 131-140. Fairley, Hamilton N., (1920). A Comparative Study of Experimental bilharziasis in monkeys contrasted with the hitherto described lesions in man. Jour. Path. and Bact. 23, 289-314. Fairley, Hamilton N., and Jesudasan, F. (1930). Studies in Schistosoma spindale, Part I. Ind. Med. Res. Memoir, No. 17. Fairley, Hamilton N., and Nackie, E. P. (1926). Pathology of S. spindalis. Proc.of 6th Congress, F, E. A. T. M., 1, 423-447. Fairley, Hamilton N., and Mackie, F. P. (1930). Studies in Schistosoma spindale, Part III. Ind. Med. Res. Memoir, No. 17. Krishnamurti Ayyar, V. (1927). Rhinosporidiosis in Cattle. Trans. F. E, A. T. M. 3, pp. 658-664. Manson Bahr, P. H, and Fairley, Hamilton N. (1920). Observations on Bilharziasis amongst the Egyptian Expeditionary Force. Parasitology. 12, 33. Montgomery, R. E. (1906). Bilharziosis amongst animals in India. 11, Jow. Trop, Vet Science. 1, 138-174. Oxspring. G. E. (1931). Bovine Nasal Granuloma. Jl. R. A. V. C. 2, No. 4,179-182. Pembrey, M. S., and Ritchie, J. (1913). General Pathology. Edward Arnold, London, p. 90. Rao, M. Anant Narayan, (1932). A Comparative Study of Cercarial Fauna in Madras. Ind. Vety. Jour. 9, No. 2, 107-111. Sewell, R. B. Seymour, (1922). Cercariæ Indicæ. Ind. Jl. Med. Research X. Supplement.
SERUM-PROTEINS OF HEALTHY HILL BULLS AND THEIR VARIATIONS DURING RINDERPEST AND AFTER RECOVERY BY KSHITISH CHANDRA SEN, D.Sc., Biochemist AND AMARESH CHANDRA ROY, M.Sc., Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on 22nd October 1932.) (With eight text-figures.) The object of this paper is to record the results of some experimental investi- gations carried out at this Institute on the relation of pre-existing ratios between different protein fractions in the blood serum of a normal animal with its immuno- logical behaviour towards an infection with rinderpest virus, and, also in this connection, to study quantitatively the changes in various fractions of serum proteins during an infection and subsequent recovery. This question of susceptibi- lity to a disease is not only of practical interest to us, but is also of fundamental importance from the point of view of immunology. T. B. Robertson [ 1912 ] has shown that the average values of the ratios of certain fractions of the serum proteins in a particular species of healthy animal may give an indication of its immunity towards certain diseases. In recent years several authors have also shown that during the course of a disease some particular protein fraction often increases at the cost of another, and some striking cases are to be found in the observations of Lloyd, Napier and Paul [ 1928-29 ], and Lloyd and Paul [ 1929-30 ], in human kalazar, typhoid, and malaria. Hartely [ 1914 ] working in this Institute observed that during an attack of rinderpest there was a considerable variation in the different protein fractions of Indian Hill bulls, and his investigations were also extended to animals immunised and hyperimmunised against rinderpest. In view of the important modifications introduced in recent years in the technique of serum-protein determinations, it was thought desirable to study this problem in more detail, and to correlate the results, if possible, with the immunity acquired by the animals on successful recovery from the disease. (39)
40 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I A large amount of literature has accumulated on the subject of changes in serum proteins in animals undergoing immunisation or actually passing through an infection. Langstein and Mayer [ 1904 ] were among the first to show that in rabbits immunised against typhoid, pneumococcus, streptococcus, dysentery, cholera, and swine erysipelas, the serum globulin rose while the albumin diminished. In the following year it was observed by Mayer [ 1905 ] that the serum of dogs infected with Trypanosomes showed a similar globulin rise, but the total protein was not markedly affected. Vadala [ 1907 ] found a remarkable alteration from the normal in the albumin-globulin ratio of serum proteins, with slight changes in the total protein, in cases of ankylostomiasis. Sisto [1907 ] studied the variation in the protein content of the serum in different pathological conditions by the refractometric method, and found a decrease of total protein in fever, oedema, diuresis, marasmus, and after a prolonged fluid diet, but could not establish any relationship between the protein-content of the serum and the disease. Epstein [ 1912 ] in a long series of observations on serum-protein variations in certain diseases, noticed a rise in the globulin content of the serum in diseases such as cardiac disease, pneumonia, emphysema, polycythemia, diabetes mellitus, and parenchymatous nephritis, while a decrease or a normal value for the globulins was observed in tuberculosis and diabetes insipidus. The total protein was found to be normal or fell far below normal in some cases. Hartley (loc. cit.) from his experiments on variations serum-proteins during an attack of rinderpest observed an increase in the percentage amounts of albumin, with a decrease in those of globulin, and of euglobulin or proteins insoluble in saturated common salt solution, in the sera of Hill bulls in which the disease had a fatal termination. There was a decrease in the total heat-coagulable protein but no change was observed in the composition of the serum-protein during the first five days after inoculation with rinderpest virus. Much work has been done on the variation of serum-proteins of animals during immunisation with diphtheria toxin, and among the early workers Seng [ 1899 ] observed a rise in the globulin fraction of the serum-protein of animals immunised against diphtheria. A systematic study of the serum- proteins at different stages of immunisation against diphtheria toxin was made by Hiss and Atkinson [ 1901 ] and later by Joachim [ 1902 ]. A rise in the globulin fraction of the serum-proteins at the expense of the albumin was observed by these authors, but contrary to what had previously been noted by Butjagin [ 1902 ], and Szentagh and Wellmann [ 1898 ], Joachim [ 1902 ] found no essential increase of the total protein, while the rise of the globulin affected solely the euglobulin fraction which contained none of the antitoxin. Ledmgham's [1909 ] results with regard to changes in serum-proteins in horses and goats during immunisation with diph- theria toxin are in more or less agreement with those recorded by Joachim (loc, cit.)
SERUM PROTEINS IN BULLS HEALTHY, RINDERPEST ATTACKED AND RECOVERED 41 but he believes that there may be some intimate relation between the amount of antitoxin developed and the quantity of the globulins. A similar observation was made by Gibson and Banzhaf [ 1910 ], who noticed a significant rise in the " saturated sodium chloride precipitated serum globulin " of horses after immunisation against diphtheria toxin along with a rapid rise in the total serum globulin, but subse- quently there was a sharp fall in the former fraction, and this decrease remained far below the normal, and tended to vary inversely with the total serum-globulin content. The variations in the content of serum-albumin were found to be similar to those observed by Atkinson and Ledingham (loc. cit.) before, and the serum- albumin decreased to a minimum just after the time of the serum-globulin and antitoxic maximum, but it tended to return to the higher level when the horse had been in use for several months as an antitoxin producer. The changes in the fibrinogen were often sudden and there was no apparent association with antitoxic potency, or serum globulin content. The question of a globulin rise in infection and immunity has recently been subjected to much study by various workers such as Schmidt and Schmidt [ 1917 ], Mayer, Hurwitz and Taussig [1918], Reyman [ 1924 ], and Kund-C. Berthelsen [ 1931 ], and these authors have come to the con- clusion that there is no parallelism between the rise and the antitoxin content. A study of serum-protein changes of human beings in normal and pathological con- ditions has been made by several workers. Thus Rowe [ 1916] examining the serum proteins of human beings in various diseases by Robertson's micro-refrac- tometric method found that muscular activity, even of the simplest sort, increased total serum proteins; this increase occurring more in the albumin than in the globulin fraction. In syphilis, pneumonia, and chronic nephritis, a rise in globulin was observed, while a decrease or normal value of the total proteins was obtained in several diseases such as pneumonia, chronic nephritis with oedema, etc. An excellent review of the literature on the function of plasma proteins up to 1925 has been given by Howe [ 1925 ]. In some recent papers to which reference has already been made, Lloyd, Napier and Paul (loc. cit.) have tried to give a serologi- cal diagnosis of kalazar, malaria, and typhoid on the basis of a variation in the amount of the different serum protein fractions, and have shown that in some of these diseases there is a rapid rise in the serum globulin fraction in the course of infection. This rise is more or less due to the increase in the euglobulin fraction on which the diagnostic ' formolgel ' reaction of kalazar is supposed to depend. In some cases the total protein content of the serum is also found to increase. It is interesting to note in this connection that in Hartley's experiments with, bulls which died ultimately from an attack of rinderpest, no rise in the globulin fraction was noticed, but on the contrary there was a gradual fall. These results are thus just the reverse of what is found in the case of some human diseases. This fact may be
42 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I due to the different amounts of protein fractions normally present in healthy human beings and bulls. A consideration of these important differences may, however, be reserved till the results of the experimental work recorded below are discussed. Estimations of plasma or serum proteins have in the past been done both by physical and chemical methods. Amongst the physical methods the refracto- meter method of Robertson has been commonly used, while the interferometer method, though recently used by some authors, is not particularly promising when working with dilute solutions [ Howe, 1925 ]. According to Howe (loc. cit.) the results obtained by the refractometer method of Robertson tend to be too high when compared with the standard method by Kjeldahl, and the greater error occurs in blood plasma with a high globulin content. The refractoviscometric method gives fairly concordant results for normal sera but is not suitable for estimations of pro- teins in pathological sera [ Howe, loc. cit.]. The chemical method consists in precipitating out different fractions of proteins by treating the serum with a suitable salt solution of proper concentration. The oldest method consisted in filtering the different protein fractions on weighed filter papers, washing the respective fractions with the proper concentration of the salt solution used for precipitating the fraction and estimating the protein content, either by coagulation of the protein in these fractions with hot water, drying, and then weighing it on tared filter-papers, or the nitrogen content of the coagulated fractions was estimated by the Kjeldahl method. In recent years a variation in the technique has been made by Wu [ 1922 ], who has introduced the principles of colourimetric determination in the estimation of serum proteins. It has been known for sometime past that proteins which contain tyrosine as one of their constituents give a blue colouration with the complex phospho-molybdic acid commonly known as Folin's phenol-reagent. Folin [ 1912 ] found that the colour developed by the interaction of this reagent and tyrosine was very suitable as a standard for colouri- metric comparison, and Wu has shown that this standard can be used in the colouri- metric determination of proteins. The principle of the method is, in short, firstly to determine the so-called tyrosine equivalent of particular protein fractions of a species of animal precipitated by suitable saline precipitants, and then to multiply the actual amount of tyrosine observed colourometrically from protein fractions of other experimental animals of the same species by this equivalent. The results would then express the amount of actual protein matter in the various fractions. In his original paper Wu used magnesium and ammonium sulphate for the frac- tional precipitation of globulin. Unfortunately both magnesium sulphate and ammonium sulphate, which have been largely used as precipitants of protein frac- tions, interfere with the production of maximum colour, and sometimes cause a
SERUM PROTEINS IN BULLS HEALTHY, RINDERPEST ATTACKED AND RECOVERED 43 turbidity in the mixture if present in solution. For this reason it is necessary to remove these reagents before albumin can be estimated by the phenol reagent. This is a tedious operation and is one of the disadvantages of Wu's original proce- dure. Several years ago Howe [ 1921 ] pointed out the advantage of using sodium sulphate as a precipitant of protein fractions and recently Greenberg [ 1929 ] has modified the original Wu's method by using sodium sulphate instead of magnesium sulphate or ammonium sulphate. The use of a solution of sodium sulphate, however, necessitates working at a slightly higher temperature, namely at about 37°C. In determining the suitable analytical method to be used in our investigation we have studied both Wu's original procedure as well as Greenberg's modification, and we found the latter suited our purpose best, the results being in good agreement with the Kjeldahl method of determination, which was carried out occasionally to keep a control on the colourimetric estimation. Kjeldahl's method was, of course, used in the preliminary experiments to obtain the tyrosine equivalents of the particular species of animal (Hill bull) experimented upon by us. In the experiments described in the following pages, analyses of serum proteins of twenty-eight healthy animals, and sixteen animals, which had recovered from an attack of rinderpest or from immunisation against rinderpest, have been carried out. Eight of the healthy animals were then inoculated with virulent rinderpest virus, and the changes in the serum proteins of these animals were studied day by day. Six of these animals succumbed from the disease whilst one of them passed through an attack but recovered; one did not show any symptom of rinderpest and was pro- bably completely or partially immune. Each animal was bled from the jugular vein to the extent of about 25 c. c. in a small sterile tube every evening which was kept overnight at the ordinary room temperature. The serum obtained from the clot was centrifuged and the clear serum was then analysed. Parallel determina- tions made with fresh defibrinated serum did not give any different result. Every sample of serum was treated in the same way so as to get a comparative result. Albumin and globulin fractions were estimated according to Greenberg's method by precipitating the total globulin with a 22.5 per cent. sodium sulphate solution in a dilution of 1 in 31. Greenberg did not estimate the euglobulin but we have utilised the method of euglobulin precipitation suggested by Howe, namely, preci- pitation by a 13.5 per cent. solution of sodium sulphate in a dilution of 1 in 31 and have used this strength in all our experiments. All precipitations and filtrations have been carried out in an incubator at a temperature of 37°C. A great deal of difficulty was experienced at first in the filtration of euglobulin and total globulin fractions with several varieties of gravimetric filter papers, but later we obtained uniformly good results by using Whatman No. 42. The tyrosine equivalents of the different
44 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I fractions of Hill bull sera obtained in this way were determined in some cases from pooled healthy sera and in others from single animals. Ten Hill bulls were used in all, and the mean of the values thus obtained was taken. All analytical results given later have been done in duplicate. In Table I the amounts of different pro- tein fractions in healthy Hill bulls are shown. The percentage of each protein fraction is given in terms of the total protein in 100 c. c. of the serum.
SERUM PROTEINS IN BULLS HEALTHY, RINDERPEST ATTACKED AND RECOVERED 45 TABLE I. Healthy hill bulls. Number Total protein in grams per 100 c.c. serum Albumin in grams per 100 c.c. serum Globulin in grams per 100 c.c. serum Euglobulin in grams per 100 c.c. serum Pseudo- globulin in grams per 100 c.c. serum Albumin. Globulin. Euglo- bulin. Pseudo- globulin. Per cent. Per cent. Per cent. Per cent. 984 989 994 1044 7.5515 6.9519 7.1340 6.6845 3.2095 3.2350 2.8635 3.0560 4.3420 3.7169 4.2705 3.6285 1.5780 0.9789 1.1610 0.7935 2.7640 2.7380 3.1095 2.8350 42.5 46.50 40.14 45.5 57.50 53.50 59.86 54.5 20.9 14.08 16.2 11.9 36.60 39.42 33.66 42.6 988 981 977 855 9.0470 6.2287 6.0746 7.5510 2.5690 2.7840 2.6150 3.4400 6.4780 3.4447 3.4596 4.1110 2.9100 1.2054 0.6860 1.3020 3.5680 2.2393 2.7736 2.8090 28.4 44.70 43.05 45.5 71.6 55.3 56.95 54.5 32.16 19.3 11.3 17.2 39.44 36.0 45.65 37.30 1001 713 818 999 7.0050 6.0688 8.0956 6.9030 3.3940 2.9900 4.1530 3.2095 3.6110 3.0788 3.9426 3.6935 0.7560 0.9868 1.2950 0.8890 2.8550 2.0920 2.6476 2.8045 48.4 49.3 51.3 46.5 51.6 50.7 48.7 53.5 10.79 16.2 16.0 12.8 40.81 34.50 32.7 40.7 723 996 821 992 7.5515 6.8569 7.0460 6.0621 3.8190 3.4404 3.5520 2.7145 3.7325 3.4165 3.4940 3.3476 0.7500 0.8033 0.9924 0.7031 2.9825 2.6132 2.5016 2.6445 50.57 50.17 50.4 44.8 49.43 49.83 49.60 55.20 9.9 11.7 14.08 11.60 39.5 38.13 35.52 43.60 979 998 983 955 7.0050 8.4087 7.8473 8.2322 3.2990 3.3940 .. 2.4932 3.7060 5.0147 .. .. 0.4054 1.6560 1.2898 .. 3.3006 3.3587 .. .. 47.1 40.3 .. .. 52.90 59.7 .. .. 5.80 19.6 16.4 30.3 47.10 40.1 .. .. D
46 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, I From the above Table it will be observed that the average total protein content per 100 c.c. serum of healthy hill bulls is 7.2152, the range varying from about six to nine grams. The percentage variations of several protein fractions is, however, interesting. Thus in the case of euglobulin the amount varies from 5.8 to 32 per cent., the average being 15.9 per cent. In the case of total globulin and pseudo- globulin the variations are from 48.0 to 60.0 per cent. in the case of globulin and 32.0 to 47.0 per cent, in the case of pseudoglobulin, the average values being 54.7 and 31 per cent. respectively. The variation in the amount of albumin is of the same order as that of globulin, the range varying from 40 to 51 per cent. in the twenty animals examined. It is of interest at this point to compare the amount of different protein fractions observed in the serum of animals which have recovered from an attack of rinderpest with the values given above for healthy hill bulls. Sixteen animals, recovered from rinderpest virus inoculation experiments, were examined in this connection and the results are shown in Table II.
SERUM PROTEINS IN BULLS HEALTHY, RINDERPEST ATTACKED AND RECOVERED 47 TABLE II. Hill bulls recovered from rinderpest. Number Total protein in grams per 100 c.c. serum Albumin in grams per 100 c.c. serum Globulin in grams per 100 c.c. serum Euglobulin in grams per 100 c.c. serum Pseudoglobulin in grams per 100 c.c. serum Albumin Globulin Euglo- bulin Pseudo- globulin Per cent. Per cent. Per cent. Per cent. 695 7.3919 3.8710 3.5209 0.5379 2.9830 52.4 47.6 7.3 40.3 1393 7.4893 3.2990 4.1903 1.0823 3.1080 44.05 55.95 14.4 41.55 592 6.6154 3.3470 3.2684 0.3664 2.9020 50.6 49.4 5.9 43.5 522 6.2371 3.5520 2.6851 0.2641 2.4210 56.9 43.1 4.23 38.87 735 6.9519 3.1840 3.7679 0.2518 3.5161 45.9 54.1 3.70 50.4 935 6.0621 3.1198 2.9423 0.1711 2.7712 51.4 48.6 2.82 45.78 846 7.4893 3.6600 3.8293 0.6887 3.1406 43.5 56.5 9.20 47.30 752 6.7334 3.6600 3.0734 0.3264 2.7470 54.3 45.7 4.9 40.8 958 6.8569 3.7100 3.1469 1.1529 2.9940 54.1 45.9 17.3 28.6 948 6.7334 3.6100 3.1234 2.0294 1.0940 53.6 46.4 30.1 16.3 961 6.6851 3.0960 3.5891 0.9055 2.6836 46.3 53.7 13.9 39.8 952 5.7162 3.0960 2.6202 0.5162 2.1040 54.1 45.9 9.02 36.88 1019 6.9519 3.0198 3.9321 1.4959 2.4362 43.4 56.6 21.5 35.1 1007 6.6851 2.5250 4.1601 1.4191 2.7410 37.7 62.3 21.3 41.0 1018 7.0050 2.4800 4.5250 1.0320 3.4930 35.4 64.6 14.7 49.9 912 7.4229 2.7840 4.6389 1.4499 3.1890 37.5 62.5 19.5 43.0 D 2
48 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I It will be observed from the above Table that the amount of total protein in the serum of these animals is not markedly different from that observed in the case of healthy hill bulls. There is a slight difference, however, between the protein fractions. Thus in the case of euglobulin the range varies between 2.8 and 22 per cent., the average being 12.5 per cent. Both the minimum and maximum values are somewhat lower than those observed in the case of healthy bulls. This reduc- tion may be due to an after-effect of the inanition of the animals during the attack of the disease, but reference to this subject will be made later on. Though some other slight variations are to be observed such as in the case of total globulin and pseudoglobulin between these two series of experimental animals, it appears that the difference is not of a fundamental nature, and we cannot distinguish between a healthy animal which is susceptible to an attack of rinderpest and a recovered animal which is immune to this disease by simply determining its protein fractions quantitatively. Having determined the serum protein fractions of animals which were either healthy or had recovered from an attack of the disease, our attention was directed to the study of the variation of the serum proteins during the course of a rinderpest infection. As has already been mentioned, out of the eight animals experimentally infected with rinderpest six died and two lived and estimations were continued for a considerable period in the case of those two animals which survived the attack of the disease. Attempts were made to determine the variation in the amount of the serum protein fractions daily after the animals were inoculated with virus, but, in some cases, the necessary data could not be obtained due to extraneous causes such as hæmolysis, etc. In the following six Tables, the experimental results obtained in those cases which succumbed are given. The variations of the different protein fractions are graphically shown in the adjoining curves, and the tempera- ture charts which are also appended, will be found useful in correlating the clinical symptoms with the variations of serum proteins of any particular animal.
CHART I. HILL BULL 913. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
SERUM PROTEINS IN BULLS HEALTHY, RINDERPEST ATTACKED AND RECOVERED 49 TABLE III. Bull No. 913. Age50 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I TABLE IV. Bull No. 719. Age CHART II. HILL BULL 719. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
CHART III. HILL BULL 962. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
SERUM PROTEINS IN BULLS HEALTHY, RINDERPEST ATTACKED AND RECOVERED 51 TABLE V. Bull No. 962. Age 52 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I TABLE VI. Bull No. 756. AgeCHART IV. HILL BULL 756. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
CHART V. HILL BULL 843. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
SERUM PROTEINS IN BULLS HEALTHY, RINDERPEST ATTACKED AND RECOVERED 53 TABLE VII. Bull No. 843. Age54 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I TABLE VIII. Bull No. 841. AgeCHART VI. HILL BULL 841. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] E
SERUM PROTEINS IN BULLS HEALTHY, RINDERPEST ATTACKED AND RECOVERED 55 It will be noticed that in all the above cases there was a marked variation in the amounts of different serum protein fractions in the course of the infection. All the six animals died within eleven days of the inoculation of the virus. There was a fall in the absolute amount of the total protein in every case. A striking instance of this is to be seen in the case of Bull No. 913 where the total protein fell from 6.3252 grams to 4.9213 grams per 100 c. c. of serum; a reduction of 22 per cent. This result confirms the previous observations of Hartley (loc. cit.) in this laboratory. Other serum protein fractions also show considerable variations. For example, there is a shift in the absolute amounts of total globulin, pseudoglobulin, and euglobulin, but the albumin portion does not show a marked fluctuation. Some interesting points are to be noticed when the results are calculated in per- centages of the total protein. Thus in the case of Bulls 913 and 719, the euglobulin decreases considerably before death occurred. The total globulin also decreased while the albumin fraction increased considerably. In bull 841 there is, however, some difference. Thus the euglobulin percentage remains almost constant while both globulin and pseudoglobulin diminish. There is, however, a rise in the albumin fraction. In case of Bull 962, euglobulin continuously diminishes but there is not a marked variation of either globulin, pseudoglobulin, or albumin. It seems, therefore, that we cannot generalise from these very few data as to whether there is any definite variation of any protein fraction in any particular direction during infection with the virus of rinderpest. So far we have given the results of inoculation experiments in which animals ultimately succumbed to the disease. In the next two tables, the data are given of the variations of serum proteins of two animals which survived the attack of the disease. E2
56 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I TABLE IX. Bull 900. AgeSERUM PROTEINS IN BULLS HEALTHY, RINDERPEST ATTACKED AND RECOVERED 57 TABLE X. Bull 927. Age58 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I TABLE X[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
CHART VIII. HILL BULL 927. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
BULL 900 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
CHART VII. HILL BULL 900. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
SERUM PROTEINS IN BULLS HEALTHY, RINDERPEST ATTACKED AND RECOVERED 59 The animals of which the data are given in the above Tables showed different clinical symptoms. Bull No. 927 passed through an attack of typical rinderpest but was on the way to recovery by the seventh day after the inoculation. Bull No. 900 did not show any temperature reaction; this animal, however, lost condi- tion during the first ten days, and although no clinical symptoms of the disease appeared, it is probable that the animal was affected to some degree by the inocula- tion of virus. It will be observed from Tables IX and X, that in the case of Bull No. 900, the absolute amount of the total protein fell from 7.086 grams to 5.8733 grams per 100 c. c. of serum during the first ten days, whereas in the case of Bull No. 927 there was no appreciable fall in the total protein. A curious fluctuation in the euglobulin percentage is also noticed during the whole period, particularly in the case of Bulls Nos. 900 and 927, charts VII and VIII. The results presented in the foregoing pages may be examined from two points of view, namely first, whether the pre-existing ratios of different protein fractions in a healthy animal have any effect on the reaction of the animal-body towards rinderpest, and, secondly whether the observed fluctuations of serum protein fractions of either a healthy animal or an animal which has recovered from an attack of the disease are due to some metabolic disturbance. In order to test the first point it was decided to inoculate another ninteen healthy animals with rinder- pest virus, and then to determine the reaction of these animals to this inoculation. Nine of them recovered from the attack of the disease while ten of them succumbed. In Table XI, the pre-existing ratios of different protein fractions of these ninteen healthy animals and their reactions after the inoculation of rinderpest virus are shown. As the globulin portion usually shows some variations in this disease we have confined ourselves mainly to the ratio of this fraction to other protein fractions of the serum. TABLE XI. Number of the animal Albumin/ Globulin Euglobulin/ globulin Total protein/ Euglobulin Percentage reaction (Edward's Nota- tion) 984 0.78 0.36 4.78 0 989 0.87 0.26 7.01 66.7 994 0.69 0.29 6.17 41.6 1044 0.83 0.22 8.40 50 988 0.39 0.45 3.10 50.0
60 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I TABLE XISERUM PROTEINS IN BULLS HEALTHY, RINDERPEST ATTACKED AND RECOVERED 61 tions of Howe [1922] who showed sometime ago that an increase in the globulin content of a calf is often mainly due to various types of mild infection. Though some of our results seemed at first to support this view (for example, Bulls Nos. 994, 998 and 773 which lived) it was apparent after further experimentation that a generalisation of this nature cannot be made. Many variations of a similar type have been observed in the ratios of other protein fractions, and we have come to the conclusion that none of these pre-existing ratios of protein fractions gives any adequate idea of the immunological behaviour of these animals towards an attack of rinderpest. It is interesting, however, to consider at this point the peculiar fluctuations of the different serum protein fractions, not only during the disease, but also for a fairly long time after the process of recovery has set in. The fluctuations during the course of the disease can, of course, be explained as due to the pathological state of the animal. It is, however, surprising to find, as we have done in the case of Bulls Nos. 900 and 927, very low and fluctuating values for some of the protein fractions long after the animals had returned to an apparently healthy state. A reason for this may be the after-effect of the period of inanition during the latter part of the disease. This point is of importance in this investigation because, in determining the pre-existing ratios of our healthy animals, no control could be kept on the diets of these animals for any length of time prior to the beginning of this experiment, the reason being that these animals are purchased from contractors and it is possible that some of the serum protein fractions of the healthy animals given in Table I may have given low values on this account. That inanition may have an important effect on the serum protein fractions of healthy animals is evident from the work of various authors. Thus Githens [1904] found that there occurred a rise in the globulin fraction in dogs kept short of food especially affecting the fibri- noglobulin and euglobulin. Glässner [1905] from his investigations on protein changes of rabbits before and after immunisation with bacterial emulsions, bacterial toxins, and proteid bodies, came to the conclusion that a rise in the globulin fraction was only marked in those animals which had lost weight during immunisa- tion and that the rise in the globulin fraction may be a secondary symptom depend- ing on inanition. Moll [1906], however, in his experiments on fasting dogs and rabbits observed no marked rise in the globulin fraction as observed previously by Githens (loc cit.), but on the other hand, he noticed a fall of globulin in two cases. He does not believe that the rise in globulins is an inanition effect though it is possible that pure inanition may influence this phenomenon during immunisation. Robertson (loc. cit.) found that during starvation the total protein content of the blood serum rises and in the rabbit, ox, and horse starvation leads to an increase in the proportion of albumin to globulin in the serum, while in the rat and dog,
62 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I starvation leads to an increase in the proportion of albumin to globulin in the serum. Apart from this possible effect of inanition, there is another possibility to be borne in mind, namely, a seasonal or environmental variation of serum protein fractions even in healthy animals. Thus the albumin content of the serum of the ox has been found by Handovsky [1924] to be highest in summer with accompanying changes in the globulin content. This fact, of course, may be due to an effect of better dieting as it is well known that during summer months the pasture and other green forage are rich not only in their protein content, but also in some of the essential minerals and vitamins. It is, therefore, possible that the fluctuations of serum protein fractions observed by us in the case of the recovered animals may be, at least in part, an after-effect of undernutrition suffered during the course of the disease. In concluding this paper, we may mention some curious observations which we have made regarding the condition of the blood during the latter part of an attack of rinderpest, especially in those cases where the animal was in a very poor condi- tion. It was found that in some animals the fragility of the red blood corpuscles increased considerably after the 7th day of the disease. The blood samples were invariably hæmolysed to a greater or less extent, though every care was taken not to disturb the corpuscles more than was necessary. It is, of course, well-known that in many diseases the resistance of the red blood corpuscles towards lysis greatly diminishes and some authors are of opinion that this may be due to a change in the plasma protein. We are not, however, aware of any one else observing this phenomenon in rinderpest. Another interesting fact observed by us is that in several cases the serum of the diseased animals freed from the clot which had stood over- night became a clear jelly in three to four hours at the room temperature. This phenomenon was observed in the case of three animals which died subsequently. On making a post-mortem examination of these three animals, it was found that none of these animals died of pure rinderpest but in addition to this disease either piroplasmosis or coccidiosis or both were present. In none of the other animals which died of pure rinderpest could this subsequent gelation of the clear serum be observed. There was apparently no marked physico-chemical change in these three samples of sera and the pH of each of them was normal. These two interesting points, namely, the question of the fragility of the corpuscles and that of the gelation of the serum are, however, under investigation and will be discussed in a future paper. SUMMARY. 1. An analysis of different serum protein fractions of twenty-eight healthy hill bulls has been made by a modification of Wu's colourimetric procedure, and the
SERUM PROTEINS IN BULLS HEALTHY, RINDERPEST ATTACKED AND RECOVERED 63 standard data for total protein, albumin, globulin, euglobulin and pseudoglobulin for these animals have been tabulated. 2. The pre-existing ratios between different protein fractions have been calcu- lated, and it has been shown that these ratios do not give any indication of the immunological behaviour of the animals towards a rinderpest infection. 3. An experimental study has been made of the variations of different serum protein fractions during an attack of rinderpest. It has been found that in every case when the disease ended fatally there was a decrease in the absolute amount of the total protein, globulin, and euglobulin, thus confirming the results of Hartley (loc. cit.) previously obtained in this Laboratory. When the results were, however, expressed in percentage of the total protein, a daily analysis showed considerable fluctuations in the values of these different fractions, and a clear-cut generalisation could not be made. 4. There was a fluctuation of the different protein fractions for a long period after recovery of the two animals which survived an attack of the disease. A con- sideration of the different factors involved in this behaviour points to the view that this phenomenon may be due to either a seasonal or environmental effect or to an after-effect of under-nutrition during the disease period. 5. It appears that during the latter part of the disease, the fragility of the red blood corpuscles increases and often the blood samples become hæmolysed. In some cases it was also observed that, when rinderpest was associated with piroplas- mosis or coccidiosis or both, the clear serum samples underwent a process of gelation on standing. ACKNOWLEDGMENT. The plan of the experiment was originally drawn up by Mr. J. R. Haddow, B.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., D.V.S.M., I.V.S., Serologist of this Institute and to him and to Mr. F. Ware, F.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., Director of this Institute, we wish to offer our best thanks for their constant interest and encouragement during this work. Our thanks are also due to Mr. P. C. Banerji, G.B.V.C., Veterinary Deputy Superinten- dent for his assistance in making observations and in calculating the percentage reactions of the bulls after virus inoculations. REFERENCES. Berthelsen, K. C. (1931). J. Immunol., 21, 43. Butjagin (1902). Hyg. Rundschau, No. 12,1193. Epstein, A. A. (1921). J. Exper. Med., 16, 719-731. Folin, O., and Denis, W. (1912). J. Biol. Chem., 12, 245-51.
64 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I Githens (1904). Hefmeister's Beiträge, 5, 515. Glässner (1905). Z. f. Exper. Path. U, Ther., 2, 154. Gibson and Banzhaf (1910). J. Exper. Med., 12, 411. Greenberg (1923). J. Biol. Chem., 82, 549. Hiss and Atkinson (1901). J. Exper. Med., 5, 47. Hartley, P. (1914). Mem. Dep. Agr. India Vety. Ser., 1, 205-219. Howe, P. E. (1921). J. Biol. Chem., 49, 93. STUDIES IN SOUTH INDIAN PASTURES. I. SEASONAL VARIATION IN THE MINERAL AND NITROGEN CONTENT OF SPEAR GRASS (ANDROPOGON CONTORTUS) BY P. V. RAMIAH, M.A., B.Sc. (Edin.), Assistant Agricultural Chemist, Agricultural Research Institute, Coimbalore. (Received for publication on 15th August 1932,) (With one text-figure.) India shares with no other country in the world, her pre-eminence as an agri- cultural country. The system of agricultural practice prevalent makes it necessary to maintain large herds of cattle for purpose of tillage, and the supply of fodder for this large cattle population is a growing problem with the increasing pressure of the human population on the existing tillage land. The Royal Commission on Agriculture in India [ 1928, 2 ], in their report estimate the cattle population of the Madras Presidency at 22,000,000 head, and that of the sheep and goats at 19,000,000 head. This huge livestock population requires for its maintenance, not to speak of its improvement, roughage from the natural herbage of grasses and the cultivated fodders. The supply of fodders from the cereal crops amounts to a huge quantity, but still the deficiency of roughage is a notorious fact. The herbage of natural grasses is in this Presidency an unknown factor both as regards quantity and quality. Pasture in the sense in which it is understood in the temperate regions is almost unknown, and the causes which have led to the evolution of a system of agriculture in which the cultivation of grasses finds no place are many and varied and may be classified under two broad heads, (a) Economic and (b) Climatic. The economic causes found their origin in the pressure of population on land, which leads to high land values and rents, resulting in the evolution of a system of agriculture which pays more heed to the needs of the human rather than the cattle population, by growing food and money crops, thus making it impossible for leaving fertile tillage land free for growing grass. The uncultivated waste lands are left as grazing areas which, as the Royal Commission on Agriculture in India [ 1928, 2 ] have pointed out, though affording a large amount of grazing in certain brief periods of the year are of little use to the cultivator of tillage lands owing to their distance from his holding. Each village has its grazing lands set apart for com- munal grazing, but though the co-operative system of the ancient village community has found its quintessence in the Panchyat system, the village grazing lands are pro- bably the most neglected part of the village. They are not cultivated or cared for, and (65)
66 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I village cattle congregate in them for grazing day after day, and during the rains derive some herbage, but during the dry months get nothing. It is a pitiable sight to see large herds of cattle lying about on the village grazing ground chewing cud and seeking shelter from the sun. The second set of causes depending on the nature of the climate have perhaps, even, a greater influence. In the Madras Presidency the prevailing climate over the greater part of the area, is one of long dry spells alternating with short wet ones. The total rainfall is appreciably higher than in temperate regions where grass lands have reached a high degree of development, but the bulk of the rain falls within a short period and the dry period that intervenes between two wet seasons, is so long that the growth of the shorter grasses is hindered, and the rapidly growing taller grasses mature early and become unpalatable in a short time. There is an abundance of the coarser grasses during the wet season and a severe shortage during the dry. The conditions are thus not favourable for the growth of pastures which require an equable climate with well-distributed rainfall. If culti- vation of grasses was attempted it would mean frequent irrigations during the dry season, which would raise the cost of production and make it economically unpro- ductive to attempt to cultivate pasture. The two sets of contributory causes are thus interlinked and explain the appa- rent neglect of one of the greatest assets in the improvement of livestock. There is a distinct vicious circle in operation, on the one side the efficient cultivation of tillage lands necessitates good cattle, on the other the pressure of population on the land, and adverse climatic conditions makes one of the best means of maintaining working animalsSTUDIES IN SOUTH INDIAN PASTURES 67 is totally lacking for this country, and though there is no acute mineral deficiency prevalent among cattle, there is a suspicion that in some tracts at least there may be a shortage of mineral nutrients. A shortage may be more serious than an actual deficiency, in so for as, by its insidious and long continued action, the results may react on the species of animal in a more serious manner than a deficiency which appears as a specific disease. A shortage may cause the enervation of the individual resulting in lowered vitality, and lead to the deterioration of the species. The results of an investigation into the first aspect of the problem, i.e.. the seasonal variation of the mineral content of natural grass herbage, are reported in the present communication. EXPERIMENTAL. The investigation reported consisted of a study of the mineral matter and protein of the herbage of four paddocks at the Livestock Research Station at Hosur during two seasons from July 1929 till December 1930. The Hosur Livestock Research Station of the Madras Agricultural Department was prior to the year 1924 a Remount Depot of the Army Department, and consists of an area of 1,600 acres, the greater part of which is under permanent pasture. These pastures had been laid down for the greater part by the Army Department and some of them are as old as 50 to 60 years. The nearest approach to permanent pastures are found here. The main flora is the Spear grass, Andropogon contortus, which is almost an indigenous grass to the area, and is of very wide occurrence in other parts of India. The Livestock Research Station lies at an elevation of 3,000 feet above mean sea level, and is near the south-eastern edge of the Deccan Plateau. The climate of the locality is a fairly cool and equable one, with a well distri- buted rainfall, though the tract is frequently subject to famines. The topography of the country is characterised by its undulations, the tops of the hillocks being waste lands and the valleys usually well cultivated and receiving their water supply from large contour tanks which are filled up during the rainy season. The Spear grass is a very hardy species with a deep rooted habit, and tillers freely. It is very drought resistant, and given a normal season of frequent light rainfall keeps green throughout the year and provides grazing for animals. The principal period of growth is between September and the beginning of December, when the tract receives the bulk of its rainfall from the North-east monsoon. The flowering period is about the middle of November. At its best the grass grows to a height of two feet and is well liked by animals. At the time when it is dead ripe and seeds have set, the grass is not liked by animals, because of the sharp barbed seeds it carries and which have given the grass its name. These seeds are
68 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I the one disadvantage of the grass, and the Livestock Station uses a comb drawn by horses to comb out the seeds before mowing the grass for hay. The plan of the investigation was to take monthly samples from the four paddocks selected, over a period of eighteen months. The places where samples were drawn were marked off by wooden stakes driven into the ground, and an area covered by a circle of 10 feet radius was separated and not grazed or mown. The sample was cut by hand from this area, and after thorough mixing on a cemented floor, shaken free of sand and earth, and all other species other than the Spear grass picked out. A sample of 100 grams was put into an envelope and weighed for the determination of the original moisture. The rest of the sample reduced to about 500 grams by quartering and brought to the Research Institute at Coimbatore for analysis. CHARACTER OF THE SEASON. Table I gives details of rainfall at the Livestock Research Station, Hosur, for the period during which the investigation was being carried out. TABLE I. Month 1929 1930 Mean Inches. Inches. Days. Inches. Days. January . . . . 0.30 1 0.50 1 0.27 February . . . . 1.30 3 0.16 1 0.32 March . . . . . .. .. 0.17 1 0.48 April . . . . . 7.54 7 2.20 2 1.63 May . . . . . 3.04 4 9.64 5 4.41 June . . . . . 1.52 8 2.52 7 2.15 July . . . . . 1.31 4 0.96 4 2.53 August . . . . 0.32 1 1.34 6 4.11 September . . . . 7.01 10 2.26 6 5.68 October . . . . 7.05 8 7.70 13 5.97 November . . . . 4.92 5 2.31 5 3.42 December . . . . 1.05 3 2.17 3 0.91 Total 35.36 54 31.93 54 31.88 NOTE.STUDIES IN SOUTH INDIAN PASTURES 69 growth of the grass in normal years. During the eighteen months of the investigation from July 1929 till December 1930, the seasons can be divided up into Dry period I, July-August 1929 ; Wet period I, September-November 1929; Dry period II, December 192970 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I Generally the four paddocks were poor in lime and phosphate, Nos. 3 and 38 in nitrogen in addition. The soils had not been manured for two years previous to the starting of the investigation. The last application, three years previously, had been cattle manure as a top dressing followed by a grubber to incorporate the manure in the soil. This method was never found very satisfactory and the cattle manure is usually left in lumps on the surface to be eaten up by termites or baked up by the sun during the dry periods. The soils of the four paddocks had been under grass prior to the occupation of the Station by the Agricultural Department and no records exist as to when they had been ploughed and laid down to pasture. For all practical purposes they were permanent pastures. The grass lands were thus not intensive pastures in any sense but merely well cared for and kept free from weeds and carried a good growth of Andropogon contortus in an almost pure culture. CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF THE HERBAGE. Tables III to VI give the mineral composition of the herbage samples drawn from Paddocks 3, 35, 32 and 38 during the eighteen months of the investigation, and Table VII the mean values for the four paddocks, represented graphically in Chart I.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Seasonal variation in Minerals and Nitrogen. F 2
STUDIES IN SOUTH INDIAN PASTURES 71 TABLE III. Sample taken from Paddock No 3, Livestock Research Station, Hosur. (Percentage on dry basis.) 1929. Original moisture Total ash Si O2 Silica free ash Calcium as CaO Phosphate as P2O5 Potash as K2O Protein as nitrogen x 6.25 July . . . . 31.32 27.03 4.29 0.517 0.314 1.108 4.61 August . . . . 61.30 11.92 7.92 4.00 0.718 0.353 1.186 4.49 September . . . 65.61 16.35 12.45 3.90 0.563 0.336 0.974 4.17 October . . . . 82.25 11.61 8.46 3.15 0379 0.310 1.324 5.43 November . . . . 73.51 7.29 4 30 2.99 0.456 0.370 1.090 8.83 December . . . . 47.88 9.96 7.07 2.89 0.459 0.382 1.121 4.50 1930. January . . . . 51.56 10.59 7.09 3.50 0.500 0.449 1.202 5.21 February . . . . 50.19 9.12 6.36 2.76 0.408 0.523 0.956 3.48 March . . . . 19.46 14.97 9.63 5.34 0.378 0.185 0.850 3.12 April . . . . 28.43 12.42 8.14 4.28 0.613 0.372 1.258 3.45 May . . . . . 55.74 19.16 16.11 3.05 0.588 0.387 1.470 5.48 June . . . . 56.97 13.32 8.84 4.48 0.631 0.484 1.472 7.49 July . . . . 53.15 11.90 7.87 4.03 0.626 0.463 1.400 4.07 August . . . . 39.54 14.57 10.70 3.87 0.637 0.541 0.901 2.98 September . . . 53.76 10.96 7.88 3.08 0.491 0.284 1.074 4.82 October . . . .. 9.98 6.76 3.22 0.400 0.343 1.290 6.27 November . . . 75.01 7.32 4.11 3.21 0.467 0.529 1.290 8.70 December . . . . .. 11.99 9.44 2.55 0.666 0.521 1.122 4.81
72 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I TABLE IV. Sample taken from Paddock No. 35, Livestock Research Station, Hosur. (Percentage on dry basis.) STUDIES IN SOUTH INDIAN PASTURES 73 TABLE V. Samples taken from Paddock No. 32, Livestock Research Station, Hosur. (Percentage on dry basis.) 74 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OP VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I TABLE VI. Samples taken from Paddock No. 38, Livestock Research Station, Hosur. (Percentage on dry basis.) STUDIES IN SOUTH INDIAN PASTURES 75 TABLE VII. Seasonal variation in minerals. Mean value of four paddocks at Hosur. (Percentage on dry basis.) Period Month Calcium Phosphate Potash Protein Remarks 1929. 1 July . . . 0.623 0.416 1.670 4.95 2 August . . 0.594 0.336 1.137 4.61 3 September . . 0.698 0.322 0.966 4.17 4 October . . 0.563 0.412 1.894 7.12 Heavy rain. 5 November . . 0.466 0.492 1.219 9.40 Grass in full flower. 6 December . . 0.309 0.353 1.450 4.17 1930. 7 January . . 0.380 0.393 1.461 4.27 Very dry. 8 February . . 0.544 0.371 0.842 3.36 76 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I The main points which are to be observed in the data presented are :STUDIES IN SOUTH INDIAN PASTURES 77 Cruickshank [1926] at Aberdeen and Woodman and co-workers [1926] at Cambridge found that there was a well defined seasonal variation in the mineral content of herbage of pastures. Cruickshank found that the calcium and phosphate curves were similar, while Woodman found that the two varied inversely, the phosphate increased at a time of heavy rainfall and fell during drought, calcium following a reverse course. Aston [1931] in New Zealand records an increase in phosphate during periods of rainfall and the converse effect with calcium. Green- hill and Page [1931] observed that while the calcium content showed no seasonal trend, the phosphate content showed definite seasonal variation falling during drought and rising with the incidence of rainfall. Orr and Holm [1931] reporting on an investigation on the mineral content of pastures in Kenya, state that the incidence of rainfall has a marked influence on the phosphate, nitrogen and potash contents, the three constituents rising during times of heavy rainfall. Fergusson [1931] has observed a similar effect of seasonal conditions on the nitrogen contents and his results with calcium and phosphoric acid confirm those of other workers. As Orr [1929] has pointed out there are several factors operating in the varia- tion of minerals in pastures, one of them is the seasonal factor, the other perhaps the more important is that of the stage of growth of the grass. At the Livestock Research Station the period of maximum growth coincides with that of the wettest part of the year. The peak values for nitrogen and phosphoric acid occur at the times the grass is at its best and is flowering and also when the rainfall is the heaviest. That it is the stage of growth which is more important is borne out by the fact that in May 1931 when the rainfall was very heavy, there was a slight increase in the nitrogen content which proved to be temporary as it was not sus- tained during the succeeding month. It was due apparently to there being a temporary flush of growth stimulated by the heavy rainfall, while during the two seasons during which the investigation was carried out, the period of peak values for nitrogen and phosphate were during the month of November when the grass reached its maximum growth prior to seed formation. The stage of growth of the grass was apparently of greater moment than the seasonal factor. It would be interesting to note what would be the effect of a severe drought during the months of October and November. INFLUENCE OF SOIL ON THE MINERAL CONTENT OF THE HERBAGE. The soil on which the grass was grown was, as has been already pointed out before, poor in calcium and phosphoric acid and two out of the four paddocks were
78 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I poor in nitrogen as well. Table VIII gives a comparative statement showing the minerals present in the soil and the herbage. TABLE VIII. Mineral contents of soil and herbage. STUDIES IN SOUTH INDIAN PASTURES 79 to a statistical examination at the end of the investigation when sufficient material had been collected. The correlation coefficients are given in Table IX below :80 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I the true protein a preliminary test was carried out and it was seen that the Stutzer copper hydrate precipitate and the filtrate contained the following quantities of nitrogen and phosphoric acid respectively. STUDIES IN SOUTH INDIAN PASTURES 81 The calcium content during the dry season was high and reached a value which was nearly equal to that of a good British pasture. During the wet season, how- ever, which was the grazing season and during which time there was the most herbage on the paddocks, the value fell and there seems to have been a shortage of calcium. The phosphate content at no time equalled that of a good pasture and a shortage of phosphorus is indicated throughout the period, the shortage was how- ever most marked during the dry seasons when the values fell to the minimum. Potash was similarly on the low side except during the period of flush and before the grass came into flower. Excessive potash is, however, not a very desir- able factor, in a tract where drinking water is scarce, owing to its diuretic effect. Considered from the view-point of mineral deficiency there seems to be no actual deficiency with the exception of calcium, during the best part of the grazing season but a shortage of the other two minerals82 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I maintained at the Livestock Research Station. Van Zyl [ 1928 ] has noted that native cattle in Africa are able to exist and reproduce normally on very poor pastures and his observation seems to be confirmed in this country. The main diffi- culty seems to be one of slow calcium and phosphorus starvation with a cumulative effect over several generations perhaps, leading to debility and general poverty of condition in locally bred stock. An experiment of a preliminary nature was con- ducted by the author (unpublished data) in which it was shown that the feeding of a mineral supplement containing bonemeal and lime was distinctly beneficial, its action being prophylactic rather than curative in making for better conditions with dairy young stock, the results will form the subject of a future communication. That there is a mineral deficiency in some tracts of this Presidency is seen from analysis in these laboratories of grasses collected in connection with a botanical survey of fodder grasses some years ago. There are also some reports of osteopha- gia and malnutrition and the subject will be taken up in detail at some future date. The information regarding osteophagia is unauthenticated, and as far as is known, no clinical evidence has been recorded of deficiency diseases due to low calcium and phosphoric acid in fodders and feeds. PRACTICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF THE RESULTS. The practical significance of the results of this investigation can be summed up as follows:STUDIES IN SOUTH INDIAN PASTURES 83 farmer in the locality to start hay-making, hoping for no rain till his stacks are up. The Livestock Research Station has, however, been attempting to mow early and when the usual curing process has not been possible to follow, artificial means have been adopted with some measure of success. The other means of getting in the hay before the dead ripe stage is to manure with ammonium sulphate and rush up growth earlier than usual, this is being tried with some measure of success with other species of grasses and may be a practical proposi- tion if it means hay of higher nutritive value. Making of silage from immature grass has been tried and is now the usual practice at the Livestock Station, the resulting silage is of high nutritive value and has none of the defects of that made from dead ripe grass. (ii) The feeding of a mineral supplement to young stock and cows while on grazing is also indicated by the shortage or deficiency of calcium and phosphoric acid. A supplement has already been recommended and is in use for some time now. (iii) Livestock improvement in this Presidency should have two main lines of effort, one being the breeding side where better stock are bred by careful selection or grading up existing herds, the other side of the question and one of equal importance being to feed well for better stock. The best animal may deteriorate by insufficient nutrition, and malnutrition can undo the best efforts of the breeder. The results reported on above point to a shortage of mineral nutrients and one possible method of livestock improvement is that of feeding minerals to keep up the quality of the cattle and thus ensure a healthy progeny. SUMMARY. (i) The problem of an adequate supply of fodder derived from the herbage of natural grasses is acute in South India. The causes that have led to this lack of natural pastures are two, namely, economic and climatic. The investigation reported on is an attempt to solve the problem along the lines of a study of the mineral content with a view to conserve the available supplies of herbage to the best advantage. (ii) At the Livestock Research Station, Hosur, where the study was carried out, the pasture was one of almost pure culture Spear grass (Andropogon contorlus) and the results show that the minerals and nitrogen of the grass have variations depend- ing on the season and period of growth. The variations are very similar to those recorded in other countries. The main factor involved seems to be one of the G
84 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I period of growth rather than the actual time of the year or incidence of rainfall. Nitrogen and phosphoric acid curves followed a parallel course, while the calcium curve varied inversely as the nitrogen and phosphoric acid. There was a positive but statistically not significant correlation between nitrogen and phosphoric acid, the positive correlation pointing to an intimate constitutional relationship between the two. (iii) The pastures apparently had a shortage of calcium and phosphoric acid at almost all parts of the year. An adult working animal would thus get just suffi- cient of the two nutrients for maintenance, while the young animal and the milch cow are both in danger of suffering from a deficiency if grazing on pastures without any concentrate. A mineral supplement is thus indicated for use for this class of animals as a prophylactic. (iv) The mowing of the herbage for hay should be done early if the best is to be got out of the grass since once seed is set the values for phosphoric acid and nitrogen fall rapidly and the hay is of poor nutritive value as compared with the herbage at the best period of growth. Silage-making is possible and is being done at the period of good nutritive value. The work was carried out at the Coimbatore Agricultural Research Institute and the Livestock Research Station, Hosur, and my best thanks are due to the Government Agricultural Chemist, the Deputy Director of Agriculture, Livestock, and the Superintendent, Livestock Research Station, for the facilities placed at my disposal and to Mr. Purushottam Charlu, B.A., for help in connection with the statistical examination of the data. REFERENCES. Aston, B. C. (1931). New Zealand, Jour. Sc. and Tech, 12, 304. Crichton, J. (1930). Jour. Diary Research, 2, 21. Cruickshank, E. M. (1926). Jour. Agri. Sc., 16, 89. Fergusson, W. S, (1931). ibid. 21. 233. Fisher, R. A. (1925). Statistical Methods for Research Workers, Edinburgh and London, 174 Greenhill, A. W, and Page, H. J. (1931). Jour. Agric. Sc., 21, 220. Hart and co-workers (1923). Jour. Biol. Chem. Orr, J. B. (1929). Minerals in Pastures, London. Orr, J. B., and Holm, A. (1930). Sixth Report of the Economic Advisory Committee on the mineral content of natural pastures, London. Ramiah, P. V. (1930). Annual Report to the Director of Agriculture, Madras. Royal Commission on Agriculture in India (1928, 1). Report. Royal Commission on Agriculture in India (1928, 2). Report, 178. Theiler, A., and Green (1932). Nutrition Abstracts and Reviews, 1, 359. Van Zyl (1928). 13th and 14th Reports of the Director of Veterinary, Education and Research, Union of South Africa. 985THE CURATIVE TREATMENT OF SURRA (TRYPANOSOMA EVANSI INFECTION) IN EQUINES BY MEANS OF " BAYER 205 " (NAGANOL) BY S. K. SEN, M.Sc., F.E.S., Assistant Research Officer, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on 9th June 1932.) During the decade that has elapsed since the introduction of " Bayer 205 " in the field of medical and veterinary science, fairly extensive trials have been carried out with this drug in combating infections due to practically all species of trypanosomes known to be pathogenic to man and animals, and except in infections due to the congolense group of trypanosomes, the results obtained from the use of this drug may be declared to have been uniformly satisfactory. In the case of equine surra in particular, " Bayer 205 " has yielded results that have rightly caused it to be acclaimed as a drug possessing very superior trypanocidal properties, and at the present moment it is the drug of choice in the treatment of this disease. However, cases of equine surra are now and then encountered which are markedly resistant to the action of this drug, and observations at Muktesar showed that in a number of such cases the ineffectiveness of the drug might be ascribed to the fact that such of the parasites as had found their way into the cerebrospinal system remained unaffected by the drug present in the general circulation. On the other hand, some cases were also observed where intravenous medication alone without simultaneous intrathecal treatment " was capable of producing at any rate apparent recovery for a considerable period, even in equines that had undoubtedly harboured infection in the cerebrospinal canal" [Edwards, 1928]. It seemed, however, to be a desirable procedure, in the treatment of equine surra, to sterilize separately, by the simultaneous injections of the drug, both the general circulation and the cerebrospinal canal, particularly in view of the fact that it is the latter locality from where relapse strains are generally held to originate. The combined intravenous intrathecal method of treating equine surra with "Bayer 205 ", as at present recommended by this Institute, is based upon the principles mentioned above, but this method is hardly necessary for adoption for prophylactic purposes or in early stages of the disease where cerebrospinal involvement is not (85) G2
86 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I likely to have occurred. In practice, however, it is not always an easy matter to come to a decision as to whether the disease has progressed to a stage where intrathecal medication is called for, and this is particularly so when, as is usually the case, the subject under treatment does not bear any definite history as to the date when infection might have been contracted, whilst the examination of the cerebrospinal fluidCURATIVE TREATMENT OF SURRA IN EQUINES 87 following pages it is proposed to present a critical résumé of all available information bearing on these two questions. I.88 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I of Agriculture, Dutch East Indies, Java, for 1922 (presumably on the basis of results reported by Rodenwaldt and his collaborators) that in view of the toxicity of " Bayer 205 ", " no higher doses could be used than ½ grm. per 150CURATIVE TREATMENT OF SURRA IN EQUINES 89 TABLE I90 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I three others that received smaller doses of the drug. Of the three former animals, however, Horse No. 19 and Pony No. 74 may be left out of consideration, for they received an injection of the drug at the rate of 5 grms. per 1,000 lb. body- weight only when they were in extremis. The true percentage of recoveries at the higher rate of dosage was therefore 87.5. Reference may also be made here to an experiment recently carried out upon six horses at Muktesar, to test the efficacy of a single large dose of '' Bayer 205 " given intravenously alone. The six animals were artificially infected with surra on 30th September 1931 and 8 days later, when they had fully developed the infec- tion (as evidenced by the occurrence of parasites in the blood, accompanied, in some cases, by swelling of the limbs and paleness of the mucous membrane of the eyes), four of the six animals received each an intravenous injection of the drug at the rate of 8 grms. per 1,000 lb. body-weight and two others at 5 grms. each. Thereafter the condition of all the six animals quickly returned to normal, and none of these has relapsed up to the moment of writing, that is, during a post-treat- ment observation period of more than five months, so that, according to recent authorities, they may now be declared as having been definitely cured. Coming to cases of natural surra in India, Howard [1926] tested the efficacy of the intravenous injection of " Bayer 205 " on four horses which exhibited the clinical symptoms of surra but did not show the actual parasites in the blood. The four animals received the drug in doses of 1 to 3 grms. but no visible effect " was produced. Another horse that showed the parasites in the blood was injected intravenously with 2 grms. of the drug, and although this was followed by the disappearance of the parasites, the animal became gradually weaker in the hind- quarters and had to be destroyed. It may be mentioned that all the five horses had been previously treated with tartar emetic. In some of the recent Reports issued by the Civil Veterinary Department in the Punjab, mention is made of " Bayer 205 " having been used on a large scale in the treatment of natural surra under field conditions in that province. No mention occurs in the Reports as to the manner in which the drug was employed or the scheme of dosage adopted, but, as far as can be gathered, it was used intravenously alone, and the following extract is illustrative of the extent of success achieved in the course of these trials :CURATIVE TREATMENT OF SURRA IN EQUINES 91 Method I extends over 29 days including 5 intravenous injections. 92 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I 1928, Kahan Singh gives the protocols of three ponies treated by this method, although they received only the first five injections of the series. One of the treated horses was discharged as cured; one died after the completion of the treatment and the third succumbed during the course of the treatment. In an earlier communica- tion, the same author [1927] publishes the protocols of four other horses treated in accordance with a somewhat different scheme of dosage. These protocols are of sufficient interest to merit reproduction :CURATIVE TREATMENT OF SURRA IN EQUINES 93 4. Four cases were treated with success being discharged as cured within three weeks. They were however unsound animals and were sent to the Pinjrapole where two lived for four months and two were lost sight of. None of these had a relapse as far as our information goes. 5. Two cases died within 24 hours after the first injection. 6. The animals noted in paragraphs 4 and 5 were all debilitated animals and not suitable subjects for treatment at all. 7. In all cases the Trypanosomes disappeared from the peripheral blood within 24 hours of injection." II.94 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I instance a total of 10 grms. each of " Bayer 205 " and atoxyl was administered in this manner. In the large-dose treatment, the drugs were administered in doses of 3 grms. each. In a recent paper, Bubberman [1931] recommends the treatment of infected horses by the " simultaneous injection of 3CURATIVE TREATMENT OF SURRA IN EQUINES 95 18. IX. 30. Injected 100 c.c. of a 1 per cent. solution of tartar emetic. 23. IX. 30. Injected 100 c.c. of a 2 per cent. solution of " Bayer 205 ". 28. IX. 30. Injected 100 c.c. of a 1 per cent. solution of tartar emetic. 3. X. 30. Injected 100 c.c. of a 1 per cent. solution of tartar emetic. 8. X. 30. Injected 100 c.c. of a 2 per cent. solution of "Bayer 205". Cured and discharged. 2. Mare No. 59. Age 4. Condition poor. 24. IX, 9. X, 24. X. Injected on each of these dates 100 c.c. of a 2 per cent. solution of " Bayer 205 ". 29. IX, 4. X, 14. X, 19, X. Injected on each of these dates 100 c.c. of a 1 per cent. solution of tartar emetic. Cured and discharged. 3. Colt No. 49. Age 4 months. Condition very poor. 20. IX, 5. X, 20. X. Injected on each of these dates 25 c.c. of a 2 per cent. solution of " Bayer 205 ". 25. IX, 30. IX, 10. X, 15. X. Injected on each of these dates 25 c.c. of a 1 per cent. solution of tartar emetic. Cured and discharged. 4. Horse No. 189. Age 9 years. Condition very poor. 31. X, 15. XI. 30. XI. Injected on each of these dates 100 c.c. of a 2 per cent. solution of " Bayer 205 ". 5. XI, 10. XI, 20. XI, 23. XI. Injected on each of these dates 100 c.c. of a 1 per cent. solution of tartar emetic. Cured and discharged. 5. Mare No. 198. Age 6 years. Condition very poor. 3. XI, 18. XI, 7. XII. injected on each of these dates 75 c.c. of a 2 per cent. solution of " Bayer 205 ". 8. XI, 13. XI, 23. XI, 28. XI Injected on each of these dates 75 c.c. of a 1 per cent. solution of tartar emetic. Cured and discharged. 6. Pony No. 228. Age 2½ years. Condition very poor. 15. XI, 30. XI, 15. XII. Injected on each of these dates 50 c.c. of a 2 per cent. solution of " Bayer 205 ". 20. XI, 25. XI, 5. XII, 10. XII. Injected on each of these dates 50 c.c. of a 1 per cent. solution of tartar emetic. Cured and discharged. The form of treatment with a combination of these two drugs, as very recently outlined by Abdulla Khan [1932], for horses weighing from 600 to 800 lb., is as follows :96 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I 11th day. 100 c.c. of a 1 per cent. solution of tartar emetic intravenously. 16th day. As on the first day. 21st day. As on the sixth day. 26th day. Ditto. 31st day. As on the first day. (In all, 6 grms. of " Bayer 205 " and 4 grms. of tartar emetic.) III.CURATIVE TREATMENT OF SURRA IN EQUINES 97 TABLE II98 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I as having died of re-infection. Ten animals received repeated injections of the drug, and of these 2 (Mare No. 57 and Horse No. 28) relapsed shortly after receiving the first injections, whilst in the case of 7 out of the remaining 8 animals, the second injections were given before they had passed the full length of the period during which relapse might have occurred. Mare No. 57, which showed the para- sites in the blood 45 days after the first combined injection, has been regarded here as a case of relapse, although, in reality, it might have been a case of re- infection, in view of the fact that " from one month to two months after the last injection one may see a relapse in the infections if the treatment has not been completely successful" [Edwards, quoted by Williams, 1929], and again, it is stated that '' the animal treated is resistant to re-infection for almost a month to six weeks afterwards but subsequently may become re-infected " (Ibid). Pony No. 76 represents a case which is somewhat different from the others in that it originally received only intravenous injections of the drug. Nevertheless, it would seem more appropriate to include this animal in the category of those treated by the combined method. Mare No. 68 and Horse No. 70, although included in the foregoing Table, received only tryparsamide for their intrathecal injection, which drug has been found by repeated trials at Muktesar to have little effect on infec- tions due to T. evensi, so that these two cases may be regarded as having received only intravenous injections of " Bayer 205 ". It is of interest to note that both of these cases were considered cured, although one eventually died of causes other than surra. Reference may be made here to a small trial recently carried out upon two ponies at Muktesar to test the efficacy of the intravenous-intrathecal method of treatment. The two ponies were of the same lot as six others treated by intrave- nous injection alone and to which reference has been made earlier in this note (p. 90), all the eight animals having received their infective inoculations on the same date, that is, on 30th September 1931. Of the two ponies treated by the combined method, one received two and the other three injections of the drug, and both recovered from the infections, although one died, shortly after, of causes other than surra. During the past 5 years, the intravenous-intrathecal method of treating equine surra has been given extensive field trials by the Army Veterinary Depart- ment in India. The first trial was carried out at the Mona Remount Depôt in 1927, when 51 horses and 3 mules were treated by the method, and out of these, 46 horses and all the 3 mules were cured [Williams 1929]. Three further outbreaks of the disease, all of which occurred in 1928, were dealt with by the same method of injection and the results, as summarized by Williams (l.c.), were as follows :- " An infantry battalion in the Malakand CURATIVE TREATMENT OF SURRA IN EQUINES 99 13 mules treated ; 10 cured, 3 developed paralysis during treatment and were destroyed. Bombay 100 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, I surra, and the immediate desideratum in this connection is the publication, by field veterinary workers in India, of precise statistical data bearing on this question. If, however, as is believed to have been the case, all of the 354 ponies that are reported to have been cured in the Punjab (ante) were treated with " Bayer 205 " administered intravenously alone, then these results compare favourably with those obtained by the Army Veterinary authorities in India from the adoption of the combined method of injection, for, whilst in the latter case the percentage of recoveries varied from 77.4 to 96.3, the recoveries in the Punjab cases amounted to 91.4 per cent., whilst, according to the figures kindly supplied by the Director of Veterinary Services, Punjab, the percentage of cures obtained in that province from the use of this drug during the past 6 years was 87 (3,534 out of 4,055; ante). Coming to the question of the treatment of artificial cases of surra, one notices that out of 10 animals (inclusive of Mare No. 68 and Horse No. 70 injected intra- thecally with tryparsamide but exclusive of Horse No. 19 and Pony No. 74) treated during 1925-26, at Muktesar, by the simple intravenous injection of " Bayer 205 " at the rate of 5 grammes per 1,000 lb. body-weight (Tables I and II), 9 (or 90 per cent.) were considered definitely cured of the disease, whilst, in the case of animals treated by the combined method, the recoveries amounted to 88.2 per cent. Judged by these results, there would seem little to choose between the two methods and, in addition, the results of the recent trials carried out upon 8 experimental cases of surra, at Muktesar (pp. 90 and 98) would appear to point to the conclusion that the intravenous method alone is capable of yielding equally good results as those obtained by the combined method, for recoveries were obtained in all of the 6 horses treated by the " intravenous alone " method, as also in the two others treated by the combined method. To sum up, while the introduction of the intravenous-intrathecal method has registered a definite advance in the treatment of equine surra as being, well calculated to prevent the occurrence of relapses, the method represents, in reality, an extension rather than a supersedence of the simple intravenous form of treatment, in that the combined method is indicated only in actual cases of cere- brospinal involvement, as determined by the presence of parasites in the spinal fluid, or " when outwardly visible symtoms of typical surra are quite manifest; " in other cases, " complete cure can often be obtained by administering the intraven- ous injection of the treatment alone, but successful treatment in such event is achieved in very early cases of infection " [Edwards ; quoted by Williams, 1929]. Even as a method designed to prevent relapses, the success of the combined form of treatment will depend upon the extent to which it would be legitimate to accept the view that it is only the cerebrospinal region from where relapse strains originate,
CURATIVE TREATMENT OF SURRA IN EQUINES 101 for Yorke [1921] would seem inclined to regard it as probable that the general circulation in subjects apparently cured of trypanosomiasis may later be re-invaded by strains originating not only from the cerebrospinal system but also from the tissue spaces and circulation back washes. However, in the absence of definite experimental evidence in support of Yorke's statement, it does not seem necessary to depart from the conventional practice of regarding the spinal canal as the only seat of origin of relapse strains. The main problem that requires elucidation at the present moment relates, therefore, not to the genesis of relapse strains but to whether " Bayer 205 " does not possess the requisite degree of " penetrability ", so as to be capable of finding its way into the spinal canal even when the drug is introduced intravenously alone into the general circulation. Edwards [1928] has already obtained results pointing to the conclusion that " Bayer 205 " is endowed with such properties (ante), whilst the experience of later workers has also shown that in the treatment of clinical cases of equine surra, a single intravenous injection of " Bayer 205 ", at the rate of 5 to 8 grms. per 1,000 lb. body-weight, is usually capable of effecting a cure under field conditions in India and in a great majority of such " cured " cases, no relapse has been found to occur during a post-treatment observation period extend- ing over a year or more. If these findings are confirmed by future experience, then the problem of controlling surra will have been solved in a manner consistent with, the requirements of field workers in India, for in that event the treatment will involve neither the technicalities of the intrathecal puncture nor the multipli- city of injections entailed by the combined method. REFERENCES. Abdulla Khan (1932). A Brief Note on Surra, Its Diagnosis and Treatment. Punj. Vet. Journ., February, pp. 1-8. Baermann (1922). Die Behandlung der Surra mit "Bayer 205 ". Beihefte z. Arch. f. Schiffs-u. Trop.-Hyg.,26, 73-123. [Abstr. in Trop. Vet. Bull., 11, 2-3; 1923.] -----------(1923). Die Behandlung der Surra mit " Bayer 205." II Mitteilung. Arch. f. Schiffs-v Trop.-Hyg., 27, 210-217. [Abstr. in Trop. Vet., Bull., 12, 5-6 ; 1924.] Bakker (1925). Notes on Surra in Padang Sidempoean. Ned.-Ind. Bladen v. Diergeneesk. en. Dierendeelt, 37, 153-177. [Abstr. in Trop. Vet. Bull., 13, 76-78; 1925.] Bubberman (1931). Bekämpfung von Trypanosomiasen in Nederländish-Indien. 11th Internat. Vet. Cong. London, 3, 600-613. Bubberman, Douwes & Van Bergen (1925). The Use of " Bayer 205 " in Equine Surra in the Dutch East Indies Veeartsenijkundige. Mededeeling, No. 50. Dept. v. Landbouw, Nijverheid en Handel, Buitenzorg. 64 pp. [Abstr. in Trop. Vet. Bull., 13, 73-76 ; 1925.] Edwards (1928). The Chemotherapy of Surra (Trypanosoma evansi infections) of Horses and Cattle in India. Mem. Dept. Agric. India, Vet. Ser., 4, 1-100. II 2
102 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I Hornby (1931). Control of Animal Trypanosomiasis. 11th Internat. Vet. Cong. London, 3, 614-631. Howard (1926). A Note on Treatment of Equine Trypanosomiasis (Surra) in the Field in India. Vet. Journ., 82, 105-110. Kahan Singh (1927). Annual Report of Camel Specialist, Sohawa, for the year 1925-26, pp. 3-8. Kahan Singh (1928). Report on the Work performed by the Officer in Charge of the Camel Specialist's Office, Sohawa, for the year 1926-27. Dept. Agric. Punj. Vet. Bull. No. 18, pp. 7-21. Rodenwaldt & Douwes (1922). Employment of "Bayer 205" for the Treatment of Surra in Horses in the Dutch East Indies. Ned.-Ind. Bladen v. Diergeneesk en Dierenteelt, 33, 1-79. [Abstr. in Trop. Vet. Bull., 11, 45-50 ; 1923.] Williams (1929). The Treatment of Surra (Trypanosomiasis) of Equines in India by Intravenous- Intrathecal Injections of Bayer 205. Journ. Roy. Army Vet. Corps., 1, 37-42. Yakimoff, Amanschuloff, Arbusoff, and Schurawleff (1929). Die Pferdetrypanosomose in Russland. Dent. Tierärzt. Woch., 37, 293-295. Yorke (1921). Recent Work on the Treatment of Sleeping Sickness: A Critical Review. Trop. Dis. Bull., 18,155.
PLATE X. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Ventral view of Gastrodiscus secundus from an Indian elephant × 10.
THE TREMATODE PARASITES OF THE INDIAN ELEPHANT, ELEPHAS INDICUS* BY G. D. BHALERAO, M.Sc., Heminthologist, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for Publication on 21st March 1932.) (With Plate X.) CONTENTS. PAGE 1. FASCIOLA JACKSONI .......... 103 2. PSEUDODISCUS COLLINSI ........... 105 3. PSEUDODISCUS IIAWKESI ........... 108 4. PFENDERIUS PAPILLATUS.......... 111 5. GASTRODISCUS SECUNDUS.......... 112 Through the courtesy of Mr. F. Ware, Director, Imperial Institute of Veteri- nary Research, Mutesar, an opportunity was afforded recently to study some in- teresting parasites from the Indian elephant. It is my pleasant duty to acknowledge my indebtedness to Mr. F. Ware for placing at my disposal most willingly all his collection of parasites from the Indian elephant, as well as a series of sections of Pseudodiscus collinsi and P. hawkesi. I am also indebted to Mr. H. Cooper for a collection from Assam and to Dr. Gupta of Toungoo, for a collection from an elephant in Burma. Fasciola jacksoni (Cobbold, 1869). Synonymy.104 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I of the parasite is due to the lack of the proper anatomical details being available even up to the present day. Cobbold's original description was too brief and his figure shows only the alimentary system completely. Evans and Rennie [1909] have published slightly better figures and have given a little more detailed account of the parasite, but these authors too are silent upon certain anatomical details of the parasite which are of importance from the taxonomic standpoint in this group of animals. The present opportunity is therefore taken to fill up the missing gaps in the description of the parasite, which might facilitate the task of a systematist. The worms are pinkish in colour, but appear to be of olive green colour when filled with bile. When flattened some worms appear to be perfectly round, while others present a somewhat pear-shaped appearance. In the majority of specimens there is a tendency for the anterior and posterior ends to curl down ventrally. In some cases the cephalic end is distinctly set off from the rest of the body and in such cases the shoulders are very well defined. In others which have a pear- shaped body the cephalic end cannot be so well distinguished from the rest of the body and consequently the shoulders appear to be either indistinct or absent. This indistinct nature of the shoulders or their complete absence in some cases together with the shape of the ventral sucker and the ignorance regarding the pre- sence or absence of the receptaculum seminis may have led some observers to regard it as a member of the genus Fasciolopsis. The worms measure 12TREMATODE PARASITES OF INDIAN ELEPHANT 105 The testes lie centrally in the body, one behind the other. They are very extensive and occupy nearly half the area of the body. The cirrus sac is pyri- form and is situated anteriorly to the ventral sucker. It measures 0.73 × 0.56. The cirrus is a very long structure and may be coiled in the cirrus sac or may protrude considerably out of it. The ovary is a branched structure, lying on the right side of the central line, immediately anterior to the testes. It measures 1.37 × 1.28. The shell gland lies centrally, anterior to the testes and measures 1 × 0.74. The receptaculum seminis is absent. Laurer's canal commences from the oviduct and opens to the exterior on the dorsal side of the shell-gland. The vitellaria are very extensive, and, as remarked by Evans and Rennie, occupy nearly two-thirds of the body. The vitelline follicles are small and are situated in the meshes of the intestinal branches. The number of acini in each follicle vary from two to four. Trans- verse vitelline ducts pass at the level of the posterior third of the shell-gland and form a vitelline receptacle or yolk sac in the centre, measuring 0.14 × 0.1. The uterine coils lie between the shell-gland and the ventral sucker. The eggs are operculated and measure 0.110 106 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I This fluke has been recorded a number of times from horses in India. Cobbold [1875] examined the material sent to him by Collins from horses in India and desig- nated it as Amphistoma collinsi. Some time later he received another instalment of three worms from Professor Simonds, which were collected by Stanley in India. These latter he named Amphistoma stanleyi, remarking at the same time that "This is apparently nothing more than the large variety of the above ?". Cob- bold, however, did not give any adequate account of the worm. Stiles and Gold- berger [1910] published an elaborate account of these, although the material at their disposal was very little. They, however, agreed with Cobbold in retaining the two species : P. collinsi and P. stanleyi. Maplestone [1923] made a detailed comparative study of these worms and arrived at the conclusion that the species P. collinsi and P. stanleyi are identical, the difference recognised between these two species by Stiles and Goldberger being due to the difference in age of the two specimens. Fukui [1929] also is in entire agreement with Maplestone in regard to the synonymy of P. stanleyi with P. collinsi. I have at my disposal a large number of these worms, both immature and fully mature, collected from horses at Muktesar and a study of these leads me to corroborate Maplestone's view regarding the synonymy. I have recently had an opportunity of examining some collections from Indian elephants in Madras, Assam and Burma, which on close examination proved to be P. collinsi. Although the presence of these worms in horses, as will be appar- ent from the foregoing remarks, is very common in India, its occurrence in elephants has not been recorded up to the present time. Although the parasite, P. collinsi, has been quite well described by Stiles and Goldberger, it is thought desirable to describe here the material from a different host, so that no confusion may arise in future in regard to the identity of the worm. The material for study consists of about two dozen specimens obtained from an elephant in Madras, numerous specimens of medium size and about a dozen and half specimens of large size obtained from an elephant in Assam and about half a dozen specimens obtained from an elephant in Burma. Description.TREMATODE PARASITES OF INDIAN ELEPHANT 107 ventrally in front of the posterior end and is surrounded by a prominently raised margin. Its diameter varies from 1.34 to 2.11. The mouth is situated at the anterior extremity and is 0.34108 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I trematodes, e.g., Tremiorchis ranarum. Not unlike the testes, the position of the ovary also varies a little, being sometimes situated somewhat anteriorly, and some- times posteriorly. The oviduct arises from the posterior aspect of the ovary and passes to the dorsal side where it becomes surrounded by the shell-gland. This latter lies on the postero-central aspect of the ovary and measures 0.16 × 0.18TREMATODE PARASITES OF INDIAN ELEPHANT 109 The material for study consists of numerous specimens collected in Madras and about a dozen collected in Assam. The worms are conical with the anterior end tapering and the posterior end hemispherical. The dorsal surface is convex, while the ventral one is excavated. Very rarely are the worms to be seen flat ventrally as described by Fukui [1929, 234]. The position of the genital pore appears to be in a pit on the ventral surface, but occasionally the genital papilla is seen to be slightly protruding out of the ventral surface. The digitiform papillæ described by Stiles & Goldberger [ 1910, 200] were seen in all cases. In the majority of cases were the intestinal cæca seen to end in the equatorial zone of the posterior sucker, but in a few instances it was observed that the left cæcum ends somewhat anteriorly. The testes are one behind the other and in a few cases their zones are slightly overlapping, but the condition represented by Fukui's figure 23, p. 235, was never seen. In the majority of cases the genital papilla was not very prominent, but in a few cases it appeared to be quite prominent. Fukui remarks that Stiles and Goldberger were dealing with immature speci- mens. I have at my disposal a large number of mature specimens and a few im- mature ones. My specimens agree more with those of Stiles and Goldberger than with those of Fukui. Maplestone [1923, 165 ] has raised a very important issue regarding the syno- nymy of the species P. hawkesi and P. watsoni. He was of the opinion that the two species were identical but he abstained from giving any final verdict about them since he was not in possession of either of the species. Kobayashi [1915] recorded Watsonius macaci from Macacus cynomolgus and the same author [ 1920 ] gave a description of the worm remarking in a foot note that it is very probable that the species is identical with Watsonius watsoni described by Railliet, Henry and Joycux [ 1912 ]. Recently Fukui [ 1929 ], who has had an opportunity of studying a few specimens of P. hawkesi, has remarked that all the three species: P. hawkesi, P. macaci and P. watsoni, are valid and he distinguishes them with the following key :110 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I Length of oral sucker about 1/15 body length; diameter of posterior sucker about 1/5 body length.................................... P. macaci. Length of oral sucker about 1/7 body length, diameter of posterior sucker 10/25 body length................................................... P. hawkesi. The points of difference raised above for distinguishing the three species are more apparent than real, based as they are on the observation of a limited number of specimens and the conclusions drawn from them are necessarily fallacious. With a view to test the validity of the inferences drawn by Fukui data on the lines suggested by him were obtained from 14 specimens, the result of which is tabulated below :TREMATODE PARASITES OF INDIAN ELEPHANT 111 any practical value, dependent as they are bound to be on the degree of contrac- tion undergone by the worms. Pseudodiscus hawkesi (My speci- mens) Pseudodiscus hawkesi (Stiles and Goldberger's specimens) Pseudodiscus hawkesi (Fukui's specimens) P. macaci Kobayashi, 1920 P. watsoni of Stiles and Goldberger, 1910 P. watsoni of Railliet, Henry and Joyenx, 1912 Length . 3.2112 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I measured 2.1 in length and 1.83 in breadth. In spite of the fact that the specimen under study was immature, the cirrus sac was very well developed and measured 0.6 in length, 0.27 in breadth and its walls were 0.07 in thickness ; the correspond- ing measurements in the specimens of Stiles and Goldberger [1910], which measured 4.5TREMATODE PARASITES OF INDIAN ELEPHANT 113 with a slender process projecting from it, the appearance of the entire papilla being like a pyramid. The abdominal disc has a tendency to roll down its sides ventrally. The ventral surface of the cephalic portion behind the mouth is slightly excavated as remarked by Looss. The ventral surface of the disc is covered with " papillæ " or " pseudo-suckers " bearing on their summits small slit-like openings. As remarked by Looss " some of these organs are everted, and in this state, represent small knobs projecting somewhat over their retracted neighbours ". At a distance of 1.12114 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, I measures about 0.62 × 0.36. The vitelline glands extend from the level of the genital pore to the middle of the posterior sucker. The follicles lie mostly on the outer side of the intestinal cæca, but a few of them are seen overlapping the intes- tinal cæca as well. They do not, however, occupy ventrally all the space left free by the other organs as remarked by Looss [1907, 135]. The eggs according to Looss measure 0.15TREMATODE PARASITES OF INDIAN ELEPHANT 115 Railliet, A. (1924). Les helminthes des animaux domestiques et de l'homme au indochine. Bull. Soc. Zool. France, 49, 589ON A NEW SPECIES OF GONGYLONEMA (NEMATODA) FROM THE DOMESTIC FOWL BY G. D. BHALERAO, M.Sc, Helminthologist, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on 8th August 1932.) (With three text-figures.) The material available for study consists of two collections from the crop of fowls in Lucknow made by Capt. S. G. H. Hickey, Director, Civil Veterinary De- partment, United Provinces, and I take this opportunity of expressing my indeb- tedness to Capt. Hickey for forwarding the specimens to this Institute for examina- tion. The worms are filiform and whitish in colour. The cuticle has transverse annulations on it. The anterior end of the body is covered with cuticular bosses or plaques. On each side of the anterior end is a narrow lateral membrane which gradually narrows down and disappears quickly. A large plate-like shield in con- nection with the excretory pore found in G. ingluvicola [Ransom, 1904], is not present in this species. The mouth is surrounded by a chitinous collar and six papillæ. It leads into a short, cylindrical buccal capsule. The [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Gongylonema sumani. Dorsal view of the anterior end of male. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Gongylonema sumani. Ventro-lateral view of the posterior end of male ; al. ala ; cl. cloaca ; Gub. Gubernaculum ; r. sp. right spicule.
FIG. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Gongylonema sumani. Ventral view of the anterior and of female: c. al. cervical ala ; ex. p. excretory pore
GONGYLONEMA FROM THE DOMESTIC FOWL 117 0.223 from the anterior end. The tail is straight and tapers to a point. The caudal alæ are broad and are somewhat asymmetrical. The ala on the right side extends slightly further forwards than the one on the left side. Near the posterior extremity of the tail the alæ on either side narrow down abruptly giving it a mucronate appearance. There are five pairs of pre-anal pedunculated papillæ of which the first and the last pairs are somewhat smaller than the middle three. The four pairs of the post-anal papillæ are comparatively smaller than the pre-anal and are more or less of the same size. Occasionally one or more papillæ of either side may be suppressed. The two spicules are extremely dissimilar. The left spicule is long, slender, with a narrow tubular shaft and a barb at a short distance from its posterior extremity. The anterior end is broad and the posterior one behind the barb is very faintly striated. It measures 10.6118 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I tail. It leads into a long vagina measuring 6.7GONGYLONEMA FROM THE DOMESTIC FOWL 119 Host.PRELIMINARY NOTE ON THE LIFE-HISTORY OF THE COM- MON LIVER-FLUKE IN INDIA, FASCIOLA GIGANTICA BY G. D. BHALERAO, M.Sc., Helminthologist, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on 31st December 1932.) (With Plate XI.) On account of the great havoc that Fasciola gigantica plays in some localities in India amongst domestic ruminants, particularly in cattle and buffaloes, work to discover the intermediate host responsible for harbouring the larval forms of the fluke and to elucidate its life-history was initiated about two years ago at the suggestion of Mr. F. Ware, Director of this Institute. The observations were made in the streams within a radius of about eight miles from Almora, United Provinces, and a survey of the molluscan fauna of these streams was begun in April 1931. It was found that about 40 per cent. of the molluscs, mostly Limnæa acuminata, were infected with other cercaria, but cercaria resembling those of Fasciola were found in one case only out of about two thousand snails examined. Starting on the hypothesis that the infection may be seasonal, which later proved to be. true, another tour was made to the locality in question in the month of July 1931. This time the infection of the molluscs with the organism suspected at the time to be the cercaria of F. gigantica was 60 per cent. Early in August 1932 another survey of the infected snails was made and this time also the percentage of infection in different streams in Almora District ranged from 40 to 60. In the middle of August a large number of infected molluscs were brought to Muktesar and were kept in a cement trough of water into which was also introduced some grass. Attempts were then made to infect artificially two hill bulls and two hill goats by feeding them every day throughout August and September on the grass from the trough as well as drenching them with water from it. The experimental animals were determined to be free from fluke-infection by examining their fæces for about three weeks previous to the commencement of feeding and they continued to be so up to the 18th November 1932, when one of the bulls was noticed to be passing eggs in the fæces. Within a week from this date all the experimental animals showed Fasciola ova in their fæces. On the 9th December one of the bulls succumbed and the other followed suit on the 12th. One of the experimental goats was destroyed on the latter date. The liver of all the animals and, in the case of the bulls, the gall (120)
PLATE XI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Shells of Limnaea acuminata, the intermediate host of Fasciola gigantica.
LIFE-HISTORY OF LIVER-FLUKE IN INDIA 121 bladder also, was found to be teeming with F. gigantica on post-mortem examination. This experimentation has therefore confirmed beyond all doubt my previous sus- picion that Limnæa acuminata harbours the larval forms of F. gigantica. The emergence of the miracidia from the eggs, their invasion of the mollusc and further development in it, the development of the cercaria in redia, their liberation from the molluscan host and the encystment of these on the grass have all been studied, and a detailed communication on all phases of the life-history of this most import- ant fluke will appear in one of the subsequent issues of this journal.
RINDERPEST: CLINICAL SYNDROME IN GOATS IN INDIA BY J. D'COSTA, G.B.V.C., Temporary Deputy Director, AND BALWANT SINGH, G.P.V.C., Officiating Veterinary Deputy Superintendent, Imperial Veterinary Serum Institute, Izatnagar. (Received for publication on 10th, December 1932.) (With Plate XII.) The increasing recognition amongst Veterinary workers of the advantages of using the so-called "goat virus" in preventive inoculations against rinderpest in cattle makes it a matter of some urgency that a comprehensive account embodying all the essential features of the rinderpest-syndrome in goats should be made avail- able for field workers in India. The publication of an account of this kind would also seem warranted in view of the remarkable similarity that is known to exist in the case of goats between the clinical symptoms of rinderpest on the one hand and those of pleuro-pneumonia on the other, this similarity having been long held to render a correct diagnosis of rinderpest in this species of animal a matter of consi- derable difficulty in practice. Edwards [1927] expresses the belief that some of the out. breaks of pleuro-pneumonia in goats reported by workers in the past were in reality those of rinderpest, and even to this day there would appear to exist a certain amount of confusion as to the precise characters by which the two condi- tions might be differentiated. In what follows the writers of this note propose to present what they believe to be an accurate picture of the rinderpest syndrome in goats, the details of this picture having been drawn from their own personal experience with this disease extending over a period of about five years, both at the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, at Muktesar (altitude 7,500 ft. above sea-level) and at its plains tributary station at Izatnagar. Brief accounts of rinderpest, as it occurs in goats, are to be found in the writings of such early workers as Galambos [1861] cited by Hutyra and Marek [1926], Chicoli [1863] cited by Hutyra and Marek [1926], Koch [1897] and, latterly, (122)
RINDERPEST : CLINICAL SYNDROME IN GOATS 123 of Topacio [1926], all working in countries outside India. In India itself, Hallen, as far back as in the year 1871, mentioned the infectivity of the bull virus for goats and also claimed to have successfully infected 3 out of a batch of 8 goats with this disease. Oliver [1913], working in the United Provinces, mentioned the occurrence of rinderpest in both sheep and goats, with a higher death-rate from this disease in the latter species of animal. More recently, Edwards [1927] and Cooper [1931], both working in India, have published brief notes upon the disease in goats, with especial reference to the degree of rinderpest reaction requisite in these animals for the production of a potent virus. The observations recorded by all these authors upon the clinical symptoms of the disease will be referred to at relevant points in the following pages. SUSCEPTIBILITY. The susceptibility of goats to rinderpest in this country, as in the case with ruminants generally, varies considerably on account of certain factors, such as race, region, climate, age, sex and condition, and therefore it is necessary that one should take note of the above factors before making deductions as to the degree of reaction exhibited by these animals to an artificial or natural infection with rinderpest virus. PERIOD OF INCUBATION. The period of incubation as observed by the present writers is from about 2 to 5 days, this depending, as one would expect, upon the susceptibility of the animal and the virulence of the virus. In cases of acute type, the initial rise of tempera- ture has been observed about the 52nd hour from the time of inoculation and in rare cases as early as the 44th hour. These observations are therefore not quite in accord with those of Beaton [ 1930 ]. who gives 4 to 5 days as the incubation period for rinderpest in goats. In subacute cases, however, the initial rise of temperature may occur as late as the 4th day from the date of inoculation and this was also observed to be the case in a few instances of naturally contracted rinderpest. SYMPTOMS. The earliest symptom in artificially infected cases is a rise of temperature, which may reach the maximum of 104° F. to 106° F. on the 4th or 5th day from the day of inoculation of virus. In some cases an abrupt rise of temperature as high as 103° F. and 104° F. has been noticed as early as 2nd or 3rd day from the date of inoculation. In a large proportion of goats there is a secondary rise of temperature during the second week [ Topacio, 1926 ; Cooper 1931 ], with marked symptoms of pneumonia and in such cases death usually supervenes. This elevation in tempera- ture is followed by cessation of feeding, slackness in rumination and depression, the
124 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I most prominent symptoms being an arched back, a rough staring coat and a dry muzzle and the chest cavity is also affected. The respiration becomes disturbed and hurried and, as noted by several previous workers [ Galambos, 1861; Chicoli, 1863; Koch, 1897 ; Beaton, 1930 ], there is discharge from the nose, accompanied by a hard and suppressed cough, with occasional groaning especially on movement. At this stage the pulse is frequent. The goat stands with its head stretched down- wards and forwards and later becomes recumbent with the head still advanced, (Plate XII). About the 3rd day from the date of virus injection the mucous membrane of the nostrils becomes congested; there is sneezing and watery discharge from the nose, followed by a profuse thick muco-purulent discharge. In some cases the discharge dries up in the form of small crusts and causes serious obstruction in breathing. A careful examination of the chest about the 4th or 5th day reveals the presence of pleurisy and partial or complete consolidation of the lungs, especially of the anterior and middle lobes. The presence of fluid may also be observed in the pleural cavity in a few cases. There is a slight congestion of the gums, the lower surface of the tongue and soft palate, with dribbling of saliva from the mouth. The buccal lesions, such as vesicles and ulcers on the gum and under the tongue so frequently observed in the case of cattle are very seldom noticed in goats. The conspicuity of the absence of these lesions has been mentioned by more than one worker [ e. g., Topacio, 1926 and others ], although Beaton [ 1930 ] describes pin-point eruptions on the lips and gums on the 10th to 14th day from the date of appearance of the first symptom. The conjunctivæ are congested and there is slight watery discharge which later becomes muco-purulent. The fæces in the early stages of the disease are dry, hard and dark and passed with difficulty, but later they become soft and pasty. A watery diarrhPLATE XII. Goats affected with rinderpest. Note the staring coat, arched back and the depressed appearance of the animals.
RINDERPEST : CLINICAL SYNDROME IN GOATS 125 watery discharge from the nose and eyes while sneezing and a small degree of cough may also be present, but the severe pneumonic symptoms, such as laboured breath- ing, cough and the distressed look, so frequently noticeable in the acute type, are entirely absent in the subacute form of the disease. The constipation is followed by the passage of soft fæces of pasty or even watery consistency. The temperature returns to normal about the 7th or 8th day, when the animal regains its appetite and about the 10th or 12th day it usually starts feeding and shows complete signs of recovery. The percentage of recovery in un-complicated cases of rinderpest is as high as 40 to 50, while in the acute type, with which the pneumonic symptoms are usually associated, the estimated percentage of recovery is 10 to 25 only. BLOOD PICTURE. The blood throughout the course of the disease reveals anæmic changes only. REPRODUCTION OF THE DISEASE. The reproduction of the disease in susceptible goats and cattle is easily accom- plished by the injection of blood drawn at the height of infection, i.e., about the 4th or 5th day from the date of virus inoculation, although, in a number of instances, goats have been successfully infected even when injected with blood taken as early as the 3rd day after virus inoculation. Healthy goats kept in contact with infect- ed goats were also found to contract the disease. POST- MORTEM APPEARANCES. (a) General.-126 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I duodenum shows slight congestion or is livid in colour. The mucous membrane of the small intestines, caecum and rectum presents marked congestion and the contents are fluid. The gall-bladder is distended with dark green bile, with a faint blush of congestion of the mucous membrane. The mucous membrane of the genital organs is also congested. (c) Respiratory system.RINDERPEST : CLINICAL SYNDROME IN GOATS 127 conditions, notably miliary tuberculosis, tubercular pneumonia and pleuropneumonia and in the absence of the diagnostic buccal lesions, viz., vesicles and ulcers, it is difficult to distinguish this disease from the others. However, when rinderpest is suspected in goats128 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, I REFERENCES. Beaton, W. G. (1930) Jour. Comp. Path. & Therap. 43, pp. 301-307. Chicoli, (1863) cited by Hutyra and Marek (1926) Spec. Path. and Therap. of the diseases of domestic animals. Cooper, H. (1931). Ind. Jour. Vet. Sc. & Anim. Husb., 1, p. 6. Edwards, J. T. (1927). Trans. 7th Congr. Far Eastern Assoc. Trop. Med., 3, p. 705. Galombos, (1861) Gyogyaszat cited by Hutyra and Marek (1926) Spec. Path. and Therap. of the diseases of domestic animals. Hallen, J. H. B. (1871). Rep. Ind. Cattle Plagues. pp. 883-889. Hutyra and Marek (1926) Spec. Path. and Therap. of the diseases of domestic animals. Koch, R. (1897). Agri. Jour. Cape of Good Hope., Jan. & Feb. p. 9. Oliver, E. W. (1913). Bull. 20 U. P. Agra. & Oudh. p. 2. Topacio. (1926). Phil. Agri. Rev. 19, p. 4.
BIHAR AND ORISSA VETERINARY COLLEGE, PATNA. NOTICE. The next session of the Bihar and Orissa Veterinary College will commence from the 1st July, 1933. 1. Each candidate desiring admission should submit his application on the prescribed form, together with the following certificates in original, so as to reach the Principal on or before the 1st June, 1933. (a) Age and moral character certificate from the Head-master of the school at which he last read. (b) University certificate or a certificate from the School or University authorities to show that he has passed the Matriculation Examina- tion. (c) Medical certificate of fitness from an Assistant Surgeon. (d) Letter from his guardian stating that all expenses incurred by his ward, during the latter's period of study at the college, will be paid. (e) Letter of identification from some well known person stating that the candidate is known to him and that the statements made in the application form are correct. 2. Each Government or District Board stipendiary should, in addition to the above, produce a letter from the Director of Veterinary Services, Bihar and Orissa, or from the Chairman of the District Board concerned, to whom he should apply in the first instance, stating that his selection as stipendiary has been approved. 3. Preference will be given to candidates who have passed the I. A. or I. Sc. Examination of a recognised University. A good knowledge of English is essential. 4. Non-stipendiary candidates will have to appear before the Governing Body of the College when called for interview. 5. Fees must be paid according to the scale under rule 8 of the College rules, in advance, the initial payment due at the time of admission being Rs. 35-8 only. 6. Candidates will reside in the college hostel from the date of their admission unless specially exempted. 7. Admission forms may be had free on application to the principal. A pros- pectus will be supplied on receipt of Re. 0-4-0, for each copy required. (129)
130 Corrections to the Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry, Volume II, Part IV. _____ ERRATA. (1) Page 352, line 12 read " O. intermedia " for " O. odhneri ". (2) " Type-species.THE DURATION OF IMMUNITY IN CALVES INOCULATED BY THE BULL VIRUS CUM SERUM METHOD AGAINST RINDERPEST BY J. D'COSTA, G.B.V.C., Temporary Deputy Director, AND BALWANT SINGH, G.P.V.C., Offg. Head Laboratory Assistant, Imperial Veterinary Serum Institute, Izatnagar. (Received for publication on 7th September 1932.) A survey of the available literature upon the subject of the immunisation of calves against rinderpest indicates that the general opinion in most countries, notably in Africa, is that calves do not form a suitable medium for the practice of this method of immunisation, in that the duration of the immunity conferred as compared with that developed in adult cattle is so uncertain as to be of negligiblt value in the immunisation of cattle in extensive areas. The earliest available references on the subject to which we have access is that of Montgomery [ 1915-16 ], who states that the double inoculation of calves under six months old does not always result in the production of permanent immunity, and Pool, India [ 1921 ], states that calves under 9 months old should not be inoculated. P. Croveri, Somaliland [ 1919 ], Walker, Kenya [1921 ], and Askar Mohammad Bey, Egypt [ 1924 ], have described experiments upon calves from immune cows, which would indicate the presence in such calves of a partial or complete immunity ; this immunity depending upon the ingestion of anti-bodies in the milk from immune mothers. The immunity wanes as the animal becomes older and completely disappears a short time after weaning. In the experiments of Walker, Kenya [ 1929 ], and Deutressoulle, West Africa [ 1924 ] the immunity in unweaned calves from immune cows was of such strength as to withstand without fatal result a test inoculation of virulent blood alone. According to Walker [ 1921] (131) B
132 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II calves from non-immune mothers do not possess any immunity, but no reference can be obtained as to whether the serum-simultaneous inoculation of such calves produces a durable immunity. Mention must also be made of the work of Rabag- liati, Egypt [ 1924 ], and his conclusion that the double inoculation of unweaned calves cannot be relied upon, and that when it is performed it should be repeated after weaning. The interesting conclusion which this author draws from his experiments is that a calf, which reacts to the first serum- simultaneous inoculation, will not subsequently react to a further inoculation. He states that stock from one year old and upwards can be relied on to give a durable immunity. In Nigeria the unsatisfactory results following upon the serum-simul- taneous inoculation of calves have also been noted. In India Edwards [ 1927 ] describes the investigation of immunity developed by young calves in the experimental herd maintained at the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, and he also details the advantages, economical and technical, which would accrue if this method could be shown to be reliable. The object of the experiments referred to in this article, as laid down by Dr. Edwards, late Director of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, was :IMMUNITY IN CALVES AGAINST RINDERPEST 133 protection. The virus was obtained from Kumaon hill-bulls, artificially infected, and in those cases which showed no evidence of reaction at the normal period (fourth or fifth day) after inoculation, a further dose of virus was administered. In all cases the virulence of the virus used for immunisation and for testing the duration of immunity was tested by inoculation into susceptible hill-bulls. Altogether 128 calves have so far been used for this experiment, of which the records of 98 (30 of indigenous breed and 68 indigenous X European) are given in the appended Table I. The remainder either died, were destroyed for other experimental purposes, or were otherwise disposed of before the period of test. B 2
134 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II, TABLE I. Details of inoculated calves. Serial No. Brand No. Breed Date of inocula- tion Age at time of inocula- tion Reaction to serum- simultaneous inoculation Date of retest Interval between inoculation and test Reaction to test 1 147 ½ European . . 12-11-26 10 days . No appreciable reaction . 11-9-30 48 months Severe reactionIMMUNITY IN CALVES AGAINST RINDERPEST 135 11 394 Ditto . . 28-9-27 2 months . Ditto . . . 23-9-31 48 136 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II TABLE IIMMUNITY IN CALVES AGAINST RINDERPEST 137 38 10 Ditto . . 8-8-22 6 138 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II TABLE IIMMUNITY IN CALVES AGAINST RINDERPEST 139 65 49 Ditto . . 7-5-23 7 140 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II TABLE IIMMUNITY IN CALVES AGAINST RINDERPEST 141 91 39 ¼ European . . 1-12-22 15 142 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II Of the animals which completed the experiment, 53 showed no definitely appreciable reaction, either at the time of inoculation or after the test dose, and it is presumed that at the time of the initial inoculation the virus in most, if not all, of these animals was capable of multiplication and diffusion to a sufficient extent to stimulate a durable immunity, although the effect was not sufficient to produce symptoms appreciable to the ordinary methods of clinical examination. Support is lent to this view by the fact that the great majority of the animals in this group were immunised between the ages of 4IMMUNITY IN CALVES AGAINST RINDERPEST 143 TABLE II. Distribution of X European calves reacting to test dose, according to age at immunisation, and interval of test. Age at time of immunisation Interval between Immunisation and test Total. Percentage reacted to test Up to 12 months 13144 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II TABLE III. Distribution of indigenous calves reacting to test dose according to age at immunisation, and interval of test. Age at time of Immunisation Interval between Immunisation and test Total Percentage reacted to test Up to 12 months 13-24 months 25-36 months 37-48 months No. immu- nised No. reacted to test No. immu- nised No. reacted to test No. immu- nised No. reacted to test No. immu- nised No. reacted to test No. immu- nised No. reacted to test Up to 3 months .. .. .. .. 4 1 .. .. 4 1 25 4IMMUNITY IN CALVES AGAINST RINDERPEST 145 The relation of age to lack or loss of immunity is particularly well marked in the European crossbred animals, although not so evident in the calves of indigenous breeds, probably on account of the smaller numbers involved in the age groups in which breakdowns occurred. Further there is with increasing age at the time of inoculation a decrease in the severity of the reaction to the test dose. The only animal in the whole series which died as a direct result of rinderpest was inoculated when 14 days old and tested 31 months later, which would indicate quite a wide range in the degree of immunity conferred by the original inoculation. Owing to inequality of numbers in the various age groups as compared with the period of test it is not possible to decide whether the immunity conferred originally wanes proportionately to the interval allowed before test or whether the evidence of incomplete immunity at the time of test indicates that only this degree of immunity was conferred at the time of the first inoculation. We are inclined to believe that the immunity conferred by the first inocula- tion does not remain constant but decreases more or less rapidly, depending on the individual, until the stage of complete susceptibility is once more reached.
146 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II TABLE IV. Distribution of calves reacting to test dose arranged in approximately equal numerical groups according to age at immunisation and interval of test. Age at time of Immunisa- tion Interval between immunisation and test Total Percentage reacted to test Up to 12 months 13IMMUNITY IN CALVES AGAINST RINDERPEST 147 In Table IV we have attempted to place the calves in groups, as numerically equal as possible, according to their age at the time of immunisation and the interval of time between immunisation and test, and we consider that the figures in the " total " columns, vertical and horizontal, of this Table indicate the relation- ship of these two factors to the duration of immunity, and also support our belief stated above. In general the results obtained in these experiments are in conformity with those obtained by other workers, and we conclude that in India calves under 4 months should not be submitted to the serum-simultaneous method of inoculation as the immunity conferred, if any, is too short to be of any practical value. In calves over this age, however, the method is applicable as the economy effected in serum, and the early reduction of the number of unprotected animals in a herd, will more than counterbalance the small percentage of cases of incomplete immunity of short duration. As a further precaution to eliminate these doubtful cases, it appears to us advisable to re-inoculate all animals immunised in calf-hood with a dose of virus148 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II SUMMARY. 1. The results of serum-simultaneous inoculation carried out in 98 calves of various indigenous and European × indigenous breeds are reported together with the results of immunity tests carried out at various intervals. 2. The serum-simultaneous inoculation of calves under 4 months old is con- sidered to be of little practical value. 3. The serum-simultaneous inoculation of calves four months old and upwards is recommended as economical. Better results can be obtained if the virus inocula- tion is repeated 12-18 months after the serum-simultaneous inoculation. 4. The severity of the reaction at the time of immunisation as judged by the presence or absence of clinical symptoms did not give any indication of the dura- tion of immunity within the maximum test period (4 years). All calves showing a reaction which could be definitely attributed to rinderpest were immune for this period. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. The experiments recorded in this article were planned and carried out under the direction of Dr. J. T. Edwards, D.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., late Director of this Institute, to whom we tender our acknowledgments. ;We also desire to thank Mr. H. Cooper, M.R.C.V.S., for guidance in the execution of the work, and Mr. J. R. Haddow, B.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., D.V.S.M., for assistance in the preparation of the records. REFERENCES. Askar, Mohammad Bey (1924). Experiments to determine the susceptibility of weaned calves to Cattle Plague. Ministry of Agriculture, Egypt, Bull. No. 42. Croveri, P. (1919). Bull Soc. Path. Exot., 12, 2, 65-71. Doutressoulle (1924). Rec. Med. Vet., 100, 464-468. Edwards, J. T. (1927). Trans. Seventh Cong. Far East Assn. Trop. Med., Calcutta, 3, 707-717. Montgomery, R. E. (1915-16). Ann. Rep. Dept. Agr., British East Africa, p. 66. Pool, W. A. (1921). The Serum Simultaneous Method of Inoculation against Rinderpest. Agr. Res. Inst., Pusa, Bull. No. 120. Rabagliati, D. S. (1924). J. Comp. Path. and Ther., 37, 1-18. Walker, J. (1921). Experiments and Observation in connection with (1) Rinderpest Immunisa- tion, (2) Pleuro-pneumonia Contagiosa Bovum (lung-sickness), and the Preventive Method of Inoculation. Dept. Agr. Kenya Bull. No. 2. --------------(1929). Rinderpest Research in Kenya. Dept. Agr. Kenya Bull. No. 8-A.
ON THE FRACTIONAL PRECIPITATION OF THE ANTIBODY CONTAINING PROTEIN OF ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM: PART I, PRELIMINARY COMMUNICATION BY J. R. HADDOW, B.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., D.V.S.M., I.V.S., K. C. SEN, D.Sc., AND A. C. ROY, M.Sc., Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on 1st February 1933.) INTRODUCTION. The nature of the antibodies occurring in the serum of immunised animals has been the subject of much study in recent years, and numerous experiments have been carried out to separate the particular fraction of the serum with which anti- bodies are associated from other serum proteins which appear to be inert in this respect. Many of these experiments have been undertaken with the object of isolating a particular antibody and of studying its chemical and physical properties. A review of this aspect of the subject has been given by Hartley [1931], and al- though a complete separation of antibodies free from proteins has not been effected up till now, Frankel and Olitzki [1930] and Frankel [1932] being probably the only workers claiming to have done so, these fractionation experiments have been utilised in concentrating an immune serum by discarding other fractions which do not appear to contain any antibody. The greater part of these experiments has been done on antitoxic sera, and a number of investigators have shown that the protective substances or antibodies present in immune sera are associated with the globulin fraction of the serum, either with the so-called euglobulin, with the pseudoglobulin, or with both, depending on the antigen and also on the experimental animal. Thus Seng [1899] demonstrated that diphtheria antitoxin was associated with the soluble globulin or pseudoglobulin fraction of horse serum, and this obser- vation of Seng was supported by Pick [1901]. The latter worker, however, showed that in goats immunised against diphtheria toxin the euglobulin fraction instead of the pseudoglobulin fraction contained the antitoxin, and that tetanus antitoxin (149) C 2
150 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II was associated with the pseudoglobulin fraction in the serum of horses immunised against tetanus toxin. The same author found that typhoid agglutinins of horse serum were contained in the pseudoglobulin fraction, while cholera lysin and cholera agglutinin in the horse and goat occurred in the euglobulin fraction. According to Gibson and Collins [1907] the agglutinins for the dysentery group of organisms, typhoid, coli, and cholera, are not confined to either of the globulin fractions. Landsteiner [1900] showed that the substance occurring in normal serum which exerts an antitryptic effect is associated with the albumin fraction of the serum, and this was confirmed by Cathcart [1904]. Opie and Barker [1907] found that an anti-leucoprotcase occurs in serum albumin. The presence of an antiviral body in antiviral serum was first demonstrated by Sternberg [1892] in an anti-vaccinial serum, and Béclère, Chambon, and Menard [1899], in attempting to locate these bodies, found them to be associated only with the globulin fraction of the serum. Hartley [1914] attempted to concentrate an antiviral serum by salt- ing out the different protein fractions. Working with anti-rinderpest serum he found the antibodies to be exclusively associated with the euglobulin fraction and not with the pseudoglobulin or albumin fractions, which he has shown to have no protective powers. Henseval [1919] found that all the protein fractions of anti- vaccinial serum including the albumin portion possessed some degree of antiviral activity, but Findlay [1931] has recently demonstrated that the immune body responsible for the protective action of rabbit anti-vaccinial serum is associated with the globulin fraction, the major part of it being with the euglobulin portion and the smaller with the pseudoglobulin. Ledingham, Morgan and Petrie [1931] have obtained an anti-vaccinial serum by hyper-immunisation of the horse with the virus of vaccinia, and they have found that the antiviral body is associated with the euglobulin as well as with the pseudoglobulin fractions of the serum, but not with albumin. In horse anti-poliomyelitis serum Morgan and Fairbrother [1930] found the highest concentration of the antibody in the euglobulin portion although there was a general distribution of the antibody throughout the serum proteins. Weyer, Park and Banzhaf [1929], on the other hand, had previously located the antibodies of anti-poliomyelitis serum in the pseudoglobulin fraction alone. Felton [1925, 1928] in a series of experiments on anti-pneumococcus serum finds that the major part of the protective bodies are associated with that small fraction of globulin which occurs near the border line of the salt precipitation limits of euglobulin and pseudoglobulin. Goodner [1930] locates the antibodies of anti meningococcus serum in the Felton fraction of the serum, and it seems that the distemper antibody is also associated with the same fraction [Laidlaw and Dunkin, 1931]. Mallick and Maitra [1932] have found that the antibodies of anti-venomous horse serum are mainly associated with the pseudoglobulin fraction. It will thus
PRECIPITATION OF ANTIBODY FROM ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM 151 be observed from this general review of the literature that a large amount of work has been done on the fractionation of immune serum and more or less definite knowledge has been gained as to the nature of the protein fractions with which the antibodies in different types of anti-sera are associated. Since, however, the nature of the different precipitated fractions of the protein depend on the nature of the precipitant used, it is considered advisable to give a short summary of the precipitation methods hitherto used before the object of the present research is detailed. One of the earliest workers on this subject was Dieudonné [1897], who found that globulins precipitated by means of carbon dioxide and acetic acid contained no antitoxin, but all the antitoxin was precipitated on saturation with magnesium sulphate. This work was done on anti-diphtheria serum. Belfanti and Carbone [1898] and Seng [1899] used the same method of precipitation. Brieger and Boer [1893], and Astros and Rietsch [1900] precipitated the globulins and antitoxin by means of the chlorides of sodium and potassium. Hiss and Atkinson [1901] used magnesium sulphate. Ammonium sulphate is, however, probably the most widely used salt for precipitating euglobulin and total globulin, and some of the early users of this substance were Brieger and Ehrlich [1893], Wasserman [1894], Brodie [1897], Pick [1901], Gibson [1906], Ledingham [1907], Gibson and Benzhaf [1910], and Hartley [1914]. Among recent workers with this method may be mentioned the names of Findlay, and Ledingham, Morgan and Petrie, reference to whose work has already been made. Most of these authors used a solution of ammonium sulphate, but Barr, Glenny, and Pope [1931] have recently pointed out the supe- riority of using solid ammonium sulphate in many of these fractionations. Felton (loc. cit.) has introduced a modification of the older method of acid precipitation, and both he and Goodner (loc. cit.) found that more than 80 per cent. of the immune bodies are precipitated by this method. The principle of the method is that the anti-serum is brought down to a certain hydrogen ion concentration at a dilution of 1: 10, and the resulting precipitate containing most of the immune bodies is filtered off. OBJECT OF THE PRESENT INVESTIGATION. Although, as already mentioned, Felton's experiments were carried out with anti-pneumococcus serum, it seemed to us that his methods might be applicable to anti-rinderpest serum. According to Hartley [1914] the antibodies in anti-rinder- pest serum are mainly associated with the water insoluble protein, and it was thought probable that most of the antibodies would be precipitated with the so- called Felton fraction. In large scale work on the separation of antibodies, this
152 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II would be advantageous because, apart from introducing another salt into the system, the trouble of dialysing the added ammonium sulphate, when this method is employed, is removed. Nothing is, however, known about the relative efficiency of these two methods in the precipitation of antibodies from anti-rinderpest serum, so a comparative study was first required, and it was considered desirable to obtain some data on the following points :PRECIPITATION OF ANTIBODY FROM ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM 153 From these four sera the following different fractions were prepared:154 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II everyday to prevent bacterial decomposition. When the precipitate was free from ammonium sulphate, it was redissolved in normal saline and the volume made up to the original volume of the serum used. The pH was adjusted to 7.6PRECIPITATION OF ANTIBODY FROM ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM 155 and rinderpest virus are inoculated simultaneously into a number of susceptible hill bulls, while for control a group of healthy bulls is inoculated with virus alone. From the nature and degree of the reaction shown by the animal, the protective value of the anti-serum can be approximately estimated. As our tests were merely to obtain a preliminary indication of the value of the methods used, in most cases only two bulls were used for each sample. The period of observation was in all cases 15 days and our results based on the observations made on the most susceptible animal in each case. These results are tabulated below :156 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, II interest to note here that there was no perceptible difference in the potencies of the two fractions of insoluble proteins obtained at two different pH, namely, 6.8 and 6.4, and it may be mentioned that Felton also did not find much difference in the potencies of water precipitated fractions of anti-pneumococcus serum when the pH range was between 6.0 and 7.0. With regard to the total globulin fraction, the test clearly indicates that more immune bodies have been precipitated with the total globulin than with the euglobulin (ammonium sulphate method). This observation is contrary to Hartley's earlier finding that the whole of the antibodies of anti-rinderpest serum are associated with the euglobulin fraction; at least this appears to be the case when we are dealing with the euglobulin fraction which is precipitable by one-third saturation with ammonium sulphate. It is interesting, however, to find that the potencies of the total globulin fraction and the water-insoluble protein fraction do not differ greatly, and this observation seems to indicate that in the so-called water-insoluble protein (the Felton fraction), we have probably obtained a precipita- tion of a protein fraction which lies on the border line between the fractions usually designated as euglobulin and pseudoglobulin, and that the immune bodies of anti- rinderpest serum are associated not only with the euglobulin fraction, but to a certain extent also with the pseudoglobulin fraction. In this connection it is of interest to refer to the work of Chick [1914] and Sörensen [1925], who believe that it is almost impossible to obtain a complete separation of euglobulin and pseudo- globulin, which are associated as a labile compound, and to the results of Svedberg and Sjögren [1928] on the homogeneous nature of native serum globulin. The recent investigation of Reiner and Reiner [1932] on the physical and chemical properties of different fractions of serum globulin may also be referred to. It is considered that the data in this paper are too meagre to permit of further discussion on this point at present. It is, however, indicated that the total globulin fraction and to a lesser extent the water-insoluble protein fraction give better separation of the antibodies of anti-rinderpest serum than the euglobulin fraction (ammonium sulphate method). In the case of samples 3 and 4 the idea was not only to ascertain the relative amount of antibodies in the different protein fractions, but also to determine whether the precipitated fractions can be dissolved in a much less volume of saline than the volume of the original serum used, and, thus concentrated, if this solution would show a relatively higher potency without a great increase or indeed without any increase, in the volume of the actual dose administered. Unfortunately, owing to difficulty experienced during dialysis, concentration to the degree originally anticipated was not possible, and where further concentration was
PRECIPITATION OF ANTIBODY FROM ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM 157 attempted by partial drying under vacuum at a slightly elevated temperature the results were unsatisfactory owing to a defect in the apparatus at our disposal. The euglobulin fraction of sample 3 was concentrated four times, i.e., the precipitate was dissolved in ¼ the volume of the original serum. The globulin fraction of sample 3 as well as the two fractions from sample 4 were concentrated twice. The result of the test of these sera and the original sera are given in the accompanying Table. The dose of serum in the Table is given in terms of the concentrated fractions. Test results of samples 3 and 4. Sample. Dose of serum per 100 lbs. Initial condition. Final condition. Percentage potency based on relative loss or gain in weight. 3 15 c.c. Fair Worse 55 3 a 15 c.c. Poor 158 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, II sample 3, and the results of sample 4 and its derived fractions that, with more experience on a larger scale, standard concentration on a practical basis may yet be attained. In conclusion we may remark that this preliminary investigation has covered roughly the three points for the study of which the present research was started and the results so far obtained are summarised later on. Much more work will be necessary before satisfactory conclusions can be formulated but we should like to mention here that current experiments on a larger scale, which will be published later, already confirm the indications of the tests reported now. Several difficul- ties of a practical nature have also been encountered, and in a future communica- tion these will be discussed. SUMMARY. (1) An experimental investigation has been carried out on the fractionation of the antibody containing proteins of anti-rinderpest serum by several methods and an attempt has also been made to concentrate the antibodies after fractionation. The potencies of the different fractions have been estimated by animal inoculation experiments on " hill bulls " susceptible to rinderpest virus. (2) The total globulin fraction precipitated by half saturation with ammonium sulphate appears more potent than either the water insoluble protein fraction, or the euglobulin fraction obtained by one-third saturation with ammonium sulphate. (3) Attempts made to concentrate low potency sera by fractionation of the sntibodies and their subsequent concentration have given encouraging results. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We desire to express our thanks to Mr. F. Ware. F.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., Director, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar-Kumaun, for his encourage- ment and helpful suggestions throughout the course of this work, and also to Mr. P. C. Banerji, Veterinary Deputy Superintendent, for his supervision of the animals while under test. REFERENCES. Astros and Rietsch (1900). Compt. Rend. Soc. Biol. 52, 337. Barr, Glenny and Pope (1931). Brit. J. Exp. Path. 12, 217. Béclère. Chambon and Menard (1899). Ann. Inst. Past. 13, 81. Belfanti and Carbone (1898). Zeit. f. Bact. 23, 906. Brieger and Boer (1896). Zeit. f. Hygiene. 21, 259. Brieger and Ehrlich (1893). Zeit. f. Hygiene. 13, 336. Brodie (1897). Jour. Path. and Bact. 4, 460. Cathcart (1904). Jour. Physiol. 31, 497. Chick, H. (1914). Biochem. Jour. 8, 404.
PRECIPITATION OF ANTIBODY FROM ANTI-RINDERPEST SERUM 159 Dieudonné (1897). Arbeiten aus dem Kaiserlischen Gesundheitsamte, 13, 293. Felton, L. D. (1925). J. Inf. Dis. 37, 199, 309. A PRELIMINARY REPORT ON THE SUCCESSFUL INFECTION WITH NASAL SCHISTOSOMIASIS IN EXPERIMENTAL CALVES BY M. ANANT NARAYAN RAO, Lecturer in Parasitology, Madras Veterinary College. (Received for publication on 27th March 1933.) It has been established that, in the nasal lesions and in the nasal discharges of the so-called nasal granuloma of cattle, schistosome ova of a typical shape are met with, and from the lesions worms have also been obtained and described. The experiment recorded here was designed with a view to determine the kind of cercariæ involved, the intermediary host and also the period of incubation as there is no recorded evidence of any work having been done. There were two ways open to the writer of elucidating the points in question. One way was by infecting different kinds of freshwater mollusca, bred in the laboratory, with the miracidia obtained from the ova in the nasal lesions and utilising the cercariæ thus obtained for infection in bovines. The other, the easier alternative, was to obtain different kinds of mollusca from the freshwater ponds or tanks, used by cattle in villages, where nasal schistosomiasis is endemic, and to utilise for infection the apharyngeal cercariæ discharged by the snails. The latter method was adopted. To effect this the writer, in June 1932, visited Nammiandal, a village in North Arcot District, where nasal schistosomiasis is enzootic and collected snails mostly Planorbis exustus (Deshayes) from the tank there. These snails discharged two species of apharyngeal cercariæ, viz., one resembling cercariæ of Schistosoma spindalis described by Soparkar in 1921 and another resembling Cercariæ IndicSUCCESSFUL INFECTION WITH NASAL SCHISTOSOMIASIS IN CALVES 161 Indicæ XXX was much more than with the cercariæ resembling those of S. spin- dalis. In order to compare the difference in incidence in areas where this disease is less prevalent, snails were obtained in September 1932 from Conjeevaram and it was found that the rate of infection in the mollusca with Ceroariæ Indicæ XXX was almost negligible when compared with the rate of infection with cercariæ of S. spindalis. In the same month a large number of snails were also collected from the Spur Tank, Madras, in which buffaloes wallow practically all the year round and where no cases of Nasal Schistosomiasis have been noticed. It was found that from the snails collected here only a small percentage of Planorbis exustus dis- charged cercariæ resembling those of S. spindalis, and none resembling the other was present. From the above it was clear that Cercariæ Indicæ XXX predominated over those of S. spindalis in the villages Nammiandal and Bandarlapalli where Nasal Schistosomiasis is endemic; hence it was thought possible that the former may develop into the adult Schistosomes found in Nasal Schistosomiasis. With this idea in view one calf (No. 409) was infected with the few available cercariæ from two or three snails that remained out of the collection obtained from Conjeevaram at the end of September. In December 1932, soon after the rains, the writer collected on 3rd December 1932 and on 28th December 1932 two batches of snails amounting, in all, to 2,975 Planorbis exustus and 2,050 Limnea leuteola from the pond in Bandarlapalli. The rate of infection in these was found to be 1.27 per cent. and 1.71 per cent. respec- tively. Two more calves (Nos. 410 and 411) were obtained, and these two along with the previous one were infected by three different methods. Calf No. 410 was drenched with water containing approximately 4,000 cercariæ per dose; calf No. 411 was infected by the nose by applying to the mucous membrane of the nostrils with a pipette, about 4,000 cercariæ per dose; and calf No. 409 was drenched with water containing approximately 2,000 cercariæ per dose and at the same time about 1,000 cercariæ were applied to the mucous membrane of the nose. The calves got a daily dose of cercariæ from 6th December 1932 to 14th December 1932 and again from 31st December 1932 to 5th January 1933. The idea in giving repeated doses for a few days was to simulate the supposed natural infection. Perhaps the animals in the villages get daily doses of infection while drinking water from a pond and this is continued as long as they drink from the same infected pond. The pond water at Bandarlapalli was subjected to an examination regarding the apharyngeal furcocercarial content and it was found that on an average there were three furcocercariæ per cubic centimeter of water. Assuming that an average-sized bovine drank about 6 gallons of water per day,
162 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II the total dose of cercariæ swallowed would be about 15,630, in addition to what might burrow through the skin. Though in the natural mode of infection these animals might get comparatively larger doses than it is possible to give under experimental conditions, yet it would appear that Nasal Schistosomiasis can be produced in calves with comparatively smaller doses of cercariæ. On the 3rd day of infection in the nose, the muffle of calves Nos. 409 and 411 showed dryness, the edges showed scaling of the epithelium and the mucous membrane too was reddened with small red dots on it. These symptoms disappeared in about a week after the first course of application of cercariæ. Similar symptoms were again noticed during the second course of application of cercariæ to the nose. The nasal washings and fæces of the three calves were periodically examined from the last week of January 1933. From about the 15th February calves Nos. 409 and 411 showed a thin discharge from the nose and occasional sneezing was observed in the latter. On 28th February 1933 a few small beads of pus were seen in the nostrils of calf No. 411 and when the discharge was examined, it showed ova resembling those found in nasal schistosomiasis and all of them contained live miracidia. On 3rd March 1933 calf No. 409 also showed suppurative foci on the mucous membrane of the nose, and on 4th March 1933 ova were seen in the nasal discharge as in the other. This experiment shows that the minimum period of incubation in the two calves is roughly 3 months. Calf No. 410 has been showing a discharge from the nose but no ova have been found in it up to the time of writing this paper. So far none of the calves showed ova of S. spindalis in their fæces. It is my pleasant duty to acknowledge my indebtedness to Mr. T. J. Hurley, M.R.C.V.S., D.V.S.M., Principal, Madras Veterinary College, for the valuable suggestion of infecting one calf in the nose only and the calf infected in this way has shown the disease first. I am also grateful to Mr. P. T. Saunders, O.B.E., M.R.C.V.S., Director of Veterinary Services, Madras, for obtaining sanction to conduct these experiments, and to Messrs. A. Ramaswamy Ayyar, K. P. Dorai- swamy, L. S. Parameswara Ayyar and S. Vaidynatha Mudaliar for all the help rendered by them in this work. My thanks are also due to Mr. R. Narasinga Rao, District Veterinary Officer, Madras, for providing me with snails from Conjeevaram on two occasions.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Lateral view of the anterior end ×830. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Dorsal view of the anterior end × 830. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Posterior extremity of female × 830. Setaria buxi.
ON A FEW NEMATODES PARASITIC IN GOATS AT MUKTESAR BY G. D. BHALERAO, M.Sc., Helminthologist, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on 3rd August 1932.) (With three text-figures.) Setaria buxi n. sp. Only one female specimen was obtained from the peritoneal cavity of a hill goat at Muktesar by Mr. Gurubux Singh who very kindly placed it at my disposal for which I wish to express my indebtedness to him. The worm is of medium size, measuring 45.2 * in length and the maximum thickness which is attained at some distance behind the 164 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II Yorke and Maplestone [1926] listed seventeen species under the genus Setaria, out of which eight species : S. bicoronata, S. cælum, S. cornula, S. scalprum, S. transversata, S. effilata, S. bidentata and S spelaea have been insufficiently described and Thwaite [1927] is somewhat sceptical in regard to their inclusion in this genus. Out of the remaining nine species Purvis [1931] has definitely shown that S. digitata is a synonym of S. labiato-papillosa, since he found that the outline of the lateral lips and the nature of the terminal knob of the tail of the female, the characters which were supposed to distinguish the two species from one another, vary from specimen to specimen. Boulenger [1921] and Thwaite [1927], however, regard these as two distinct species. Five additional species of the genus have been described by Thwaite [1927], viz., S. poultoni, S. southwelli. S. boulengeri, S. pillersi and S. Yorkei. Subsequently to this Issaitschikow and Rajewsky [1928] added S. tundra, Rajewsky [1929] added the species S. altaica and the species S. loveridgei was described by Sandground [1928]. The account of the last one was not accessible to me in India. Out of these species the present specimen comes closer to the species S. labiato-papillosa, S. poultoni and S. equina; but from all these it can be distinguished by the following features :NEMATODES PARASITIC IN GOATS AT MUKTESAR 165 Oesophagoslomum asperum Railliet and Henry, 1913. This species was recorded for the first time from the Panama Canal Zone by Railliet and Henry [1913]. Subsequent to this date Goodey [1924] recorded its presence in China and the Federated Malay States. The writer has obtained these specimens along with the species O. columbianum and occasionally with O. venulosum from the cæcum of hill goats (Capra sibirica) at Muktesar. This is therefore the first record of the species in India. Gongylonema verrucosum (Giles, 1892). This species has, up to the present, been recorded by several writers only from the sheep, ox and zebu in India and South Africa. It has not so far been recovered from goats in any country. The writer during the course of the last two years obtained this species on several occasions from hill goats (Capra sibirica) at Muktesar. This is therefore the first record in the world of this parasite from goats. REFERENCES. Baylis, H. A. (1929). A Manual of Helminthology. London, xi+303 pp. Boulenger, C. L. (1921). Parasitol. 12, 341ON TWO UNRECORDED NEMATODES FROM THE ABOMASUM OF CATTLE IN INDIA* BY G. D. BHALERAO, M.Sc., Helminthologist, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on 24th March 1933.) (With eleven text figures.) The worms dealt with in this paper are two nematodes which have been col- lected on several occasions from the abomasum of cattle at Muktesar. The cattle in all cases were the hill bulls that are used at this Institute for maintaining the rinderpest virus. It is a matter of some surprise that in spite of the common occurrence of these worms no record of their existence has yet been made from any part of India. The present opportunity is therefore taken to supply a descrip- tion of these very interesting specimens. Capillaria bilobata n. sp. The worms were found in the contents of the abomasum and were not attached to its walls. The worms are thread-like being much thinner than sewing cotton, increasing gradually in thickness from the anterior to the posterior end without any marked increase in the post-NEMATODES FROM ABOMASUM OF CATTLE IN INDIA 167 into the minute 168 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II posterior end almost at the commencement of the rectum and proceeds anteriorly for a distance of nearly 5. The oviduct is a very small and somewhat narrow tube which enlarges into a broad uterus. As a rule very few ova are seen at the com- mencement of the uterus to a distance of nearly 0.8. The part of the uterus that follows contains a large number of ova which are packed to its utmost capacity. In the last portion of the uterus the ova appear to be arranged in a line one behind the other. This portion of the uterus is followed by a long muscular vagina measuring 0.235- 0.254 in length. The eggs (Fig. 6) are lemon-shaped and measure 0.033NEMATODES FROM ABOMASUM OF CATTLE IN INDIA 169 Capillaria longipes Ransom, 1911. Capillaria brevipes Ransom, 1911. Capillaria sp. Morgan, 1925. Capillaria bovis Schnyder, 1906. Capillaria bilobuta Bhalerao, 1933. Length of lateral alæ. 0.3 0.2170 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II Hæmonchus similis Travassos, 1914. This species has so far been recorded by Travassos [1914 and 1921] from cattle only in Brazil and Europe. There exists up to the present time no record of its presence in the orient. This therefore forms the first occasion on which it is being recorded from the latter region. On comparing the material at my disposal with the description given by Travassos [1921] it was found that my specimens differ in some respects from the original material, particularly in regard to the position of the vulva, the terminal portions of the female genitalia and to a little extent the nature of the rays supporting the dorsal asymmetrical lobe of the bursa: the other points of difference being of minor character. All these points of difference may have been due to observations on a limited amount of material at the disposal of Travassos. The present opportunity is therefore taken to describe in full detail the material at my disposal. The worms are small, cylindrical, thin and brownish red in colour. On many occasions they were found associated with Hæmonchus contortus but an infection exclusively due to these worms was not infrequent. The cuticle in both the sexes is finely striated transversely and longitudinal striations as many as 26 in number were also noticed. The cervical papillæ are quite prominent and pyramidal. The excretory pore and the nerve ring are situated almost at the same level, anterior to the cervical papillæ. The NEMATODES FROM ABOMASUM OF CATTLE IN INDIA 171 lateral ray divides into three branches : the postero-lateral, the medio-lateral and the antero-lateral. The first of these is the stoutest of the three and is almost straight. The other two are bent dorsally. The externo-dorsal ray which also supports the lateral lobe of the bursa is the most slender of all the rays and is almost straight and of uniform thickness. The arrangement of the rays supporting the lateral lobes of the bursa are, as will be seen, from the above, exactly iden- tical with those described and figured by Travassos. They also agree, as pointed out by Travassos, in the following descending order of stoutness :172 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II resembles, more or less, the one that I described [ Bhalerao, 1932 ] for Ostertagia orientalis. The non-muscular portion of the ovijector leads into the uterus. The muscular portion of the uterus measures 0.14 and the non-muscular portion 0.165 in length. The uteri are divergent and contain a fairly large number of ova. The ovaries pass forwards approximately up to the anterior two-fifths and are spirally coiled round the intestine as in H. contortus. The eggs measure 0.053NEMATODES FROM ABOMASUM OF CATTLE IN INDIA 173 Fig. 3. Capillaria bilobata.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 6.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 7. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 8. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 9. E
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 10. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 11-A.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 11-B. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 11-0. E 2
THE RÔLE OF MINERALS IN CALF FEEDING BY A. C. CHAUDHURI, B.Sc., Ph.D. (EDIN.), Professor of Hygiene, Dietetics and Animal Breeding, Bihar and Orissa Veterinary College, Patna. (Received for publication on the 19th July 1932.) (With one fig.) The present experiment was planned and carried out with the idea of finding some means to improve the condition of a number of calves which were very back- ward in growth at the cattle breeding farm attached to the Bihar and Orissa Veteri- nary College. It was found that in the herd of calves in the farm there were a large number of them which were lean, small and unthrifty in condition though otherwise they were quite healthy. In studying the causes which might have produced this backward condition, it became apparent that the calves were insufficiently nourished and attention was therefore directed to finding a suitable milk substitute to be given in conjunction with the milk ration. An experiment was carried out in Aberdeen and Edinburgh by Orr, Crichton, Shearer and Speedy [1929] to rear calves with a minimum amount of milk plus some milk substitute without in any way interfering with a satisfactory rate of growth. They were able to maintain in the experimental calves a satisfactory rate of growth, as compared with the controls which received a full milk ration, by supplying a small amount of milk, and a supplement consisting of an appropriate protein and mineral mixture with a little cod liver oil added to it, to make the composition of the ration more like that of milk. An investigation carried on with poultry in 1923 showed that a great impetus to the growth rate could be given by the addition to a cereal ration of small quan- tities of mineral salts having a composition closely allied to that of the minerals in eggs. Later in 1925 in Scotland and Northern Ireland it was demonstrated that the addition of milk to a ration of mixed cereals doubled the rate of growth in chicks and that for this purpose separated milk was as good as whole milk. From these experiments it is evident that minerals play an important part in growth ; unless sufficient minerals of the right kinds are available in the food sup- plied, a satisfactory rate of growth is not maintained. Ordinarily the milk of the dam is the natural food for calves and satisfactory growth is obtained from it when supplied in sufficient quantity. It is found that (174)
THE RÔLE OF MINERALS IN CALF FEEDING 175 when the amount of milk supply is reduced but sufficient amount of well balanced concentrates are supplied, even then the rate of growth is reduced. The reduction is probably due to the lack of the proper kind and amount of minerals, proper kind of protein and the accessory factors that are present in the milk. The present experiment was undertaken to find out whether it was possible to improve the condition of the calves which were distinctly very backward in growth, by adding a mineral supplement and to find out the best means of supplying the accessory factors present in milk. In India where the average milk yield of cows is very poor, it is a difficult problem to maintain a satisfactory rate of growth of calves because it is not possible always to spare sufficient milk for them. This being so, it becomes evident, that if a suitable substitute can be obtained to take the place of the milk of which they are deprived, their rate of growth and general condition will materially improve. MATERIAL AND METHOD. The experiment was carried out in the Government Cattle Farm, Phulwari. In this experiment 15 of the most backward calves that could be selected from the herd were taken. The age of the calves varied from one week to seven months and they were all of Tharparkar breed except one which was from a cross between a Tharpar- kar bull and a Shahabad cow. The calves were arranged in three groups, in such a way that the total weight of each group was as nearly as possible the same. The animals were distributed in each group according to their age, sex and weight as evenly as possible. This was the best arrangement that could be made in the absence of calves of the desired kind and of the same age and weight. The three groups were kept in three separate pens ; had their distinguishing permanent numbers in their ears, and each group was provided with tin discs marked A, B and C according to the group to which the animals belonged. They had access to a common enclosure for exercise. All the calves were provided with twine muzzles when they were in the paddock to prevent them from eating any grass or green stuff and were fed twice daily, the food consisting of equal parts of linseed cake and crushed oats as much as they could eat and rice straw was provided ad lib. The difference in feeding among the three groups was that the group " A " was kept as control, and fed on concentrates and straw. Group " B " received concen- trates and' straw plus mineral mixture. Group " C " received concentrates and straw, mineral mixture, and 4 ozs. of whole milk per head per day. The milk was given to see whether the accessory factors present in the small amount of milk provided would make any difference in the rate of growth.
176 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, II The mineral mixture used was :Average weight per calf. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1.
THE RÔLE OF MINERALS IN CALF FEEDING 177 TABLE I. Date of weighing. Total weight of group " A " in lbs. Total weight of group "B" in lbs. Total weight of group "C" in lbs. Average weight per calf. Group "A". Group " B ". Group " C ". Lbs. oz. Lbs. oz. Lbs. oz. Lbs. Lbs. Lbs. 10-8-31 . . 555 0 560 0 557 0 111.0 1120 111.4 18-8-31 . . 572 0 572 0 567 0 114.4 114.4 113.4 29-8-31 . . 606 8 618 0 612 8 121.3 123.6 122.5 1-9-31 . . 610 6 621 12 616 4 122.9 124.3 123.2 8-9-31 . . 615 12 653 12 618 2 123.1 130.7 123.6 15-9-31 . . 630 8 666 4 643 8 126.1 133.2 128.7 22-9-31 . . 675 0 714 0 679 0 135.0 142.8 135.8 29-9-31 . . 695 0 752 0 724 0 139.0 150.4 144.8 6-10-31 . . 719 0 771 0 771 0 143.8 154.2 154.2 14-10-31 . . 734 0 782 0 820 0 146.8 156.4 164.0 20-10-31 . . 786 0 834 0 877 0 157.2 166.8 175.4 27-10-31 . . 814 0 861 0 895 0 162.8 172.2 179.0 3-11-31 . . 844 12 885 0 943 14 168.9 177.0 188.7 10-11-31 . . 858 0 926 0 1,011 0 171.6 185.2 202.2 17-11-31 . . 900 0 954 0 1,040 0 180.0 190.8 208.0 24-11-31 . . 925 8 964 0 1,098 0 185.1 192.8 219.6 2-12-31 . . 958 0 1,019 12 1,159 0 191.8 203.9 231.8 8-12-31 . . 1,006 0 1,078 0 1,206 0 201.2 215.6 241.2 15-12-31 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22-12-31 . . 1,079 0 1,151 0 1,316 0 215.8 230.2 263.2 29-12-31 . . . . . . .. . . . . . . 5-1-32 . . 1,166 0 1,260 0 1,446 0 233.2 252.0 289.2 12-1-32 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19-1-32 . . 1,230 0 1,328 0 1,510 0 246.0 265.6 302.0 Table II shows the net weekly increases of each group and the total amount of food consumed each week. It will be seen that the total amount of food con- sumed is practically the same in each group. The consumption is rather a little more in group " A " than in either " B " or " C ".
178 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II TABLE II. Serial No, Period. Group A. Group B. Group C. Total food consumed. Total weight gained. Total food consumed. Total Weight gained. Total food consumed. Total weight gained. Lbs. oz. Lbs. oz. Lbs. oz. Lbs. oz. Lbs. oz. Lbs. oz. 1 18th to 24th August 1931. 61 2 . . 51 0 . . 61 0 . . 2 25th to 31st August 1931. 75 13 38 6 73 4 49 12 70 0 49 4 3 1st to 7th September 1931. 92 4 5 6 93 0 32 0 91 8 1 14 4 8th to 14th 1931. 99 8 14 12 97 8 12 8 96 0 26 6 5 15th to 21st THE RÔLE OF MINERALS IN CALF FEEDING nbsp; nbsp; nbsp; nbsp; nbsp; nbsp; nbsp; nbsp; nbsp; nbsp; nbsp; nbsp; 179 Up to the 2nd stage of the experiment none of the calves in any of the groups were allowed any green fodder. It was found that without any green fodder calves of both the groups " B " and " C " showed increase in weight over the calves of the control group " A ". Of " B " and " C ", the progress made by the calves of " C " group is most remark- able. At this stage it was thought to add cut green fooder in place of straw which consisted of chopped stalk of Jowar (Andropogon Sorghum) to the ration of all the groups and to find the effect on the growth. The results may be seen from Table III. It will be seen that during the period when green fodder was given there was a marked improvement in growth in all groups specially in group " B " than in group " A". This is probably due to certain elements and minerals present in the green fodder and which are necessary for proper growth. The condition of group " B " probably goes to prove that apart from minerals certain elements which are present either in milk or in green fodder are also necessary for growth. TABLE III. 180 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II At this stage it was decided to test the effect of the mineral supplement when the calves were allowed to graze with other calves of the farm. The condition of grazing at this time of the year is poor. It will be seen from Table III that there is a slight decrease in growth in all. But the gains made by both " B " and " C " were yet better than that made by " A ". The reduction is no doubt due to the poor condition of the pasture, that is to say, the pasture was deficient in minerals and those elements which help proper growth. DISCUSSION. It would appear from the results of this experiment that calves which are back- ward and unthrifty in condition are able to put on more weight when a suitable mineral mixture is added to their ratio n of concentrates. Their capacity to grow was more pronounced when in addition to a mineral supplement a small quantity of 4 ozs. of milk was supplied to them per head per day. This is due to the elements that are present in milk and which are also present in cod-liver oil as is found by the Aberdeen experiment. It will further be seen from the results that the addition of the minerals and those elements do not increase the weight by increasing their capacity to eat more food but by increasing their assimilating power. The total amount of food consumed and the total gain in weight by each group leads to such conclusion. The group " C " not only gained in weight but they showed also a marked improvement of their appearance and size. It is, however, not possible to furnish figures relating to the sizes, as no records were kept of their heights during the progress of the experiment. But at the end of experiment all the calves belong- ing to the group " C " appeared higher than those of the calves belonging to the groups " B " and " A ". In this experiment it is seen that the addition of a limited amount of green fodder has the effect of raising the rate of growth in all but this effect is much pronounced in group " B " which was so long getting as its food concentrates plus minerals supplement only. Green fodder was probably supplying those elements which help proper assimilation. During the last stage of the experiment all the calves were turned on to grazing but they all received their experimental foods. It is seen that the gain in weight made by " B " and " C " is still greater than that made by group "A" which indicates that the minerals obtained from grazing are not sufficient in quantity. If we turn our attention to the condition of the grazing we find that it was very poor during the period in question. That is why probably the group "A" failed to make the same rate of growth when the calves of the three groups were allowed to graze. From the results of this experiment it may be con- cluded that calves may be maintained in thriving condition with a limited milk ration plus a suitable mixture of concentrates and minerals. The condition of
THE RÔLE OF MINERALS IN CASE FEEDING 181 u nthrifty calves, which may be due to unbalanced food lacking in sufficient proper minerals, may be improved with the help of a ration mentioned in this experiment. SUMMARY. It was found that calves which were very stunted in growth improved in weight and condition when a mineral supplement was added into their daily ration. This improvement was very marked when a small quantity only about 4 ounces of milk was added to their ration in addition to the mineral supplement. The rate of growth was accelerated in the group " B " which received concen- trate and mineral supplement only, when green fodder was given to them. It was found that the calves of the groups " B " and " C " consumed com- paratively less food than the calves of the group " A " but put on more weight. This may be due to the fact that minerals helped them to assimilate more food. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. The author wishes to record his thanks to Mr. R. T. Davis, M. R. C. V. S., I. V. S., the principal of the college for giving permission and full facilities to carry out the experiment and for taking great interest in the work. Thanks are also due to the Farm Manager for offering facilities in the farm and to the Assistant for attending to the routine work of this experiment. REFERENCES. Orr, Crichton, Shearer and Speedy (1929). Scottish Journal of Agriculture 12, 2. Prentice, Baskett and Robertson (1928). The Nutrition of the chicks and its effect on growth, maturity, egg production and mortality. Pamphlet No. 37, Ministry of Agriculture, Belfast.
PAPERS ON INDIAN TABANIDAE, X*. THE LIFE-HISTORY OF TABANUS SPECIOSUS RIC. BY P. V. ISAAC, B.A., M. Sc. (London), D.I.C.; Offg. Imperial Entomologist, Imperial Institute of Agricultural Research, Pusa. (Received for publication on 3rd April 1933.) (With Plate XIII.) INTRODUCTION. Among the Tabanidæ of India Tabanas speciosus Ric. is one of the largest in size. Though not found in numbers, it does occur all over the Indian plains and is a source of injury to livestock. Very little is known of the life-history of this blood-sucking species. Patton and Cragg [1913] have recorded that this lays its eggs on the leaves of water lilies growing in deep water and that each egg-mass consists of 500 to 600 eggs. The egg-mass has also been described and figured by them. They have not described the larva but have stated that the larvæ are powerful swimmers and have large air sacs connected with their tracheal tubes, so that they can float or sink at will. This paper embodies a description of the complete life-history of this insect. A female was observed at Giridih, Bihar, laying eggs in the field. The egg-mass was brought to Pusa and the larvæ that hatched from it were bred in small glass beakers, each larva in a separate beaker. Although in recent years much effort has been spent on investigating the life-histories of Tabanidæ because they are blood-sucking pests of cattle, the complete life-history including the number of larval instars of members of this genus has been only known in the case of certain Indian representatives that were studied by the writer [1924]. As is the case with the majority of Indian flies of the genus Tabanus, Schwardt [1931], working re- cently in North America, has observed the larvæ of T. lineola Fb. to pass through a maximum number of seven instars. Schwardt [1932] also studied important facts in the life-histories of two more North American Tabanids and found that T. atratus Fb. passes through a maximum of nine larval instars and T. trimaculatus P. de B. passes through a maximum number of eight larval instars. In both these cases the larval period is a little over three hundred days. In the Indian species T. crassus Wlk. (= T. rufiventris Fb.) studied by the writer [1924], eight larval instars were observed and here too the larval period was noted to be much longer than in most other Indian Tabanids. * Eight previous papers in the series were published as Memoirs of the Dept. of Agric. in India, Entomological Series, and the ninth paper appeared in Vol. II, Pt. 3 of this Journal. (182)
PLATE XIII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Tabanus speciosus Ric.
LIFE-HISTORY OF tabanus speciosus RIC. 183 HABITS OF T. speciosus RIC. The females suck blood from cattle during day. Patton and Cragg [1913] have mentioned that the female attacks the animal on the lower parts of the back of the hind legs. The eggs are laid during day usually at, or a little before, noon on stems of paddy or twigs of other small plants over water which is about a foot or more deep. Each egg-mass contains about 500 eggs closely packed together in a slightly elongated dome-shaped mass. The true eggs are covered over with blackish elongated empty egg-like bodies, glued together with a chalky substance which is spread irregularly. The use of a chalky substance to cover the eggs has been observed in the case of the egg-masses of T. rufiventris Fb. (= T. crassus Wlk.) by the author [1924]. Patton and Evans [1929] have suggested that the purpose of such a chalky deposit is to protect the eggs from parasites. The case of T. speciosus Ric. is the only one known among Tabanids where use is made of such flattened egg-like bodies to cover the true eggs and this seems to be a really efficacious means of protecting the eggs from natural enemies. On hatching the larvæ crawl out from the lower end of the egg-mass, fall into water and swim till they reach the shore. Then they burrow into the soil and live close to the edge of the water. They feed by sucking the juices of earth- worms and other soft bodied animals they can prey on. When ready to pupate they move away from the water edge to drier but damp soil. DESCRIPTION OF EARLY STAGES. Egg.184 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II two laterally and two pairs ventrally. Minute brownish spines are present on the fleshy ridge and larger bristles are seen at the extremity of the parapodia. Pupa.THE DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT OF STERILITY IN THE STALLION AND THE BULL (A Resumé of the literature). BY CAPTAIN S. C. A. DATTA, B.Sc., M.R.C.V.S. , Temporary Veterinary Research Officer, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. [Received for publication on the 14th July, 1932.] Of the many problems of importance that the animal clinician has to grapple with, the determination of the cause of cessation of reproduction or reduced fertility in the living animal is one of the most perplexing. Variability in the fertility of the best known thorough-bred stallions and pedigree bulls or their absolute sterility has inflicted a considerable loss to the breeding industry, but the majority of the pioneers in this field, notable among whom have been Zschokke, Hess, Albrechtsen, Wester, Williams, Richter and Quinlan [1929], have occupied themselves almost exclusively with aspects of sterility in the female animal, and facts about the rôle played by the male are less familiar. With regard to unproductive marriages in man, that the male is as important as the woman has only recently come to be recognised. At the present time, increasing demands for scientific veterinary knowledge for help against sterility are being made and the problem is also increas- ing in its scope due to certain recent developments in endocrinology. For the reasons stated above and because the published literature on sterility in the male animal is in an unsatisfactory state, the present article has been prepared. It will be realised that further research and enquiry are urgently required for the elucida- tion of this problem and it is hoped that this resumé, without any pretension to being an elaborate or complete one, may lead to this end amongst workers in this country. Practical breeders have observed from olden times that all male animals are not equally effective in impregnating their females and begetting healthy offspring. Some animals are nearly perfect in this respect while others may require numerous repetitions in service, even when mated with healthy females, and may even then produce weak offspring, abortions or retained membranes wherever they are employed. Sterility in the male may be due to a variety of causes. As Gilman [1922] has stated environment, diet, endocrine secretions, impediments to coitus, (185) F
186 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II excessive sexual use, infection and disease of sexual organs have all got a bearing on sterility. It is known that animals that are closely confined, those that are overfat as well as those fed on a deficient ration very frequently fail to bring forth their young. Although the immediate concern of this resumé is what is termed as functional sterility in the male, some of the factors are so interrelated that a few of the more obvious causes, such as pathological lesions, anatomical deformities, infections, metabolic disturbances of dietetic, endocrinal or genetic origin may be briefly touched upon with profit. The optimum condition for fecundation is that a normal spermatozoon should meet a normal ovum in a normal environment. Any deviation from the optimum condition leads to either temporary or permanent impairment of the reproductive health and fertility of the sires, the diagnosis of which can usually be arrived at from the breeding record, and a careful clinical or laboratory examination either singly or combined. The ultimate value of a breeding sire is estimated by the record of his performance. A clinical examination shows whether his general behaviour, sexual desire, and ability to copulate freely are those of a normal and vigorous male and it is to be expected that given good general care and mated only to healthy females, the usefulness of the efficient sire will be maintained. INFECTION. Conditions such as obesity, muscular weakness or lameness, etc., may act as an impediment to fertilisation apart from actual macroscopic and minute lesions involving the genitalia or accessory organs. But infection appears to be the greatest single factor. According to Williams [1923], "the failure of sixty per cent. of the copulations to produce living young is referable to prenatal death resulting from infection. If the infection kills or mortally injures the spermatozoa in the seminal tubules or elsewhere in the male genitalia, if the infection is added to the semen when ejaculated or later kills the spermatozoa or fertilised ovum, or if the infection exists in the ovary, oviduct or uterus in the female the principle remains the same ; it is death from genital infection ". Specific lesions of genital infections like dourine, vesicular veneral disease, the veneral granuloma of dogs are transmitted readily between the two sexes in coitus. Cultural examination of the external genitalia of the sire is rendered difficult owing to the risk of contamination with extraneous micro-organisms. The specific organisms of equine and bovine abortion, streptococci, staphylococci, B. coli, B. typhosus, B. tuberculosis and aspergillus have been recovered by workers from the testis, epididymis and seminal vesicles and Williams [1926] records a case where a stallion so thoroughly and uniformly infected his mares that of 19 only 3 conceived, of which one aborted, one foaled a weakling and another produced an apparently healthy foal. Local inflam-
DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT OF STERILITY IN STALLION AND BULL 187 matory conditions such as orchitis, epididymitis as well as infection elsewhere in the body may inhibit or even abolish normal spermatogenesis. HEREDITARY FERTILITY FACTOR. That sterility may be due to structural malformations has already been men- tioned. Gross imperfection of the genitalia, severe hernia and improper descent of the testicles may be the expression of genetic action. According to Crew [1924] grades of fertility are definite racial and breed characters and are transmitted in inheritance and imperfections of the external genital organs are a part of the general conditions of intersexuality and of hermaphroditism, both of which are definitely genetical in nature. Richter [1926] and Wester [1921] lay great emphasis on heredity in the causation of sterility of male goats and bulls. Crew points out that chromosome aberrations lead to complete sterility and offers this as an expla- nation of the common sterility seen in the offspring of an inter-specific cross, such as a mule. He also brings forward cytological evidence in support of this con- tention. In the case of another species cross, Bos americanus × Bos taurus, however, there is probably a lethal factor as this cross is followed by the occurrence of hydramnios during pregnancy resulting in maternal or foetal death. ENDOCRINE FACTOR. The correlation of function between the reproductive organs and other glands of internal secretion are well known. Among the endocrines that bear a special relation to sexual development and function are the anterior lobe of the pituitary, the thyroid, the prostate and the adrenal cortex. Disease of the pineal gland may involve premature sexual development. The thymus gland has an inhibitory action on the growth of the sexual organs and becomes markedly reduced at puberty. There is little doubt that some cases of sterility are due to a derange- ment of this correlation. Hormones have now been extracted from many tissues. Evidence is available to show that the anterior lobe of the pituitary contains at least three hormones188 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II stated that difficulties have been experienced by most breeders in getting mares in foal until grass is available and this, in Todd's view, is due to the beneficial effects of vitamins and sunlight in stabilising the endocrine balance. Further Sanders [1926] showed that a stallion's fertility varies according to the district of the country in which he stands or travels, being higher in the north and west of England and Wales than in the south and east and very low in Scotland. DIET. There is ample evidence that nutritional deficiencies will modify the sexual activity of the parent and of the spermatozoa, thus affecting fertility. Paul [1906] was perhaps the first to show that fertility is affected by diet. Osborne and Mendel [1919] noticed that although animals fed on artificial diets grew vigorously to adult size, they were, with few exceptions sterile. Mason [1925] observed that an increase in breeding capacity is brought about in stalled cattle by turning them out on to green grass. It is known that lack of vitamins B and E in the diet results in the degeneration of the germ cells and the seminal epithelium, although growth and development may proceed in the normal way. With regard to mineral deficiencies of phosphorus and calcium as a cause of sterility, low fertility and reten- tion of placenta in cattle, Kelley [1932] refers to the experience of several colonial and foreign authorities, in particular to Hindmarsh and Hopkirk. The former had experience of a herd in which cattle were frequently sterile ; oestrum was exhibited but conception did not take place. During the following year, they were given a regular ration of bone meal with the result that practically all bred on to time. Hopkirk has shown that the so-called Waihi Disease which is characterised by the absence of oestrum is a deficiency condition being amenable to bone meal feeding. Experimental evidence is available from Germany and elsewhere that sperm pro- duction is greatly influenced by the feed. A basal ration of 15 pounds of oats and 15 pounds of hay resulted in a sperm production of 2,885,701,420 per ejaculation. When the basal ration was supplemented by 10 hens' eggs and 5 lbs. of wheat bran daily, the sperm production was approximately three times as great. A supplement of dried peas and linseed cake increased the production over that seen with the basal ration to about 50 per cent. only. Other proteins and lipoid substances gave results varying between those obtained with the oil cakes and with the eggs. Further experiments show that rats were inactive sexually when fed on whole milk until copper and iron were added in small quantities. Deficiency of iodine also has been proved to act detrimentally on sexual life and fertility. In Australia potassium iodide is therefore added in small quantities to the ration. Another agent which has been found useful in the female is wheat germ oil, but no record of its use in the male has been found. From what has been said above, it will be
DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT OF STERILITY IN STALLION AND BULL 189 seen that a careful examination of the diet of a sterile animal is warranted although he be apparently normal in condition. SEMINAL PATHOLOGY. Apart from the above factors, examination of the seminal fluid is of great value in arriving at a correct diagnosis of sterility since the spermatogenctic function of the testicle is very sensitive to outside influences. The influence of the frequency of coitus on sperm formation has received considerable attention in Germany. Studies of the quantity and quality of spermatozoa produced by stallions with varying intervals between service indicate that the rest period between services for normal spermatozoa production is 48 hours. Daily matings caused an increase in the percentage of immature sperms. Matings after intervals of more than two days did not result in an increase in the number of viable sperms. Sexual stimulation did not appear to influence sperm production. Complete absence of functional sperms may be due to atresia of the seminiferous tubules, non-develop- ment of the interstitial tissue of the testis as in cryptorchidism. Williams and Savage [1925] have published a comprehensive article on the micropathology of bull semen, and by means of the head length measurement of the sperms projected at 3,000 diameters, as recommended by them, Conklin [1930] has been able to detect changes in the spermatozoa, referable to disease of the genitalia, long before a clinical examination would show pathological changes. COLLECTION OF SEMINAL FLUID FOR EXAMINATION. It is more convenient and easier to collect semen from sires after service than before. It is necessary to observe cleanliness, otherwise presence of smegma, masses of epithelial debris, bacteria, pus, blood cells, and catarrhal discharge may make the examination more difficult. The penis and preputial folds should be thoroughly washed with soap and water and the vaginal cavity douched out with a mild solution of salt or bicarbonate of soda before service is permitted. The seminal fluid may be collected from the vaginal floor of the female with a spatula or glass rod. It may not be necessary to use a vaginal speculum for the pur- pose. Semen on emission may be caught direct into a beaker or test tube from the tuft of hair at the ventral commissure of the vagina or from the penis by pressure on the urethra of the sire. PREPARATION AND STAINING OF SMEARS. Wet.190 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II semen is thick it is advisable to mount it in 0.9 per cent. saline solution or in water only. Dry.DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT OF STERILITY IN STALLION AND BULL 191 in the generative tract of the male, they become motile in the secretion of the accessory glands and also in Ringer's solution. Their motility is most vigorous in the normal fluids of a female generative tract. Spermatozoa in the male passages or female generative tract may retain their vitality and their power of fertilising ova for 30 days or more (rabbit), for 21 days (man). Recently it has been found possible to keep the semen of the male in tubes in a fertile condition outside the body for 40 hours or more, and use it for inseminating females at the end of this period. To a person familiar with spermatozoa, the appearance is quite certain and de- finite, but to distinguish a healthy spermatozoon from a weak and diseased one and to distinguish a perfect one from a malformed one, requires considerable experience and skill. A simple determination of the presence or absence of sperms in the semen is not enough. The secretion of the vagina is normally acid and is inimical to sper- matozoa. If their motility is weak they are not able to continue their progressive movement to reach and enter the cervix uteri. The rate of movement, morphology, structure and staining reactions of the sperm have to be considered for a rational diagnosis. The popular impression that if the presence of a few motile spermatozoa is demonstrated in the specimen of semen, fertility may be expected is not based on scientific experience [Walker, 1929]. When one recollects the process of impregna- tion of the ovum as observed microscopically one realises clearly that the fertility of a given animal should be judged not merely by the numerical frequency of spermatozoa and of the motility present, but by a further study of (a) duration and (b) quality of motility, (c) the percentage of the motionless to the actively motile sperms. Specimens of semen may be collected at different periods after service and the change in the characters of the sperm noticed for judging the vitality of the sperms. VITALITY OF THE SPERMATOZOON. (a) Duration of motility is determined by192 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II brief description of the three different kinds of motilityDIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT OF STERILITY IN STALLION AND BULL 193 progressive vibratile motion to a to and fro lashing movement and the morphology may be altered in the following ways:194 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II enlargement of the male sex organs and particularly of the seminal vesicles, following injection of the urine of pregnant women into male rats or mice. Recently Jongh and Laqueur [1931] have shown that the ovarian hormone arrests the development of the testes and the dependent male sex organs, but the sub- stance from the anterior pituitary or apparently a substance identical with it, as found in the urine of early pregnancy, promotes the development of the testes and the associated sex organs. The considerable enlargement of the testes after the administration of the anterior lobe hormone when present is insignificant as com- pared with the striking increase (30 times or more) in the size of the seminal vesicles. They further studied the action of this hormone on the genitals of senile male rats and have found that the sex organs are reactivated, interstitial tissues are increased and seminal vesicles are enlarged again by means of gravid urine. Gerard [1931] showed that the testicle of the hedgehog which is normally quiescent in the winter reacts to injection of pregnacy urine by marked activity of the inter- stitial cells. The seminal vesicles and prostate in the young animal become rapidly enlarged after injection. Interesting results have been obtained by Foucin [1931], who found that the injection of urine from pregnant women in the immature testis of the guinea pig rendered cryptorchid by operation, causes the interstitial tissue to develop rapidly. The contents of the seminal tubules were unaffected. Develop- ment of the seminal vesicles ran parallel with that of the interstitial gland and these organs attained to full size as in normal animals. Various drugs like glucose [Zondek, 1931], and suphosalicylic acid [Crew and others, 1931] have been used to render the urine less toxic on experimental mice or treated animals. In cases of endocrinal or dietetic deficiency [Meigs, 1927] readjustment of diet is necessary. In obesity, reduction in the quantity of food and moderate exercise are indicated. Since it is well known that mares failing to hold to one sire sometimes do so readily to others, Todd [1931] considers it a sound procedure to recommed the use of a second sire to obviate sterility in cases where a foal is a financial consideration. Therapeutic drugs except when given as tonics are useless in cases of male sterility. In studying the stimulation of guinea pig sperms suspended in a glucose saline fluid, bufferred at pH 8 by means of drugs, Baker [1931] found that strychnine hydrochloride had a marked stimulating effect at 1/16, 1/64, 1/256 per cent. Bru- cine hydrochloride, which was half as poisonous, has the same stimulating effect on sperms. He expressed the hope that this discovery might find practical appli- cation in medicine and agriculture wherever sterility be due to inactivity of sperms. As already mentioned, the mere changes in the hydrogen-ion concentration of the semen has a profound effect upon the motility of the spermatozoa and therefore on the fertility of a male. Unterberger [1930] reports that the addition of bicarbonate
DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT OF STERILITY IN STALLION AND BULL 195 of soda to the vaginal contents during coitus results in the cure of many cases of sterility. This is perhaps due to the correction of excessive acidity which is found in the vaginal contents of these sterile cases. The work of Anderson, Peter and Healey [1921] suggests that douching of the vaginal canal before coitus with a strongly bufferred solution, as phosphates, bicarbonates of the required pH (7.3 in the case of stallions), may produce beneficial results. In man, diathermy and massaging of the prostate and testicles have been recommended for sterility accompanied with sluggish motility of sperms, but these operations would not seem practicable in the case of the larger animals. Human physicians claim that 40 grains of the anterior lobe of the pituitary and 12 grains of desiccated suprarenal daily have cured cases of sterility in the human male by increasing motility, number and size of the sperms. Jakeman [1931] says that many cases of sterility attributed to testicular dysfunction are doubtless due to anterior pituitary deficiency and may be corrected by the administration of anterior pituitary in doses ranging from 3 to 10 grains per day and presumably he is referring to cattle. From the above, a dose rate may be worked out, as such experimental treatment would certainly seem indicated. Proprietary preparations are obtainable from several manufacturers, for example :196 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II workers and it is claimed that recrudescence of fertility, sexual potency and an enhancement of bodily functions generally takes place. Recently Lebedinsky [1931] has shown that a number of phenomena of senility are to a great extent abolished by tearing and compressing the testicular tissue and that these effects are maintained for 9½ months. It is suggested that the effects are due to blocking up of the contents of the seminiferous tubules in the testes like those of vasoligation, ligature of the epididymis and vasectomy. In cases of inflammatory conditions of the genitalia [Dimock and Snyder, 1924], or even in cases of defective sperms, a complete sexual rest for varying periods may be tried. A case is on record where after a complete sexual rest of 25 days, another sample was obtained which showed a remarkable improvement in the staining qualities, whereas the previous samples showed only degenerate sperms. REFERENCES. Anderson, W. S., Peter, A. M., Healey, D. T. (1921e)DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT OF STERILITY IN STALLION AND BULL 197 Meigs, E. B. (1927)-Nutritional deficiencies in Abortion. Jl. Am. Vet. Med. Ass. 70, 853-866. Miller, W. C. (1931)SELECTED ARTICLE NUTRITION IN RELATION TO REPRODUCTION, WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO STERILITY.* BY I. LEITCH, M.A., D.Sc., Imperial Bureau of Animal Nutrition, Aberdeen. The occurrence of sterility in farm animals, and more particularly in dairy herds, is so common as to render it a problem of first-class importance. An inquiry into wastage in dairy herds, made at the Hannah Dairy Research Institute (1), showed that disease disposals constitute 44.3 per cent. of the total and that re- productive troubles, failure to breed and abortion, form the largest single class of causes, totalling 19.3 per cent. of the whole. Similar studies in Kent (2).. covering a total of 82 herds during 1928-30, showed that sterility was the chief single cause of disposals, accounting for 26 per cent. of the total, and studies in Cambridge for the year 1928-29 (3) gave a similar result with 23.72 per cent. of disposal due to sterility. In the two latter studies the annual general replacement rates were between 20 and 25 per cent. The problem appears to exist wherever intensive dairy farming is practised. In many areas it is important also under extensive conditions, and, although accurate data do not appear to exist, it is evident that sterility is commonly regarded as one of the major problems of animal husbandry throughout Europe and in the Dominions (4). The problem of sterility is possibly less acute in other classes of farm stock than in dairy herds. In pigs the incidence varies greatly and appears to be, to a large extent, dependent on management (5). But breeding difficulties exist in all classes of stock, and the sum total of losses involved must represent a very con- siderable total. From the practical point of view, sterility in the female is of greater im- portance than in the male. The subject will, therefore, be discussed chiefly in regard to the female. The causes of sterility may conveniently be dealt with under two main heads, infective and nutritional. *Reprinted from the Imporial Bureau of Animal Nutrition : Nutrition Abstracts and Reviews, Vol. II, No. 3. (198)
NUTRITION IN RELATION TO REPRODUCTION 199 INFECTIONS IN RELATION TO STERILITY.Contagious Abortion. The chief cause of sterility in this class and, according to some observers, the chief cause of sterility generally, is contagious abortion. The disease is very widespread, and appears to be increasing rather than decreasing (6, 7). It is difficult, however, to make a true estimate of its importance as a cause of sterility. The initial losses of calf and milk are so great that the tendency is to early disposal. Dalrymple-Champneys (8) states that 80 per cent. of infected cows abort only once, and Smith (9) considers that recurrence of abortion and chronic disease are due, not to the abortion bacillus, but to secondary infections with other pyogenic organisms. According to Robbin (10), the number of infected cows that become sterile, following abortion, is estimated by different observers at from 20 to 75 per cent. Davis and Morgan (11) found that 20 per cent. were sterile following a single abortion and a further 10 per cent. became sterile after a time. Gwatkin (12) found either difficulty in breeding or sterility in 17.7 per cent. of reactors as compared with only 3.9 per cent. in non-reactors. On the other hand, there are observers who consider contagious abortion of minor importance as a cause of sterility (13, 14), and who state that sterility is not more frequent where abortion is common than in abortion-free areas (15). Other Infections.200 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II that prolonged feeding of calcium and phosphorus cured or prevented the infection. Folmer Nielsen (20) points out that the importance of contagious abortion depends, chiefly, on its chronicity. If this, as Smith suggests, is due, not to Br. abortus, but to other organisms it might be thought that, following the first abortion, the condition should be regarded in the same way as other infections. There appears to be good ground for the view that diet affects susceptibility to infection. Williams (21, 87) points out that bacteriological studies show that the organs of the non-pregnant cow contain many bacteria which are usually harmless, but assume a pathogenic role under unfavourable influences. Such unfavourable influences, he suggests, are to be found in improper feeding. Nielsen (20) shows that the incidence of uterine infections and of the associated ovarian changes increases with number of gestations and lactations, and Quinlan (24) emphasises the importance, in the treatment of all such cases, of attention to diet. These suggestions are in complete agreement with what is known of susceptibility to infections of other areas (22). Deficiency of vitamin A alters the condition of the mucous membrances of the respiratory passages, and the defence mechanisms of the body, so that organisms which normally exist in the body without causing signs of disease become pathogenic. A rickets-producing diet, fed to rats which are normally immune to tuberculosis, cause them to become highly susceptible. Hence there is an increasing tendency to believe that these infections of the genital tract may be, to some extent at least, the result of poor condition and improper feeding. Stalfors (23) considers that catarrhal conditions of the uterus may depend on lack of tone in the uterine muscle, and that the effect of iodine irrigation, as frequently practised, may be due to the stimulant action rather than to any antiseptic property of the solution used. An excellent review of this question is given by Quinlan (24), who is also of opinion that the adequacy of diet has not received sufficient attention. Ovarian changes.NUTRITION IN RELATION TO REPRODUCTION 201 performances in milk production. He points out that the animals are usually stall-fed for long periods on diets exceedingly rich in concentrates, and that actual symptoms of deficiency (bone disease) occur. The output of mineral matter in high milk production is enormous, and unless special provision is made to meet the requirements, depletion of the skeleton is bound to occur. Stockklausner (15) and Frei (26) both regard this as one of the causes contributing to produce sterility. MALNUTRITION IN RELATION TO STERILITY. Under-nutrition.202 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, II Phosphorus deficiency.NUTRITION IN RELATION TO REPRODUCTION 203 content Meigs (43) found that cows were very difficult to get in calf, while con- trols with a supplement of calcium carbonate gave much better results. Kennedy- found that animals on a diet deficient in calcium were sterile, although ovula- tion occurred. The uterus was pale, flaccid and in a state of inactivity. Sim- monds (44) found, in extensive experiments on rats, that a minimum percentage of calcium in the ration was necessary for successful reproduction, and that in- crease above the minimum gave improved reproduction with better condition of the parents. An interesting observation by Küst is quoted by Frei (45), namely, that rickets and nymphomania occur together in the same herds. Davidson (46) has shown that protracted deficiency of calcium in the ration of breeding sows leads to a very considerable increase in the number of pigs born dead. The effect is cumulative, becoming more pronounced in the second and third generations. A salt mixture representing the mineral elements of blood meal, had a marked effect on the occurrence of 204 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II Smith (88) that premature birth and imperfect development of the young in pigs could be prevented by administration of iodine to the sows. Stiner (89) and Schropp (90) have both found that administration of iodine, either as an inorganic salt or in pasture manured with iodine, had a beneficial effect on fertility, the number of services required being reduced. Muller-Lenhartz and v-Wendt (91) found similar results to follow the feeding of a mineral mixture containing cal- cium, phosphorus, iron and iodine. It has also been suggested that conditions of relative iodine deficiency might arise in areas where deficiency of iodine is not thought to occur, under conditions of intensive feeding. The results of a four years' experiment at the Rowett In- stitute suggest that in stall-fed cows there may be a relative deficiency of iodine adversely affecting reproduction (communicated). Fluorine excess.NUTRITION IN RELATION TO REPRODUCTION 205 breeding efficiency. In a series of experiments on rats, Slonaker and Card (62, 63, 64) showed that the age at puberty, the length of the reproductive span and the size of litters were all affected by the quality of the protein fed. Rats receiving animal protein matured earlier than those receiving only vegetable protein; the intervals between litters were about two months in the former and varied up to four months in the latter. The period of reproductive activity on animal protein was seventeen months ; on vegetable protein only two to seven months. Sterility was high on vegetarian diet; the number of young in litters was greatly reduced and the effect was cumulative, the vegetarian rats being completely sterile in the third generation. Simmonds (44) showed, that a diet in which only vegetable protein was supplied greatly reduced fertility, while a high proportion of animal protein increased it. Wan and Wu (65) also found a significant difference in litter size in favour of omnivorous, as compared with vegetarian, rats. Later, Slonaker (66) showed that there is an optimum protein level for reproduction at 1.4 per cent. of the ration (animal protein), higher or lower levels giving diminished litter size and increased sterility. This level was also best for length of reproductive span. A large excess of animal protein over the optimum level causes pathological changes in the ovary and promotes sterility (67). The difference in value between animal and vegetable protein for reproduction may possibly be due to deficiency of essential amino-acids in the latter. Courrier and Raynaud (68) have shown that rats fed on a diet deficient in lysine showed no sexual cycle. Males on the same diet had relatively poorly developed testicles. In poultry feeding it is well recognized that sufficiency of calcium and phospho- rus and an adequate supply of good quality protein are essential for egg production. Optimum quantities and ratios are being determined by experiments at all the main centres of research (69, 70, 71). According to the most recent results, plant protein, adequately supplemented with calcium and sodium chloride, may give as good results as animal protein. There are, however, no data to show whether this is true for mammals. Vitamin deficiency.206 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II In males, spermatozoa become non-motile, then disappear, while germinal epitheli- um degenerates and testis weight is reduced. More recently, it has been shown that a deficiency of vitamin A also causes degeneration of the germinal epithelium, and complete sterility (73, 74, 75). This effect is more rapidly produced than that of vitamin E deficiency. From time to time it has been suggested that other vitamins were necessary for reproduction. It is doubtful, however, whether deficiency of vitamin B has any specific effect on fertility. The present position (76) appears to be that the effect on fertility of deficiency of vitamin B is due, not to lack of the vitamin itself, but to the inanition characteristic of the condition. Vitamin D appears, at least under certain conditions, to be necessary for normal reproduction in birds, but this is again probably only a secondary effect associated with the effect of vitamin D on mineral metabolism and the high mineral requirements for growth of the egg. It is uncertain whether deficiency of vitamins affecting fertility occurs under natural conditions. It has been suggested by Velu (77) that deficiency of vitamin E may be the cause of a condition in sheep in Morocco in which pregnancy occurs, followed by death and absorption of the foetus. The point does not appear to have been experimentally investigated. It has also been thought that vitamin E might be deficient in the rations of farm animals, particularly those stall-fed on poor rations. Experiments have therefore been made by Graves and Miller (78), and by Rogers (79) in the United States, and at the Department of Animal Gene- tics in Edinburgh (communicated) to test whether the feeding of sprouted oats would influence sterility in cases not attributable to any definite pathological condi- tion. The results, although suggestive, are inconclusive. (There appears to be some doubt as to whether sprouted oats contain any considerable amount of vitamin E.) On the other hand, Vogt-MNUTRITION IN RELATION TO REPRODUCTION 207 ior pituitary ceases to be active in animals fed on a vitamin E deficient diet. Some correlation, therefore, appears to exist between vitamin E and the hormones of the anterior pituitary. It is also known that under-activity of the thyroid (simple goitre, cretinism) is, in some way, correlated with iodine metabolism, and that over-activity may, to some extent at least, be controlled and modified by diet (83). Sterility due to disturbance of the functions of these glands may, therefore, ulti- mately be due to lack of dietary balance of a kind not yet fully understood. Interesting observations have been made on the effect of diet on the production of spermatozoa. Polowzow and Naguzew (84) have shown that production in the stallion is definitely related to quality of food, and that eggs and bran have a stimulating effect. Parchutin (85) records exactly similar observations. Nordby and Bollen (86) describe a case of temporary sterility in a boar fed on Canadian field pea screenings. A change of diet to barley, oats, tankage, oil meal, alfalfa and sodium chloride resulted in complete restoration of fertility in six weeks. At the time of the change in diet the pH of the semen was 7.61, and motility of the spermatozoa was ' very unsatisfactory '. On the altered diet the pH fell to 7.35 and motility improved along with the reduction of pH. This last observation suggests a possibility that the supposed effect of infect- ions of the female genital tract as due to ' spermatoxins' and ' spermalysins' might, in reality, be the effect of a change in pH. It has been shown that such an alteration, for instance, in regard to wound infections, may completely change the nature or pathogenicity of the organisms present, and changes in the pH of body fluids and secretions may easily be effected by diet. Hence the infections themselves and the supposed toxic effect on spermatozoa might both be due to an abnormal pH. Conclusion. This brief review of the literature shows that under-nutrition or malnutrition due to imbalance of the constituents of a diet, vitamins, proteins or minerals, may seriously interfere with normal reproduction. The influence of such faulty diets has been clearly demonstrated in experimental work with laboratory animals. It is known that similar defective diets occur, with similar results under extensive conditions of animal husbandry, and they may be reproduced under intensive conditions on artificial rations. No data exist to indicate to what extent such factors do actually affect fertility in practical, intensive or semi-intensive, farming, but they may be of considerable economic importance. In addition to this direct influence of diet on fertility, there is the other, possib- ly even more interesting and important, indirect effect though its modifying action on susceptibility to infections. It is known that malnutrition practically deter- mines susceptibility to certain infections, and there is evidence that it may be an
208 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II important predisposing factor to infection with Br. abortus and other organisms which interfere with reproduction. It is perhaps unlikely that an organism of the apparently high virulence of Br. abortus should become innocuous under the most perfect dietary conditions, but the relative importance, as regards subsequent sterility, of malnutrition of the host and virulence of this or other infecting orga- nism has not yet been established. There is obviously urgent need for further extensive investigations on the whole subject of nutrition in relation to reproduc- tion and the various infections which interfere with conception and the normal development of the foetus. BIBLIOGRAPHY. (1) Quoted in Vet. Rec., 1931, 11, 1050. (2) Garrad, G. H. Vet. Rec., 1931,11, 525-527 (3) Private communication. (4) N. Z. Dept. Agric. Ann. Rep., 1930-31. (5) Finlay, G. F. Bull. I. National Council Pig Breeders and Pig Feeders, 1924. (6) League of Nations: Monthly Epidemiological Report. 9th Year, No. 10, 1930. (7) J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1930, 77, 491-493. (8) Dalrymple-champneys, W. Minist. Health Reports on Pub. Health and Med. Subjects, 1929, No. 56 (H. M. S. O.). (9) Smith, T. J. Exp. Med., 1919, 30, 325-339. (10) Robin, Rec. Med. Vet., 1930, 105, 702. (11) Davis, H. P., and Morgan, R. F. Univ. Nebraska Agric. Exp. Stat. Res. Bull. No. 46, 1930. (12) Gwatkin, R. Ontario Farmer, March, 1931. Ontario Res. Found. Rep. for 1931. (13) Hess, E. ' Die Sterilität des Rindes', Hanover, 1921. (14) nbsp; nbsp;Richter, J. ' Ursachen and Behandlung der Unfruchtbarkeit des Rindes', Berlin 1922. (15) Abstracted in Vet.Rec., 1930, 10, 331. (16) Wester, J. 'Die Sterilität des Rindes,' 11th Int. Vet. Congr., London, 1930. (17) Meigs, E. B. J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc, 1926-27, 70, 855. (18) Smythe, R. H. Vet. Rec., 1931, 11, 753-756. (19) White, G. C., Rettger, L. F., and Chapman, L. M. Biennial Rep. Storrs Agric. Exp. Stat., 1920-23. Pub. Doc. No. 34, pp. 177-240. (20) Nielsen, F. Third Northern Veterinary Congress, Oslo, 1928. (21) Williams, W. L. J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc. 1928, 73, 62-77. (22) Orr, J. B. Brit. Med J., 1931, i, 883-836. (23) Stalfors, H. Cornell Vet., 1930, 20, 1. (24) Quinlan, J. Ann. Rep. Div. Vet. Serv., S.A., 1929, 831-1055. (25) Conklin, R. L. 'Sterility-Its Prophylaxis and Treatment ', 11th Int. Vet. Congr., London, 1930. (26) Frei, W. ' Prophylaxis and Tharapie der Sterilität des Weiblichen Rindes,' 11th Int. Vet. Congr., London, 1930.
NUTRITION IN RELATION TO REPRODUCTION 209 (27) Nichols, J. E. Ztschr. f. Tierziichtyng u. Züchtungsbiol., 10, 225-234. (28) Stewart, W. L. Vet. Rec., 1931, 11, 1033. (29) Loeb, Biol. Bull., 1917, 32, No. 6. (30) Kennedy, W. P. Physiol. Rev., 1926, 6, 485. (31) Nichols, J. E. J. Agric. Sci., 1926, 16, 365-375. (32) Nichols, J. E. J. Minist. Agric. (Engl.), 1926, 33, 218-225. (33) nbsp; nbsp;Mohler, J. R. Rep. Chief U. S. A. Bur. Animal Indust., 1931. (34) Theiler, Green and Du Toit. J. Agric. Sci., 1927, 17, 291 ; 1928, 18, 369. (35) Du Toit, P. J. and Bisschop, J. H. R. Ann. Rept. Div. Vet. Serv., S. A., 1929, 1059-1166. (36) Eckles, Becker and Palmer. Minnesota Stat. Bull., 1926, No. 229. (37) Hart, G. H. ' The Scientific Principle of Nutrition with particular reference to Percentage. Calf Crop in Range Herds '. 11th Int. Vet. Congr., London, 1930. (38) Orr, J. B. ' Minerals in Pastures,' H. K. Lewis, London, 1929. (39) Hart, McCollum, Steenbock and Humphrey. Res. Bull. No. 17, Agric. Exp. Stat., Wisconsin, 1911. (40) Hart, McCollum, Steenbock and Humphrey. J. Agri. Res., 1917, 10, 175-198. (41) Hart, Steenbock and Humphrey. Res. Bull. No. 49, Agric. Exp. Stat., Wisconsin, 1920. (42) Hart, Steenbock and Morrison, Res. Bull. No. 390, Agric. Exp. Stat., Wisconsin, 1927. (43) Meigs, E. B. Proc. World's Dairy Cong., 1924, p. 1046. (44) Simmonds, N. Amer. J. Hyg., 1924, 4, Supplement. (45) Küst, Frei, W. Schw. Arch. f. Tierheilk., 1931, 73, No. 11. (46) Davidson, H. R. J. Agric. Sci., 1930, 20, 233-264. (47) Rettger, L. F., White, G. C. and Chapman, L. M. Storrs Agric., Exp. Stat. Rep., 1920-23. Pub. Doc. No. 34, pp. 59-88. (48) Kossmag, M. Tierärztl. Rundschau, 1931, 37, 386-387. (49) McGilvray, C. D. Ontario Dept. Agric. Bull. No. 304, 1925. (50) Graves, E. F. J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc., 1930, 77, 354-361. (51) Orr, J. B., and Leitch, I. ' Iodine in Nutrition '. M. R. C. Spec. Rep. Series, No. 126, 1929. (52) Velu, H., and Balozet, L. Bull. Acad. Vet. de France, 1931, 4, 373-376. (53) Velu, H. C. R. Soc. Biol., 1931, 108, 635-637 . (54) Velu, H. Ibid., 750-752. (55) Churchill, H. V. J. Dent. Res., 1932, 12, 141-148. (56) McCollum, E. V., Simmonds, N., Becker, J. E., and Bunting. R. W. J. Biol, Chem., 1925, 63, 553. (57) Schulz, J. A., and Lamb, A. R. Science, 1925, 61, 93. (58) Bergara, C. C. R. Soc. Biol., 1927, 97, 600-602. (59) Del. Castillo, E. B. Ibid., 1928, 99, 1405. (60) Chaneles, J. Rev. Soc. Argent. Biol., 1929, 5, 317-396. (61) Velu, H. Note to Soc. Pathol. Exotique, Dec., 1931. (62) Slonaker and Card. Amer J. Physiol., 1923, 64, 35-43. (63) Slonaker and Card. Ibid., 167-180.
210 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II (64) Slonaker and Card. Ibid., 203-209. (65) Wan, S., and Wu, H. Chinese J. Physiol, 1931, 5, 53-70. (66) Slonaker, J. R. Amer. J. Physiol. 1931, 97, 573-580. (67) Frei, W. Arch. f. Gynäkol., 1931, 147, 836-852. (68) Courrier, R., and Raynaud, R. C. R. Soc. Biol., 1932, 109, 881-883. (69) Orr, J. B., and others. Scot. J. Agric., 1925, 8, 66-69. (70) nbsp; nbsp;Prentice, J. H. Agric. Progress, 1931, 8, 19-23. (71) Robertson, G. S. J. Minist. Agric. (N. Ireland), 1931, 3, 1-5. (72) nbsp; nbsp;Verzar, F. Ztschr. f. Vitaminforsch., 1932, 1, 116-134. (73) Wolfe, J. M., and Salter, H. P. J. Nutrition, 1931. 4, 185-192. (74) Mason, K. E. J. Exp. Zool., 1931, 55, 101-122. (75) nbsp; nbsp;Evans, H. M. Amer. J. Physiol., 1932, 99, 477-486. (76) Moore, C. R., and Samuels, L. T. Ibid., 1931, 96, 278-288. (77) Velu, H. Bull. Acad. Vet. de France, 1931, 4, 71-81. (78) Graves, R. R., and Miller, F. W. Rep. Bur. Dairy Indust., U. S. Dept. Agric., 1927. (79) Rogers, L. A. Rep. Bur. Dairy Indust., U. S. Dept. Agric., 1928. (80) Vogt-MABSTRACTS The anthelmintic value of kamala for tapeworms in chickens. REBRASSIER, R. E. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. N. S. Vol. 33, 895212 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II Tetrachlorethylene is as efficient as carbon tetrachloride in removing nematodes; moreover its wider margin of safety and its less injurious effect upon the liver makes it preferable to carbon tetrachloride for the removal of hook worms, ascarids and other nematodes in dogs, cats, foxes and other animals. Care should always be exercised in selecting a chemically pure drug. [G. D. B.]. CABSTRACTS 213 Minute forms may be dropped into hot water and left for a few moments, then transferred with a pipette into cold fixative. Staining.- The author obtained excellent results with alum cochineal upon the material fixed in the manner described above. After differentiation in acidulated alcohol the material should be washed in running water for an hour, soaked for an hour in 50 per cent. alcohol, for another hour in P5 per cent. alcohol and then transferred to becchwood creosote and mounted in creosote solution of Canada balam. Sections may be stained in any of the four following stain combinations :REVIEWS The Veterinary Bulletin, Vol. III, Part I. Published by the Imperial Bureau of Animal Health, Weybridge, Surrey, England. (Annual subscription £2.) In Part IV, Volume I of the Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry, a review was published of the first two numbers of the newly publish- ed Veterinary BulletinREVIEW 215 The subject matter contained in the book is restricted to the discussion of problems connected only with the horse breeding industry, and, so far as this information goes, is a handy guide for those interested in the prevention of disease in breeding establishments. This is the object of the book, as stated in the Preface, and no comparison is made with, nor anything of interest mentioned about other domestic animals with regard to their breeding and obstetrical peculiarities, as one would be led to expect from the title. The Anatomy and Physiology of the females genitalia, foetal membranes and placenta, are discussed in the opening chapters in the usual manner, with little to attract the attention of veterinarians possessing an average knowledge of the subject. The remaining chapters are interesting and informative and deal with the subjects of equine parturition, hygiene, care of the foal and dam, etc., in detail, and are rich in useful information. As a handy guide to veterinary horse masters, this publication is to be highly commended, but as a book for veterinary surgeons who have of necessity to deal with Obstetrics in all its normal and abnormal aspects, chiefly the latter, this work loses much of its value. [W. T.]
216 INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, II NOTES THE MAYNARD-GANGA RAM PRIZE. NOTICE. Applications are invited for "The Maynard-Ganga Ram Prize " of the value of Rs. 3,000 which will be awarded for a discovery, or an invention, or a new practical method tending to increase agricultural production in the Punjab on a paying basis. The prize is open to all, irrespective of caste, creed or nationality and Government servants are also eligible for it. Essays and theses are not eligible for competition and applicants should prove that some part of their discovery, invention, etc., is the result of work done after the prize was founded in 1925. The Managing Committee reserves to itself the right of withholding or postponing the prize, if no satisfactory achievement is reported to it. All applications in competi- tion for the next award should reach the Director of Agriculture, Punjab, Lahore, on or before the 31st December, 1933. * * * * * * * * In 1925 the late Sir Ganga Ram, Kt., C.I. E., M.V.O., R. B., Lahore, with that generosity for which he was so well known, handed over to the Punjab Govern- ment a sum of Rs. 25,000 for the endowment of a prize of the value of Rs. 3,000 to be called the Maynard-Ganga Ram Prize and to be awarded every three years, for a discovery, or an invention, or a new practical method which will tend to increase agricultural production in the Punjab on a paying basis. The competition is open to all throughout the world. Government servants are also eligible to compete for it. Applications for the next award were invited by the 31st December, 1932. The response was, however, poor and it has been decided by the Managing Committee of the above-mentioned prize that the award should be postponed for another year and that further applications should reach the Director of Agriculture. Punjab, Lahore, on or before the 31st December, 1933. BIHAR AND ORISSA VETERINARY COLLEGE, PATNA. A post-graduate class will be held at the Bihar and Orissa Veterinary College as last year from 1st July, 1933, for the advanced training of Veterinary graduates in (1) Pathology and Bacteriology including Parasitology and post-mortem tech- nique, (2) Histology, (3) Veterinary Hygiene, Dietetics and Genetics, (4) Meat and Milk inspection and (5) Veterinary Medicine including parasitic, contagious and inanition diseases. The course will be for six months only, for which a sum of Rs. 60 will be charged as tution fee and Rs. 10 as admission fee. Seat rent for the hostel will be at the rate of Rs. 5 per month. Private candidates desiring admission should apply to the Principal, Bihar and Orissa Veterinary College on or before the 15th June, 1933 with the original diploma and a certificate of character. Further particulars, if required, may be obtained on application from the Principal. MGIPC-S3ORIGINAL ARTICLES THE ETIOLOGY OF BURSATI BY CAPTAIN S. C. A. DATTA, B.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., Temporary Veterinary Research Officer, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on 27th May 1933.) (With Plates XIV218 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. Of these two theories, the former is the older, being first suggested by Jackson [1842], but actual experimental data in support of this were only later put forward by Smith [1884], Steel [1885], Burke [1892], and finally by Holmes [1914]. For the purposes of this article, the work of the latter two workers only need be recounted. In attempting to prove that this condition was an epithelioma, Burke [1880-1888] most vehimently criticised the mycotic theory but again a few years later [1892] he was emphatic that the disease was a form of actinomycosis. Holmes' view was that it was a form of sporothricosis resembling a disease of the horse and the mule described by Carougeau [1909] in Madagascar, since a chalky white growth, resembling closely the fungus Sporotrichum minutissimum was repeatedly obtained in culture by him from Bursati tumours, kunkurs, and direct from the blood of horses affected with the disease. Experimental inoculations carried out by him with cultures of this fungus yielded only negative results. As a result of a prelimi- nary study of the condition in Calcutta in 1929, Datta [1931] also recorded certain experimental data from which it appeared that the actinomycotic theory was the more plausible, since a strain of actinomyces, resembling Holmes' culture in morphology, was isolated without difficulty from Bursati lesions, and because the disease could not be transmitted experimentally through the intervention of flies, which were allowed free access between affected subjects and healthy equines, with unprotected cutaneous wounds in various parts of the body. It may be noted that another similar condition designated as ' leaches' affecting equines in America, is considered by Theobald Smith [1893-94] as being caused by a fungus, similar to that concerned in "Madura foot of India ", the yellow granules of the equine disease being identical with what are called ' Sulphur granules' of actinomycosis. With regard to Holmes' work, one cannot overlook the fact that he does not put forward any mycological data on which the identification was based, for, there is nothing in his description to indicate that the characteristic lateral spore-clusters were observed with his fungus. Further if his theory were correct, one should expect to find nodules spreading along the course of lymphatics with lymphangitis and lymphadenitis, but it is known that these do not constitute the clinical features of Bursati. The helminthic theory was first put forward by Lingard [1905], who referred to the presence of a " felted aggregation of nematode worms " in the inner layer of a Bursati sore but, as Holmes has pointed out, " there is an indefiniteness about Lingard's statements which fail to make clear whether personal observations were being recorded or deduction made from the literature of other writers on the subject". Further in questioning the identity of Lingard's " felted aggregation ", Gaiger [1915] has adduced evidence to show that they represented, in reality,
THE ETIOLOGY OF BURSATI 219 merely muscle fibres. The latter worker would seem justified in this view, because there is authentic evidence that such a mistake is not unknown and has actually been made by other workers in the experience of the writer of this article. Again, a confusion such as this seems probable when one remembers that Lingard may have received a suggestion, regarding the possible occurrence of a nematode or its debris in bursati tumours, from his knowledge of the description of similar structures by Rivolta [1868] and Laulanie [1884] in connection with a similar condition in Europe, viz.:220 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. and horses are generally affected but donkeys are also susceptible. No breed of horses appears to be exempt since the thin-skinned subjects, like Arabs and Walers, are as predisposed to the condition as the coarser country-breds. It is on account of the prolonged duration of the disease, its resistance to treatment, and recurrence even after a deep excision that the condition has been likened by several workers to cheloid, epithelioma and rodent ulcer. The statement by Lingard [1905] that Bursati occurs in bovines lacks confirmation, and it may be that he obtained this idea from the American literature on the subject. It is to be noted that reports on the occurrence of Bursati in bovines in Egypt are available even in recent administration reports from that country, but in the absence of proofs the condition need not be considered as identical with the equine condition. Any causal relation- ship of the rainy season with the disease, as the name suggests, has not been proved, for, certain parts of India are known where the rains are excessive and prolonged and Bursati is infrequent, but Nunn [ 1896 ] has observed that the number of cases varies proportionately with the rain-fall in successive years. A curious fact about the disease is its peculiar seasonal incidence. The onset of the disease commences as early as April or May. It then continues unchecked in spite of all possible methods of treatment until the end of October or the beginning of November, when the disease tends to disappear spontaneously, or yields to the mildest treatment. But the lesions in some cases persist even longer. The rainy season has probably no more untoward effect on the course of this disease than in the case of ordinary cutaneous wounds. The description of the microscopic lesions of Bursati, illustrated by photographs, as given by Holmes [ 1914 ] is more exact than those of the earlier workers, and for any reader, who may desire to see representations of actual naked eye lesions, a reference to Plates I and II and Fig. 5 of Plate III of his Memoir is recommended. Again, P. A. Fish [1895-96] has given an excellent historical sketch of the older Bursati literature and the same may be perused with profit. In the initial stage of the disease, an enlargement of uncertain size is noticed, followed by loss of hair. It is important to remember that several workers (Adams, Smith, Lingard and Holmes) have observed the disease to commence as a papule or an intact tumour, and the last-mentioned even states :THE ETIOLOGY OF BURSATI. 221 the surface. When the surface is shed, the sore is smooth, but as granulations start, an irregular worm-eaten picture is presented. The degenerative lesion is seen to be active at more than one focus, the healing of the first sore being followed by the appearance of fresh ones at the same site or elsewhere. It seems obvious from this that the supply of the infective agent is continuously maintained throughout the Bursati season and this has been repeatedly confirmed in micros- copic sections. In an equine already affected or showing what has been called a Bursati diathesis [ Collins, 1874 ], an accidental wound may assume the typical clinical features, but it is very doubtful if ordinary wounds on non-infected cases ever develop into the genuine sores of Bursati. Pruritus may be intense at the com- mencement, but if the sores are protected from flies, the affected animal does not show much evidence of discomfort, once the disease has become established. The clinical features of Bursati sores are typical, but the most distinctive of all is the presence of what have been called kunkurs. These are yellowish bodies, globular and of the size of a millet seed or a pea, or elongated and about the size of a rice grain, found in varying numbers embedded in little pockets or fistulae in the limited patches of the diseased tissues. The kunkurs are soft and contain granular flesh coloured material when young but are hard and fibrous or even calcareous when old. Deposition of calcareous salts is generally inappreciable but occasionally it may be very pronounced. When pressed between glass slides, well- formed kunkurs behave as a hard elastic body. They have a smooth surface and can be easily shelled out on pressure, leaving pockets of variable dimensions in the mother tissue. If an incision be made into the tumefied tumour, the underlying disease process is found to extend well beyond the limits of the superficial sore and more numerous kunkurs are seen in the subcutaneous tissue. Most writers have described caseous and calcareous degeneration in kunkurs but there seems to be no resemblance of these to tuberculous changes. The commonest predilection seats of the lesions are provided by the angles of the mouth, the fetlock and pasterns, the prepuce and the face just below the eyes, but occasionally the lesions may occur in any other situation liable to persistent and mild abrasions. The occurrence of Bursati kunkurs in internal organs such as the liver, lung, kidney, etc., has been reported by several workers [ Burke, Meyrick, Steel, 1881, Lingard 1905, and others ]; but it has been shown in another article by Datta [1933] that the conditions of '' perihepatitis and small filarial nodules" of Lingard [ 1905 ], "calcific diathesis " of Meyrick [ 1878 ], and " Calcareous de- generations in the horse " of Smith [ 1885 ], are due to infection with Schistosoma indicum. It has to be conceded, however, that at least one internal organ222 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. and Burke [ 1884 ] found Bursati horses showing lung lesions, and Hodgkins [ 1910 ] describes a case of lung affection in which the organ in stated to have been the subject of an intensive Bursati invasion, being crammed with nodules of varying sizes, and the pleura covered with whitish yellow patches beneath which were pieces of kunkur ranging in size from a hazel nut to a pin's head. These appear to be the only recorded cases in India which may be considered as cases of pul- monary habronemiasis in addition to the following. From a severe case of Bursati, mule No. 738 of the L. A. T. T. Coy., Lahore Cantt., destroyed on humane grounds, a specimen of lung showing kunkurs, portions of skin lesions, and a sample of worms, collected from the stomach, were obtained through the kindness of Major V. C. Leckie, R.A.V.C. Histological examination of the skin and the lung revealed the presence of actual habronema larvae and the typical lesions in both the organs. This Bursati case is of considerable interest, as it is the first definite case of so-called internal Bursati and pulmonary habronemiasis to be proved in this country. It should be noted in passing that the stomach worms collected from this case were identified as Habronema muscae. Lingard is the only worker in India, who has described calcareous nodules on the membrana nictitans, and further he has furnished a picture of the same, which bears some resemblance to the conjunctival lesions described by the Australian workers, Lewis and Seddon [ 1918 ]. When bursati lesions occur on the limbs, they present a circular contour of variable diameter with an even raised margin. The sores present irregularly elevated granulations, and on the slightest manipula- tion, they bleed readily. The slow inflammatory processes progress by contiguity of tissue, often receding in one place and advancing in another. There may be a thin, brownish scab formation or a blood-streaked serum may be discharged. Pus formation is seen but rarely, and that after secondary infection. When healing takes place, which process is very slow, the superficial skin becomes thickened, depigmented and shows sparse hair growth. The experience of the present writer, which he has confirmed histologically, shows that the organised or partly organised lesions persist under the apparently wholly cicatrised wound and show considerable predisposition to attacks in the following year, and this is in conformity with the experience of "Max " [ 1876 ]. Lesions in fresh and also very distant sites occur quite frequently in an affected subject. The lesions below the eye follow very ciosely the tract that lachrymal secretion or tears keep moist, and present an elon- gated, excoriated form with irregular edges and multiple surface erosions. Due to structural peculiarities of the prepuce, the lesions there show a marked tendency towards extension and calcification and the individual kunkurs are generally of a large size. Paraphymosis is often met with as a complication in stallions.
THE ETIOLOGY OF BURSATI. 223 Apart from the local lesions, there is scarcely any systemic disturbance, and bursati does not impair an animal much from its serviceable qualities unless the disease has assumed a very extensive form, or has affected the penis, the seat of saddle or the angle of the mouth. The disease generally occurs in old animals but young animals are also affected. As a rule, there is only a single case in a stable, and the disease has not been observed to spread by direct or indirect contagion to other equine subjects, housed in the same or in an adjoining stable. Removal of a diseased animal, in the height of the Bursati season, to particular places, e.g., Jhansi, or to the hills, has been observed by more than one worker [ Burke, 1881, Holmes, 1914 ] to exercise a very salutary effect on the course of the disease. It is said that cases of Bursati are not so frequent now-a-days as compared with what they were a generation ago, and this may probably be explained as being due partly to the better hygienic conditions now obtainable for our animals, and partly to a diminution of the number of horses in the country. PATHOLOGICAL HISTOLOGY. Unlike other aspects of Bursati, its pathological histology has been dealt with by remarkably few workers. Even in Holmes' description, superseding as it does the earlier and more imperfect attempts, a consideration of it has been dismissed in about twenty lines. Credit, however, is due to him for having described for the first time certain essential features of Bursati, e.g., the presence of a marked eosi- nophile infiltration and what he terms, empty spaces of varying sizes. From the foregoing remarks it is clear that a fuller and, at the same time, a more correct description of the histological features of these growths is certainly indicated at this juncture. Again, for the successful elucidation of further problems regarding the mode of infection and efficient methods of diagnosis and control, the definite and significant histological findings recorded below, should serve as helpful indications. Materials for the present studies were provided by a valuable collection of 26 samples of preserved growths, received at this Institute from time to time since 1922 to date, from different parts of India. Of these a few were neoplastic or merely inflammatory in nature; and although some samples were in a bad state of preserva- tion it is satisfactory to record that the same helminthic incitant was consistently demonstrated in 17 samples, obtained from such distant parts as Assam, United Provinces, Hyderabad-Deccan, the Punjab and North-West Frontier Province. Further, in these positive cases and in 5 other samples from the same collection typical microscopic lesions, which in the light of present experience may be consi- dered as of more value in diagnosis than even the worm larvae, have been persis-
224 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. tently detected (Plate XVII, fig. 1). Experience has repeatedly shown that the demonstration of the actual parasite, once the typical lesions had been seen, depended upon the examination of a sufficient number of serial sections, although the growths in a majority of cases were excised only at a late stage of the disease, when one might have expected that the most interesting stages of the disease process had passed off. The usual picture of Bursati consists of an inflammatory granulation tissue in- volving the skin and the subcutaneous tissue, characterised by a profound eosino- philia and the presence of well-defined areas of degeneration. These areas represent sections of the so-called kunkurs (Plate XVII, Fig. 1), which have been known since the earliest times to form a typical clinical feature of these growths, and in the centre of these, sharply margined empty spaces are frequently seen. Since the causal parasites are very fragile and soon lose their distinguishing features, it is often difficult to detect them without great perseverance. Only odd parasites are found actually lying free in the supporting matrix of the growth. The large majority of the larvæ are found enclosed in what appear to be capillary vessels, the majority of which are probably venules (Plate XIV, fig. 2 and Plate XV, fig. 2), since in the centre of the kunkurs one often observes a delicate-walled structure with a well-defined lumen and containing eosinophile cells or blood pigment. In the earliest stage of an individual lesion, the worm larvæ are found invariably to form the nucleus of the commencing degenerative changes (Plate XV, fig. 1); and concentration of toxic products appears to be much higher in the immediate sur- roundings of the worm than at the periphery, where the degenerative process gradu- ally subsides into the healthy tissue. Since the toxin diffuses for the same distance in all directions, the degeneration area is often seen to have a round or oval contour (Plate XVII, fig. 1). In early lesions around the parasite the cellular constituents predominate, the earliest picture being represented by an accumulation of lympho- cytes in foci, supported by scanty, thin, fibrillary strands of connective tissue, disposed in a loose and circular manner. In the centre of these, a blood vessel with the enclosed larva is almost invariably to be seen as forming the nucleus for the nodule (Plate XVIII, fig. 1). In a few sections, however, the typical early lympho- cytic reaction has been seen around an unoccupied capillary. In others the usual appearance of diffusive degenerative changes around a vessel, containing eosinophile leucocytes mainly, but no worm or its remnants, has been seen. The reactions are obviously due to the parasite in both these types of sections, it having been missed as a result of the sectioning knife passing at a different level. Around the indivi- dual nodular lesions an attempt at delimiting the parasitic action is manifested by the formation at most of two or three concentric rings of connective tissue, but the
THE ETIOLOGY OF BURSATI. 225 process of ringed fibrosis has never been seen to have advanced to any great degree compared with, what one finds in Schistosomiasis indicum in the horse, for instance. The connective tissue strands of old growths may be very dense and appear to be almost cartilaginous in texture. The sequence of events in the formation of kunkurs would appear to be as follows. The earliest tissue reaction against the parasite is represented by the lymphocytic infiltration, followed by an aggregation of plasma cells, neutrophile leucocytes and eosinophiles. Plate XIV, fig. 1, shows a typical habronemic abscess in the skin, consisting practically wholly of lymphocyte cells arranged in a nodular form around the worm larvæ, as one usually finds in the gastric lesions due to H. megastoma and no eosinophiles or fibrosis are seen at this stage. Necrosis and karyorrhexis of the nuclei of eosinophiles and other cells then takes place. While necrosis is in progress around the parasites, one finds at the periphery of the necrotic mass, young fibrous tissue cells massing together with giant cells. The supporting matrix between the kunkurs is provided by typical granulation tissue in various stages of development, generally with a dense accumulation of eosinophiles in lymph channels and proliferation of endothelial cells and fibroblasts. In a growth of very recent formation the superficial covering is composed of unaltered epithelium with extreme dilatation and engorgement of subcutaneous capillaries, which generally run perpendicular to the surface epithelium. Plate XIV, fig. 2, shows a section through the periphery of a kunkur, which presumably was formed in the course of one of these perpendicular capillaries. Exudation into the epithe- lial covering and consequently a hazy appearance of individual cells is later seen, leading eventually to superficial breaches or ulceration. Generally the hair folli- cles are unaffected in the early stage, excepting for a tendency towards a collection of the exudate in them, but sometimes a few hair follicles are seen to form sites of actual degenerative lesions as in Plate XVII, fig. 2. The surface epithelium is ulcerated more or less extensively in the active stages, and an attempt at repair by an ingrowth of the surface epithelium is seen now and again. It is a noteworthy fact that, generally in the commencing disease, a more pronounced reaction than could be expected from a surface infection, has been seen in the deeper parts of the subcutis. Contrarily, Plate XVI, fig. 1, however, is the picture of an exceptional section in which the superficial epithelium shows a degenerative involvement, but careful examination failed to reveal the presence of any parasitic incitant and the subcutis appeared to be normal except for the presence of some eosinophiles here and there. An idea of the marked degenerative power possessed by the parasite can be gathered from a study of sections, and from this, it appears improbable that penetration of the surface skin by the larva, without leaving any trace of the track
226 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. followed by it, can really take place, since a single larva in the subcutaneous situa- tion has been seen to produce quite large areas of degenerative foci, probably due in part to the burrowing nature of the exudative fluid. In a number of these large degenerative areas, one can make out only a few interlacing strands of adult con- nective tissue and an occasional capillary in an otherwise homogeneously eosinophile mass. In places, organisation is seen to have taken place, either whole or in part; in others, it has scarcely started. Any parasitic debris which is not removed by phagocytosis, is soon made innocuous by the deposition of lime salts. Lesions in the prepuce show a very marked predisposition to calcification and to extension, but these features have been seen occasionally in the lesions in other situations. The most outstanding and fundamental changes, however, concern the blood capillaries. When the degenerative changes in the endothelium of the capillary have not gone very far, a thin layer of a delicate endothelium can be recognised without much difficulty (Plate XVIII, fig. 2). Certain vessels show varying degrees of endarteritis with partial or total obliteration of the lumen by the replacing connective tissue and also an increase in the amount of elastic tissue at places. The commencing inflammatory changes in the vessel wall are represented by a tendency to diffuse staining (Plate XV, fig. 2). More severe inflammations are manifested by a marked dilatation of the wall due to infiltration with exudative cells. The degree of exudation apparently determines whether only the endothe- lium is to be proliferated or shed, or the vessel wall is to undergo necrosis, calcifi- cation or total disruption. The desquammated endothelial cells can be seen lying scattered in the periphery of the thrombus mass formed in an affected vessel, or where the wall has given way, the endothelial cells may be wandering free in the matrix of the growth. It is important to note here that apparently healthy worms in cross THE ETIOLOGY OF BURSATI. 227 obtained from Mr. G. D. Bhalerao, M.Sc., who identified the larvae, as those of Habronema spp. In certain sections, little, if any, degenerative changes in the parasite can be discerned; in other sections an empty, ovoid or spiral space, which was also seen by Holmes [1914], containing a granular debris, apparently an impress of an escaping or a degenerated parasite fallen out in sectioning, is to be noticed. The anterior and posterior ends of the causative larva have been seen in more than one section (Plate XIX, figs. 2 and 3). As the anterior ends, which were seen in two cases, appeared to be more typical than the posterior, they were submitted to a careful examination. The vestibule was found to be cylindrical in both the cases and to measure 36.5228 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. Although the invariable association of Habronema larvae with Bursati lesions has been shown in the present histological studies, it is to be admitted that the mere presence of worms is by itself not enough for the purpose of casually connecting them with the growth until the disease has actually been reproduced under artificial conditions. Again, the failure on the part of several workers [Van Saceghem, 1919, and Hill, 1920] to induce the Habronema worm to penetrate the intact skin would seem to provide enough room for the presumptive view, advanced by Roubaud and Descazeau [1921], that the presence of pre-existing abrasions or broken cutis is essential for the production of so-called Summer Sores, and the obvious method of proving this would be to create the disease ex- perimentally by introducing into wounds Habronema larvae actually derived from the proboscis of flies. If a more reasonable explanation regarding the production of natural cases of the disease were not forthcoming, parenthetically it may be said that one such is available and is given below, the invading Habronema larvae would be reduced to the status of mere secondary organisms ; and the condition, etiologically, would present some analogy to myiasis, which in a great majority of cases is caused by fly larvae deposited in previously existing wounds. On the other hand, it is noteworthy that while in myiasis the invading larvae duly grow to maturity, Habronema larvae encountered in Summer Sores and Bursati represent only erratic forms, which, after wriggling about for a while in the resulting inflammatory granuloma, die and lie embedded in degenerated areas, the kunkurs, as observed upon histological examination of diseased tissues. The question therefore arises if cutaneous habronemiasis represents an accidental secondary condition, or whether it can be brought into the category of a normal disease entity, such as one finds in gastric habronemiasis, where the stomach of the equine represents the normal habitat for the developing worms. The death and degenera- tion of the worm in the kunkurs cannot be a feature necessary for the fulfilment of its life-history, and it seems certain that their death is due to some accident or misfit in the host-parasite relationship, which they cannot help. In describing certain noteworthy histological findings, it has been stated above that the most outstanding and fundamental changes in Bursati concern the blood capillaries, and that in the centre of early kunkurs, a blood vessel with the enclosed larva is almost invariably to be seen as forming the nucleus for the individual nodule-for- mation. Again healthy worms have also been seen inside apparently healthy vessels (Plate XVIII, fig. 2). These findings bring out significantly the close analogy of Bursati to human filariasis, due to Filaria bancrofti, where the worms accidentally get held up in the capillaries producing the characteristic embolism, while the great majority of the worms float about in the circulating blood. This
THE ETIOLOGY OF BURSATI 229 analogy should be kept in mind, since certain well-known but hitherto unaccount- able clinical facts of Bursati can now be explained on this view. In the light of the present histological findings, Bursati, at any rate as it occurs in India, appears to be a single disease entity, the presence of moulds in open sores having no significance ; for, it has been shown above that the diagnos- tic lesions of Bursati are represented by the kunkurs and that they are, histologi- cally speaking, typical helminthic nodules, the same nematode larvae of Habro- nema spp. having been demonstrated consistently as forming the inciting nucleus for the production of the nodular lesions. There need now be no doubt, therefore, regarding the helminthic as also the habronemic origin of Bursati. With regard to the mode of infection, the position is more unsatisfactory. A perusal of the Bursati literature shows that the fly transmission theory has been held by the natives of India from as early a date as 1820, and that among the other old theories, it was believed to be a blood disease [Ubique, 1877 and Ferris, 1881]. In the case of cutaneous habronemiasis, as known in different parts of the world, the hypothesis current at present is that these helminthic granulomata are caused by the deposition of the habronema larvae in wounds by flies. Although the current view is undoubtedly an improvement on the old Indian belief, it will be seen from what is stated below that it is still unacceptable, since it fails to provide a satisfactory explanation for the known facts regarding Bursati. Contrarily, however, it will be realised that from a consideration of certain clinical peculiari- ties of the disease, which have been emphasised by most observers, one cannot resist the belief that the disease is more than a mere local infection, although there are little or no constitutional symptoms. Notable among the protagonists of what may, for brevity, be called the fly theory, are Railliet and Henry [1915], who suggested that habronema larvae penetrate the skin in the same manner as the larvae of ankylostomes, but from the experimental work of several other workers, it appears that these larvae are not able to penetrate the equine skin even when the epidermis alone is damaged. Margarinos Torres [1924], however, claims to have proved that the larvae of Habronema muscae, if deposited in wounds of a guinea-pig. are able to reach the lungs, it being an organ for which they appear to have a marked preference. The failure on the part of the present writer [1931] to transmit the disease through the agency of flies receives support from Holmes [1914], who states " I am unaware of recorded cases of transmission of the sore from horse to horse by means of outside agencies ", and also in the statement of Spooner Hart [1873]: '' Practice and time have afforded ample proof of the non- contagiousness of Bursati, for my bursatied subjects stand among other animals and I have never seen any ill effects ensue ". The statements quoted here and the
230 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. general experience that in the following year or years " animals once affected with the disease are almost certain to have it recur " (Kerr, 1829) at the same seat or in sites far away, where there have been no wounds, to the exclusion of other animals, indicate that the mechanism underlying the production of natural cases of the disease is not so simple as the current fly-transmission theory would imply. The exclusion of other animals is remarkable, since infected flies undoubtedly have access to all animals housed in a particular stable, where there had been a case or cases previously. Further, it is known that the prevention of contamination of wounds from infected flies and the local application of numerous otherwise very efficient drugs, have failed in the hands of many workers to prevent the recrudes- cence of the sores in certain parts several years in successions, or of fresh sores in other parts of an effected subject; but the available information shows that the larvae in the skin lesions soon die out, i.e., within a month of implication. Again, that bursati sores persist during the whole of the special season, which is several times longer than one month, is known. The control and cure of Bursati should have been achieved by now by the prevention of reinfection by bandaging or appli- cation of fly-repellents, like Van Saceghem's [1918] Plaster of Paris and Naphthalene preparation, if the fly theory represented a true picture of the essential pathogenic process; but the unfortunate fact that Bursati is still incurable, recurrence is common and destruction of affected cases is still practised, shows that fly trans- mission is not the usual method. The work of Margarinos Torres [1924] however proves that occasionally the migration of larva, deposited in a superficial wound, may take place. The possibility of infection taking place through the general circulation, which has already been suggested by Laulanie [1884] in the case of Summer Sores, offers an interesting alternative, following naturally as a corollary to the significant histo- pathological findings, referred to above. That the clinical peculiarities of Bursati are such that one cannot resist the belief that the disease is more than a mere local infection has already been stated and a consideration of expressions, such as, a " bursati diathesis " [Collins, 1874], " peculiar conditions of the patient's system " [Smith, 1879], " constitutional predisposition of the disease " ["Max ", 1876] used by several workers, makes it obvious that a certain subjective factor is indispensable to the production of the sores. The subjective factor or " bursati diathesis " would seem to resolve itself into the infestation of the equine stomach through the inter- mediary agency of flies and the consequent floating of the migratory worm larvae in the general circulation. Some of the earliest observations, such as " the poison appears to be carried to other parts of the body " [Meyrick, 1878] would point to the intervention of the general circulation, and the same is again supported by the com-
THE ETIOLOGY OF BURSATI 231 mencement. of the growths as an intact tumour, or the lesions being first observable in the subcutis with extension outwards later, a feature which has been affirmed by several keen observers. The first definite case of so-called internal bursati involving the lung, in associa- tion with the skin lesions and the presence of Habronema in the stomach has been described earlier in this article. A correct decision upon whether there really exists any relationship between habronemiasis involving different functional systems, such as cutaneous, pulmonary or gastric, in the same animal is important, since an affirmative verdict would add considerable support to the new theory elaborated herein, viz., an internal origin of Bursati. It would appear to be the opinion of Roubaud and Descazeaux [1921] that each is a separate entity, being produced by infected flies, alighting on abrasions, or nostrils or on the lips, as the case may be. Further they believe that ingestion of parasitized flies also may cause the gastric affection. But the above-mentioned case of internal bursati is comparable to the experience of several other workers. For instance, Drouin [1902] observed the simultaneous involvement of the skin and the lung in Summer Sores. In Belpel's [1925] experience in Italy, skin lesions were associated with the presence of the worm in the stomach, and finally Dieulouard [1926] working in Brazil, found that of 20 horses, showing pulmonary habronemiasis, 19 showed evidence of having had Summer Sores at some time during their life, and that the lung lesions occurred only in animals showing evidence of skin involvement. The migratory propensities of Habronema larvae have been demonstrated by Margarinos Torres [1924], and the association of various forms of habronemiasis in the same animal as observed by several workers, has been remarked upon. It seems that the presence of the migratory worm larvae in the general circu- lation cannot by itself produce the disease. There still remains the need of a further factor, injury or contusion, in order that thrombus formation may take place in the capillaries, enabling the arrest of the worm larvae in embolic masses. Bursati growths would therefore appear to be formed only in seats, liable to much risk of successive contusion and injuries, and a breach of the surface may also serve the same purpose, the actual lesions of Bursati being due to an effort of the host tissues to get rid of the embolic masses. Even a deep excision of the growths by the surgical method and a rigid insistence upon the retention of a bandage has failed in the hands of many workers, and the reason is not far to seek. The sectioning of blood vessels in the surgical operation leads to clot-formation and consequently bursati sores. In short, the writer feels justified in advancing the view, that in a majority of cases the habronema larvae are transported through the
232 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. general circulation to certain parts of the body, where they are arrested owing to previous thrombus formation, and not deposited on existing wounds by the fly. Turning now to the specific identity of the Habronema responsible for Bursati in India, H. muscae appears to be the most probable. It may be noted that in France and Australia, H. megastoma is incriminated as the causal agent of Summer Sores and Swamp Cancer, and that in Brazil, Margarinos Torres [1923] considers " H muscae is the most important and perhaps the only cause of the disease ", and Van Saceghem [1917] believes the same to be true in Zambi in the Congo. That the measurements and character of the anterior end of the larvae, as seen in sections of the skin and again in sections of the prepuce lesion conforms to those of H. muscae has been mentioned earlier in this article. The occurrence of the same species of the worm to the exclusion of other species in the stomach of a case, which showed both pulmonary and cutaneous habronemiasis, appears to be more than a mere coincidence. The experience in India would therefore support that of the Brazilian worker and of Van Saceghem [1917 ]. In regard to the probable intermediaries, certain native flies, six muscid and one sarcophagid of Queensland [Johnston, 1920], Drosophilid flies in Ceylon [ Crawford, 1926 ], have been incriminated in addition to the usual Musca domestica and Stomaxys calcitrans and recently Patton [ 1932 ] has stated : " Musca crassiros- tris is a probable transmitter of Habronema in India, for I have found these nema- todes developing in it ". In addition to being related to " special districts " and " special seasons ", Bursati has been called a disease of ''special circumstances" by Burke [ 1881 ], and though the precise factors are as yet imperfectly understood, the occurrence of particular species of Habronema and of the appropriate flies in the same locality now seem indispensable to the production of Bursati. The fact that the sores, after having manifested considerable resistance to treatment, tend to disappear spontaneously at the approach of the winter indicates that the supply of the larvae is no longer continued. That a close relationship must exist between the cycle of evolution of the bursati Habronema and the life-history of its inter- mediate host is obvious from the work of Ransom [1913, Hill, 1920 ] and others: and until the evolutionary stages of the worm in relation to the fly in question have been worked out, month by month, the factors responsible for the bursati, season and districts, will not be understood. A scheme of evolution has been given by Roubaud and Descazeaux [ 1921 ], but as far as the writer is aware, this has still to be confirmed. As a result of histological studies upon sections of H. megostoma tumours, from about 20 cases, collected at different times during a number of years, the author could obtain no proof for the view originally advanced by Des-
THE ETIOLOGY OF BURSATI 233 cazeaux that the female parent probably brings forth young but once during a period of 12 months. From what has been said above, it will be realised that the effective control and cure of Bursati must depend upon the eradication of the Habronema worms from both the definitive and intermediate hosts, disposal of equine faeces and intra- venous administration of drugs like Tartar Emetic and Novarsenobenzol. CONCLUSIONS. The present investigation reveals the nature of Bursati known in India since 1829. It is a habronemic granuloma of equines, most probably due to H. muscae Carter, involving the skin and internal organs such as the lung. The disease is more than a mere local infection, the causative larvae exhibiting considerable mig- ratory powers. In the majority of cases, skin lesions would appear to be produced through the general circulation, wound infection playing an insignificant role. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. The thanks of the author are due to Mr. G. D. Bhalerao, M.Sc., Helmintholo- gist at this Institute, for identifying the helminth larvae, discovered in the course of this investigation, and to Mr. J. Sunder Rao, Artist, for the execution of the illustrations. REFERENCES. Allen, H. (1923). Vet. J. 79, 24-27. Baylis, H. A. (1929). A Manual of Helminthology, Ldn., 226. Belpel, M. J. (1925). Rev. Vet. 77, 5-24. Abs. Trop. Vet. Bull. 13, 93 & 123. Bull, L. (1916). J. Comp. Path. Therap. 29, 187-193. Burke, R. W. (1881). Vet. J. 13, 16-22. 234 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. Descazeaux, M. J. (1915). Ralliet's Report, Bull. Soc. Cent. Med. Vet. 91. Abs. Trop. Vet. Bull. 4, 468-486. THE ETIOLOGY OF BURSATI 235 Smith, F. (1884). Vet. J. 19,16. 236 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. Plate XVIII, fig. 1.PLATE XIV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. × 30. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. × 56.
PLATE XV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. × 140. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. × 554.
PLATE XVI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. × 14. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. × 14.
PLATE XVII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. × 13. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. × 13.
PLATE XVIII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. × 85. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. × 132.
PLATE XIX. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. × 128. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. × 280. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. × 300.
CERCARIA HURLEYI, N. SP. BY M. ANANT NARAYAN RAO, Lecturer in Parasitology, Madras Veterinary College. (Received for publication on 8th April 1933.) (With Plate XX.) This pharyngeal longifurcate cercaria was obtained from seven snails of the species Limnea leuteola (Lamarck), out of 710 collected from the Spur tank, Egmore, during the last quarter of the year 1931. This kind of larval trematode has not been found in any other kind of fresh water snails collected from the Spur Tank. The cercariae occur in long slender sporocysts in the digestive gland of the snail, and often the sporocyst wall is seen bulging in places in which a large number of cercariae are massed together. It was not possible to obtain a complete sporocyst, but it would appear that the larvae escape by bursting open the wall at the bulges. The cercariae that were discharged by the snail in water were chosen for study. Each larva is a powerful swimmer, though small in size. It appeared to be nega- tively phototrophic. The body is an elongate cylinder measuring 1.0 × 0.04 mm. The tail stem is 0.08 × 0.02 mm., and each furcal ramus is 0.15 mm. in length. The body and tail are spinose. The cercaria has two pale yellow eye spots, in front of the ventral sucker. On the body there are four setae on each side, and on the tail there are six of such setae. Each seta originates from a refractile granule. In the body there are two suckers. The oral sucker, with its pile of circular muscle fibres, simulates a protrusible anterior penetrating organ. The ventral sucker, which is a little wider in diameter than the other, is situated a little behind the middle of the body. It is well developed and its cuticular lining is armed with three rows of short and stout spines. The alimentary canal is well developed. There is a short prepharynx, a small muscular pharyngeal bulb, followed by a long 238 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. and open on the margin of the oral opening. The duct of the larger gland appeared to be a little wider than that of the other one. The excretory system pattern consists of five pairs of flame cells in the body and two in the tail. From the bilobed excretory bladder a collecting tube on each side is seen to proceed forwards, and each tube forms a tangle on either side of the ventral sucker. At the tangle there is a cross connection between the two main tubes and this connection is anterior to the ventral sucker. Each tube then divides into an anterior and posterior collecting tubules. The anterior tubule divides into two branches, each ending in a flame cell. The posterior tubule divides into two branches, one of which bifurcates soon after and ends in two flame cells. The other branch bifurcates at the level of the excretory bladder and one branchlet ends in a flame cell near the bladder and the other branchlet passes into the tail stem where it divides into two divisions, each sur- mounted by a flame cell. The flame cell formula is 2 [(2)+(2+1)+2]. The genital cells are arranged in the form of a mass of cells between the ven- tral sucker and the bladder. The tail consists of a stem and two long furcal rami. Inside the stem, there is a caudal excretory channel originating from the bladder. The canal runs the whole length of the stem, bifurcates into the furcal rami and each division opens in a midfurcal pore. There are six pairs of caudal glands, arranged along the caudal canal in the tail stem. Identification.PLATE XX. CERCARIA HURLEYI, N. Sp. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 1. Side view. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 2. Ventral view. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 3. Photomicrograph of C. hurleyi (Note the contracted body.)
CERCARIA HURLEYI, N. SP. 239 From the Table it is seen that the cercaria described in this paper resembles the cercaria of Strigea tarda Streenstrup, 1842, described by Harper [1931], but the former differs from the latter in the flame cell formula and also in possessing pale yellow eye spots and fine setae on the body and the tail stem. As regards longifuroate cercariae found in India, Soparkar [1921] has described only one, Cercaria bombayensis No. 9. It differs from the one under report in having 6 penetration glands, 10 pairs of flame cells in the body and two in the tail and its alimentary canal is not developed. Sewell [1922] in his " Emarginate " group has included such holotsome cercariae as possessing a few penetration cells, a well developed alimentary canal, and a flame cell formula having five pairs in the body and two pairs in the tail. He also said that members of that group are not represented among the Indian forms. It would appear, therefore, that this is the first of its kind in that group to be reported from India and since it differs from the other holotsome cercariae described hitherto, it is proposed to name it Cercaria hurleyi. REFERENCES. Brown, F. J. (1931) . . . . Some freshwater Larval Trematodes from Cheshire. Parasitology, 23, 88-98. STATISTICAL STUDIES IN RECORDS OF INDIAN DAIRY CATTLE. II*. RELIABILITY OF DIFFERENT LACTATION YIELDS AS MEASURES OF A COW'S MILKING CAPABILITY. BY LALL CHAND SIKKA, B.Sc. (AGRI.) Punjab Agricultural College, Lyallpur. (Received for publication on 25th April 1933.) (With 5 graphs.) INTRODUCTION. That Indian cattle are low yielders, and therefore uneconomical producers of milk is widely recognised. The high milking qualities of the cross-breds, which make them economical producers of milk are also generally admitted. Yet extensive experiments in cross-breeding with many a foreign breed have shown that the per- manent solution of the Indian Dairy Cattle problem lies with the pure-bred Indian cattle rather than with the cross-breds. No doubt, the first cross has invariably been highly successful, and the half-bred Indian-European cattle have always been good and economical producers of milk, but later crosses with the imported sire or double crosses, have admittedly been disappointing LACTATION YIELDS AS MEASURES OF A COW'S MILKING CAPACITY. 241 factor, i.e., selective breeding coupled with rigid selection. Those who have studied the evolution of these herds are aware of the large number of cattle culled in order to bring these herds to their present level of milk production. To quote a single instance, out of a total of 208 female calves born in the Agricultural College Dairy, Lyallpur, from the time it was started, and excluding the 23 calves that are being reared, only 78 were reared to maturity, and of those 36 culled (46 per cent.) on account of poor production. However, the age at which cows have been culled on account of poor produc- tion has varied considerably at different dairy farms, and no uniform standard has been followed. Thus, though at the College Dairy, Lyallpur, out of a total of 36 cows culled on account of poor performance 24, or 66 per cent. were culled after milking for one lactation only, i.e., were selected very early, this task of weeding out the inferior animals was considerably deferred at other places, such as the Pusa Dairy Farm, where animals were usually tried for two or three lactations generally before they were discarded. Evidently these two Dairy Farms have assigned different values to the various lactation yields of a cow as a measure of her milk-giving capacity, for though at Lyallpur the first lactation yield has been reckoned as quite reliable, at Pusa it has been more often than not ignored. It costs a huge sum, however, to rear a calf from birth to productive age. It is, therefore, a waste of labour and capital to cull cows without giving them a fair trial. It is equally unsound, however, to maintain poor producers in a herd for any unnecessarily lengthy period. The question of determining the best age for selection242 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. factors already reported (Lall Chand Sikka, 1931). Only records thus standardised have been employed. Table I below gives the chief analytical constants for these data both " raw " and " corrected ". TABLE I. Analytical Constants for the " raw " and " corrected " records. Constants. " Raw " yield. " Corrected " yield. Mean . . . . . 4141 LACTATION YIELDS AS MEASURES OF A COW'S MILKING CAPACITY. 243 used for this study of the 194 cows, whose milk yield for the first 4 lactations at least is known, though actually, for a very large number of the cows' included, the number of records known has been more than 4. Where, therefore, the number of records known has been larger than 4, the highest of these, though where only 4 are known, the highest out of the four, has been taken to measure cows' milk-giving capacity. This procedure is justified in view of the results already reported regarding the variations of milk yield with age, wherein it was shown, that Indian cows in general increase in their yield till their 3rd lactation, maintain it in the 4th, and thence decline at an ever-increasing rate, and there- fore, where we know the yields for the first four lactations of a cow, as in this case, we generally know her maximum milk-yielding capacity. It is recognised that this idea of talcing the corrected maximum lactation yield, as a measure of a cow's milking capability, might not find favour with practical breeders, who feel, and rightly so, that in a cow it is not the exceptionally high yield in any one lactation that counts, but it is the yield over a number of lactations that really matters, and consequently in selecting cows, we should take average yield for life, rather than the yield for any one lactation. But as shown below the mean yield of a cow for several lactations and her maximum lactation yield are highly correlated, and thus mutually convertable. Besides the maximum yield is less variable and hence more reliable than the mean yield for several lactations. This latter point is well-illustrated in Table II which gives the main analytical constants of the curves for the generally accepted measures of a cow's milking capability, e.g., mean corrected yield for first three or four lactations, and the measure used in this study " corrected " maximum lactation yield. TABLE II. Analytical constants of the curves for the mean " corrected" yields for the first 3 or 4 lactations and " corrected " maximum lactation yields. Constants. Mean " corrected " yield for first 3 lactations. Mean " oorrected " yield for first 4 lactations. " Correoted " maximum lactation yield. Mean . . . 3877 244 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. A study of the above Table shows that both skewness and co-efficient of variation are lower in the case of maximum yield than in the mean first 3 or 4 lactations yield, which means that the maximum yield being less variable is a more reliable measure of a cow's milking capability than her mean yield for several lactations. That the mean yield and maximum yield are definitely correlated is shown in Graph I, in which each point in the dotted curve represents the mean yield for first four lactations for the different cows, and that in the continuous curve the maximum yield corresponding to this mean yield, the mean yields being arranged in the ascending order according to their magnitude from left to right. It will be noticed that except for a few exceptions here and there, the maxi- mum yield goes on increasing regularly with the increase in mean yield. From the correlation surface drawn for these 2 variables, the following cons- tants were obtained:NUMBER OF COWS. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] GRAPH I.[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] GRAPH II.LACTATION YIELDS AS MEASURES OF A COW'S MILKING CAPACITY 245 STANDARD DEVIATION = 1196/1-(.8763)2 The probable error, .6745 × standard deviation, works out at 389 lbs., which means that 50 per cent. of the cows with 2,000 lbs. mean " corrected " yield for 1st 4 lactations, would be expected to have a maximum yield between 3,112 246 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. the r for the III calf being +.1079 LACTATION YIELDS AS MEASURES OF A COW'S MILKING CAPACITY 247 maximum yield and mean 1st to 4th calf yield248 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. is only through averaging 2 or more lactations that this variability is decreased, and therefore their reliability increased. TABLE VI. Authority. Data. Co-efficient of variation. Per cent. Gowen (1920) . Jersey cows' random sample milk yield 26.5 NUMBER OF COWS. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] GRAPH III.NUMBER OF COWS. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] GRAPH IV.NUMBER OF COWS. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] GRAPH VLACTATION YIELDS AS MEASURES OF A COW'S MILKING CAPACITY 249 4,000 lbs. in their very first lactation have to be discarded. This is because the 1st calf yield of a cow is not an infallible measure of her future yield. Unless a cow actually gives a yield of at least 4,000 lbs. in her first lactation itself, one can never be sure as to whether she will ever give a yield of 4,000 lbs. in her life. It is likely that a cow may yield only 1,000 lbs. in her 1st lactation and 5,000 lbs. or even more in her very next lactation, though another cow may yield a little less than 4,000 lbs. milk in her first lactation, and may never exceed this yield in any of her subsequent lactations, her first lactation yield itself being her highest lactation yield. With mean first 2 lactations " corrected " yield, Graph 4, the case is materially different, as here to cull the 37 poor producers we need cull a much smaller number of good producers. With mean 1st 3 lactations " corrected "yield, Graph 5, the conditions show still further improvement, though to eliminate all the 37 poor producers on the basis of this standard even, we have to cull a few good producers as well. All this goes to show that though superlative accuracy is never possible, both mean 1st 2, or mean 1st 3 lactations yield, denote the milk yielding capacity of a cow more truly than her 1st calf yield. Also that out of the mean 1st 2 or 1st 3 lactations yield, the latter is a more dependable indication. Table VII presents these results on a numerical basis. It shows how the cows under study have behaved with regard to their maximum yield after giving different amounts of milk in their 1st, 1st 2, or 1st 3 lactations. TABLE VII. Milk yield of 1st lactation, or mean milk yield of 1st 2 or 1st 3 lactations. Percentage of cows giving maximum yields of When judged by 1st lactation yield When judged by mean 1st 2 lactations yield When judged by mean 1st 3 lactations yield Less than 4,000 lbs. 4,000 to 5,000 lbs. Above 5,000 lbs. Less than 4,000 lbs. 4,000 to 5,000 lbs. Above 5,000 lbs. Less than 4,000 lbs. 4,000 to 5,000 lbs. Above 5,000 lbs. Below 1,000 . 25 50 25 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,000250 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. A study of this Table reveals the same story, i.e., that first calf yield is not a good measure from which to judge the future yield of a cow, and that mean 1st 2, or mean 1st. 3 lactations yield is definitely better in this respect. For instance, of the cows that yielded between 2,000LACTATION YIELDS AS MEASURES OF A COW'S MILKING CAPACITY 251 unsound, specially under Indian conditions, where the cattle are generally poor, good and economical cattle rare, and consequently the cost of production of milk is too high to make dairying a business proposition at most places. It may be urged therefore, that only the best milkers be kept and the poor ones culled without any unnecessary loss of time or capital. The argument is no doubt- plausible, but is defective for the following reasons :252 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. (2) No doubt the practice of keeping poor yielders in a herd is economically unsound, but since it costs very high to rear a calf to maturity age LACTATION YIELDS AS MEASURES OF A COW'S MILKING CAPACITY 253 2. The mean of two or more lactation yields is generally a more reliable measure than individual lactation yields, thus confirming the results obtained by Gowen, Gavin, Tuff, and Roberts. 3. The mean of a larger number of lactation yields is more reliable than that of a smaller number, or in plain words, the longer is the period for which a cow has been milked, the more certain we can be of her milking qualities. 4. The individual lactation yields are less reliable as a measure of a cow's milk- ing capability on account of their greater reliability. Taking the mean of a few lactation yields decreases this excessive variability and therefore increases their reliability. 5. The practice of culling cows on the basis of their first lactation yield alone, therefore, is unjustified, as by doing so, there is the risk of culling some good cows too, and keeping some poor animals. This study suggests that for herd improve- ment work the ideal plan would be to try all cows well, i.e., milk them for several lactations, before it is decided to discard them. This, however, is not practicable as it is economically unsound to keep poor producers for unnecessarily lengthy periods. As a compromise between the practices of culling cows in the first lacta- tion and trying them for several lactations, the suggestion is put forward that where a cow is otherwise desirable, she should at least be tried for two lactations. In actual practice the trial need not extend over the complete 2nd lactation, as the cow's behaviour in the first month of a lactation period itself, gives an idea of her per- formance for that lactation. REFERENCES. Arjan Singh Mann. (1930-31). Scientific Report of the Imperial Agriculturist, Pusa. Eraser. (1930). Daily Farming. John Wiley and Sons, New York. Gavin. (1912). Journal of the Royal Agri. Society of England, 73. Gavin. (1913). Journal Agri. Science, 5, 4. Gowen. (1919). Journal Agri. Research, 16, 3. Gowen. (1920). Genetics, 5, 2. Gowen (1920). Journal of Heredity, 11. Gowen. (1924). Milk Secretion. Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore. Johnston and Kartar Singh. (1932). Board of Economic Enquiry, Punjab, Rural Section Publication, 25. Lall Chand Sikka. (1931). Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry, 1,2. Roberts. (1928), Proceedings World's Dairy Congress, 281-287. Smith. (1930-31). Scientific Report of the Imperial Dairy Expert, Bangalore. Tuff. (1928). Proceedings World's Dairy Congress, 275, 281.
CONGENITAL "BLINDNESS" OF CALVES IN INDIA. A RÉSUMÉ OF THE POSITION. BY CAPTAIN S. C. A. DATTA, B.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., Temporary Veterinary Research Officer, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on 17th August 1932.) (With Plates XXICONGENITAL BLINDNESS OF CALVES 255 again be made later in this article, thinks that the available information suggests " the possibility of the amaurotic and teratomatous conditions being different degrees of the same defect". These two may, therefore, be considered together, at least provisionally, as curiously enough they have been occurring together at the same Farm for a number of years, and the speculative theories advanced so far to explain the unknown etiology are based on the same principles, irrespective of the class of abnormality involved. It has also been ascertained from the above Bureau that these cases of " blind- ness " at Quetta are quite different from those referred to by Crew [1925] as a " peculiar type of blindness in Holstein-Friesian cattle ". It is to be noted that all such specimens received at Muktesar for examination and report during a period of about ten years have been provided by the same Dairy Farm at Quetta, but it has recently been reported that the same condition occurs in Shikarpur, Sukkur and surrounding villages in Sindh. Some cases of "blindness" in calves, apparently identical with those at Quetta, have also been seen in Delhi by Colonel A. Olver, Expert Adviser in Animal Husbandry to the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research, and cases of teratomatous formation on the eye of calves have also been encountered at the Veterinary College Clinic in Calcutta. The occurrence of mul- tiple cases at Quetta and in Sindh is surprising as the observable defects in the calves show nothing that can be associated with a parasitic or bacterial genesis. From the evidence obtained from the reports and specimens collected at Mukte sar, the dermoid tumour is found to be usually of a small size, a slight puffiness being noticed around the eye. The growth may be situated at the corneo-scleral junction as shown in Plate XXI, fig. 2, or simply on the membrana nictitans or the conjunctiva alone. If the affected calf lives long enough, the size of the tumour increases with the growth of the animal. In some cases the tumour may be so large as totally to occlude the palpebral fissure (Atresia palpebrarum) with no more than a speck of the vestigial eyeball being left behind [vide Plate XXII, figs. 1 and 2]. The outer and inner canthus are both equally affected, in fact, no segment of the eyeball appears to be exempt. The orbital cavity is unaltered on both sides and the microphthalmic eye is found situated in a pad of connective tissue. The tumours are composed of structures resembling skin and contain hair, hair follicles, sweat and sebaceous glands and pigment cells [vide Plate XXIII, figs. 1 and 2]. Usually affected calves live for some days only but they may live for years, if allowed to do so. The growths may be considered as benign since the available records do not suggest spread by metastasis and the histological picture of the growth reveals no characters of malignancy. The condition appears to affect the male and the female offspring alike, although a tabular statement supplied with a
256 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. recent specimen would seem to indicate the inheritance to be more marked in the maternal line as seen in Schmidt's [1913] description of a case of " pathological fold of the eye ". No special colour or breed seems to be a predisposing factor. The sires at Quetta are all imported animals and the dams are of both Scindhi and Sahiwal extraction. Calves are generally born blind with or without the abnormal growth. It is said that occasionally blindness or the growth may develop later in the first few months of the calf's life. In the less severe cases, the growths can be easily stripped off without leaving much palpable blemish or defect. The position appears to be more unsatisfactory in the amaurotic class of cases where no abnormal growth or lesion can be detected in the eye or its appendages despite the fact that the calves are born blind either at full term or sometimes a few days prematurely. In these cases, the pupil is well-dilated and seems to be fixed in one position although this does not seem to be due to unusual adhesions. The pupil does not react to strong sunlight, mydriatics or myotics. Generally both the eyes are involved, but occasionally only one eye may be defective. In most cases the calves are otherwise healthy, although in an infrequent case they may show deformity of some other part of the body, e.g., the neck or spine may be curved. The condition of amaurosis has been met with lately in two buffalo calves also at Quetta. Careful dissection of the eye from these cases reveals a distinct opacity of the lens and the frontal sinus is sometimes found to contain a reddish gelatinous fluid. It is doubtful if this opacity can be considered as constituting a cataract. Minute histological examination of the structure composing the eye has been made and all the probable pathological changes likely to have produced the condition, such as the detachment of the retina from the choroid coat or a peripheral neuritis affecting the optic nerves similar to that attending (i) quinine or Salvarsan Amaurosis in man or (ii) tobacco amblyopia in horses [Lancet Correspondent, 1894], have been eliminated. Although the occurrence of teratomata in calves has been re- ported from other parts of India, the simultaneous occurrence of both classes of the condition appears to be restricted to Quetta, and the villages round and about Shikarpur and Sukkur. The double condition thus appears to affect, a large area of North-West India. Enquiries have been addressed for determining if the condi- tion occurs in other parts of India and for collecting more information on the lateral as well as the direct lines of descent of the affected calves. It will be seen from a perusal of the literature, which follows hereafter, that no species of animals are exempt from this condition, although reports on the occur- rence of such growths in species other than the ox have yet to be made in India. Published reports on teratomata in situations other than the eye are commoner and reports of such growths on the eyes of calves are very few indeed. Few cases have also been recorded in man.
CONGENITAL BLINDNESS OF CALVES 257 Credit is due to Grafe [1822] for priority in reporting the occurrence of tera- tomatous formation on the margin of the cornea with growth of hair (in man) and the term " trechosis bulbi " is employed by him. Edwards [1859] appears to be the first to describe a case among animals where both eyes presented such growths. Robertson [1877] describes a case of congenital hairy tumour springing from the sclerotic and cornea of a shorthorn bull-calf, six months old, which was otherwise in perfect health and well-formed. The owner described this as a " double under eyelid " and stated that it had been observed shortly after birth. The only distur- bance the tumour seemed to cause was an abundant flow of tears. Numerous hairs similar to eye lashes were found projecting between the eyelids, analogous to moles of the skin. Walley [1877] reports two cases of corneal Dermatoma and says that clinically these growths are not of much consequence. They are more interesting as showing the close relation which exists between conjunctival corneal structures and the skin. Nettleton [1885] describes a dermoid growth on the cornea, of the circumference of a shilling. Bland Sutton [1903] employs the term " conjunctival moles " and says that they have been observed in horses, sheep, oxen and dogs. He furnishes a picture of a sheep with the growth and further states that they are provided with hair or wool according to the nature of the tegumentary covering, characteristic of the mammal in which, they occur. In dealing with dermoid teratoma of the conjunctiva, Law [1903] states :258 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. In these cases of congenital " blindness " the normal physiological processes which underlie the somatic development of the eye are obscured and the aberrations in question are produced in a manner which is not understood. Of the many theories which have been invoked for explaining either a teratomatous formation or microphthalmia, the following may be recalled for scientific interest ;CONGENITAL BLINDNESS OF CALVES. 259 maternal parent is drawn from the country-bred stock of Scindhi or Sahiwal ex- traction. Any relationship of the condition with the cows does not seem likely as this peculiar condition has not yet been reported from any other part of India where cows of these breeds are employed for the raising of stocks, excepting for the solitary report from Shikarpur and Sukkur already mentioned. Dr. Darling remarks that " From the pedigrees offered I have worked very carefully through the possible relationships, and I can see no reason for attributing the amaurosis or teratomatous condition of the eyes of the calves to an heredity factor." The data secured so far do not point to the condition being a feature of atavism or the blindness being transmitted as a recessive mutant, as might be expected from a statement of Crew and Smith [ 1930 ] to the effect that blindness caused by the entire absence of the eye or by the presence of a rudimentary eye is inherited in a recessive fashion. As there was every reason to believe in the possibility of the condition being transmissible to the progeny, the authorities at the Quetta Dairy were advised that the affected calves be not retained for breeding purposes. A statement of Crew [ 1925 ] that" chances that a recessive mutation will affect the race is very small indeed if the mating is free and uncontrolled ", suggests that the affected calves might have been retained and successfully utilised without detriment to the progeny. Excepting the Scindhi dam, the only common factor at Shikarpur and the Quetta Dairy seems to be the feeding of Juar fodder, obtained from Shikarpur. Chemical analysis of forage at Quetta has been carried out and mineral additions such as bone meal, lime, and potassium iodide to the fodder have been made without any evident reduction in the incidence of the condition there. It was observed that in a certain year, when the fodder was supplemented by mineral constituents and all the cows were served by the usual imported Friesians, there was no scarcity of cases of abortions, premature births and " blind calves ", where- as in other years there have occurred no cases of blindness, notwithstanding abortions and premature births, although no mineral additions to the fodder were made. As mentioned before, the help of the Imperial Bureau of Animal Genetics, Edinburgh, was invoked and the Chief Officer's reply is quoted in extenso :260 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. tion would have been higher even than in the crossbreds, whilst in purebred Indian cattle the condition might have been rare. Such a result, of course, would indicate the possibility of a dietary deficiency due to innate lack of metabolic adaptation in the imported cattle. As that character of the animal known as " constitution " rests no doubt on a multiple factor basis, it is obvious that the crossbred cattle would not inherit either of the parents' " constitutions " in a clear-cut Mendelian manner. The metabolic adaptation of the crossbreds would be more or less deficient and this would be more pronounced, from the genetical multiple factor point of view, in the cross genera- tion, quite apart from the fact that in addition these individuals would be three- quarters European blood. From your records I see that many of the defective calves are such three-quarter breds. You will see, however, that the actual condi- tion does not appear to be directly due to a genetical factor, but to an indirect constitutional factor which allows the development of such a condition in the presence of some dietary deficiency. I should be pleased to hear further from you if any good results accrue from phosphate feeding of the cattle." With reference to the two important points raised in the above reply, it is to be noted that (1) the conditions are not restricted to the crossbreds only, as a few cases of the same condition have been seen in several villages in Sindh and also in two buffalo calves at Quetta, and (2) bone meal, lime and potassium iodide have been added to the fodder without any apparent results. The circumstances of the origin of amaurosis would make one suspect some disturbance of central origin due to an animal or vegetable toxin, bacterial infec- tion or impaired circulation during intrauterine life. For the last four or five years, vaccination against abortion has been practised on all the heifers and newly purchased animals, but the condition existed at the Farm even prior to the intro- duction of this vaccination and hence the vaccine can scarcely be incriminated. The influence of the amount of moisture and temperature of this locality on the development of Mendelian characters has to be examined. It is said that there is a deficiency of phosphates in the forage at Quetta and if it is so, phosphate therapy should be beneficial. It is understood that there occurs in man a peculiar night-blindness (Hemorolopea) which readily responds to phosphate, treatment. A similar condition of "night-blindness "(nyctalopia) is known to occur in the Madras Presidency and Raghavan and Thiagaraj (1920) consider that severe sunlight and errors in diet are probably the causal factors in this condition. Defective hormonic secretion may also be involved. Lethal factors like those in the production of earless sheep [Wriedt, 1921] and semilethal factors as in cases of microphthalmia, coloboma and glaucoma in a certain breed of
CONGENITAL BLINDNESS OF CALVES. 261 dogs [Wriedt, 1924] may be causally connected with the genesis of the so called "blindness" in India. Our thanks are due to several members of the Royal Army Veterinary Corps, who have held charge of the Baluchistan District, and particularly to Major C. Townsend and Major W. N. Rowston for supplying us with much information in connection with this interesting condition. We are also greatly indebted to Colonel G. Mellor, Director of Military Farms, Simla, for his interesting note and tables, which are appended to this article. REFERENCES. Bland Sutton, J. (1903). Tumours, Innocent and Malignant, p. 391. Crew, F. A. E. (1925). Ani. Gen., p. 321. Crew, F. A. E., and Smith, A. D. B. (1930). Genetics of the horse, pp. 144-145. Edwards, (1859). Edin. Vety. Rev. Grafe, (1822). Jl. der Chir. und Augenheil- Kunde, 4. Joest, E. (1921). Path. Anat. Dom. Ani, 3, part II, p. 415. Kitt, T. (1906). Comp. Gen. Path. Lancet Correspondent, (1894). Blindness in horses produced by eating tobacco plant, Vet. Jl. 39, 181. Law, J. (1903). Vet. Med. 3, 375. Nettleton, J. (1885). Vet. Jl. 21, 235. Nicholas, E. (1914). Vet. Ophthalmology, pp. 136-138. Nicholson, G. WdeP, (1929). Histogeny of Teratomata, Jl. Path. and Bact. 32, II, 365. Nunn, J. A. (1893). Detachment of retina from Choroid coat of the eye, Vet. Jl. 34, 241. 262 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. NOTE DATED 23RD JULY 1932 BY COLONEL G. MELLOR, DIRECTOR OF FARMS, SIMLA. I have read with great interest Capt. Datta's paper on congenital blindness of calves. From the information available I have compiled a chart showing incidence of blindness on the Government Military Dairy, Quetta, since 1913. This CHART SHOWING INCIDENCE OF BLINDNESS SINCE 1913 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
CONGENITAL BLINDNESS OF CALVES. 263 may not be accurate for the early years but I know that from 1st April 1929 to 31st March 1930 no calf was born blind at this Farm. I also attach a statement showing details of parentage of all calves born blind or going blind at Quetta264 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. " Half ", a CONGENITAL BLINDNESS OF CALVES. 285 Information regarding calves born blind at Government Military Dairy Farm, Quetta, during 1931-32. Serial No. Name of Dam Breed Farm where served Farm where spent her dry period Date of birth Calves Sex and Breed Farm where born Period sire was in Quetta when dam served No . of calves born previously Remarks Sire Period No. Whether any born blind 1 Lotus . Countrybred . Quetta Quetta 7-4-31 F. ½ (½ Fr. + ½ Sah.) Quetta Chieftain . 7266 THE INDIAN JOURNAL 0F VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, HI. Information regarding calves born blind at Government Military Dairy Farm, Quetta, during 1931-32CONGENITAL BLINDNESS OF CALVES. 267 Information regarding calves that went blind after birth at Government Military Dairy Farm, Quetta, during 1931-32. Serial No. Name of Dam Breed Farm where served Farm where spent her dry period No. and names of calves Date went blind Date of birth Sex and breed Farm where born Period sire was in Quetta when dam served No. of calves born previously Sire Period No. Whether any born blind 1 Bess . . ½ Bred (Ayr. Sah.) Quetta Quetta H. 233 Half . 15-3- 30 31-8-29 F. ¼ (¼ Ayr., ¼ Sah.) Quetta Omega . 8 months . 4 2 Gulkheri . Ditto . 268 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. 1927-28. Month Gram Bran Cake Salt Kirby Bhoosa Berseem Makai Remarks July 1927 . . Fed Fed Fed 2 ozs. per head per diem for the year Fed Fed .. Gram, Bran and Cake were mixed in the proportion of 6 : 2 : 1 and of this mixture the cows in calf received a ration of 4 lbs., I lb. for every month over six in calf, thus at seventh } month it received 5 lbs., at 8th month 6 lbs., and in the 9th month 7 lbs., 15 lbs. of dry fodder throughout. Also 10 lbs. of green fodder was fed per head during months it was avai- lable. August CONGENITAL BLINDNESS OF CALVES. 269 1929-30. Month Gram Bran Cake Salt Kirby Bhoosa Ber- seem Makai Remarks July 1929 Fed Fed Fed 2 ozs. per head per diem for the year. Fed Fed 4 days Fed .. Gram, Bran and Cake were mixed in the proportion of 6 : 2 : 1 and of this mixture the cows in calf received a ration of 4 lbs., 1 lb. for every month over six in calf,thus at seventh month } it received 5 lbs., at 8th month 6 lbs., and in the 9th month 7 lbs., 15 lbs. of dry fodder throughout. Also 10 lbs. of green fodder was fed per head during months it was available. August 270 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. Analyses of grasses at Quetta. Register No. Name of sample Locality Rain- fall in inches Air per cent dried wt. Ash per cent. Insol : residue on fodder Crude fodder Pro- tein Lime Phos- phate Chlo- rine Iron 230 Hill grass . Quetta. .. .. 9.584 4.92 .. 5.4 1.08 .141 .358 .176 59 Kirby . PLATE XXI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Head of a newly born calf showing a teratomatous growth completely filling the palpebral fissure of the left eye. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Photomicrograph showing dermoid teratoma at the cornea-scleral junction.
PLATE XXII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. A pair of eyeballs totally covered by extensive teratomatous formation. The eyeballs in this case were very small and rudimentary. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. A. Topmost pairPLATE XXIII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Photomicrograph showing the histology of a dermoid teratoma of the eye, with a sebaceous gland. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Photomicrograph showing the structures which compose a dermoid teratoma of the eye.
THE CHEMOTHERAPY OF CONTAGIOUS BOVINE ABORTION. A RÉSUMÉ. LAKSHMI SAHAI, M.Sc, M.R.C.V.S.. Veterinary Investigation Officer, Bihar and Orissa. Contagious bovine abortion is one of the most dreaded and widespread scourges of the cattle industry causing enormous economic loss to stock-owners, but in spite of the fact that the disease has claimed the attention of some of the best workers in all lands for well over a quarter of a century, hitherto very little has been accom- plished in the way of its control. Biological products such as the various kinds of live and dead vaccines have been widely tried, but while they have proved to be of some value as palliatives they have been found to bo of little use for the complete eradication of the disease. The undoubted success which has been achieved in the treatment of certain human and animal affections with chemicals has led a number of workers from time to time to turn their attention towards chemotherapy in the hope of finding some remedy that might offer a relief from the disease. Although the field of chemotherapy has been widely explored and the search is by no means at an end, the literature on the subject remains so scattered as to be almost inaccessible to most field workers and it was therefore thought that if the informa- tion so far gathered were collected and compiled in an easily accessible form it might be of some benefit to field workers in this country, if only because it might serve to put them on their guard against placing too much reliance on the so-called abortion cures which are from time to time advertised. The résumé that follows has been compiled with that object in view. Of the various chemotherapeutic agents that have been tried, those of the flavine series have perhaps attracted the widest attention due to their supposed affinity for or selective action on the genital organs of the female and of these acriflavine is the most important. Edwards and Coffman [1926] were the first to claim successful results in the treatment of contagious bovine abortion with intra- venous injections of acriflavine. Three injections were given, the first injection was of a 1272 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. of the blood of one of the cows gradually became less and less markedly positive and in fourteen months it was negative to the test. The blood from all other cows gradually lost its agglutinating power. Guinea-pigs injected intraperitoneally with milk from cows that had been treated failed to develop the characteristic lesions. The milk was positive to the biological test before the treatment. All cows receiving two large doses bred and produced normal calves after a normal gestation period. These findings of Edwards and Coffman attracted a good deal of attention. Huddleson [1927], however failed to confirm these findings. A Shorthorn cow that had aborted received three injections in doses of 200 c.c. each of a 1 in 100 solution of acriflavine at intervals of a week. Huddleson failed to note any reduction in the agglutinin content of the blood or any change in the microflora of the udder as detected by the guinea-pig inoculation test up to three and a half months after the last injection. According to Bryan [1929], however, who tried the drug on two herds with a history of recurrent abortions, the animals became negative to the test and ceased to abort. Graham and Thorp [1930] have shown that while acriflavine in dilutions of 1 to 2000 has a definite bactericidal action on the Bacillus abortus suis Traum in vitro, it has no germicidal action in vivo as judged by the agglutination titre which remained unaltered. Proflavine which is closely allied to acriflavine but is soluble only in dilutions of 1 in 220 and above was found to be highly efficacious by Power [1926]. He gave a single intravenous injection of 350 c.c. of a 1 in 300 dilution except in one case in which two injections were given. Huddleson [1929] obtained no better results with this drug than with acriflavine. An infected cow was treated with two injections of 300 c.c. each of a 1 in 200 dilution of proflavine, but the agglutination titre of the blood and the bacterial content of the udder remained practically unchanged for one and a half years after the treatment. Schubert [1929] records very good results following the use of trypanblue. The drug was tried on 27 herds heavily infected with the disease. After the trypanblue treatment the disease completely disappeared from 22 herds, the remain- ing 5 herds showing only occasional isolated cases. The treatment consisted of three injections of a 1 per cent. solution in sterile water given intramuscularly preferably in the neck muscles. The second injection was given three weeks after the first and the third two months after the second. Schubert stresses the import- ance of giving the injections at the intervals specified and on the basis of observa- tions extending over some years claims that the treatment is highly effective. Larrieu [1932] strongly recommends Brauer's method of treatment with phenol with certain modifications which he has used extensively in France and which he finds to be very efficacious. The treatment consists in the administration of an
CONTAGIOUS BOVINE ABORTION. 273 ampoule of Nator B after 30 days and a second after 45 days of gestation and from the commencement of the fifth month a subcutaneous injection behind the shoulder of 5 c.c. of a 5 per cent. aqueous solution of carbolic acid once every fifteen days until calving is accomplished. Leuthold [1920] reports favourably on the therapeutic value of syrgotral which is an odourless and tasteless 1-6 per cent. aqueous solution of syrgol, a solid sub- stance containing 20 per cent.silver in the form of colloid oxide of silver and of colloidal silver. The drug is administered per os and the best results are obtained when syrgotral is administered before the animals are bred and during the first two months of pregnancy or during the seventh, eighth and ninth month of pregnancy. Graham and Thorp [1930] experimenting with acriflavine, trypacrin " A" (a compound of gentian-violet and neutral acriflavine), tryparsamide, colloidal carbon and iodine in the form of alkali hypoiodite "Farodine", found that while acriflavine, both neutral and acid dyes, and to a less extent trypacrin " A" possessed some bactericidal action on Bacillus abortus suis Traum in vitro, these and the other drugs exerted no germicidal action on the organism in vivo in that they failed to alter the blood serum agglutinin titre of abortion infected cows. Acriflavine, trypacrin "A", tryparsamide and colloidal carbon were administered intravenously and alkali hypoiodite " Farodine " intramuscularly. Gwatkin failed to note any beneficial results following the use of formaldehyde and mercurochrome in artificially Bacillus abortus infected rabbits when adminis- tered intravenously in 3 per cent.and 1 per cent.strengths respectively. Ziemann [1921] claims to have cured cases of undulant fever by intravenous injections of collargol and to have tried the. drug in contagious abortion infected herds but does not give any results. Other drugs that have been unsuccessfully tried include neoarsphenamine and sodium cacodylate administered intravenously, pyridium and butyl chloride per os, thionin intravenously and by the mouth and chloroform vapour viâ the teat canal. Neosalvarsan, mercuric iodide and methylene blue have likewise been found to be of no value. From the above summary of the results hitherto obtained, it will be seen how difficult it is to assess the relative merits of the various therapeutic agents that have so far been tried in the absence of more extended and properly controlled trials, for while in the case of some, conflicting findings have been recorded with regard to the efficacy or otherwise of the others we have the testimony of individual workers alone to rely upon. The disease has proved so ruinous and intractable
274 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. to treatment that in our anxiety to seek relief from its depredations we are perhaps too apt to seize upon any remedy for which success is claimed only to find later that the claim is unreal and based on insufficient data. Contagious bovine abortion is a self-limiting disease in which there is a decided tendency after the first storm has blown over for the abortions to subside and for the affected animals to acquire after the first one or two abortions a degree of resistance that enables them to go through the normal period of gestation without a mishap which in the absence of adequate controls is apt to be attributed to the supposed benefit of the particular treatment that has been employed, while what has really happened is nothing more than the normal process of recovery which would have ensued in the natural course of events even if no treatment had been adopted. It is well known that agglutinins may persist in the blood long after infection has been overcome. Their presence merely indicates that either the animal is or has been infected while in some of the experiments cited above an immediate fall in the agglutinin titre has been sought for as evidence in support of the therapeutic value of the treatment adopted. Breeding efficiency and agglutination titre, unless observations on the latter are made for fairly prolonged periods, are therefore not a safe criterion in assessing the value of any drug in the treatment or cure of contagious bovine abortion. In ap- praising results in those cases in which a previously infected animal which has been treated brings forth a normal calf at the end of a normal gestation period reliance must necessarily be placed on the bacteriological examination of the milk, the vagi- nal discharges and the fCONTAGIOUS BOVINE ABORTION 275 these individuals become again capable of resuming their former vocations. But it is very doubtful whether this clinical cure connotes also a bacteriological cure, for relapses sometimes occur and it would therefore appear that what has occurred is merely a clinical cure, such individuals remaining carriers of the germs which again become active when a suitable opportunity offers. Since cattle and, for the matter of that, goats and sheep affected with contagious abortion show no clinical symp- toms of the disease at all, the apparent discrepant results in the two cases are in reality not discrepant at all. REFERENCES. Bryan (1929). Vet. Med. 25, 511SELECTED ARTICLES MINERAL METABOLISM OF FARM ANIMALS.* BY KSHITISH CHANDRA SEN. INTRODUCTION. For quite a long time research in nutritional problems meant the study of the body requirements of proteins, fats and carbohydrates. About half a century ago the Munich School of Physiologists headed by Voit drew attention to the fact that minerals were necessary for the proper utilisation of foods. Thus Förster1 showed that in the case of dogs which were given food from which the major part of the mineral matter has been extracted with hot water, the animals were unable to digest the food which was vomited unchanged after several hours. This aspect of the nutritional problem did not however attract much attention till the work of Hart, Steenbock, McCollum and others was started in 19062 in which the importance of pro- viding sufficient mineral matter for the proper nutrition, growth and power of repro- duction of farm animals was demonstrated. With the growth of our knowledge in vitamin physiology in recent times, the question of mineral requirements has as- sumed a place of great importance as in some cases it has been definitely shown that there is a marked correlation between the need of a vitamin factor and the assimila- tion and retention of certain mineral constituents. The object of the present paper is to give a short summary of the present posi- tion of the problem of mineral metabolism with special reference to the nutrition of farm animals. It is not intended to discuss the vitamin question in detail. The importance of the problem from the point of view of Indian conditions will be touched upon as far as possible, though very few experimental results of this nature are available. THE NEED FOR MINERALS. It is important to determine, before we proceed further, the rôle of the minerals in the living organism. The animal body has been analysed and the results are scat- tered throughout the literature. In general the following are the elements besides carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen which are found in large quantity: calcium, phosphorus, sodium, chlorine, magnesium, potassium, sulphur and iron. It was * Reprinted from Sir Prafulla Chandra Ray Seventieth Birthday Commemoration Volume of the Jour. of the Ind. Chem. Soc. (1933). (276)
MINERAL METABOLISM OF FARM ANIMALS 277 at first thought that these were the only minerals essential for the body. It is how. ever now known that there are other minerals, often present in traces, such as copper, manganese, iodine, etc., which are also necessary and serve important physiological functions in the growth and maintenance of the body. We can classify the known functions of the minerals in the following way : (1) the maintenance of a proper osmotic pressure in the body fluids, (2) the maintenance of the neutrality of the blood and the lymph, (3) the maintenance of the proper physiological balance between various mine- ral ingredients in the blood, (4) to aid the processes of digestion and absorption, and (5) for the supply of various constituents of growing tissues and of internal secretions. It is not necessary to say anything more now with regard to the above classifi- cation, as the importance of minerals for the abovementioned purposes is well known, MINERAL REQUIREMENTS. The question of mineral requirement is not a simple one and the amount varies in the case of different animals, with age and time. Thus a lactating animal re- quires a higher percentage of lime than a non-lactating one. Our information with regard to most elements is scanty ; only definite results are known in the cases of lime and phosphoric acid. Mineral requirements as a rule are greater for a young animal than for an aged one, because in addition to the maintenance of the body, more minerals are necessary for the growing skeleton and tissues. It has been known for a long time that milk is an ideal diet for the young and an interesting relation has been discovered between the rate of growth of an animal and the composition of its mother's milk.3 In Table I the numerical relations are shown. TABLE I. Species No. of days in which wt. of the newborn is doubled Milk of the species contains% Protein Ash CaO P2O5 Man 180 1.6 0.25 0.049 0.056 Horse 60 2.0 0.38 0.114 0.121 Cow 47 3.5 0.72 0.161 0.189 Goat 22 4.3 0.81 0.191 0.219 Sheep 15 6.5 0.89 0.277 0.269 Pig 14 6.7 1.03 0.395 0.357 Dog 9 7.1 1.01 0.338 0.364 F 2
278 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. It will be observed that there is a remarkable correlation between the rate of growth of an animal and the mineral and protein content of its mother's milk. Since the minerals do not supply energy in any form, their function is entirely different from that of carbohydrate, fat or proteins. From the above table it is clear that the milk of a rapidly growing species contains a larger proportion of ash. This is of course intelligible from the fact that more mineral matter is necessary in these cases to build up the bone and the skeleton. A similar correlation is observed between the chemical composition of the body and that of milk of the same species as has been shown by Bunge.4 THE EVALUATION OF THE MINERAL REQUIREMENT. It has been stated already that only in the case of lime and phosphoric acid is the amount of mineral requirement known. An idea of the requirement for these two substances may be obtained from the following considerations. It is known that each of these ingredients is present in the animal body to the extent of about 1% of the body weight of pig and about 2% in the case of bullock. On this basis, for an increase of 100 lbs. in the body weight, the CaO and P2O5 requirement will be about 1 lb. each. Godden and his co-workers5 have found in metabolic experiments with pigs that only 50% of the intake of these minerals is retained under normal favour- able conditions, and hence 2 lbs. of these minerals will be necessary for a 100 lbs. in- crease of live weight. For a calf nearly double these amounts are necessary. Thus a calf putting on 1½ lbs. weight per day must therefore absorb from the intestine and retain approximately ½ oz. of lime per day and a pig about ¼ oz. Ten pounds of cow's milk contain roughly ¼ oz. of lime and MINERAL METABOLISM OF FARM ANIMALS 279 for example it would take 2 cwts. of a mixture of oats, bran and maize to yield 3 oz. of lime. The danger of calcium deficiency arises therefore either when grazing on poor pasture or during indoor feeding on concentrates.7 A good deal of attention has been paid to the requirements of lactating animals where the need for both these minerals is high. Large numbers of experiments have been reported by various investigators to keep an animal in positive calcium balance or to keep the animals in equilibrium. Forbes and his co-workers8 were unable to obtain a positive calcium balance with cows during the first half of lactation, despite an abundant supply of calcium, phosphorus and other minerals. Hart and others9 succeeded in obtaining a positive calcium balance by feeding alfalfa hay. In later experiments they could only reduce, but not make positive, the negative balances of milking cows by substituting alfalfa hay for timothy hay. These latter results were attributed by them to a faulty curing of the hay which destroyed the vitamin assisting calcium assimilation. Many other authors record beneficial effects from feeding fresh green food. Hart, Steenbock and Hoppert10 found that with milking goats the administration of cod liver oil converted a negative to positive calcium balance, but the oil was not well tolerated. In some experiments at the Rowett Institute in the case of young hog pigs on a ration of maize, middlings, oat meal and blood meal, cod liver oil raised the calcium retention from a minus quantity to over 60% of the intake. Irradiation with artificially pro- duced ultraviolet light produced a similar effect both in growing and in lactating animals. Thus, for example in the case of young pigs, exposure to light from a carbon are lamp for one hour daily raised the calcium retention from 0.46 gram to 2.1 gram. In lactating goats the effect of light was to diminish the loss of calcium or to convert a loss to a gain.11 BALANCE BETWEEN MINERALS. The question of mineral requirement is intimately connected with assimilation and retention, and balance between different mineral constituents. It is becoming evident now that the ingestion of one mineral may profoundly affect the retention of another mineral. Thus Henderson 12 has found with pigs that when the ratio of lime to phosphoric acid in a ration is 1:1, there is an adequate assimilation and retention of both elements, but when the ratio is only 1 : 2.5, the balances are very much lower and the animals fare better under ultraviolet treatment. It is of course well known that a high variation in CaO : P2O5 ratio in the diet causes either a low calcium or low phosphorus type of rickets in rats which is indeed the basis of Sherman and Pappenheimer's 13 rachitogenic diet. Phosphorus may be present in abundance and may be absorbed from the intestine in sufficient amounts, but unless
280 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. a sufficient amount of calcium be present it cannot be used for bone construction, and the greater part may be lost in the excreta. According to Ingle 14 an excess of phosphorus may deplete the body of previously stored calcium. The nature of the diet, in certain other respects, also affects the assimilation of calcium. Thus, for instance, a higher proportion of calcium appears to be absorbed from fresh pasture than from most other food-stuffs. In the case of hay the method of curing is of some importance, assimilation being more difficult from hay that has been left lying out for a long time than from hay secured from minimum exposure to the elements. In the case of children, Blauberg 15 found the assimilation of calcium from human milk, cow's milk and an artificial food was respectively 82, 61 and 33 per cent. Sherman and Hawley 16 found that calcium in vegetables could not be assimilated as easily as the calcium in cow's milk. The ratios of other con- stituents of the ration to calcium are also of some importance. According to Ingle17 excess of magnesium may limit absorption. There is an optimum ratio of fat to calcium. The ratio of acid to basic radicles has also an influence, assimilation being more rapid when there is an excess of acid radicles. The influence of a proper CaO : P2O5 ratio has already been mentioned. With regard to the assimilation of other minerais, it is probable that the amount of calcium in the diet affects assimilation of iron. With an ample calcium intake, the body can satisfy its needs from a smaller amount of iron than is the case when the intake of calcium is limited.18 A certain amount of controversy has centred round Bunge's theory 19 for the necessity of a correct balance of Na: K in the diet. He showed that an excessive ingestion of potassium salt causes an elimination of sodium and chlorine. This is of importance in practical feeding of farm animals, because a depletion of sodium and chlorine would tend to react unfavorably on the animals. Lengthy experiments on heifers carried out by Hart and his collaborators 20 have however shown the in- completeness of Bunge's theory. They found in the case of different groups of animals, fed on rations of different cereals, but all having free access to salt that the amount of sodium chloride consumed bore no relation to the potassium content of the ration, either when used alone or when supplemented by potassium salts. But an interesting question has been raised with regard to the effect of an abnormal ratio of Na : K on the retention of other elements such as calcium. Thus Seeman21 first suggested and Zander 22 supported the idea that an excessive K : Na ratio may be the cause of rickets. Aron 23 also considered it probable that such a ratio interfered with the deposit of calcium and bone formation in cattle, while Zuntz 24 has recorded that fodder which cause rickets usually show an excessive proportion of K to Na. In recent years Richards, Godden and Husband 25 have investigated the effect, on the metabolism of the growing pig, of increasing the proportion of Na
MINERAL METABOLISM OF FARM ANIMALS 281 to K by addition of sodium salts to a cereal ration, and have found that the addi- tion of sodium chloride or sodium citrate led to increased assimilation and retention of nitorgen calcium and phosphorus. In a later paper 26 it was found that the addition of potassium citrate to the diet decreased the retention of the above constituents. With regard to lime retention, potassium citrate led to a decrease while sodium citrate showed an increased retention and the authors conclude that a high Na : K ratio may have a considerable influence on the calcium assimilation, THE INTER-RELATION BETWEEN ORGANIC AND INORGANIC CONSTITUENTS OF THE DIET. The first point that arises in this connection is the rôle of organic constituents on the retention of minerals and secondly the rôle of minerals in the phenomenon of digestion and absorption of the energy producing substances. Thus Auchinache 27 in a recent series of elaborate experiments with sheep finds that there is some unidentified substance in green pasture which is superior to cod liver oil in assisting assimilation and retention of lime and phosphoric acid. Godden and others 28 find that with pigs on a ration badly balanced with respect to CaO and P2O5, the addi- tion of oils like cod liver oil, linseed oil and olive oil caused a rise in the calcium and phosphorus balances. The question of the rôle of minerals on the digestion and assimilation of the organic constituents of the food has not been throughly studied, but the results obtained by Förster 29 are significant. When minerals were previously extracted from the food, he found that on this diet dogs died sooner than in complete starva- tion. Signs of disturbance of the digestive organs appeared early. They were soon accompanied by increased excitability and weakness of the neuromuscular system. The central nervous system was also affected, as was shown by the occurrence of con- vulsions and periods of drowsiness. A remarkable feature of the experiments was the profound disturbance caused by relatively small losses of inorganic salts from the system. The total mineral matter of the body at the beginning of the feeding with the diet from which all salt had been extracted was estimated at 1500 grams. During the experimental stage, the body lost phos- phoric acid and sodium chloride in greatest amounts compared with other minerals, but the actual amount of loss of these minerals was only 30 grams and 7 grams respectively before death occurred as a result of mineral starvation. A well nourished body could lose a far larger proportion of its total protein, fat or carbohydrate without showing any marked disturbance of its functions.30 Regarding the effect of minerals on intestinal absorption, recent experiments by the writer 31 on the rôle of blood calcium on carbohydrate metabolism point to some
282 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. interesting probabilities. Thus with rats it has been found that a deficiency of calcium in blood causes a large decrease of sugar absorption from the small intes- tine. The question may now be raised as to the possibility of minerals functioning as a limiting factor in the carbohydrate utilisation by larger animals. Magee and Reid 32 have recently found that the addition of 0.2% phosphate increased the absorption of sugar by 50% in rats. These studies open out interesting fields of research in the physiology of absorption, THE RELATIVE IMPORTANCE OF VITAMINS IN THE FEEDING OF STOCK. There has been a good deal of confusion regarding the necessity of supplying vitamins to farm animals. Many results have been ascribed to unknown food factors which could easily be explained on the basis of their mineral constituents.33 Thus according to Orr 34 in feeding experiments with fowls, where yeast is used as a source of vitamin B, some of the beneficial results obtained by giving yeast, can also be observed by giving a solution of inorganic phosphate and glucose in an amount equivalent to that obtainable from yeast. It is known that fowls have a high requirement of phosphorus while yeast is also a good source of phosphorus. The beneficial rsults of cod liver oil have been attributed to its vitamin content. It appears that vitamin D may be necessary for stock feeding. Apart however from its vitamin D content, the value of the oil may be due to its iodine content. Compared with ordinary feeding stuffs, many of which contain very little iodine, cod liver oil is rich in this substance and the results obtained by Smith 35 on pigs and Marine and Kimball36 have shown that the administration of minute quantities of iodine may be followed by marked beneficial effects. With regard to the necessity of other vitamins, Theiler and his co-workers 37 in their experiments on cattle, sheep, goats and horses on rations deficient in vitamins, did not observe any symptoms which could be ascribed to vitamin deficiency. In the case of sheep, the addition of vitamin B to the ration led to no improvement in their condition. The lack of dependance of growing cattle on their rations for vitamin B1 38 and B2 has been recently explained by the finding 39 that these factors are synthesised by the bacteria in the rumen of the species. In their experiments on pigs which are rapidly growing animals and therefore are likely to suffer from vitamin deficiency, Orr and his collaborators 40 could not produce any sign of malnutrition on ration deficient in vitamin A or C. Similar results have been obtained by Golding and his co-workers 41 with vitamins A and D who could not produce rickets in pigs on vitamin deficient diet although growth was stimulated in pigs of low weights on supplying pure milk and other substances. It is thus obvious that the require- ments of the pig for these vitamins must be so low that there is no danger of
MINERAL METABOLISM OF FARM ANIMALS 283 deficiency on any ordinary ration. Crowther 42 and White and Roberts43 have confirmed this view by practical experiments. Poultry 44 and also a calf 45 do not seem to suffer from a deficiency of vitamin C, and with regard to other vitamins the addition of cod liver oil to an already balanced diet is said not to give any im- provement in growth, egg-laying or hatchability of the eggs.46 The evidence on this point, however, is somewhat conflicting. Thus Foster 47 states that in an experiment conducted with two groups of hens, to ascertain the relative dietetic values of linseed oil and cod liver oil, it was observed that the linseed oil group developed the habit of eating their own eggs and others did not. On changing over the diets, within a week the group now on linseed oil began to eat their eggs and the former egg-eaters (now on cod liver oil) dropped the habit. Foster thinks that there is some connection between this depraved appetite (pica) and avitaminosis. It is interesting to note that the existence of a similar depraved appetite is well known to poultry-keepers in India. Hart and others 48 consider that the effect of cod liver oil on an unbalanced ration is due to its vitamin content. Baby chicks grow very well when cod liver oil is administered, or ultraviolet light is given. Since eggs are rich in vitamin A, some source of this substance is needed in the ration. There is good evidence to indicate that a close relationship exists between the diet of cows and hens and the vitamin A content of milk and eggs. The highest con- centrations of vitamin A in these foods occur during the season when an abundance of fresh green forage is available. The lack of green forage for the winter feeding of dairy cattle and laying fowls can to a large extent be overcome through the use of properly cured leafy forage, yellow seeds, such as yellow corn and yellow roots. From the practical standpoint therefore, the question of vitamin addition is not of much importance in cattle feeding. As all grains, grain offal, pasture, roots, etc., are rich in vitamins, there is little danger of naturally grazing farm animals suffering from a deficiency of vitamins. The only possibility of vitamin deficiency is in the case of indoor animals fed on rations composed mainly of artificial foods. It is remarkable that the vitamin requirement diminishes when the ration becomes better balanced with regard to the known constituents of food.49 According to McCarrison50 if a ration be properly balanced with regard to the known constituents of food, it is hardly possible for deficiency diseases, i.e., those due to lack of vitamins, with the possible exception of scurvy, to occur outside a laboratory. MINERAL DEFICIENCY AND DISEASES DUE TO MALNUTRITION IN FARM ANIMALS. The object of this section is to record a brief account of the numerous observa- tions made on the malnutrition of animals on a mineral deficient ration and its effect on maintenance, growth and reproduction. The deficiency of lime and phos-
284 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY III, III. phorus, both natural and experimental, has been the most investigated,. and many cases of Rickets, Osteoporosis or Osteomalacia, soft bone, bent leg, etc., are to be found in the literature. Deficiency of chlorine, iron, potassium, sodium, magnesium and iodine also occurs in many parts of the world. In the case of a deficiency of calcium, it has been proved that a slowing of the rate of growth, rickets and various digestive disturbances may be induced.51 In a long series of experiments to which reference has already been made, Hart, McCollum and Steenbock (loc. cit.) studied growth and reproduction in cattle on a restricted diet of various grains. It was observed that the wheat fed animals (a diet deficient in calcium) suffered from malnutrition. Their offspring were not carried to full term and those that were not born dead usually died several days after birth. Meigs52 and Hart, Steenbock and Humphrey53 have found that loss of calcium (in milch cows with a negative calcium balance) has a serious effect on the condition of calves. They may be small and weakly, or may not live. Further, there may be difficulty in getting the cows to breed and abortion is liable to occur, but the same cows give birth to healthy, full time calves when the ration is improved by the addition of calcium salts. A deficiency of calcium or phosphorus in the diet leads to decreased rate of growth in growing animals and decreased production in full grown animals. The feeding of deficient mineral has a remarkable effect on such cases. Thus Theiler and others54 showed that the feeding of bone meal to stock grazing on phosphorus deficient pasture resulted in a rate of growth nearly three times greater than that of control animals on the same pasture without bone meal. The milk yield in this case also increased by 40 per cent. According to a Rowett Institute experiment, in the case of pigs on a Calcium deficient diet, the gain in weight in 124 days was 69.3 lbs. as compared with 132.8 lbs. on the same ration with the addition of cal- cium rich salt mixture. Elliot and others55 fed young pigs on a ration of oatmeal bran, blood meal and potatoes with some swede turnip, " marmite " and cod liver oil being added to prevent vitamin deficiency. The ration was markedly deficient in calcium. The animals became unthrifty as shown by a staring coat, a tendency to emaciation, lethargy and a stilted gait. By the end of the third month bony deformities were evident. Post-mortem examination of the bones showed a reduced calcium and phosphorus content, excess of osteoid tissue, and a disorganisation of the zone of proliferation of cartilage. Control animals on the same ration with the addition of a calcium rich salt mixture grew at the normal rate and remained in perfect health. A very significant result has been obtained with breeding animals. Davidson56 in Cambridge working with sows found that deficiency of calcium was the cause of weak litters, with high mortality after birth, becoming progressively worse with successive generations. Breeding was impossible in the fourth genera-
MINERAL METABOLISM OF FARM ANIMALS 285 tion. It was noted that there was an absence of udder development at parturition and an obvious lack of milk during the suckling period. In a somewhat similar experiment with cattle at Wisconsin, Hart and others57 found that on a ration of ground oats and oat straw, cows failed to breed or gave birth to dead calves. These workers calculated that for normal reproduction, there should be 0.45 part of calcium per 100 of the ration. Much attention has not however been paid to other minerals. McGowan and Crichton58 studied the subject of iron deficiency in the case of young pigs. They found that with a deficiency of iron, the young pigs gained in weight at fully the normal rate, but were fat and flabby. The skin was paler than normal and in some cases the hæmoglobin was as low as 25 per cent. of the normal. The death rate was high. As a result of experiments on animals Hoslin59 has also suggested that deficiency of iron may be the cause of primary anæmia in children. Waddel and others60 recently showed the physiological function of traces of copper in hæmoglobin building and Elvehyem, Hart and co-worker61 have shown the necessity of copper as a supplement to iron in hæmoglobin formation in the pig. Orr62 states that a diet containing too little salt produces in cows a staring coat, lustreless eyes and a condition of general malnutrition with a decrease in milk yield. The condition appears to be due to a lack of chlorine, and can be rapidly cured by giving either sodium chloride or potassium chloride. An excess of chlorine however might lead to pathological symptoms. Thus McCollum63 regards an inflammatory condition of the eyes, resembling xerophthalmia which he calls "salt ophthalmia" as due to excess of chlorine in the food. So far we have been considering malnutrition in cattle more or less under experimental conditions. The importance of this mineral deficiency lies however in the fact that some deficiency diseases, due to lack of minerals, are common in all parts of the world. Thus Marine64 studied the curative effect of iodine on goitre by observations on sheep in Michigan. Severe losses occurred there through goitre with which were associated certain pathological conditions and heavy death rate in lambs. Ennis Smith65 in Montana found a striking case of the effect of iodine in preventing the birth of hairless pigs. Helmer66 in British Columbia and Torrance67 in Canada recommended administration of potassium iodide to sows, ewes and cows as a prophylactic measure against goitrous conditions. Numerous other experiments on the beneficial effect of iodine on a iodine-low ration have demonstrated its value in the dieting of farm animals. The most important of recent contributions to the study of mineral requirement has been made on phosphorus deficiency by a group of workers in South Africa, and a very recent paper by Theiler and Green68 summarises the position of aphosphorosis
286 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. in ruminants with a bibliography of 150 papers. It is therefore not necessary to discuss this subject any further, but mention may be made of one of their interest- ing conclusions, that aphosphorosis may be made evident by blood analysis long before any clinical symptom of phosphorus deficiency appears. In a paper on "Pica" which means depraved or perverted appetite in animals Foster (loc. cit.) has brought together many interesting natural cases. Thus while wool eating in sheep may sometimes be due to the presence of external parasites, Green69 records a serious outbreak of the habit among penned sheep fed on maize endosperm and minimal ration of auto-claved hay, " a diet faulty both in mineral and in vitamin content". Hutyra and Marek70 consider the fault to lie in the low salt content and the ill-balanced mineral ratio of the fodder. The same observers quote tales of Alpine hunters and mountaineers whose perspiration-soaked clothes were greedily licked by salt-starved mountain sheep. An interesting form of pica is the habit of eating earth at the so-called " salt licks ". This is found specially in tropical regions and salt licks are known to occur in the Punjab, in the Madras Presidency and in Hyderabad State. Some salt licks in South Africa are composed mainly of lime and phosphorus, whilst others may be rock salt or a mixture of sodium carbonate and bicarbonate. Recent analysis at Nairobi of the Lumbwa cave earth, which is largely used as a salt lick has shown that in addition to 5 per cent. Na2O, there are also present 5 per cent. Fe2O3 and up to 5.25 per cent. Ca3(PO4)271. An analysis of Madras salt licks by Newcomb72 showed that the substances contained large amounts of iron and some iodine. Roy (unpublished data) in this laboratory has recently analysed several samples of salt licks and edible earths and has found that some of them contain appreciable amounts of lime and iron while others mainly sodium chloride, traces of carbonate and sulphate. CONCLUSION. In concluding this paper a brief reference may be made to the work done in India on this subject. An important investigation in this direction is that of McCarrison73 on the goitre problem and the distribution of iodine in certain regions of India. With regard to lime and phosphorus deficiency, Davis74 states that the low milk yield of cows in Bihar is due to deficiency of phosphorus in the pastures and McCarrison75 has stated that in Bihar and on the Malabar coast mortality among cattle is high, sterility is common and the milk yield of cows is low. McCarrison suspects the cause to be lack of phosphorus. Smith76 suggested that in many parts of the country the local fodders were deficient in mineral matter and Warth77 considers that the deficiency of phosphorus is perhaps the most important
MINERAL METABOLISM OF FARM ANIMALS 287 problem in India. He also cites the work of Meggitt who found deficiencies of lime in Assam and Harrison's soil survey in Madras Presidency showing regional defi- ciencies. It is of course well known that soil deficiencies are reflected in the crops. Matson78 has observed the beneficial effects of patassium iodide, in cases of delayed shedding of calf hair and Nayudu79 considers that iodine fed to young calves im- proves their appearance. Aiyer and Kayasth80 have recently studied the chemical composition of some fodders of the Central Provinces and Berar and find that these are deficient in phosphorus and lime. The poor stunted growth of the cattle in Chhattisgarh, may according to them, be due to phosphorus deficiency. According to our own work here, some of the Muktesar pastures are markedly deficient in phosphoric acid and lime. There is thus no question that pasture in many parts of this country is deficient in nutrient minerals, but no systematic work has however been done to determine if, by the addition of suitable salt mixtures, the nutritive value of our pastures can be improved. Some experiments in our Institute, now in progress, seem to indicate that the addition of bone meal to the ration of dairy cows increases the milk yield. Since improvement in the condition of cattle is linked with the agricultural prosperity of our country, research into the food values of pastures and allied problems of nutrition in relation to Animal Husbandry is of urgent necessity. Pioneer work on the digestibility of fodder, silage, etc., and food values of different substances for growth and milk production has been done by Warth and collaborators81 and by Lander and others82 and it is now necessary to investigate the need of supplying minerals to the mineral deficient natural pastures of India for the proper growth, fertility and productive capacity of her cattle. The writer wishes to record his sincere thanks to F. Ware, Esq., F.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., Director of this Institute, for first asking him to take up the study of the present subject and for his constant encouragement and advice. Thanks are also due to the authorities of the Rowett Research Institute, Aberdeen, who gave every facility for studying this problem at first hand. In preparing this article the writer has received considerable help from the numerous experiments and publications of this Institute. REFERENCES. (1) Forster, Z. Biol288 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. (5) Godden and Husband, J. Soc. Chem. Ind., 1925, 44, 671. (6) Sherman and Hawley, J. Biol. Chem. 1922, 53, 375. (7) Orr, Proc. Vet. Congress Ayr., 1929. (8) Forbes, Schulz, Hunt, Winter and Remler, J. Biol. Chem., 1922, 52, 281. (9) Hart, Steenbock, Hoppert, Bethke and Humphrey, J. Biol. Chem., 1922, 53, 21 ; 54, 75. (10) Hart, Steenbock and Hoppert, J. Biol. Chem,, 1921, 48, 33. (11) Husband, Godden, and Richards, Biochem. J. 1923, 17, 707: Henderson, Biochem. J., 1925, 19, 52 ; Orr. Magee and Henderson, ibid, 1925, 19, 569. (12) Henderson, Biochem. J., 1925, 19, 52. (13) Sherman and Pappenheimer, J. Fxpt. Med., 1921, 34, 189. (14) Ingle, J. Agri. Sci., 1908, 3, 22. (15) Blauberg, Z. Biol., 1900, 40, 1, 36. (16) Sherman and Hawley, J. Biol. Chem., 1922, 53, 375. (17) Ingle, J. Physiol., 1905, 32, 183. (18) Orr, Journal of State Medicine, 1924, 32, 421. (19) Bunge, Z. Biol., 1873, 9, 104. (20) Hart, McCollum, Steenbock and Humphrey, Wisconsin Agric. Expt. Stat. Research Bull,, 1911, 17. (21) Seeman, Virchow's Arch., 1879, 77, 299. (22) Zander, Vischow's Arch., 1881, 83, 377. (23) Aron, P.flüger's Arch, 1905, 106, 91. (24) Zuntz, (1912): Cited by Armsby in " Nutrition of farm animals," p. 342. (25) Richards, Godden and Husband, Biochem. J., 1924, 18, 651. (26) Richards, Godden and Husband, Biochem, J., 1927, 21, 971. (27) Auchinache, Unpublished data, Rowett Institute. (28) Husband, Godden and Richards, Biochem J., 1923, 17, 707. (29) Forster, Quoted from Orr. Presidential Address to Section M. Brit. Assoc., 1925. (30) Orr, ibid. (31) Sen, Unpublished results, Rowett Institute. (32) Magee and Reid, J. Physiol. 1931, 73, 163. (33) Compare Husband, 1st Report of the Rowett Research Institute, 1922, 57. (34) Orr, Agricultural Progress. 1925, V. 2. (35) Smith, J. Biol. Chem., 1917, 29, 215. (36) Marine and Kimball, Western Reserve Univ. Bull., 1923, 26. (37) Theiler et al, Union of South Africa. Vet. Dep. Reports 3 and 4. (38) Bechdel, Eckles and Palmer, J. Dairy. Sci., 1926, 9, 409. (39) Bechdel, Honeywell, Dutcher and Knutsen J. Biol., Chem., 1928, 80, 231. (40) Orr and Collaborators, J. Agric. Sci., 1924, 14, 114; Brit. J. Expt. Path., 1922, 3, 10. (41) Zilva, Golding, Drummond and Coward, Biochem, J., 1921, 15, 427. (42) Crowther, Olympia Agric. Co. Bull, 3, 1923.
MINERAL METABOLISM OF FARM ANIMALS 289 (43) White and Roberts, J. of Ministry Agric., 1923, 30, 27. (44) Carrick and Hauge, J. Biol. Chem., 1925, 63, 115. (45) Thurston, Univ. of Minnesota, 1928. Quoted by Gortner, Outlines of Biochemistry, 1929. (46) Orr, Agricultural Progress, 1925, 2, Scotish, J. Agri. 1924, 7, 264. (47) Foster, Kenya and East African Medical Journal, 1927, 4, 68. (48) Hart et al, J. Biol. Chem., 1924, 60, 341. (49) Pitz, J. Biol. Chem., 1918, 36, 439; Lewis : ibid 1919, 40, 91. (50) McCarrison, Deficiency Diseases 1921, 42. (51) Hutyra and Marek, Path. and Ther. of Diseases of animals 1913 ; I, 930 et seq. Eliot, Cri- chton and Orr: Brit. J. Expt. Path. 1922, 3, 10; Korenchevsky : Etiology and Patho- logy of Rickets, 1922. (52) Meigs, The relation between the quantity and availability of calcium in the Ration in the Milk yield of Dairy Cows, Washington, D. C., 1924. (53) Hart, Steenbock and Humphrey: Agric. Expt. Stat. Wisconsin Bull., 1920, 49. (54) Theiler, Green and Du Toit, Journal of the Department of Agric., Union of South Africa, May, 1924. (55) Elliot, Crichton and Orr: Brit. J. Expt. Path, 1922, 3, 10. (56) Davidson, Proc. Brit. Assoc,, Glasgow, 1928. (57) Hart, Steenbock and Humphrey, Agric, Expt. Stat. Wisconsin, Res. Bull., 1920, 49. (58) McGowan and Crichton, Biochem. J., 1923, 17, 204; 1924, 18, 255. (59) v. Höslin : Quoted by Czerny and Keller : Des kindes Ernahrung, 540. (60) Waddel, Steenbock, Elvehyem and Hart : J. Biol. Chem. 1928, 77, 769. (61) Elvehyem, Hart and others, J. Nutrition, 1929-30, 2, 277; J. Biol. Chem., 1932, 95, 363. (62) Orr, Milk Industry, August, 1925. (63) McCollum, Simmonds and Becker, J. Biol, Chem., 1922, 53, 313. (64) Marin, Western Reserve Univ. Bull., 1923, 26, 61. (65) Ennis Smith, J. Biol. Chem. 1917, 29, 215. (66) Helmer, Expt. Station, Summerland, B. C. Report, 1921, 6. (67) Torrance, Health of Animals Branch : Circular No. 3, Canada. (68) Theiler and Green, Nutrition Abstr. and Reviews, 1932, 1, 359. (69) Green, Physiol. Rev., 1925, 5, 336. (70) Hutyra and Marek, Spezielle Path. u. Ther der Haustiere, 1922. (71) Quoted from Foster, loc cit. cf. Gregory: The Rift Valleys and Geology of East Africa, 1921, and appendix to above by Cathart. (72) Newcomb, Trans. 7th Congress of Far Eastern Association of Tropical Medicine, 1927, 3, 450. (73) McCarrison, Etiology of Endemic Goitre, London, 1913. (74) Davis, Agric. J. India, 1917, 12, 77. (75) McCarrison, Roy. Commission on Agric. in India, 1927, 1, part 2, 105. (76) Smith, Roy. Commission on Agric. in India290 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. (78) Matson, Agric. and Livestock in India, 1931, 1, 237. (79) Nayudu, ibid, 1931, ], 240. (80) Aiyer and Kayasth, ibid., 1931, 1, 526. (81) Warth, Singh and Husain, Mem. Dept. Agric. India, 1925-26, 8, 153 ; Warth and Ahmad : ibid. 1925-26, 211; Warth : ibid., 9,1926-27. 37, 125 ; Warth and Gossip, ibid., 1928, 10, 1; Warth : ibid., l930. 11, 53, 73, 85 ; Warth and Kutty : J. Animal Husbandry and Dairying in India, 1928-29, 2, 31; Ayyangar, Rasul, Singh, Kolhe, and Sikka : ibid. 1929- 30, 3, 77. (82) Lander and Dharmani, Mem. Dept. Agric. India, 1926-27, 9, 63, 235 ; Lander, Dharmani and Chand : ibid, 1929-30, 10, 169, 181, 193.
TRANSMISSION OF ANIMAL DISEASES BY AEROPLANES. NOTE BY DR. P. J. DU TOIT, Director of Veterinary Services for the Union of South Africa. (Reprinted from the Quarterly Bulletin of the Health Organisation, League of Nations, Goneva, Volume II, No. 1.) When rinderpest swept over South Africa in 1896-97, it was observed that the disease advanced at about the same rate as an ox-wagon. To-day the rate of progress would probably approximate more closely the speed of a motor-car or aeroplane. Vehicular transport has become an important factor in the spread of animal diseases. One example may suffice to prove the truth of this statement. In August 1918, a dog was smuggled into England from the Continent by aeroplane and was landed at Plymouth. It developed rabies, which spread to seventeen counties, and it was only after a very energetic and costly campaign, lasting three years, that the disease was again eradicated. South Africa is exposed to this danger in a very special degree, because all aeroplanes entering the Union of South Africa have to pass over tropical countries which harbour many dangerous diseases. Other countries, which are free of these diseases and which lie on the route followed by the aeroplanes, are, of course, exposed to the same dangers. These diseases may be conveyed in three ways : by means of live animals; by means of insect vectors; by means of products con- taining the infective material. These three methods may be elucidated briefly. (a) INTRODUCTION OF DISEASES THROUGH LIVE ANIMALS CONVEYED BY AEROPLANES. At present the danger is practically confined to domestic pets (especially dogs), although in the future the conveyance of larger domestic animals by air may become an everyday occurrence. Some of the diseases which may be transmitted in this way are the following:292 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. infection. Again, several species of animals (and also man) are susceptible to this disease. In view of the enormous financial burden which an outbreak of this disease imposes on a country, it behoves us to take every possible precaution against its introduction. 3. Rinderpest.TRANSMISSION OF DISEASES BY AEROPLANES 293 3. Nairobi disease (gastro-enteritis) of sheep is a virus disease transmitted by ticks which are present over the greater part of Africa. As far as is known the disease is confined to a comparatively small area in Kenya. But there is nothing to prevent the disease getting a foothold in other countries if infected ticks were introduced. (c) INTRODUCTION OF DISEASES BY MEANS OF PRODUCTS CONTAINING INFECTIVE MATERIAL. The outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in the United States of America in 1908 was traced to the introduction of contaminated vaccine lymph. In another instance, hog cholera serum was responsible for the spread of foot-and-mouth disease. The importation of vaccines and sera by air or otherwise should be carefully controlled. Other objects capable of carrying infection are skins, horns or other parts of animals which air passengers may collect during their travels. The danger of introducing diseases like foot-and-mouth disease in this way is very great. RECOMMENDATION. Consideration should be given to the desirability of national regulations and international agreements to prevent, as far as possible, the transmission of animal diseases by aeroplanes. C 2
A COMPARISON OF CARBON TETRACHLORIDE AND TETRACHLORETHYLENE BY G. W. RAWSON, Detroit, Michigan, Animal Industry Department, Parke, Davis and Company. [Reprinted from the Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association, N. S. Vol. 33, No. 4.] Judging by various comments appearing in veterinary literature and elsewhere, it would seem that some misunderstanding has arisen about the use of tetrachlorethylene that is well worthy of correction. For instance, it has been erroneously stated: 1. That tetrachlorethylene is similar to carbon tetrachloride in that it causes asphyxiation in cases where it enters the respiratory organs; 2. That it produces an injurious effect on the liver; 3. That it is dangerous to use in case animals are suffering from the effects of calcium deficiency. The object of this article is to determine whether there is any justification for the beliefs expressed above. As may be seen by the following table, carbon tetrachloride and tetrachlorethylene are similar in certain physical features, and both belong to the chlorine group of compounds; however, there are several very important differences between them that should be considered. Tetrachlorethylene Carbon tetrachloride Chemical formula . . . . . C2Cl4. CCl4. Form . . . . . . . Liquid. Liquid. Color . . . . . . . Colorless. Colorless. Odor . . . . . . . Ethereal. Aromatic. Specific gravity . . . . . . 1.619 at 20° C. 1.632 at o° C. Boiling point . . . . . . . 121-122° C. 77° C. THE EFFECTS OF TETRACHLORETHYLENE ON THE RESPIRATORY ORGANS. In regard to the possibility of tetrachlorethylene causing asphyxiation, it should be noted that it has a much higher boiling point than carbon tetrachloride; consequently there is less danger of it causing asphyxiation even though the drug accidentally enters the trachea or lungs. A number of tests have been made to determine whether tetrachlorethylene is capable of causing asphyxiation. For instance, Schlingman1 introduced 1 c.c. of (294)
CARBON TETRACHLORIDE AND TETRACHLORETHYLENE 295 tetrachlorethylene into the larnyx of a dog weighing about 15 pounds, by means of a pipette. No ill effects followed other than a slight cough. Another dog was injected intratracheally with 1 c.c. tetrachlorethylene, without fatal results, although vomiting, retching and dyspnea followed, as might be the case if water were injected into the trachea. In order to determine whether foxes are likely to be affected when tetrachlorethylene enters the respiratory organs (as might occur if a capsule were accidentally broken in the mouth) Hanson2 broke six 1 c.c. capsules in the mouth of each of two foxes without any ill results following, other than a temporary irritation of the mouth as evidenced by profuse salivation and by the rubbing of the mouth with the paws. Hanson adds : Under similar conditions the use of carbon tetrachloride would undoubtedly have brought about collapse and possible death from inhalation-intoxication. More recent observations by Hanson3 have shown that tetrachlorethylene does occasionally cause inhalation-intoxication in foxes. Consequently, it should be administered in soft gelatin capsules and the patient closely watched to see that the capsule is successfully swallowed. In case a capsule is broken in the mouth and signs of collapse develop, such as dilation of the pupils, trembling and general 'grogginess,' it is advisable to commence artificial respiration. One recommended method is to grasp the animal by the hind legs and to whirl it around in order to centrifuge the drug from the lungs; then lay the animal down on the ground and perform artificial respiration. Cases of choking and death have been occasionally reported in dogs following the administration of tetrachlorethylene enclosed in capsules, but when such cases are properly investigated it is usually found that death was due to a capsule being pushed down the trachea, with resulting mechanical suffocation. Occasionally a hog may die following the administration of drugs in capsules. This may be attributed either to a capsule having been pushed into the trachea or having lodged in the retropharyngeal recess or blind pouch, setting up irritation and swelling, the capsule itself causing death by suffocation. Lamson, Bobbins and Ward4 found it impossible to produce surgical relaxation (anesthesia) in certain dogs with tetrachlorethylene when using an ordinary ether- bottle attached to a tracheotomytube, even though the tetrachlorethylene was heated. Anesthesia could, however, be induced by the cone method. THE EFFECTS OF TETRACHLORETHYLENE ON THE LIVER AND OTHER ORGANS. In comparing the toxicity of tetrachlorethylene with that of carbon tetra- chloride on dogs, experimental evidence has shown that the former has no appreci-
296 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. able effect on the liver, whereas carbon tetrachloride does cause necrosis of the liver, even though there may be no external symptoms. Again quoting from Drs. Lamson, Robbins and Ward4 : Dogs have been given doses of tetrachlorethylene up to 4 c.c. per kilo at intervals of 2 or 3 days for a period of several months without producing any pathological changes in the liver. Dizziness and incoordination of muscular movement may occasionally follow the administration of tetrachlorethylene, but as a rule such symptoms disappear rapidly, leaving no after effects. According to Lamson, Robbins and Ward4, dizziness following the administration of tetrachlorethylene is probably due to either exceptionally large doses or to the presence of oily or fatty food in the gastor-intestinal tract at the time of treatment. Oily or fatty foods, therefore, should be excluded from the diet twenty -four hours or so prior to the administration of tetrachlorethylene, and for several hours afterwards, to prevent absorption of the drug from the intestine. Under ordinary circumstances, there being no oils or fats in the intestinal tract, tetrachlorethylene does not seem to be absorbed in dogs even when administered in relatively large doses. Again quoting Lamson, Robbins and Ward4 : If normal dogs are given doses of tetrachlorethylene up to approximately 10 c.c. per kilo, or fifty times the therapeutic dose, no indication of the absorption of the drug in appreciable amounts is to be observed. THE EFFECTS OF TETRACHLORETHYLENE IN CASE OF CALCIUM DEFICIENCY. Some writers appear to be of the opinion that tetrachlorethylene is dangerous in cases of calcium deficiency ; but this opinion does not appear to have been sustained by proof. According to Minot5, ' carbon tetrachloride does produce some ill effect in dogs and other animals with low calcium balace ' but tetra- chlorethylene does not seem to have such action, at least in domestic animals. Lamson, Robbins and Ward administered tetrachlorethylene to cats and dogs pre- viously fed on a diet deficient in calcium, and no ill effects followed. Similar results were obtained by Schlingman in treating dogs with tetrachlorethylene, which had previously been prepared by being fed on a calcium deficient diet. As far as sheep or goats6 are concerned, tetrachlorethylene does not appear to have any injurious effect on them because treatment has been given at monthly intervals under carefully controlled experimental conditions for a period of over a year without any appreciable ill results. Deaths have followed the administration of 1 c.c. of carbon tetrachloride when given for the removal of liver fluke in sheep, but the reason for such deaths has not yet been clearly established. Dr. Robert Jay, in discussing an article by
CARBON TETRACHLORIDE AND TETRACHLORETHYLENE 297 Dr. J. N. Shaw7, stated that deaths appeared to be due to some unaccountable predisposition to injury by carbon tetrachloride brought about by the change of feed resulting in increased thrift of the sheep. As far as the writer is aware, no deaths have been recorded in sheep or goats that could be attributed to the effects of tetrachlorethylene, per se, even though thousands of animals have been treated with this drug during the last few years. Assuming that many animals must have been suffering more or less from calcium deficiency at the time of treatment, it would appear that tetrachlorethylene has no injurious effect in cases of this kind. Comparing the efficiency of tetrachlorethylene with that of carbon tetra- chloride, the former appears to be as effective as the latter in removing nematodes ; moreover, its wider margin of safety (due to its less volatile nature) and its less injurious effect upon the liver, recommend it in preference to carbon tetrachloride for the removal of hookworms, ascarids and other nematodes in dogs, cats, foxes and other animals. A word of warning might be offered in regard to the selection of chemically pure tetrachlorethylene. It is known that some of the tetrachlorethylene on the market contain harmful impurities, so that it is advisable for veterinarians to select a chemically pure product from a reliable source, in order to avoid trouble and possible embarrassment. REFERENCES. Sehlingman, A. S. Critical tests of tetrachlorethylene, a new anthelmintic, with special reference to its use in puppies. Jour. A. V. M. A., Lxviii (1925), n. s. 21(2) pp. 225ROYAL COLLEGE OF VETERINARY SURGEONS. PARTICULARS OF COURSE OF STUDY FOR THE DIPLOMA OF M.R.C.V.S.* POST-GRADUATE DIPLOMAS. The Diploma of Fellow (F.R.C.V.S.), the Diploma in Veterinary State Medicine (D.V.S.M.) and the Diploma in Tropical Veterinary Medicine (D.T.V.M.) are post- graduate Diplomas, the regulations governing the award of which are published separately. They can be obtained on application to the Secretary of the College, 10 Red Lion Square, London, W. C. 1. Candidates who desire to enter upon the course of study for the Diploma of Membership, must first pass a recognised examination in general education, and submit to the Royal College the certificate or certificates so gained for the approval of the Council together with their Birth Certificates. The Preliminary examination in general education must be passed one complete session before the date of the first professional examination. The following is a list of Preliminary Examinations recognised by the College for this purpose :COURSE OF STUDY FOR THE M.R.C.V.S. 299 Northern Universities.300 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. SCOTTISH EDUCATION DEPARTMENT : Leaving Certificate Examinations. MINISTRY OF EDUCATION FOR NORTHERN IRELAND : Senior School Certificate. IRISH DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION : Secondary School Leaving Certificate Examinations. CIVIL SERVICE : The Competitive Examination of the Civil Service Commissioners for appoint- ments in the Army. WAR OFFICE : Special Army Certificate. COLLEGE OF PRECEPTORS (Bloomsbury Square, W. C. 1.) : Examinations for Senior Certificate (with credit standard). EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTE OF SCOTLAND (47, Moray Place, Edinburgh): Medical, Dental and Veterinary Preliminary Examination. ROYAL COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS AND SURGEONS IN IRELAND. Preliminary Examination. EXAMINATIONS HELD OUT OF THE UNITED KINGDOM : Dominion Universities : An examination qualifying for admission to the courses and examinations required by the Medical Faculty for Degrees in Medicine and Surgery in recognised Universities in the British Empire (other than Indian Universities). An examination qualifying for admission to the courses and examinations re- quired by the Veterinary Faculty for Degrees in Veterinary Science of the Uni- versities of Sydney, Melbourne, and Pretoria. Indian Universities : An intermediate certificate of the following Indian Universities : Bombay, Calcutta, Lucknow, Madras, Punjab, and Rangoon, or an Intermediate certificate granted by a recognised Board of Intermediate Education (India) provided
COURSE OF STUDY FOR THE M.R.C.V.S. 301 that the certificate shows that the candidate has passed in English, Mathematics, a language other than English, and Chemistry or Physics. Ceylon Medical College, Preliminary Examination. Singapore Medical College, Preliminary Examination. Egyptian Government. Secondary Education Certificate. No Certificate from Indian and Colonial Bodies under this section is accepted unless it shows that the Examination has been conducted by or under the authority of the Body granting it, includes all the required subjects, and states that all the subjects of Examination have been passed at not more than two examinations. In the case of natives of India or other oriental countries whose vernacular is other than English, the certificate must include either Latin or Greek or an approved oriental language (e.g., Sanskrit, Pali, Arabic, Persian, Hebrew, Classical Armenian, Classical Tibetan, Chinese) in addition to English. Foreign Universities: Examinations entitling to the French Diplomas of Bachelier es Lettres and Bachelier es Sciences : The German Abiturienten-Examen of the Gymnasia and Real- Gymnasia: and other corresponding Entrance Examinations to the Universities in Europe. Students who have been educated at a Secondary or Public School will as a rule find it most convenient to take one of the above mentioned School Examinations (para. c., p. 298) before leaving School. For candidates who do not possess a School Certificate the examinations held by the Educational Institute of Scotland or the College of Preceptors may be re- commended. The Educational Institute of Scotland holds an examination in the months of February, May, August, and November at the following centres :302 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. The College of Preceptors holds an examination in March and September at various centres, including London, Birmingham, Bristol, Cardiff, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Leeds, Liverpool, Manchester, Newcastle-on-Tyne, Nottingham. Further information and copies of previous examination papers, price 2/2d. post free can be obtained from the Secretary, College of Preceptors, Bloomsbury Square, London, W. C. 1. Important.COURSE OF STUDY FOR THE M.R.C.V.S. 303 THE VETERINARY SCHOOL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF LIVERPOOL. Director of Veterinary Studies :304 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. FOURTH YEAR. I.COURSE OF STUDY FOR THE M.R.C.V.S. 305 The course of training for these degrees runs concurrently with the course for the Diploma of M.R.C.V.S., but as a rule an extra year is required to complete the Degree course. The Degree is not in itself a qualification to practise, the Diploma of M.R.C.V.S. alone entitling the holder to admission to the Register of Veterinary Surgeons. But the possession of a University Degree is of great advantage, and all students whose certificates in general education entitle them to matriculation at the Universities mentioned would be well advised to take the combined course. Application for admission to the Degree courses must be made direct to the University. The University of Edinburgh also grants a post-graduate Diploma in Tropical Veterinary Medicine (D.V.T.M.), particulars of which will be found in the Univer- sity calendar. COST OF THE COURSE. Tuition Fees.306 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. Carnegie Trust Bursaries :-COURSE OF STUDY FOR THE M.R.C.V.S. 307 GLASGOW VETERINARY COLLEGE. Carnegie Trust Bursaries. See above. Department of Agriculture for Scotland.308 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. University Endowments for Research.ABSTRACTS Preliminary Experiments in the Transmission of Anaplasmosis by Horseflies. SANBORN (C. E.),STILES (G. W.) & MOE (L. H.) Bull. Oklahoma Agric. Expt. Sta., No. 204, 16 pp., 4 figs. Stillwater, Okla., May 1932. During 1930, anaplasmosis was transmitted experimentally to a healthy cow subjected to 41 bites by three species of Tabanids, Tabanus gracilis, Wied., T. sulcifrons, Macq., and Chrysops sequax, Will., that had previously fed on an infected animal. Further experiments were therefore undertaken in 1931 in which flies fed on an infected animal were subsequently fed on healthy animals on the same day, or one or more days later. A cow subjected to 43 bites from 5 species of flies (T. gracilis, T. sulcifrons, T. venustus, O. S., T. fuscicostatus, Hine, and Silvius pollinosus, Will.) showed the first symptoms of a fatal infection with the disease 38 days after the first bites and 24 days after the last ones. Three other cows subjected, respectively, to 79 bites by T. gracilis, 24 bites by T. sulcifrons and 115 bites by T. venustus, developed symptoms 38, 66 and 73 days after the first feedings, and 30, 60 and 42 days after the last feedings. The first three cows were exposed to flies that had fed on an acute case of anaplasmosis, whereas in the last case the flies had fed on a carrier animal showing relatively few micro-parasites in its blood. The incidence of anaplasmosis in this territory corresponds with the period of the greatest prevalence of Tabanids, which occurs during July to October, though cases of the disease are occasionally found during other months of the year. Brief notes on the morphology and habits of these flies are given in an appendix. [ Reprinted from the keview of Applied Entomology, Vol. XX, Ser. B., Part 10, October 1932.] Les meilleurs vermifuges du gros intestine chez le chebal. (The best vermifuges for the large intestine of the horse). MAROTEL. Rev. Vet. and J. Med. Vet. LXXXV, 65-73 (1933). Twenty-one horses were used for the experiments and six vermifuges tried. The anthelmintic efficacy of the drugs was determined by counting the ova in the fæces before and after their administration. Carbon tetrachloride.310 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III , III. The influence of the nutritional state of the sheep on its susceptibility to infestation with the stomach worm, HABSTRACTS. 311 Some modern aspects of anthelmintic treatment. ROBINSON, L. E. Vet-. Rec. 13. 332-338 (1933). Two methods of determining the anthelmintic efficacy of a drug are known (1) Counting eggs in fæces before and after the treatment and (2) Comparison of the worms expelled with the worms not expelled, the latter being ascertained by killing the host after treatment. The anthelmintic selected should be effective in expelling the particular parasite, no risk of harm to the host should be involved, it should be cheap and easy and quick to administer. Very young, aged, pregnant females, extremely debilitated, emaciated and starved animals are unfit for anthelmintic treatment. So also are subjects suffering from febrile toxæmic conditions, gasto-enteritis, constipation, hepatic and renal diseases. Fatty food is a contra-indication in carbon tetrachloride treatment. Castor oil should be administered with oil of chenopodium and magnesium sulphate after carbon tetrachloride. Fasting before dosing.312 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. Surgical intervention is the only remedy for hydatid cysts. Prophylaxis.REVIEW Veterinary Pathology and Bacteriology, By S. H. GAIGER and G. O. DAVIES, of the Department of Animal Pathology, Liverpool University. (Balliere, Tindall and Cox, London) 1932. Pp. 610, 25s. English Veterinary literature will surely welcome this handbook on Veterinary Pathology and Bacteriology since the want of a comprehensive and at the same time, concise textbook for English-speaking students has been actually felt- for a long time. The authors state that the present volume has been designed mainly with a view to remove the disadvantages under which undergraduate Veterinary students in the British Empire and America have laboured, and they anticipate that general practitioners, Veterinary officers of health and others may find this book of help in their daily work. Further the claim is put forward that the book has been made " sufficiently comprehensive to enable the student to acquire the requisite know- ledge in these subjects without the necessity of searching through a varied assortment of publications at a time when he is incapable of assessing the relative values of information available ". The main book is divided into three parts, and at the end there is an Appen- dix (34 pages) which deals with the common laboratory methods, e.g., stains, media, apparatus, technique for pH and agglutination work. Part I deals with General Pathology in 84 pages and it is felt that this subject has been dealt with too briefly. An important defect in the Chapter on Tumours is the omission of a discussion upon the interesting work on Carcinogenesis, to which so much attention has been paid in recent times, following the work of Yamagiwa and others. Part II, consisting of 312 pages, is devoted to what has been termed Bacterio- logy and Pathology of Specific diseases. Since virus infections, mycology, proto- zoology and insect vectors have been included here, the term Microbiology of Diseases would perhaps have been more expressive. This section has been treated at some length and does the authors credit, but General Practitioners will perhaps be a little loath to accept the lead given in adopting the nomenclature of the Society of American Bacteriologists, which may by some be considered too cumbersome, e.g., Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae, instead of the unostentatious Bacillus of swine erysi- pelas. The discussion of Theories of Immunity (p. 139) terminates rather abruptly and no indication as to the modern trends of opinion is given. In the Chapter on Virus Diseases, one notices that the occurrence of Newcastle disease in India is still not known to the authors. They state that there is no reason to believe that carriers of rinderpest exist (p. 377), a view which will not be generally agreed to in India, while (313)
314 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, III. the notable differences which exist between Enzootic meningo-encephalomyelitis of Borna in Saxony and that described in France by Moussu and March and in 1924 have been ignored. To hold that all warts in dogs and bovines are due to Virus infection seems moreover to be premature. In the chapter on Diseases of Uncertain Origin, only two conditions315 With deep regret we read the undermentioned ' Obituary notice ' in the U. P. Government Gazette, dated the 5th August 1933. OBITUARY NOTICE. The Governor acting with his Ministers has heard with deep regret of the sudden death on 1st August, 1933, of Captain S. G. M. Hickey, M.R.C.V.S, Director. Civil Veterinary Department, United Provinces. Captain Hckey was appointed to the Indian Civil Veterinary Department by the Secretary of State for India in 1912, and after serving for about four years in the Central Provinces and Assam, was transferred to this province in August, 1916. He was promoted to the post of Head of the Provincial Veterinary Department in 1925. He was an able veterinary officer who always took a keen interest in his technical and administrative work. By his premature death the Veterinary Department loses an experienced officer, who tried to maintain a high standard of efficiency even when funds at the disposal of the department had to be considerably reduced owing to financial stringency. The Governor acting with his Ministers wishes to convey to Mrs. Hickey and other relations his deepest sympathy with them in their bereavement.
316 Errata to Volume III, Part 2 of the Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry. Page 138, Table I, Serial No. 61. For Harniana read Hariana. Page 183, Headline. For Life-history of tabanus speciosus Ric. read Life- history of Tabanus speciosus Ric. MGIPCPLATE XXIV. ADULT TREMATODE OF CERCARIÆ INDICÆ XXIII SEWELL 1922. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 1. Adult parasite. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 2. Head end showing the collar of spines, etc. (highly magnified). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 3. Metacercariæ from gill of fish. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 4. Portions of rediæA PRELIMINARY REPORT ON THE ADULT TREMATODE OBTAINED FROM CERCARIAE INDICAE XXIII SEWELL, 1922 BY M. ANANT NARAYAN RAO, Lecturer in Parasitology, Madras Veterinary College. (Received for publication on the 14th February 1933.) (With Plate XXIV and one text-figure.) Sewell [1922] described an Echinostome cercaria, C. indica XXIII, and placed it in his Echinata group. He obtained these cercariae from Limnea acuminata Lamarck, and L. ovalis Lamarck, in Calcutta. He found the rate of infection to be 1 in 16 in the former species of snails in September 1919. Cercariae of the species in question have not been reported from Madras till now, as far as I am aware, and I take this opportunity of recording them. They were obtained in large numbers from Limnea leuteola Lamarck in which the rate of infection is high. Out of 1,883 snails collected over a period of nine months, 42.8 per cent. were found infected by the test tube method. Sewell has described in detail this cercaria with a double crown of 43 spines. These cercariae are negatively photographic. After swimming in water for some little time, they enter either the "mother " snail or others of the same or different species, and encyst usually in the salivary glands or sometimes in the digestive glands. If the cercariae do not get a chance of encystment, they die in about twelve hours. The rate of infection with metacer- cariae in wild Planorbis exustus (Deshayes) and Limnea leuteola (Lamarck), obtained from the same pond was found to be 30 per cent. and 41 per cent. respectively, in February 1931. A few fish318 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, IV. flukes were obtained from its small intestines. Only in one kitten, the experiment failedADULT TREMATODE OBTAINED FROM CERCARIAE INDICAE 319 Description of the parasite. Body slender, elongate and has a pinkish-white colour. The size varies from 2.0 to 4.5 mm. by 0.75 to 1.2 mm. Dorsally the cuticle is armed with scales in the anterior third, and ventrally the whole surface up to about the level of the posterior testes is armed with rows of scaly spines which diminish in size posteriorly. The oral sucker is not powerful and is about 0.3 mm. in diameter and the oral opening is about 0.1 mm. in diameter. It is surrounded by a double collar of alternating spines about 43 in number interrupted ventrally. On each ventral angle of the collar there are four spines directed backwards and inwards. These appear to be slightly larger than those of the collar. The angle spines measure about 58.5 × 12.5 320 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, IV. in a dog here is of some interest. Leiper [1911] obtained E. malayanum in the intestines of Tamil coolies during post-mortem examination and opined that dogs, cats, etc., should be examined as possible carriers. Lane [ 1915 ] obtained from a girl in Assam somewhat similar parasites (E. sufrartyfex) and said that the Tamils, from whom Leiper obtained the trematodes, may have carried the infection to the Malay States from India, and whether it was so or not there must be other cases waiting for recognition. In Madras it is seen that low class Tamils catch fresh water fishPLATE XXV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Photomicrograph of a pair of S. suis.
SCHISTOSOMA SUIS, N. SP. A SCHISTOSOME FOUND IN PIGS IN MADRAS BY M. ANANT NARAYAN RAO, Lecturer in Parasitology, Madras Veterinary College, AND L. S. PARAMESWARA AYYAR, Assistant Lecturer. (Received for publication on the 8th April 1933.) (With Plate XXV and one text-figure.) There seems to be very little literature on Schistosomes found in pigs, and what exists seems to deal with only S. japonicum Katsurada, 1904. This parasite, it would appear, has not been reported from India. In December 1932 while collecting parasites from the pigs slaughtered in Madras, the authors first found an adult male and female Schistosome in the portal vein of an apparently healthy pig. Later four more pairs were found in 4 pigs out of 81 examined. The pigs brought for slaughter were all from the North Arcot District only, hence the authors are not in a position to say anything regarding the rate of infection in pigs in this presidency, but it would appear that it is low in pigs of that district. DESCRIPTION OF THE MALE WORM. The male, like most other Schistosomes, is fairly active when alive. The whole worm varies from 4 to 6 mm. in length. In the body of the parasite there is a constriction a little behind the ventral sucker which can be said to divide it into a short anterior portion more or less sub-cylindrical and a longer posterior portion whose lateral margins curve ventrally to form the gynecophoral canal. The anterior portion which is spindle shaped carries the oral and ventral sucker. The cuticle lining the suckers, and that lining the gynecophoral canal is spiny. The cuticle of the anterior portion of the parasite is smooth, but that covering the dorsal surface of the posterior part is covered with moderately large tubercles, (321)
322 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, IV. majority of which bear a few spines on them. The posterior extremity of the male is truncated. The oral sucker is subterminal or it appears to be so owing to the overhanging dorsal rim. The diameter is about 0.15 mm. The wall of the oral sucker is thick and it encloses a funnel shaped cavity leading into a thin walled oesophagus. The ventral sucker is somewhat larger than the other and measures 0.18 mm. in diameter. It is pedunculated. The alimentary canal begins with the oesophagus which is short and it bifur- cates in front of the ventral sucker into two intestinal caeca, and each passes on either side of the sucker dorsally only to unite in the region about the beginning of the middle third of the worm to form a blindly ending common caecum which terminates 0.2 mm., from the truncated posterior extremity of the worm. The anterior third of the common caecum appeared to possess small diverticulæ in one worm. The visible excretory system consists of a small elongated bladder 0.08 mm., in length and opens on the posterior margin of the worm. The bladder has two cornua anteriorly, each of which disappears in the tissue on either side of the parasite. The genital glands consist of 4 to 7 testes which lie apparently in a row in the median line, in the dorsal aspect, behind the ventral sucker and each gland is almost rectangular when viewed ventrally. The vesiculæ seminis is placed in front of the testes and opens ventrally just behind the ventral sucker. DESCRIPTION OF THE FEMALE. The female worm is cylindrical and has nearly uniform thickness excepting at the ends which taper slightly. The cuticle is smooth. The length varies from 4.9 to 6 mm. The oral sucker is subterminal and much more developed than the ventral sucker. It is about 0.05 mm., in diameter and leads into the Schistosoma suis, N. Sp. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Ovum-side view.
SCHISTOSOME FOUND IN PIGS IN MADRAS 323 begins at the posterior pole and immediately bends forwards, passes by the side of the ovary and in front of the ovary it meets an ill-defined granular body, the shell gland. The vitellaria begin 0.19 mm. from the posterior extremity of the ovary and are in the form of loosely packed granular clumps round the whole length of the common caecum. The vitelline ducts meet the oviduct a little behind its origin. The uterus which is a fairly wide tube, passes forward in a zig-zag manner between the intestinal caeca and opens just behind the ventral sucker apparently on a small papilla. Only one ovum could be seen in the uterus of each of the specimens available. The egg is yellowish brown in colour, suboval in shape with one side flattened. There is a small stout spine which is subterminal and inclines towards the flattened side. The egg, in utero, measures 0.09×0.041 mm. and the spine measures about 7.5 324 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, IV. MacHattie and Chadwick [1932] and many others have admitted that the ova of the various species of Schistosomes described from man and animals, within reasonable limits of variation, have a definite and characteristic shape which is generally regarded as being diagnostic of the species. These authors have also proved that a very small percentage of females produce ova showing a departure from the normal shape ; yet the fact remains that a vast majority of them produce ova each having a characteristic shape which is constant to a given species. Baylis [1929] and Faust [1930] have given outline drawings of ova of different species of Schistosomes from mammals and when the outline of the ovum of the parasite in question is compared with any one of those depicted, it looks different. The ova of all the females of the species described, resemble each other in their characteristic shape and the authors therefore believe that that shape is normal to that species. Chandler [1926] has described Schistosome ova from samples of what he believed to be human faeces which were collected from defæcation areas, near two villages, to which pigs had access. These ova resemble in all respects, the ova described in this paper. Chandler assumed that such faeces, from which he obtained samples, were passed by human beings because of the nature of the stools and the presence of ova of Anclyostomes, Ascaris and Trichuris, but, for obvious reasons that can- not be taken as evidence to prove the correctness of his assumption. The fact that the Schistosome ova described by him resemble those found in the Schistosomes collected here from pigs, suggests the probability that the fæces in which he saw them were from the pigs that had access to the areas mentioned by him, and not from human beings. The difference in the morphology between this and the other Schistosomes has been discussed above. Further the various Schistosomes de- scribed from mammals can be differentiated by the shape of their ova, and since the shape of the ova of the parasites in question is different from the others, there appears to be enough justification in making it a new species and it is proposed to name it "SCHISTOSOMA SUIS." Now that the adult Schistosome and its host has been found, we suggest to tentatively place S. incognitum Chandler, 1926, as a synonym of S. suis, because even though the former name is the older it is only a nomen nudum. REFERENCES. Baylis, H. A. (1929). Helminthology Medical and Veterinary. London, B. T. & Cox. Chandler, Asa, C. (1926). Ind. Jour. of Med. Res., 14, pp. 179-183. Faust, E. C. (1930). Human Helminthology. London, Henry Kimpton. Leroux, P. L. (1933). Jl. of Helminthology, 11, No. 1, pp. 57-62. MacHattie, C. and Chadwick, C. R. (1932) Trans. Roy. Soc. Trop. Med. and Hyg., 26, pp. 147-156.
PLATE XXVI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 1. AYRSHIRE-SINDHI BULL. F1 GENERATION. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 2. AYRSHIRE-SINDHI BULL. F2 GENERATION.
CROSS-BREEDING FOR MILK BY CAPTAIN R. W. LITTLEWOOD, N.D.A., I.A.S. (Received for publication on 20th June 1933.) (With Plates XXVI- XXXI.) It is stated that the best milkers in the breeding tracts which are taken to large towns and cities for milk purposes, half or more of them never return. They are generally the pick of the cows and this is a serious drain on the breeding tracts, secondly the heifer calves of these cows are generally neglected in the towns and the strain of good milking cattle is gradually disappearing. The town dairyman requires a good milking cow which will calve regularly and also milk without its calf if possible; therefore an experiment was started to try and evolve a breed of animal which would supply these demands until such a time as the milk-yielding powers of indigenous dairy breeds were improved. In Madras, the dairyman neglects to feed his country calf properly and quite a number of them are maintained in a semi-starved condition, whereas it is very rare to see a cross-bred heifer calf belonging to the dairyman in such a condition and this speaks for itself. In 1919, the Madras Government approved of Mr. Carruth's scheme, i.e., to use the Ayrshire Bull on the Scindi and Saniwal cows in order to try and evolve a new breed of cow suitable for urban milk supply. The first generation half-bred bull is used on the first generation cow, the second generation bull on the second generation cow and so on. In this way the breed retains half the imported blood and half the country blood. Object. In Madras the Ongole breed is looked upon as the best milker for dairy purposes; the average yield of this breed is between 2,250 and 2,500 lb. Young cows in milk are purchased in the breeding tract and brought to Madras. In many cases when these cows go dry, they are sold to the butcher and slaughtered. In order to stop the drain of these good cows from the breeding tract, it was de- cided to try and evolve a breed of cow suitable for the Madras dairymen. The number of cross-bred cows in Madras has increased considerably during the last 10 years and a dairyman will very rarely part with a cow or a heifer if it has the least sign of imported blood in it; this displays the high regard the dairyman has for cross-bred cows and he is the man who has to make his living from his cows and his opinion cannot be disregarded. (325)
326 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, IV. From 1919 to 1923, the experiment was carried out at the Military Dairy Farm, Bangalore. Early in 1923, this Government purchased 32 half-bred cows and heifers born in the experiment at Bangalore and continued this work on their own cattle farm in the Presidency. Births. 222 calves have been born and are classified as follows :CROSS-BREEDING FOR MILK 333 western countries, a stockman or labourer takes a pride and interest in all his animals but this class of trained labour is not available in India at present and it is hoped that with better training and more supervision, this standard can be obtained in the near future. Regarding udder trouble, the cross-bred is not so liable to develop this as pure Sindhis, Two tests for T. B. have been conducted on the half-bred herd and in both cases, they have been declared free. One drawback amongst the half-bred is that many cows do not conceive at the first or second covering but with all this, their dry periods are much shorter than the country cows. BREEDING BACK TO THE COUNTRY WITH COUNTRY SIRES. Quarter-bred Ayrshire Sindhi and Sahiwal.CROSS-BREEDING FOR MILK 327 The chief causes of death are :328 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, IV. Milk Yield. Before giving these it is necessary to state the average number of completed lactations per cow in each generation. Generation Including all animals Herd minus poor milkers, etc. F. 1 .......... 36 4.0 F. 2 .......... 3.5 3.9 F. 3 .......... 2.4 2.5 It is therefore seen that F.1 and F.2 have reached their best, whereas F.3 have not. The following statement includes all cows born in the experiment and shows the yields of the specially selected country dams. Class Average yield per lactation Average daily average Average days dry Average maximum yield lb. lb. lb. 15 Scindi cows..... 3,431 120 186 4,505 27 F. 1 cows...... 5,021 14.8 113 6,268 23 F. 2 cows...... 3,296 12.3 151 4,247 11 F. 3 cows...... 3,626 12.4 148 4,516 It must be noted that the Sindhi cows were specially selected for their milk yields from a large herd, therefore selection in the progeny should be continued ; poor and abnormal milkers, also long dry periods are omitted in order to arrive at a proper comparison and this is seen from the following:PLATE XXVIII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] AYRSHIRE-SINDHI COW No. 1. F1 GENERATION.
PLATE XXIX. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] AYRSHIRE-SINDHI COW No. 8. F1 GENERATION.
CROSS-BREEDING FOR MILK 329 In the F.3 group above, 2 cows in their first lactation gave 1,100 lb. of milk and these lactations have been omitted. In two dry periods 2 cows were dry for 272 and 349 days respectively and these two periods have been omitted in the calculation. The average daily yield of milk from date of first calving to date of last calving including dry periods over all cows is :330 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, IV. cows is 637 lb. milk more than that of the Sindhis, viz., 4,068 lb. as against 3,431 lb. The daily average for 19 cows is 14 lb. as against 12 lb. for the Sindhis. If the daily average yield from date of first calving to date of last calving is taken, we find that the F. 2 cows average 10.5 lb. as against 7.2 lb. of the Sindhis, an increase of 3.3 lb. per day per cow. Four cows have yielded over 6,000 lb. milk in a lactation and 5 between 5,000 and 6,000 lb. milk. Cow No. 17 is the best yielder in this herd, in 4 lactations she has averaged 6,773 lb. milk with a daily average of 18.4 lb., her highest lactation being 8,380 lb. with a daily average of 18.1 lb. Cow No. 84 in 6 lactations has averaged 4,920 lb. with a daily average, of 16.7 lb. Nine cows out of 19 have yielded over 5,000 lb. milk and 14 have exceeded the average yield of the Sindhis. F. 3 Cows. These animals have not reached their maximum. Taking the whole herd of 11 cows, their average yield is greater than that of the Sindhis by about 200 lb. but when poor milkers are eliminated, the. average yield per lactation for 9 cows is 4,151 lb. This is slightly better than the F.2 herd and is 720 lb. more than that of the Sindhis, the daily average being 13.3 as against 12 lb. for the Sindhis and the daily average yield from date of first calving to date of last calving being 10.4 lb. against 7.2 lb., an increase of 3.2 lb. per day. Two cows have yielded over 6,000 lb. milk in a lactation and 6 cows out of the 9 have exceeded the average yield of the Sindhis. The best milker in this herd is cow No. 101. In 5 lactations she has averaged 5,702 lb. milk with a daily average of 15.2 lb., her highest yield being 6,825 lb. with a daily average of 15.3 lb. Cow No. 253 gave 6,252 lb., with a daily average of 19.7 lb. in her second lactation. She has given 4,333 lb. milk with a daily average of 20.9 lb. in her present lactation and is still in milk. F. 4 Cows. There are only two cows in milk. Cow No. 274 has given 4,108 lb. in her first lactation with a daily average of 10.8 lb. She was dry for 82 days and has calved again and is giving. 20 lb. milk per day. The other cow No. 289 has. yielded 3,009 lb. with a daily average of 12.8 lb. and is still in milk. Dry periods. Fifteen Sindhi cows were dry on the average for 186 days. The F.1 herd (23 cows) were dry for 83 days, the F.2 (19 cows) for 97 days and F.3 cows (9 cows) for 94 days. This is omitting cases of abnormal periods in the case of one or two cows. There is a considerable difference here, the Sindhi cows are dry on the average for 3 months and 2 days more than the F.3. herd.
PLATE XXX. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 1. AYRSHIRE-SINDHI COW No. 16. F2 GENERATION. (DAUGHTER OF COW No. 1.) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 2. AYRSHIRE-SINDHI COW No. 101. F3 GENERATION. (GRAND-DAUGHTER OF COW No. 1.)
PLATE XXXI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] AYRSHIRE-SANEWAL COW No. 289. F4 GENERATION.
CROSS-BREEDING FOR MILK 381 Weights. F.1 calves suckle their dams and grow at a quicker rate into bigger animals. F.2 and. F.3 calves are handfed, consequently they do not grow so quickly, it is difficult to supervise the proper feeding of these animals, with milk at the proper temperature and stomach troubles are frequent. The average weights of calves at birth are:332 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, IV. When the calves of these F. 2 and F. 3 go onto ordinary rations from milk ration, they appear to fall away for a few months and after a year old they begin to pull up again, but they do not as a whole grow or look so well as the Sindhi heifers at the same age. In many cases the coats of calves are rough looking and they have tight skins but these improve as the animals grow. Ringworm has been very bad at Hosur for the last 4 or 5 years and animals attacked with this disease become run down and it takes a long time to get them back into condition again. These half-bred calves have not been pampered, they have been fed on the same fines with the country calves and young stock, and if they could not survive they have had to go under. Adult cows on the whole look well, they are not too big and are about the proper size for a small dairyman. The bulls are disappointing, the chief fault in the F.2 and F.3 animals is that they are weak in their hind legs, when viewed from the rear, their hocks almost touch one another, the forepart of the bull is generally good, a large strong neck with a good chest capacity, although in some cases some of the bulls appear to fall away behind the shoulder. Almost all cross-bred bulls are very quick and good at service. Colour. The colours of each generation are generally as follows:CROSS-BREEDING FOR MILK 333 western countries, a stockman or labourer takes a pride and interest in all his animals but this class of trained labour is not available in India at present and it is hoped that with better training and more supervision, this standard can be obtained in the near future. Regarding udder trouble, the cross-bred is not so liable to develop this as pure Sindhis, Two tests for T. B. have been conducted on the half-bred herd and in both cases they have been declared free. One drawback amongst the half-bred is that many cows do not conceive at the first or second covering but with all this, their dry periods are much shorter than the country cows. BREEDING BACK TO THE COUNTRY WITH COUNTRY SIRES. Quarter-bred Ayrshire Sindhi and Sahiwal.-This experiment has only been conducted during the last 6 years at Hosur and a good number of cows have been sold. A Sindhi bull has been used on cross-bred cows and the particulars of the cows at present on the farm are given in the list at the end. Two out of these 5 cows have yielded over 5,000 lb. milk. Cow No. 261 has given over 5,000 lb. milk in her 2 lactations with daily averages of 16.1 and 18.5. In 1930, this Government purchased 16 cows and heifers from Pusa (¼ Ayrshire, ¾ Sahiwal). The particulars of the best cows are given in the list at the end. It is seen that one cow No. 216 CL has given 8,570 lb. with a daily average of 19.9 lb. and in her present lactation has given 11,532.7 lb. with a daily average of 27.8 lb. and is still in milk. This yield is much better than any of the F. 1 half-bred cows. Cow No. 250 M.T. has given 5,495 lb. with a daily average of 15.1 lb. Cow No. 255 RJ. has given in her present lactation 8,169 lb. milk with a daily average of 17.1 lb. and is still in milk. CONCLUSIONS. In an experiment of this kind a very large number of animals are necessary, at least 200 F. 2 cows are necessary in order that a good selection can be made. Possibly 25 to 30 per cent. of the cows would be retained and the same applies to future generations. In this experiment the original numbers, I have worked on, have been very small and only very poor milkers and bad breeders have been discarded, therefore drastic discarding was impossible. There are two cows out of 9 in F. 3, which have gone over 6,000 lb. in a lactation, another animal would have reached this figure but unfortunately it died.
334 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, IV. The bulls are disappointing, only a few of them can be used for breeding purposes. Some fall away behind the shoulders and others are very light behind and have weak hind legs. The cross-bred bull has hardly any hump and in most cases no hump at all, the ryot naturally objects to these for work cattle for this reason, although on Government farms, they have been found to be quite satisfactory at work. They work well at Hosur and Coimbatore but it is very doubtful if they would suit for work purposes in the hot districts. I am afraid they could not stand the heat. Therefore it is better that they are sold away at 10 days old and only the best kept and reared for future breeding. The cross-bred cow and heifer cannot stand up to the semi-starvation rations of this country and keep fit like the indigenous breeds. They are alright so long as they are fed and housed well and a good milker pays for this. Cross-breds seen in the districts in the hands of landowners have not the same bloom or appearance as those on Government farms. The cross-bred herd has maintained the milk supply at the Agricultural College Dairy for the last 9 years and the cows have more than paid for their keep. The difference in weight of the calves on the whole in each generation are within two or three pounds and the smaller size of the adult animals in F. 2, F. 3, etc., must, to some extent, be due to feeding and the set-backs which the calf experiences in its early life. If the calves were looked after by trustworthy and efficient cattlemen, I think some improvements would be seen in the size and weight of the F. 2, etc., but this is almost impossible in India at present. The selected cows in each generation calve more regularly, have a shorter dry period and yield more milk than their country ancestors. The Livestock Section has suffered this year through retrenchment, with the result that this experiment has been discontinued. I consider it is possible to evolve a half-bred breed of milch cows for India, but it will be an expensive experiment as large herds must be maintained for selection and from what I have seen up to the present of the experiment of breeding back on cross-breds to the country breed by the use of good country sires from selected milkers, I am of the opinion that this is probably a better method. Calves possessing ¼ and 1/8 imported blood resemble the country animal much more, they have humps and their size, conformation and coats are better and the heifers appear to be thrifty feeders when compared to the half-bred. This experiment has provided data for those interested in cross-breeding and thanks are due to the Madras Government for conducting and collecting data in this experiment.
CROSS-BREEDING FOR MILK 335 First generation F. 1. Serial No. No. of cow Age years Cal- vings Average milk yield Highest milk yield and daily average Average daily average Average No. of days dry. Remarks lb. lb. lb. 1 1 13½ 9 5,885 7,397/24.1 18.1 64 Long dry period of 685 days omitted. 2 2 13 8 6,494 10,529/18.7 17.5 60 3 3 7 5 3,140 3,735/11.9 10.5 72 4 4 7 4 3,757 4,267/16.6 15.2 88 5 7 8 7 4,633 5,189/14.5 17.2 66 2 lactations of 800 lb. omitted. Cow sick. 6 8 10 8 6,574 9,731/28.9 21.7 87 One lactation of 1,150 lb. omitted. 7 9 5 3 4,314 5,752/18.8 14.8 73 8 10 6½ 2 7,375 9,347/13.5 15.4 290 9 11 3½ 1 6,286 6,286/15.5 15.5 .. 10 12 6½ 3 2,483 2,974/10.6 10.1 108 11 21 9 7 3,200 4,948/17.4 12.3 90 12 61 12 6 4,526 7,594/15.4 13.7 81 Long dry period 273 days omitted. 13 113* 7½ 3 6,157 7,590/15.7 16.4 48 One lactation of 17,092 lb. omitted. 14 129 9½ 6 5,506 7,886/23.5 17.8 84 15 209 6 3 3,524 4,048/12.1 10.8 76 Dry period of 589 days omitted. 16 210 4 2 4,462 4,873/14.6 15.4 33 17 213 6 2 6,423 6,717/15.0 17.0 45 18 221 6 4 5,183 6,439/22.7 18.5 98 19 263 5 2 5,327 5,466/15.7 18.5 62 20 271 4½ 2 7,326 7,326/20.4 20.4 57 21 278 4 1 4,299 4,299/13.9 13.9 .. 22 287 3½ 1 6,977 6,977/19.5 19.5 .. 23 291 3½ 1 3,947 3,947/19.9 19.9 .. Average 4 5,122 6,231/17.3 16.1 83 * Cow No. 113.336 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, IV. Second generation F. 2. Serial No. No. of cow Age years Cal- vings Average milk yield Highest milk yield and daily average Average daily average Average No. of days dry Remarks lb. lb. lb. 1 15 11 8 5,034 6,797/21.4 16.9 82 Two lactations of 894 and 1,893 lb. omitted. 2 16 9½ 6 4,211 6,693/19.4 14.1 94 3 17 9 5 6,773 8,380/18.1 18.4 75 4 19 7 2 3,702 3,702/12.1 12.1 185 Lactation of 901 lb. omitted. 5 22 6 3 2,685 3,587/11.1 11.7 139 6 82 10 5 4,974 5,712/16.3 15.6 57 One dry period of 274 days omitted. 7 84 10 7 4,920 6,057/17.8 16.7 93 8 86 10 6 3,880 5,421/16.6 13.9 88 9 87 8 6 2,537 3,489/12.9 10.9 133 10 90 9 6 4,118 4,440/12.4 16.1 130 One lactation of 402 lb. omitted. 11 92 7½ 4 4,456 5,088/15.8 14.9 131 12 102 9¼ 6 3,474 4,728/15.5 12.2 77 13 122 9 5 4,102 4,684/14.7 14.3 63 One dry period of 655 days omitted. 14 130 7½ 6 3,032 3,757/17.5 14.5 106 15 164 5 2 2,544 2,660/11.4 12.5 105 16 198 7 3 3,198 3,198/12.7 12.7 80 One lactation 760 lb. omitted. 17 201 3½ 2 5,314 5,314/15.6 15.6 47 18 227 6 3 3,754 5,173/16.9 11.9 59 19 266 5 1 4,592 4,592/10.0 10.0 .. Average 4.5 4,068 4,919/15.2 14.0 97 Third generation F. 3. Serial No. No. of cow Age years Cal- vings Average milk yield Highest milk yield and daily average Average daily average Average No. of days dry Remarks lb. lb. lb. 1 101 9¼ 5 5,702 6,825/15.3 15.2 70 2 139 8¾ 5 3,162* 3,628/14.2 12.7 118 *First lactation 1,229 lb. omitted. 3 143 5 2 4,514 4,514/11.5 11.5 52 4 200 7 4 3,921 4,640/13.2 14.2 89CROSS-BREEDING FOR MILK 337 Particulars of some ¼ bred cows (¼ Ayrshire and ¾ Sindhi) bred at Hosur Cattle Farm. No. Age years Milk yields Daily averages Days dry Remarks lb. lb. 225 6 4,455 5,534 4,297 12.8 14.6 14.8 95 18 71 247 5 2,477 3,663 11.3 13.8 241 102 250 5 2,540 3,583 14.6 11.1 202 .. 261 5½ 5,319 5,689 16.1 18.5 82 .. 262 5½ 3,577 13.4 79 Particulars of best animals purchased from Pusa in 1930 (¼ Ayrshire, ¾ Sahiwal). 216 CL 6 8,570 11,532 19.9 27.8 103 .. Still in milk. 237 RJ 5½ 3,902 13.7 .. 250 MT 5 3,588 5,495 11.1 15.1 117 .. 252 MB 5 4,773 5,094 15.1 19.0 47 .. 255 RJ 5 4,075 8,169 13.1 17.1 101 .. Still in milk. 265 MT .. 2,700.5 4,370 4.8 15.2 284 ..
THE DURATION OF IMMUNITY IN CALVES INOCULATED BY THE GOAT VIRUS CUM SERUM METHOD AGAINST RINDERPEST BY P. C. BANERJI, G.B.V.C., Officiating Veterinary Deputy Superintendent, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on the 13th September 1933.) The results of experiments designed to test the duration of immunity in calves inoculated by the usual sero-virus method at this Institute have recently been published by D'Costa and Balwant Singh [1933] and the continuation of the work with a modified virus will now be reported. The introduction of goat virus for prophylactic inoculation against rinderpest may be regarded as a notable advance in the development of such measures against this disease in India, although our knowledge in regard to the precise value of this product cannot, as yet, be declared to have reached a stage when it can be safely recommended for use under all circumstances as a substitute for the more usual ox virus. Nevertheless, this product would appear to meet the present demand for a cheaper method of active immunisation for general application to the herds of cattle in Indian rural districts in that, when goat virus is used, an efficient margin of safety can be attained with a much smaller dose of serum than when ox virus is inoculated. Indeed in many cases it would appear that serum may be dispensed with altogether as shown independently by Kerr [1932] and by Stirling [1932]. Although considerable attention has been paid to the susceptibility of goats in various parts of the world and Koch [1897] noted that virus when passaged through goats became less virulent for cattle, the use of virus from this source for field inoculations does not appear to have been considered a practical proposition except by Bliss [1922] who recommended the use of goat virus in China, and Topacio [1926] whose experiments proved the economy of the method. Edwards [1927] has recorded the circumstances and the method which led to the establishment of a rinderpest goat virus at this Institute, and he also emphasised the fact that this virus was free from the serious drawback attendant upon the use of ox virus, in that blood protozoan parasites, e.g., piroplasmata, are not infrequently introduced along with the virulent blood. A point of considerable importance, in regard to which little information is available, is the duration of the immunity conferred upon cattle which have been (338)
IMMUNITY IN CALVES INOCULATED BY GOAT VIRUS AGAINST RINDERPEST 339 successfully immunised by the simultaneous inoculation of goat virus and serum, and in 1928 Dr. J. T. Edwards, then Director of this Institute, initiated a series of experiments to ascertain the possibility of substituting goat virus for ox virus for the control of rinderpest in the field. One of the series consisted of comparing the duration of immunity in calves and the tests and previous records of these animals have been available to the writer, who considers that the series, though small, should now be recorded for the benefit of other workers in this field. These calves were of both indigenous and European-cross breeds and had been reared in the Muktesar Dairy Herd from dams which had been immunised by the serum-simultaneous method of inoculation with ox virus. The virus used in the case of the calves was obtained from goats that had been inoculated with " fixed " goat rinderpest virus maintained by passaging alternately through goats and bulls. Sera of known potency were used for immunisation and each calf was given the same dose of serum as it would have received if bull virus had been used. In those cases which showed no evidence of reaction before the fourth or fifth day after the initial inoculation, a further dose of goat virus was administered. The viability of the virus used for immunisation and for testing the duration of im- munity was in all cases determined by inoculation into susceptible bulls. Altogether 22 calves were used in this experiment and the record of their reactions is given in the appended Table I. Of these 22 calves 8 died from causes other than rinderpest before the period allotted for testing their immunity. The remaining 14 were tested by the inocula- tion of ox virus at intervals varying from 12340 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, IV. TABLE I. Serial No. Brand No. Breed Age Reaction to serum- simultaneous inoculation Interval of test Reaction to test Remarks 1 180 Indigenous . 1 month Nil Died before retest. ... ..... 2 169 ¼ European . 1 month and 22 days. Nil 30 months Very marked thermal reaction with slight inappetence. ...... 3 168 ¼ IMMUNITY IN CALVES INOCULATED BY GOAT VIRUS AGAINST RINDERPEST 341 10 185 ½ 342 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, IV. It will be observed that only two out of the 22 calves inoculated reacted at the time of the orginal inoculation and in conformity with the findings when ox virus was used as reported by D'Costa and Balwant Singh (loc. cit.), the reactions occurred in the oldest group of animals. Considering the dose of serum and the comparatively low virulence of the virus used it is surprising that any reaction was observed at all. One of these animals was tested twelve months later and proved to be solidly immune. The other died before the completion of the test period. Of the remaining thirteen animals which survived the allotted test period and which showed no reaction at the time of the initial immunisation, one was tested after twelve months' interval, four after approximately 18 months, four after approximately 24 months, and four after approximately 30 months. The reac- tions noted at the time of the test were :IMMUNITY IN CALVES INOCULATED BY GOAT VIRUS AGAINST RINDERPEST 343 Balwant Singh (loc. cit.) the factor of greatest importance appears to be the age of the animals at the time of the inoculation as shown in Table II below. TABLE II. Distribution of calves reacting to test dose, according to age at immunisation and interval of test. Age at the time of immuni- sation Interval between immunisation and test Total Percentage reacted 12 months 18-20 months 24 months 30-31 months Number immunis- ed Number reacted to test Number immunis- ed Number reacted to test Number immunis- ed Number reacted to test Number immunis- ed Number reacted to test Number immunis- ed Number reacted to test Per cent . Up to 3 months . .. .. .. .. 3 3 2 2 5 6 100 From 4 to 6 months. .. .. 1 1 1 .. 1 .. 3 1 33.3 From 7 to 11 months. 2 .. 3 1 .. .. 1 .. 6 1 16.6 It will be seen from the above table that only two of the nine calves immu- nised after the attainment of 3 months can be stated to have reacted to the test inoculation and in the case of these two animals the reaction was very slight and in one case of doubtful origin. In the case of the animals immunised below the age of 3 months all reacted in greater or less degree344 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, IV. goat virus is definitely of lower virulence than ox virus, it is probable that the administration of smaller doses of serum would have achieved a more durable immunity without lowering the safety factor to any marked degree. Although this has not been done in calves, the view stated above receives ample support from the results obtained by Cooper and Kerr [1931] in adult cattle. With regard to the transmission or resuscitation of piroplasmosis, it may be noted that no ox blood virus is used at this Institute if parasites can be detected by microscopical examination of blood films, so that massive infection with these parasites does not occur. In the present series the rate of complications due to resuscitated piroplasmata (13 per cent.) is approximately the same as that (11 per cent.) encountered by D'Costa and Balwant Singh in their considerably larger series of inoculations in calves using ox virus. It would, therefore, appear that in indigenous cattle piroplasmosis as a complication to anti-rinderpest inocula- tions is largely, if not entirely, due to resuscitation. In further support of this statement it may be observed that out of 266 bulls used at this Institute during the years 1930 and 1931 for the testing or passage of goat virus 43 (16.5 per cent.) developed piroplasmosis, while 105 (17 per cent.) out of 986 routine ox virus producers developed this complication during the same period. At the same time it may be stated that while there is no apparent advantage in indigenous cattle, or in thoroughly acclimatised foreign breeds, as far as resuscitation or inoculation of piroplasmosis is concerned, it is advisable to use goat virus in the case of newly imported animals and those which have had no opportunity to become " premu- nised " to the Indian strains of P. bigemina. The results reported above indicate therefore that the use of an attenuated virus derived from goats together with normal doses of serum on calves of indigen- ous and acclimatised breeds has no advantages as compared with the usual serum cum ox virus method and is definitely inferior to that method in the extent of immunity produced. It is probable, however, that better results could be achieved by the administration of smaller doses of serum, or indeed of goat virus alone. SUMMARY. 1. The results of the serum-simultaneous inoculation of 22 calves with goat virus and serum are reported, together with the results of immunity tests carried out at various intervals after the original immunisation. 2. The use of an attenuated virus together with the usual doses of serum leads to the production of a lower grade of immunity than when ox virus is used. 3. The percentage of calves which develop an appreciable immunity is less when goat virus is used than when ox virus is administered.
IMMUNITY IN CALVES INOCULATED BY GOAT VIRUS AGAINST RINDERPEST 345 4. The incidence of piroplasmosis in indigenous and European cross-bred calves was not noticeably affected. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. The work recorded in this article was planned and carried out under the direction of Dr. J. T. Edwards, D.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., late Director of this Institute, to whom the writer desires to tender his grateful acknowledgments. He also desires to thank Mr. H. Cooper, M.R.C.V.S., and Mr. J. R. Haddow, B.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., D.V.S.M., for guidance in the execution of the work. REFERENCES. Bliss, E. L. (1922). Reprint from China Med. J. March, 1922. Cooper, H. and Kerr, P. J. (1931). An. Rep. Imp. Inst. Vet. Research, Muktesar, 1930-31, 14-15. D'Costa, J. and Balwant Singh. (1933). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. Anim. Husb. 3, 131. Edwards, J. T. (1927). Trans. Seventh Cong. Far-East. Ass. Trop. Med. Calcutta, 3, 703. Kerr, P. J. (1932). An. Rep. Imp. Inst. Vet. Research, Muktesar, 1931-32, 23. Koch, R. (1897). Agric. J. C. G. H., Feb. 18th. (Reprint). Stirling, R. F. (1932). Vet. J. 88, 192. Topacio, T. (1926). Reprint from Philipp. Agric. Rev. 19,
BOVINE NASAL GRANULOMA (SNORING DISEASE OF CATTLE) IN HYDERABAD STATE BY M. R. MAHAJAN, M.R.C.V.S., Veterinary Investigation Officer, H. E. H. the Nizam's Dominions, Hyderabad. (Received for publication on the 23rd September 1933.) (With Plate XXXII and one text-figure.) This article is published because Nasal Granuloma, the causal organism of which was first demonstrated by Datta in 1931, though known to exist in all the surrounding British provinces, has not hitherto been reported from Hyderabad State. Cases of Nasal Schistosomiasis confirmed by the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, have however now been met with in the districts of Warangal, Mahbubnagar and Asifabad, and reported from Raichur. Two of these districts, viz., Warangal and Asifabad. are on the borders of the Dominions, one touching the Madras Presidency and the other the Central Provinces, and it will be shown later particularly in the case of Warangal, that the source of infection may have come from the neighbouring British territorry. The first case discovered was in Lingal, Mahbubnagar district, in January 1933 while I was conducting Rinderpest inoculation work. The subject was a cow that showed typical symptoms of the disease. On examination of the nasal washings the case was confirmed microscopically on the spot, but unfortunately, there was not sufficient nasal discharge to forward to the Muktesar laboratory for confirmation. This case, was effectively treated with intravenous injections of tartar emetic which further proves my diagnosis. It is also interesting to note that some schistosome parasites collected from a number of goats under Rinderpest experiment at this place were found to be Schistosoma spindalis, the reputed cause of nasal schistosomiasis in cattle. The next discovery was in April 1933 at the village Inagol, Warangal district, where the disease was so rampant as to affect no less than 25 animals. At this time I was camping at a village called Menole for Rinderpest inoculation work and a couple of cases were brought to my camp for treatment from Inagol and this led to the discovery. The local name given to the disease in these parts is ' Busa Rogam' (meaning loud breathing in Telugu). The history was that the animals had been suffering from this condition for about a year, the disease not having been noticed previous (346)
MAP [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Locating the affected village of Inagol underlined. D 2
BOVINE NASAL GRANULOMA IN HYDERABAD STATE 347 to this. Since there is a period of incubation before the actual symptoms of snoring appear, it is reasonable to assume that the disease was prevailing for a longer period than that stated. The affected animals were of the Krishna valley type and belonged to different cultivators; one man having as many as seven. The animals consisted of the following:348 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, IV. intermediate host of the liver fluke of cattle. In view of a recent article by Rao (1933) entitled "A preliminary report on the successful infection with Nasal Schistosomiasis in Experimental Calves" it would appear that the cercaria as obtained by us from Limnea luteola may be Cercaria Indicae XXX Sewell, 1921, with which Rao has now been successful in infecting calves experimentally, with this disease. The existence of 'Bovine Nasal Schistosomiasis' in this part of the State, however, has not yet been established. The loud ' snoring' noise was perfectly audible even from a distance in almost all the animals we examined. There was constant dribbling of the watery discharge from the nostrils, but the condition of the animals was fairly good (Plate XXXII). Examination of the nose revealed cauliflower-like growths inside the nostrils in almost all the cases. The nasal washings were collected in the manner shown in Plate XXXII. This was allowed to settle overnight, the supernatant fluid poured off and the remaining deposit examined under the microscope by means of a cover slip preparation made with caustic potash. This revealed a fairly large number of ova of Sohistosoma spindalis in all the cases. The nasal washings from a number of cases were then forwarded to the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, for confirmation. In each case it was reported that examina- tion revealed the typical ova of Schistosoma spindalis. Further than this, a small portion of the nasal growth from a positive case of the disease was then removed, preserved in formalin and forwarded to the Muktesar Laboratory. The laboratory report on this tissue is as follows : " The tissue from the nostril of case No. 9 upon microscopical examination revealed a typical histological picture of ' Bovine Nasal Granuloma ' lesions. Prolonged search failed to reveal the presence of any schistosomes parasites but a few S. spindalis ova were seen. " Treatment was conducted with tartar emetic injections given intravenously. The drug was made up into a 3 per cent. solution and the dose of this solution calculated at the rate of 2½ c. c. per 100 pound body weight. The solution was injected by means of a hypodermic syringe and no normal saline solution was used. The full course of treatment was three injections, given at an interval of a week each. The treatment was efficacious and all the cases cured ; some with the first injection only, others required two, while, a few only required all the three. It was observed that some animals showed toxic symptoms as a result of tartar emetic injections. For this, it is assumed that the idiosyncrasy of the animals played a part to a certain extent. The following symptoms were shown in a bull three hours after the injections :PLATE XXXII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 1. Showing number of cases and their bodily condition. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 2. Showing collection of nasal washings for microscopic examination.
BOVINE NASAL GRANULOMA IN HYDERABAD STATE 349 particular symptom noticed in a number of cases was a hot, red and oedematous swelling at the dewlap, which, however, was easily amenable to hot fomentations. One heifer, aged 1½ years, showed toxic symptoms of severe colicky pains about an hour after injection and unconsciousness. Then she regained conscious- ness, got up, and immediately after began to pass profuse watery stools which lasted for three days. One bullock developed an abscess at the seat of injection. No animal however succumbed as a result of these toxic symptoms. The assistant veterinary surgeon of Nirmal, Asifabad district, is responsible for the next report of the existence of ' Bovine Nasal Granuloma ' at a village Racha- puram, in July 1933, where five bullocks showed the typical symptoms of the disease. It appears the disease had been in existence there for the previous eight months. The nasal washings from two of these cases have since been examined microscopically and found positive for the ova of Schistosoma spindalis by the writer. SUMMARY. ' Bovine Nasal Granuloma ' exists in Hyderabad State, although the infection may have been an imported one from the neighbouring British territory in the case of Inagol, since this village is situated near the border of the Dominions. An interesting find was goats harbouring the parasite Schistosoma spindalis, which is the reputed cause of this disease in cattle. A further interesting find was snails of Limnea luteola (Lamarck) type that liberat- ed cercaria, in an area where the existence of this disease has not yet been estab- lished. The toxic symptoms produced by the tartar emetic injections, as encountered during treatment, are also described. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. The writer wishes to take this opportunity to express his thanks to all con- cerned, especially Mr. Doraswamy Iyengar, Veterinary Inspector, Warangal, who helped him to complete the above investigation. Thanks are also due to the Director, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, for the confirmation of laboratory materials submitted. In particular, he is grateful to Nawab Rais Jung Bahadur, the Permanent Director, and Mr. B. K. Badami, Officiating Director, Civil. Veterinary Department, Hyderabad, for their ever willing support and other facilities extended. REFERENCE. Rao, A. N. (1933). Ind Jour. Vety. Sci. and Anim. Hus. 3, 160-162.
OSTEOPOROSIS IN NORTH INDIA BY COLONEL A. OLVER, C.B., C.M.G., F.R.C.V.S., Animal Husbandry Expert, Imperial Council of Agricultural Research. (Received for publication on 24th October 1933.) (With Plate XXXIII.) That Osteoporosis does occur in India is known and its great importance to horse-owners in Ceylon has been emphasised by Sturgess in the Annual Reports of the Government Veterinary Surgeon, Ceylon for the years 1926 and 1927. Moreover the condition is evidently of considerable importance in Burma since its investigation is one of the items of research now being undertaken by the Civil Veterinary Department in that province. The cases reported in India have however been comparatively few. Hayes, M. H. in 1879 recorded three cases of Osteoporosis in Cachar (Eastern Bengal), one of which was in a country-bred Manipuri pony. Smith, T. A. in 1887 reported a case from Calcutta in a thoroughbred Australian gelding imported from Victoria in 1883 and Simons, S. T. also in 1887 described a case in a countrybred mare, the property of a tea planter in Darjeeling, while in 1895 Spooner Hart forwarded the skull of a typical case of Osteoporosis from Calcutta to England. It will be observed that all of these cases occurred in Bengal but more recently in 1931, Swaminath Ayyar reported a case in a 4-year old Indian pony from Ootacamund, and, in the Administration Report of the Army Remount Department for 1905-06 a thoroughbred English horse, of the Jhelum Canal Colony, was stated to have been destroyed for Osteoporosis. This last appears to be the only record of the occurrence of Osteoporosis in the North and the following typical case seen by the writer with Mr. Sharma, Veterinary Assistant Surgeon of the Veterinary Hospital at Simla, is therefore of interest to horse-owners in Northern India, particularly to owners of highly fed animals such as race horses, hunters and polo-ponies. The patient in this case was an aged Dun Water gelding which had for years past been used as a hack all the year round in Simla and was in excellent condition. History. The pony had been under treatment by Mr. Sharma since 13th June 1933 suffering from an obscure lameness of the near foreleg. It was said by the syce to have got this leg entrapped between the bars of its loose box and to have knocked its head against an upper bar in trying to free itself. In doing so it appeared also to have slightly injured the near fore tendon, while on examination some tenderness of the upper portion of the nasal bones was found. The pony was at that time lame on the near foreleg and the case was treated with an ordinary (350)
PLATE XXXIII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 1. Skull showing osteo-porosis of the rami of lower jaws and nasal bones. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 2. Os. coronac showing roughened areas from which tendons had been lorn away.
OSTEOPOROSIS IN NORTH INDIA 351 cooling lotion. After 3 or 4 days, as the lameness was much less, the shoe was replaced and a little walking exercise ordered. On the 1st July 1933 Mr. Sharma was again asked to see the pony, which was then reported to be lying down in its loose box and to be very uneasy, and states that when first seen by him at this time the pony was sweating a little and frequently looked round with an anxious expression as if in abdominal pain. Shortly afterwards, Mr. Sharma having left the box to speak to the owner, the syce reported that, in trying to rise, the pony had broken one of its fetlocks and was standing with the back of the off fore fetlock joint on the ground. The writer was then asked to see the pony and found it standing in its pox perspiring freely and evidently in great pain with the back of the off fore fetlock resting on the ground, as abovementioned, and the toe of that foot pointing upwards almost perpendicularly. It was clear that the limb bad completely given way in the region of the pastern and Osteoporosis at once suggested itself as the probable cause of such a lesion. In any event it was obvious that immediate destruction was the only possible course to adopt. While arrangements were being made for this to be caried out, the writer, on again entering the loose box, found that during his short absence of only a few minutes the other fetlock had descended to the ground in precisely the same manner as the off fore. The pony was thus standing on the backs of both fore fetlocks with the toes of both fore feet pointing upwards and was evidently in considerable pain but not apparently to the same extent as before. Destruction was carried out as quickly as possible and the head and the fore limbs below the knees were removed for examination as it was anticipated that pathognomonic lesions of Osteoporosis would be found in these regions. Post-mortem Findings. On dissection of the back of the fetlock and pastern it was found that the flexor pedis perforatus tendons were completely torn away from their distal attachments at the backs of the pasterns; otherwise the bones, ligaments and tendons appeared healthy to the naked eye. When boiled out the. superior and inferior maxillary and the nasal bones showed well marked lesions of Osteoporosis, particularly in the much thickened and softened rami of the lower jaw. There was also a definite thickening and softening of the nasal bones at the point where the pony was supposed to have injured its head when first seen by Mr. Sharma. These lesions can be seen in the photograph of the skull which accompanies this article, while the area from which the tendons had been torn away from the short pastern bones are distinguishable as dark roughened areas sharply demarcated from the smooth, glistening, posterior surface of the shafts (Plate XXXIII) of these bones.
352 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, IV. An interesting feature in this case is the fact that the pony had always been very carefully fed on the best of oats and bran, obtained from a contractor and not grown in Simla, and that its hay, also, had always been imported from the plains. The pony had been given a little grazing at irregular intervals and a little green lucerne, grown at Simla, but lucerne was only obtainable for a short period each year and then in very small quantities while the amount of grazing was always small. The bulk of the diet was thus oats, bran and grass hay, all grown on the plains, and any mineral deficiency which may have existed can hardly be attributed to foodstuffs grown in Simla. In fact it seems probable that lack of an adequate supply of locally grown green-stuff and consequent imbalance or mal- assimilation of the minerals present in the ration may have been an important factor in the causation of the condition which led to the premature destruction of this apparently well cared for animal. Causation. As to the causation of Osteoporosis a great deal of difference of opinion has existed in the past. Some have held it to be of entirely dietetic origin while other eminent workers, with ample opportunities of studying the disease, have held it to be of an infectious nature. The available information regarding it is discussed in the annual reports of the Government "Veterinary Surgeon, Ceylon, referred to above and the following tentative conclusions, published in the 1926 report, are of particular interest, viz.:OSTEOPOROSIS IN NORTH INDIA 353 (3) The calcium requirement of these ponies is apparently in the region of 20 grams of calcium oxide per day. If there is an excess of phosphoric acid in the diet, this amount is inadequate. (4) The causal factor of osteitis fibrosa appears to be a deficiency of calcium in the foodstuffs, the evil effects being intensified when there is a co- existing excess of phosphorus. Further conclusions, derived by Crawford from experimental work carried out in Ceylon upon animals imported from a locality where Osteoporosis did not exist and carefully guarded against all risk of infection, are given in the report for the following year, as follows:354 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, IV. porosis in certain countries which was previously so puzzling. In South Africa, for example, it was long held by workers who had carefully studied the matter that the disease must be of a contagious nature because it was first brought prominently to notice in racing stables in the Cape PeninsulaOSTEOPOROSIS IN NORTH INDIA 355 REFERENCES Hayes, M. H. (1879). Veterinary Journal 8, 402-433. Smith (1887). Quarterly Journal of Veterinary Science in India, 5, 167-168. Symonds (1887). Quarterly Journal of Veterinary Science in India, 5, 167-168. Spooner Hart (1895). Veterinarian, 68, 713-717. Swaminath Ayyar (1931). Indian Veterinery Journal, 7, 263-265. Sturgess. Annual Reports of the Government Veterinary Surgeon, Ceylon, 1926, 1927. Crawford. Annual Report of the Government Veterinary Surgeon, Ceylon, 1927. Kinther and Holt (1932). Philippine Journal of Science.
THE VECTOR OF CANINE PIROPLASMOSIS DUE TO PIROPLASMA GIBSONI BY S. K. SEN, M.Sc., F.R.E.S., Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on the 23rd October 1933.) (With Plate XXXIV and one chart.) A perusal of the available literature shows that the earliest attempts to determine the vector of this protozoan infection of dogs were made by Patton shortly after his discovery of the parasite in the blood of hounds of the Madras Hunt in 1910. Concerning these attempts, Symons and Patton, in an article which appeared in 1912, wrote as follows :VECTOR OF CANINE PIROPLASMOSIS DUE TO P. GIBSONI 357 brief trial, with negative results. This species of tick was not given an extended trial by Rao, " for lack of time and because it did not seem to be the possible vector, for it is the commonest tick on ordinary house dogs among whom P. gibsoni is very rare; further, it carries, as shown by Christophers [1907], P. canis which is the common parasite among the ordinary house dogs and if it were a carrier of P. gibsoni as well this parasite should have been seen along with P. canis, but this is not usually the case ". Whilst the facts advanced by Rao, as quotad above, doubtless justify tne conclusion that R. sanguineus is not the likely vector of P. gibsoni in South India, nevertheless, experience at this Institute during the past few years has shown that, in so far as Northern India is concerned, P. gibsoni infection is by no means of rare occurrence in house dogs, whilst it is common knowledge that street dogs in these localities are not infrequently carriers of this protozoan parasite. As to H. bispinosa, Sharif [1928], in a publication based upon the collection of ticks in the possession of the Indian Museum, mentions this tick having been only infre- quently taken off the canine species. These facts seemed to the present writer to be suggestive of the possibility that the transmitting agent of P. gibsoni infection, at any rate in the northern parts of India, was P. sanguineus, which, in these localities, is parasitic not only on dogs but also on hounds, as judged by the fact that every single specimen in several consignments of ticks received from time to time from the Jhind State Kennels at Bhim Tal (situated at a distance of about 16 miles from this Institute) was fourd on examination to belong to this species. It is of interest that the possibility of R. sanguineus being involved in the transmission of P. gibsoni infection has also been mentioned by Wakely [1931], in a pamphlet issued by the Masters of Foxhounds Association of India. An opportunity of putting this hypothesis to test occurred in July 1930, when information was received of the occurrence of a case of P. gibsoni infection in the Jhind State Kennels at Bhim Tal. A quantity of blood from the affected hound was obtained by a special messenger and was injected into two dogs which developed the infection after an incubation period of about 30 days. This strain has now been kept alive for the past three years by " passaging " through suscep- tible dogs, and in the course of this work, much useful information has been gained concerning the pathogenicity of P. gibsoni infection for country-bred dogs. This will form the subject of a separate paper to be prepared in collaboration with Messrs. P. R. Krishna Iyer, M. K. Sreenivasan and J. Idnani, Veterinary Inspectors at this Institute, who have been good enough to carry out the subinoculations for the present writer and have kept careful protocols of about 50 dogs that have so far been used in this work.
358 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, IV. The present note records the results of transmission experiments carried out upon only five dogs, two of which died from causes other than P. gibsoni infection, whilst the remaining three duly developed the infection. In view of the small number of experiments carried out and of the fact that no special precaution was adopted to prevent the animals from contracting a natural infection, the results reported in this note must be regarded as of a tentative character until further work has been done, under more controlled conditions, to confirm these findings. The writer desires to acknowledge his grateful thanks to Mr. F. Ware, F.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., Director of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, for his kind encouragement and for granting every facility in the prosecution of this investigation. FEEDING OF TICKS ON DOGS. At the outset it was realized that one of the fundamental difficulties that hampered the progress of investigations of this kind was the lack of a suitable method of feeding ticks (particularly the larval forms) on dogs. Patton (l. c.) and Rao (l. c.) have not indicated the methods adopted by them in feeding their ticks, but Rao mentions having recovered 30 nymphs in one instance, 20 in another and 30 in a third, and from this one would gather that the number of nymphs which he failed to recover was not small, for ticks, as a rule, bring forth a considerable progeny. In his work on the transmission of malignant jaundice of dogs through the agency of R. sanguineus, Christophers [1907] enclosed his experimental animals (" pups of medium size" ) in cages of iron which were kept surrounded with sheets of muslin to enable any engorged ticks to be readily seen and collected. A similar type of cage is also recommended by Patton and Cragg [1913] for feeding R. sanguineus, the cage being provided underneath with a tray to catch the urine or faeces of the enclosed animal. The ticks to be fed are dropped upon a quantity of straw placed inside the cage, care being taken first to remove the underpan in order to avoid any of the ticks getting drowned in the urine which may have collected in it. The dog is taken outside when required to feed and the cage is cleaned once a day by removing all faeces, urine and soiled straw, whilst the removal of such ticks as have lodged themselves between the bars of the cage is effected by bumping the cage over a piece of white cloth placed upon the floor. In his work upon the life-history of R. sanguineus, Nuttall [ 1913-14] enclosed his dogs in a barrel-shaped metal cage " placed horizontally upon an insulated- stand, one end of the barrel being open but guarded by a metal grating, a similar grating serving as a floor for the animal to stand upon ". The" cage was searched daily,
VECTOR OF CANINE PIROPLASMOSIS DUE TO P. GIBSONI 359 a sheet of white paper being laid upon the floor of the cage to show up any engorg- ed ticks that might have dropped upon it. It is obvious that the foregoing methods, although serviceable in their own way, entail an amount of attention which it is not always possible to afford in the midst of other laboratory duties and, moreover, it was repeatedly observed in the course of trials carried out at this Institute that some loss of ticks was inevitable when they were fed by any of the methods described above. An intensive series of experiments was therefore undertaken with a view to devising a method that would not only effect a substantial saving in time but would also ensure the reco- very of every single tick on the completion of its feed upon its host. Both these conditions were found capable of being satisfied to a very large extent in the method which is to be described presently and which is now adopted at this Institute as a routine method for feeding ticks on dogs. The method, which represents essentially a modification of one recommended by Nieschulz and Wawo-Roentoe [ 1930 ], has for its object the confinement of the ticks to a circumscribed area on the body of the host until the completion of their feed. In the original method, as devised by Nieschulz and Wawo-Roentoe, the ticks were kept confined under a cloth-cover (" Batistdecke ") fixed on to the skin of the host by means of collodion. To prevent the cloth-cover from being damag- ed by the dog, the latter was made to wear a collar made of stiff carton (of. Muller and Glass [ 1926 ], who, too, recommend the use of similar collars for dogs) and to ensure further security, the hind legs were kept wrapped in a quantity of padding (" umwickelt "). Experience at this Institute has shown, however, that collodion is not quite the type of adhesive that can be depended upon to keep the cloth-cover intact for the requisite period. In this respect, a much superior adhesive was found in the substance known as " Chatterton's Compound ", which is procurable, in the form of sticks, from all leading chemists in India (our own supply of this material was obtained from Messrs. Smith, Stanistreet and Co., Calcutta). The material is melted before use and is best applied with a small spatula or a glass rod flattened at one end. Some tests carried out at this laboratory showed that Chatterton's Compound was practically insoluble in alcohol, but that it dissolved slowly in chloroform, ether and xylol, so that any of these solvents may be used in detaching cloth-covers fixed by means of this adhesive. It was, however, found more convenient in practice gently to peel off the cover, although this caused a certain amount of temporary pain to the dog. When used alone, Chatterton's Compound was found sometimes to have a fatal effect upon such of the ticks as got stuck in this material along the margin of the cloth cover, so that it was eventually found to be a good plan to effect the initial fixation by means of collodion and to apply a layer of Chatterton's Compound only along the E
360 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND. ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, IV. outer edge of the cloth-cover. This worked well for a while until in one instance a proportion of the ticks got pressed to death, apparently as a result of the dog having reclined on the side of its body on which the ticks had been placed (for the most convenient site for placing the ticks on the host's body was found to be the sides). This difficulty was overcome by the simple expedient, of fixing a small cup, by means of Chatterton's Compound, over the cloth-cover, a suitable cup for this purpose being the lid of a " Craven A " cigarette tin (the dimensions of the cloth- cover itself not exceeding 1¼ N square). Before fixing, the lid is perforated by a number of holes to admit of air, and a piece of muslin is gummed on to the inside of the lid in order to prevent the escape of any ticks through the boles, in the event of the cloth-cover getting accidentally detached at some point along its margin. To prevent the cup from dropping off as a result of hitting against a projecting object, the animal is made to wear a tight-fitting dog-coat, broad enough to enclose the entire circumference of the middle of the body and maintained in position by looping it over the tail and buttoning it on the sides and in front below the neck (Plate XXXIV, Fig. 1). Broad (cited by Williams, 1904) recommends sprinkling bandages with cayenne pepper in order to prevent dogs from biting them off, but the use of the carton collar, as mentioned above, would appear more simply to meet this purpose, whilst by lightly tying together the hind legs, the dog is effectively prevented from making use of them in scratching off the cloth-cover. During the summer months at Muktesar, the periods taken by the different stages of R. sanguineus to complete their feed have been found to range from about 4 to 9 days, and in the feeding experiments described below, the cloth-covers were opened with due regard to these periods, whilst the ticks themselves were collected by brushing them off the body of their hosts into a funnel attached to a large entomological tube closed at the bottom. The effectiveness of the feeding method described above is illustrated in Fig. 2, Plate XXXIV, which shows a group of engorged ticks confined to a circumscribed area on the host's body. THE TRANSMISSION EXPERIMENTS. The ticks used in the present experiments had all been bred out from eggs deposited in captivity and had their infective feed in the larval stage on dogs show- ing definite symptoms of P. gibsoni infection, as evidenced by anæmic changes and the occurrence of parasites in the circulating blood, although the occurrence of febrile symptoms was not found to be a constant feature of the infection. In the
PLATE XXXIV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Dog with collar and coat on and with hind legs lightly tied. The area where the ticks have been placed is indicated by arrow. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Portion of body of dog showing engorged ticks in situ (with the cup and cloth-cover partially removed).
VECTOR OF CANINE PIROPLASMOSIS DUE TO P. GIBSONI 361 present experiments, only two dogs provided the infective feed to the larval ticks, as shown in the following Table :362 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, IV. of a more suitable subject at the time, had to be fed upon dogs showing only " rare " or " very rare " parasites. As has been mentioned earlier in this note, the infectivity of the nymphs and adults derived from one or more of the six lots of larvae was tested upon five dogs. The results of these tests are summarized in the following Table :nsmission of Canine Piroplasmosis by Rhipicephalus Sanguineus. CHARTS OF DOGS NO. 248, No. 236 AND NO. 194. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
Fig. I .VECTOR OF CANINE PIROPLASMOSIS DUE TO P. GIBSONI 363 infection in dogs. This is illustrated by the temperature charts (Fig. 1) for, as will be seen from these charts, in none of the three animals did a rise in temperature bear any definite relationship to the appearance of the para- sites in the circulating blood. It will, however, be noticed that two of the dogs showed Babesia canis, whilst the third showed rare Hepatozoon canis in the blood, and it is not improbable that the supervention of these concurrent infections determined to some extent the temperature reaction developed by these animals. It is hoped that it will be possible to obtain definite information on this point when the experiments are repeated on " clean" dogs housed in tick-proof kennels. Arrangements are in progress to undertake these experiments as soon as possible. REFERENCES. Christophers, S. R. (1907). Piroplasma canis and its Life-cycle in the Tick. Scientific Memoirs. Government of India. No. 29. Müller, G. and Glass, A. (1926). Diseases of the Dog and their Treatment. Alexander Eger., Chicago. Nieschulz, O. and Wawo-Roentoe, F. K. (1930). Uber die von Zecken. Zentralbl. f, Bakt. Abt. orig., 115, 486-488. Nuttall, George H. F. (1913-14). Observations on the Biology of Ixodidae. Part I. Parasi- tology, 6, 69-70. Patton, W. S. and Cragg, F. W. (1913). A Textbook of Medical Entomology. Christian Litera- ture Society for India, London, Madras and Calcutta. Rao, M. Anant Narayan (1926). Piroplasma gibsoni Patton, 1910. Ind. Journ. Med. Res., 14, 785-800. Sharif, M. (1928). A Revision of the Indian Ixodidae with Special Reference to the Collection in the Indian Museum. R ec. Ind. Mus., 30, 217-344. Symons, T. H. and Patton, W. S. (1912). Report on an Outbreak of Canine Piroplasmosis due to Piroplasma gibsoni (Patton) among the Hounds of the Madras Hunt, together with some Observations on the Treatment of the Disease with Salvarsan. Ann. Trop. Med. & Parasit., 6, 361-367. Wakely, A. V. T. (1930). Canine Piroplasmosis or Tick Fever in Dogs. Published by the Masters of Foxhounds Association of India. Williams, W. (1904). The Principles and Practice of Veterinary Surgery. Baillière, Tindall & Cox, London.
SELECTED ARTICLES THE EFFECT OF CLIMATE ON THE COMPOSITION OF PASTURE PLANTS.* BY A. E. V. RICHARDSON, M.A., D.Sc. Waite Agricultural Research Institute, South Australia. Recent investigations (1) (2) have shown that the mineral and protein content of pasture plants vary widely according to (a) species, (b) growth stage, (c) soil type, (d) fertilisers. Different species grown in pure cultures under similar controlled soil condi- tions and harvested at a definite stage (flowering) show wide variations in mineral and protein content. Growth stage exercises a dominating influence on both the nitrogen and mineral content of pasture species. The composition of individual species grown on different soils tends to follow the major differences in the available supply of nutrients in each soil type. The composition of a species in any given climatic region will therefore be dependent upon the fertility of the soil. The application of fertilisers, particularly nitrogenous and soluble phosphatic fertilisers, has a marked effect on the protein and phosphate content of a species. This effect is more marked on soils low in nitrogen or phosphate than on soils rich in these nutrients. The precise influence of the climatic factors on the composition of pasture has not been determined. Apart from the influence of soil type, stage of growth, and fertilisers, it would appear that pasture species grown in tropical and sub-tropical climates are lower in protein and in soluble ash than those in temperate regions. The Rowett Research Institute has analysed samples from many pastures in Britain and from many Empire sources. Godden's (3) conclusions on the composi- tion of British pastures are summarised in the following table:EFFECT OF CLIMATE ON COMPOSITION OF PASTURE PLANTS 365 Aiyer and Kayasth (4) in India conclude that, though the grasses grown on rich black soils are richer in mineral nutrients than those grown on light soils, the grasses of both areas are poor in phosphoric acid and lime compared with British pastures, and that they are very deficient in nitrogen. The silica free ash of the species investigated ranged from 2.77 to 3.69 per cent. on the black soils, and those on light soils from 1.19 to 1.69 per cent. The corresponding range for phosphoric acid was .18 to .21 for black soils, and .035 to .073 for the light soils. The mean content of grasses from thirteen centres was .55 per cent. nitrogen, .187 per cent. for P2O5, and 3.04 per cent. for soluble ash. The Government Chemist for the Sudan (5) states that the chemical examina- tion of fodder grasses grown in the Sudan showed a low mineral content when compared with European pastures. The most striking deficiencies are in nitrogen and phosphorus, the average being only 40 per cent. and 50 per cent. respectively of that of a good pasture. All grasses in the White Nile Province showed a marked phosphate deficiency. Follett-Smith (6) states that in an investigation at Waranama, British Guiana, seven pasture species from Savannah areas were markedly deficient in silica free ash, phosporic acid and nitrogen. The silica free ash ranged from .83 per cent. to 4.9 per cent., with an average value of 2.3 per cent., the phosphate content from .01 per cent. to 15 per cent., with an average value of .08 per cent., and a nitrogen content ranging from .5 per cent. to 1.31 per cent., with a mean value of .73 per cent. The samples were collected during the rainy season, and Follett-Smith stated that the phosphate content would probably be even lower during the dry season. In an unpublished report to the Rowett Research Institute natural pastures from the Samaru district (Nigeria) average .13 per cent. P205. The pasture from seven- teen other centres in Northern Nigeria showed an average content as follows366 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [III, IV. Brunnich (9) analysed a large number of grasses from the pastoral areas in sub-tropical Qeensland, where the rainfall has a marked summer incidence. Thirty- eight samples of pasture grasses of various species, taken mostly in the growing stage, gave a mean value of 1.5 per cent. nitrogen and .46 per cent. phosphoric acid. Forty samples of old grass from similar areas gave mean values of .56 per cent. nitro- gen and .16 per cent. phosporic acid. Four samples of grass hay conserved in stacks, gave values of 1.1 per cent. for nitrogen and .336 per cent. for phosphoric acid. The mean values for fifteen samples of Mitchell and Flinders grass taken in various centres in Western Queensland during a droughty period in 1927 wereEFFECT OF CLIMATE ON COMPOSITION OF PASTURE PLANTS 367 on the one hand, and rate of growth on the other. We may consider the latter aspect first. In tropical and sub-tropical climates the growth of pasture is rapid and frequently the plant approaches maturity a few months after the onset of the wet season. In cool temperate or winter rainfall climates growth proceeds much more slowly and the reproductive stage is reached only after many months of slow vegetative growth. This might be interpreted as an effect of temperature on carbon assimilation ; the rate of carbon assimilation, and hence the rate of growth within certain limits increases with temperature. The amount of carbon assimi- lated per unit leaf area need not, however, alter, unless there is an alteration in the ratio of leaf area to total dry weight. The actual facts are as yet undetermined. Another habitat factor that may affect the growth rate is the length of day. It is known that short-day types of plants are found in tropical regions and long- day types in polar and cold temperate regions (13), and Auchter and Harley (14) have shown that in temperate regions the pasture plants are of a type that form reproductive organs only during periods of long days. Moreover, Tincker (15) has shown that the long-day types of plants may be kept in the vegetative stage by exposing them to short-day conditions. While the length of day is known to have a complex effect on the growth and development of the plant, we do not know the precise relationship it bears to carbon assimilation in the pasture plants under consideration. We may turn now to the question of mineral uptake. This process is known to follow a fundamentally different course from that of carbon assimilation. Thus, Richardson, Trumble, and Shapter (2) have shown that in pasture plants in South Australia, the rate of absorption of nitrogen and phosphoric acid, i.e., total amount absorbed in unit time, is much greater in the early vegetative stages than the rate of synthesis of organic matter; nitrogen and phosphoric acid are utilised in con- siderable amount during the tillering and root establishment charaterising the early phase of development. After this early tillering stage, the rate of absorption falls rapidly. On the other hand, the rate of carbon assimilation, i.e., the total amount of carbon assimilation in unit time, is dependent, apart from temperature, light and carbon dioxide supply, mainly upon the area of green leaf surface and as this normally increases till the approach of flowering, the rate of carbon assimilation correspondingly increases and attains a maximum shortly before this stage. Thus the maximum rate of nitrogen and phosphorus absorption on the one hand, and carbon assimilation on the other, occur at two different periods of the plant's deve-
368 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, IV. lopment. As a consequence, the percentage of nitrogen and phosphorus, expressed in terms of dry matter, gradually falls from a maximum value in the earliest vege- tative stage to a minimum value at maturity. The amount of nitrogen and phos- phorus absorbed by a gramineous pasture plant is limited by the amount that can be rendered available by the soil during the vegetative phase. If nitrogen is available and soil moisture conditions are favourable tillering proceeds to the limit of the available nitrogen supply and to a lesser extent to the limit of the available phosphate supply. In temperate regions and winter rainfall climates a long period of slow vegetative growth precedes the reproductive phase, and it is probable that under such conditions the normal pasture could secure the necessary nitrogen and minerals from the soil at a sufficiently rapid rate to keep pace with the somewhat slow photo- synthetic activity of the plant except on the poorest types of soil, and except during late spring or early summer when the flush of growth occurs. An application of nitrogen just prior to this stage normally increases both the yield of dry matter and the protein content of the herbage in Britsh pastures. In tropical and sub-tropical regions of summer rainfall and winter drought, growth commences with the onset of the wet season towards midsummer, and is exceedingly rapid from the outset on account of high temperatures and favourable soil humidity and the demands of the pasture for nitrogen and phosphate are correspondingly great. Very little is known of the rate at which nitrification or denitrification proceeds in pasture land under tropical conditions, or of the precise effects of. comparatively heavy tropical rains and occasional periods of drought on the available nitrogen and phosphate supply of the soil. It is possible that the demands of the rapidly growing pasture for nitrogen and phosphorus may, for various reasons, exceed the rate at which supplies are made available in the soil, in which case, the amount of tillering will be adjusted to the available nitrogen supply. Photosynthetic activity, however, on account of high temperature and favour- able light conditions continues at a relatively high level under tropical and sub- tropical conditions, with the final result that the nitrogen and phosphorus content, and to a lesser extent the silica-free ash content, expressed in terms of dry matter produced, will be relatively low. It is possible, therefore, that the explanation may be found in terms of differ- ence in the effect of the two contrasting types of climate on the uptake of nitrogen, phosphorus and other minerals on the one hand and assimilation of carbon on the other, the carbon-nitrogen ratio tending to be high in tropical and sub-tropical climates, and low in the temperate and winter rainfall climates.
EFFECT OF CLIMATE ON COMPOSITION OF PASTURE PLANTS 369 REFERENCES. 1. Orr, J. B. Minerals in pastures and their relation to Animal Nutrition. (Lewis, London), 1929. 2. Richardson, A. E. V., Trumble, H. C. and Shapter, R. E. Factors affecting the mineral content of pastures. Bull. 49, Council for Sci. & Ind. Research, Melbourne. 3. Godden, W. Journal of Agric. Sci., 1926,16, 78. 4. Aiyer, A. R. P. and Kayasth, R. N. Mineral composition of fodders of the Central Provin- ces and Berar. Agriculture and Livestock in India, 1931,1, 526-532. 5. Report of Sudan Government Chemist. Tropical Agriculture, Trinidad, 9, 11, p. 355. 6. Follett-Smith, R. R. Agricultural Journal, British Guiana, 1930, 3, 142-159; 7. Husband, A. D. and Taylor, A. P. Journal of Agriculture, Southern Rhodesia, 1931, 154-169. 8. Henrici, M. 16th Report of the Director of Veterinary Services, South Africa, pp. 435-499. 9. Brunnich, F. Annual Reports of Department of Agriculture & Stock, Queensland, 1927- 28; 1928-29. 10. Rowett Research Institute.A GENERAL REVIEW OF THE INHERITANCE OF WOOL CHARACTERS IN SHEEP.* BY WILLIAM C. MILLER, (Institute of Animal Genetics, Edinburgh). INTRODUCTION. It is very desirable in considering the inheritance of the physical characteris- tics of wool to realize very clearly that wool-fibres as produced owe their characters partly to the basic genetic constitution of the animal, whilst they are partly a more or less accurate reflection of the environmental influences to which the sheep have been subjected from birth to shearing, or between successive shearings. For the full expression of the potentialities of the hereditary constitution of the sheep, environmental influences must obviously operate. Different environments can, within limits, modify the expression of the genetic constitution of sheep, for wool- production, but genetic constitution, being fixed, cannot be changed by environ- mental agencies. The Merino sheep, kept in the damp temperate conditions of a British sheep farm, grows wool which still has certain Merino characteristics, but it is widely different from the wool which the same sheep grows, for example, in Australia or in the phosphorus-deficient areas of South Africa. The sheep upon a deficient diet INHERITANCE OF WOOL-CHARACTERS IN SHEEP 371 2. The females of the P1 generation should be of the same age 372 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, IV. since this transition is effected earlier in some individuals and breeds than in others, it is highly necessary to make physical examinations upon a fleece which represents growth between successive shearing-dates separated by 12 months. It is very probable that many of the conflicting results recorded are due to a neglect of these considerationsINHERITANCE OF WOOL-CHARACTERS IN SHEEP 373 Standardized environmental conditions have been shown by many workers to be essential in any experiment where wool-characters are involved, and this is of such common knowledge that it requires no further emphasis. Spöttel (1929), Knoblich (1926), Seholz (1927), and others have discussed the importance of environ- mental conditions at considerable length and may be consulted. It will be desirable to review in brief such published results as have a bearing on the inheritance of those wool-characters which have been studied. It will be noted that there are in some instances opposite or different results reported by different workers who deal with the same quality or characteristic. Apart from experimental error, this may be taken to indicate divergent modes of inheritance in different breeds or crosses. There is no reason, for example, why length of wool-fibre should not behave as an incomplete dominant in one particular cross-breeding experiment, whilst in another, where different breeds are used, it may exhibit the characteristics of blended inheritance. INHERITANCE OF WOOL FINENESS. In a general way it has long been known that by crossing fine-wooled with coarse-wooled sheep, the F1 will exhibit one of two wool-types: (1) it will carry markedly mixed wool in which fibres characteristic of each parent may be found in varying proportions; or (2) the wool will be of a fineness intermediate between parental types. "Where the cross is made between a fine-wooled breed and one with a mixed hairy type of fleece, e.g. in the Merino × Scottish Blackface reported by the British Research Association for the Woollen and Worsted Industries (1922, et seq.), the F1 shows a mixed type of fleece. Where the two parental breeds are each possessed of fleeces without great variability in fineness, the progeny shows intermediate characteristics. Bailey (1914) reported intermediate inheritance in fineness in the Merino 374 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, IV. F1 possessed the mixed fleece approaching the Karakul, and he concludes that pro- bably not more than two factors are involved. Spöttel and Tänzer (1922) point out that Adametz did not pay sufficient attention to the variability of the parental breeds. Kronacher (1924) analysed wool from a Mele flock of 75 head. Merino wool is class AA ; Leicester wool is class C, D, E; 40 per cent. of Meles fell into class A, 29 per cent. into class B, and 31 per cent. into class C. He found no constant intermediate type, as had been postulated by Thilo (1922); rather is there definite segregation, and a polymeric basis appears probable. Terho (1923) obtained the following figures in analysing shoulder samples from parental breeds, Meles, etc. 382 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, IV. The determination of the number of wool-fibres growing upon a unit area of skin has not yet been sufficiently studied to permit of definite conclusions being drawn. Difficulties in securing accurate samples have been great, and until recently there has not been available a technique free from serious objections. Burns and Miller (1931) describe two methods which are calculated to overcome the more serious objections raised against some of the earlier methods and which have given satisfactory results up to date. There has not yet been time, however, to use these extensively in experiments on the inheritance of fibre population-density. Preliminary results, however, support the hypothesis that with certain excep- tions (of which crosses involving Merino parents appear most important) number of fibres per unit area is inherited in an intermediate manner. INHERITANCE OF KEMP FIBRES. During recent years the occurrence of kemp fibres in the wool of sheep has formed the subject of numerous studies (Bliss, 1926; Duerden, 1926 ; Roberts, 1926; Blyth, 1926 ; and Hirst and King, 1926). The precise nature of the kemp fibre can now be defined and it is important to differentiate between it and the medullated coarser wool-fibre, such as is commonly found in Romney wool. Kemp fibres, as they occur in domesticated sheep, represent a remnant of the coarse, hairy, outer-coat of the primitive sheep. As typically encountered, the kemp fibre is short, thick, rigid, and finer at tip and root than along the shaft; it possesses a fairly regular wave or crimp in one plane only, is extremely brittle, has a ' dead white ' or chalky appearance, and is medullated except for the short fine tip and, when shed naturally, for a portion of the proximal part of the shaft. In many breeds, if not in all, kemp has the further characteristic that its period of growth and the time of its shedding occur independently of the other constituent fibres in the fleece. Some kemp fibres are cut off at shearing time; others may have already been shed but are still entangled amongst the wool-fibres of the fleece ; whilst some are shed and fall to the ground before the wool-fibres have grown long enou gh to retain them. Owing to its lack of elasticity and the difficulties met with in attempting to dye it, the presence of kemp in wool for manufacturing purposes is a decided disadvan- tage. There have been strong reasons for considering that differing degrees of kempi- ness are inherited. Barker (1931) admirably summarizes these as follows :376 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, IV. In a paper on Lincoln INHERITANCE OF WOOL-CHARACTERS IN SHEEP 377 a bimodal type of distribution of the figures for mean lengths in the long-wooled breed (Border Leicester), with a more or less normal dispersion of frequencies in the Cheviot. In the succeeding generations all parental types are found, but in the F1 a proportion of animals is encountered with a bimodal distribution similar to the parental long-wool type. His conclusions support the findings of Davenport and Ritzman, that wool-length and fineness are dependent in inheritance upon multiple factors, rather than upon any simple Mendelian type of inheritance. His results also tend to show that follicular activity is dominantly inherited in direct ratio to the length of wool produced; this may be expressed by the statement that long wool is incompletely dominant to short wool, the length depending upon a multiple factor system. In a series of observations carried out in this Institute, in crosses between ewes of the Scottish Mountain Blackface breed, with rams of Derbyshire, Gritstone, Cheviot, Border Leicester, Lincoln, Southdown, South African Merino, and Welsh Mountain rams, we have found that the F1 animals of both sexes, from the mating of fine-wooled breeds (Merino and Southdown) to the Blackface, show very mixed wool in which there is little uniformity in length or fineness, but in which the character of fineness is generally intermediate between the parental types. Great differences were shown between different F 1 animals although the parental ewes were themselves fairly uniform and of the same wool-type.* In back-crosses to Merino 378 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, IV. Where there is great divergency in fineness between parental types, little uniformi- ty could be expected, but the use of rams of the long, lustre-wool type gave a very uniform generation. (Full results of this work will be published later.) INHERITANCE OF LENGTH OF WOOL-FIBRE. Mean length of wool-fibre in all breeds except those with a very even staple is difficult to determine. In breeds where the fleece has a typically pointed staple, which includes all the long-wool, lustre-wool, mixed-wool, and many of the inter- mediate types, the staple is composed of fibres of varying lengths, the tip being formed by the longest fibres. In such a staple, when the fibres of which it is composed are measured, it is found that typically they show a fairly normal frequency-dispersion curve, with considerable variation between different staples. When staple is considerably thicker at its base than at its tip, as in breeds which have mixed wool, the frequency-dispersion curve is likely to be bimodal with a tendency towards great irregularity, especially marked when measurements are made during the course of active wool-growth. In the Down breeds and in wool of the Merino types, where the staple is ' blocky' at the tip, mean fibre-length can be more accurately determined, but care must be exercised in obtaining representative samples. In very general terms, wool-length in crosses is intermediate between the parents'. Some authors have reported greater length to be mainly dominant to shorter length, but, since other workers using the same breeds have failed to find any evidence of dominance, it would appear that in the former cases there may have been a failure to appreciate the differences in length between first year's fleece and subsequent fleeces. Reference has already been made to this point. Among the results recorded where the inheritance of wool-length was studied in breeding experiments, the following are cited as typical examples. Thilo (1912) found Leicester INHERITANCE OF WOOL-CHARACTERS IN SHEEP 379 animals of Southdown 380 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, IV. a variation in no way related to this variation in fibre-length. Consequently, the fibres which have the fastest rate of growth in a staple produce crimps which are larger than those produced by the slower-growing fibres, and upon occasions (such as during the spring flush of grass, or when body metabolism is most active) the staple will show wider crimps than at other times. The earlier method of evaluat- ing crimping in wool by measuring the number of crimps per unit length of the staple (cm. or in.) is consequently no longer valid. (For further information see S. G. Barker, 1931.) Various authors have made records of the inheritance of number of crimps per unit length. These may be cited, although, in the light of the work mentioned above, the data presented cannot be regarded as eminently useful. Bailey (1914) in crosses of Shropshire INHERITANCE OF WOOL-CHARACTERS IN SHEEP 381 The small crimp of the merino appears to be incompletely dominant over the large crimp of the Leicester. No crimps as large as 4.8 mm. occurred in F1 though they may be observed in F2 and in back-crosses to Leicester. No suggestion is made as to the number of genes, but polymery is probable. The British Research Association for the Woollen and Worsted Industries (1925) observed in the Black- face × Kerry Hill cross an F1 of three types, viz., two parental and a third with marked wavy wool. INHERITANCE OF WEIGHT AND DENSITY OF FLEECE. In searching the literature for records of experiments which have been con- ducted in an endeavour to determine the mode of inheritance of weight of wool produced and the density of wool fibres on a unit area of skin, a considerable amount of general evidence can be produced; but there is a lack of adequate criti- cal experimentation. In most breeds of sheep there exists a degree of variation of gross fleece- weights of the order of 20 per cent. This is due to variations in actual production of clean wool occasioned by individual differences in age, size, sex, environment, and genetic constitution, to different degrees of admixture of wool with débris, soil, sand, dung, etc., and to variations in the contents of grease and moisture. Conse- quently, by weighing fleeces as they are removed from the sheep, reliable results are only obtained when large numbers are available. In most of the controlled genetic experiments reported, the numbers of sheep have been small, and mean weights for the breed or cross are not available for comparison: whilst individual fleece-weights from breeders' flocks kept under commercial conditions are difficult to obtain. For strict genetic treatment, weights of clean, scoured fleece are desirable ; a rapid means of determining the yield of clean scoured wool and a technique for determining absolute dry weights (either by direct readings or by calculation from suitable samples of conditioned wool) would be necessary. These determinations entail a great expenditure of time and considerable labour, especially where large numbers of sheep are dealt with, and the writer knows of no large-scale experi- ments where they have been recorded. From an examination of such results as have been published, from the experi- ences of practical breeders, and from careful observations made at this Institute, it is permissible to conclude that gross weights of fleece follow the general rules of intermediate inheritance. This applies to observations made within a breed or flock as well as to observations made in cross-breeding experiments in which gross fleece- weights in the parents were widely different.
382 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, IV. The determination of the number of wool-fibres growing upon a unit area of skin has not yet been sufficiently studied to permit of definite conclusions being drawn. Difficulties in securing accurate samples have been great, and until recently there has not been available a technique free from serious objections. Burns and Miller (1931) describe two methods which are calculated to overcome the more serious objections raised against some of the earlier methods and which have given satisfactory results up to date. There has not- yet been time, however, to use these extensively in experiments on the inheritance of fibre population-density. Preliminary results, however, support the hypothesis that with certain excep- tions (of which crosses involving Merino parents appear most important) number of fibres per unit area is inherited in an intermediate manner. INHERITANCE OF KEMP FIBRES. During recent years the occurrence of kemp fibres in the wool of sheep has formed the subject of numerous studies (Bliss, 1926 ; Duerden, 1926; Roberts, 1926; Blyth, 1926 ; and Hirst and King, 1926). The precise nature of the kemp fibre can now be defined and it is important to differentiate between it. and the medullated coarser wool-fibre, such as is commonly found in Romney wool. Kemp fibres, as they occur in domesticated sheep, represent a remnant of the coarse, hairy, outer-coat of the primitive sheep. As typically encountered, the kemp fibre is short, thick, rigid, and finer at tip and root than along the shaft; it possesses a fairly regular wave or crimp in one plane only, is extremely brittle, has a ' dead white' or chalky appearance, and is medullated except for the short fine tip and, when shed naturally, for a portion of the proximal part of the shaft. In many breeds, if not in all, kemp has the further characteristic that its period of growth and the time of its shedding occur independently of the other constituent fibres in the fleece. Some kemp fibres are "cut off at shearing time; others may have already been shed but are "still entangled amongst the wool-fibres of the fleece ; whilst some are shed and fall to the ground before the wool-fibres have grown long enough to retain them. Owing to its lack of elasticity and the difficulties met with in attempting to dye it, the presence of kemp in wool for manufacturing purposes is a decided disadvan- tage. There have been strong reasons for considering that differing degrees of kempi- ness are inherited. Barker (1931) admirably summarizes these as follows :INHERITANCE OF WOOL-CHARACTERS IN SHEEP 383 lamb and the proportion of kemp subsequently developed in the adult fleece. The type of birth-coat shown by the lamb is a matter of inheritance. 2. If sheep are compared which have just the same type of birth-coat, differ- ences in kempiness may be discovered, and data are at present being accumulated to discover how far, in such a case these different degrees of kempiness are inherit- ed. This work goes to show that inheritance is undoubtedly the important factor. 3. It is easily possible to find in one and the same flock, sheep of the same age, kept under precisely the same conditions, which will show absolutely different amounts of kemp in the coat. 4. Sheep kept under artificial conditions, for example, sheep that are being fed for show, if the coat was originally of a kempy nature, still preserve this feature. 5. Individual sheep examined over a period of years do not show any large differences between the proportions of kemp in different years. 6. Even in pure Merino flocks a sheep will very occasionally occur with a coat that is quite full of kemp. This is a good example of what is popularly termed ' reversion', a purely hereditary phenomenon. 7. Those breeders who have the greatest experience of intensive sheep hus- bandry, for example, the Merino breeders of Australia, have no doubt whatsoever that kempiness is a matter of breeding. To sum up, therefore, it may be confidently stated that differences in degree of kempiness are predominantly a reflection of hereditary differences, and that if environmental conditions do cause any effect, that effect is very small in compari- son. The theory that lowland breeds of sheep, kept under adverse conditions on the mountains, would rapidly develop kemp, has nothing to support it. It may be added that the complementary theory that kempy mountain breeds, when kept under low-ground conditions, would grow wool free from kemp has been shown on numerous occasions to be erroneous. Bryant (1933, unpublished) has shown that when the degree of kempiness in a Scottish Blackface ram used for breeding purposes is determined upon a percen- tage-weight basis, the figures obtained are significantly correlated with the degree of kempiness exhibited by his progeny. His analysis of the inheritance of kemp in this breed indicates that there are probably major and minor factors involved, the former of which can readily be manipulated by practical breeding, though the minor factors are more refractory. If this conclusion is substantiated, a means will be at hand whereby in the Blackface breed kemp can be reduced to negligible proportions, though absolute eradication may not be possible. From the work of
384 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, IV. Roberts and White (1930) with Welsh mountain sheep there is strong evidence that degrees of kempiness are similarly inherited in that breed, and as other breeds of sheep form subjects of study there is every reason to believe that similar principles of inheritance will apply equally to them. It is necessary carefully to differentiate between the true kemp fibre and coarse, sometimes hairy, medullated fibres which are seen particularly in britch wool from various breeds of sheep. No references to generic work on the inheri- tance of these fibres have been found, but Dry (1931) has studied their occurrence in New Zealand (mainly in Romneys), whilst; a technique which has for its aim the rapid and easy estimation of the proportion of medullated fibres in a sample of the wool of New Zealand Romney sheep, has recently been reported by Elphick (1932). This is called the 'benzol test'. It consists of examining a staple of wool from a given sheep by the naked eye after immersion in benzol, which has a refractive index practically the same as that of non-medullated wool. The air- content in a medullated fibre, having a refractive index higher than that of the solid wool-fibre enables these medullated fibres to be readily seen by the naked eye. It is stated that the technique is being applied to breeding flocks with a view to determining the mode of inheritance of medullated fibre, but to date no results are available. INHERITANCE OF CERTAIN SECONDARY WOOL-CHARACTERS. In addition to the more important characteristics of the fleece which have been discussed, there are certain minor characters which have been studied. Some of these are of very considerable practical importance, and deserve more attention than has already been paid to them. Such recorded work as is available will be briefly considered. ' Chalk-face' in Merinos.INHERITANCE OF WOOL-CHARACTERS IN SHEEP 385 Warwick (1931) and Warwick and Bell (1929) carried out experiments to determine the mode of inheritance of chalky fibres. They obtained results as shown in the following tables from Warwick (1931) :386 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, IV. He concludes this ram to have been homozygous and soft hair to be a domi- nant character. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] He concludes that this ram was heterozygous. Four other rams investigated proved to be heterozygous; with soft-haired ewes they gave a total of 31 soft- haired, 5 doubtful, and 5 stiff-haired offspring. From these and other data, Wriedt concludes that the character for soft hair is based upon a simple Mendelian dominant factor. Head furnishings.INHERITANCE OF WOOL-CHARACTERS IN SHEEP 387 The mode of inheritance of head-furnishings is consequently of considerable importance. Wood (1905-6, 1908-10) found that in F1 animals from Suffolk (bare-headed) and Dorset Horn sheep (wooly heads) the amount of wool on the forehead was more or less intermediate between that of the parental types. In F2 and subse- quent generations segregation was marked, but no definite proportions could be given. Thilo (1922) reports similar results in the work carried out in the founda- tion of the Neuenkirchen Meles sheep from English Leicester (tufted) 388 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, IV. DISCUSSION. It has been frequently pointed out by various authors that no simple Mendi- lian approach is applicable to a study of the various characters which together constitute the fleece. Wool-production by the skin of the sheep depends upon a multifactor system, whether the fleece is considered as a unit, or whether the study includes only one, or a combination, of its various physical attributes. The marked exception to this is the character of colour. The exhaustive studies made by Dry (1924, 1926, 1927), Roberts (1924, 1926 (a) 1926 (d), 1927, 1928, 1931), Roberts and Jenkins (1926), Roberts and White (1930), Vassin (1928), Ada- metz (1917), and many others show that fleece-colours in sheep are inherited in epistatic series. Colour has, however, not been considered in this paper and will not now be further discussed. Where only one wool-character has been studied, the bulk of the evidence from widely divergent sources shows that with few exceptions the character in question is exhibited by the progeny to degree which is intermediate between the parental types. It is also instructive to note that, in cross-breeding experiments in which several fleece-characters have been studied simultaneously, the interme- diate characterization of the type of wool grown by the F1 generation is constant- ly stressed. The practical sheep-breeder both in Britain and in the wool-producing coun- tries of the Empire has conducted operations along lines which are in accordance with this principle of intermediate inheritance, and has obtained most remarkable results. That individuals do occur, especially sires, which transmit to their pro- geny more of their own fleece-characters than would be expected were inheritance of these always strictly intermediate, is not disputed. But a theory of general intermediate inheritance is able to accommodate such prepotent animals as these. The degrees of homozygosity for any given character must vary, and it is readily possible by suitable selection to concentrate the factors for one or another fleece- quality in a strain or in individual animals. Where such concentration has pro- ceeded to a degree greatly in excess of the general average for the breed, it is to be expected that progeny will exhibit the quality under consideration to a more marked extent than will the average animal. In almost every breed of domesti- cated sheep there has been one outstandingly good animal during recent times, and in some breeds there have been several. At sales, competition for them or for their progeny has been fierce, and remarkable prices have been paid. In subsequent breeding they have impressed their characters upon their progeny in a manner which makes their recognition easy. It is interesting to speculate whether such individuals may not have been mutations, but in the absence of any proofs, speculation is undesirable.
INHERITANCE OF WOOL-CHARACTERS IN SHEEP 389 If those physical characters of wool which have been investigated are considered collectively in inheritance, there strongly emerges the suggestion that it will be unprofitable in the present state of our knowledge to attempt an analysis of the fleece of the sheep upon a basis of individual genetic factors ; rather does it seem desirable to accept as a working hypothesis a multifactor basis for each physical character of wool. It is permissible to consider that in the great majority of cases the phenotype behaves in breeding as a genotype, even though it may not be identical with it. Policies of breeding which aim at eradication of undesirable features, and those which are drawn up to give effect to a desire or need for improvement, may safely be framed upon this principle, which is, after all, that which the practical breeder has endeavoured to follow during the past. Improve- ment proceeding towards an ideal defined type of wool must be progressive, and the alert sheep-owner, in a position to recognize the outstandingly good animal, will seize every opportunity to make the best use of its potentialities. SUMMARY. 1. Desiderata for genetic experiments where wool-characters are to be studied are enumerated and discussed. 2. A review of literature dealing with the inheritance of fineness, length of fibre, crimp, fleece-weight and density, kemp, and certain accessory attributes of the fleece, is given. Results of the writer's work carried out in the Institute of Animal Genetics are included, and particular difficulties experienced in obtaining reliable data are summarized. 3. The inheritance of wool-characters in general is discussed and conclusions drawn from the works cited are given. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. I am indebted to the Imperial Bureau of Animal Genetics, and in particular to Miss M. V. Cytovich, for assistance given in searching literature and making up the Bibliography. To Dr. J. E. Nichols and to Mr. D. M. Bryant I am greatly indebted for allowing me to use some of their results which have not yet been published. BIBLIOGRAPHY.1 Adametz, L. 1917. Studien Über die Mendelsche Vercrbung der wichtigsten Rassenmerkmale der Karakulschafe bei Reinzucht und Kreuzung mit Rambouillets. Bibliotheca Genctica, 1, 258 pp. 390 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, IV Adametz, L. 1920. Zur Vererbung der Wollcharaktere. Deut. Landw. Presse, p. 81. INHERITANCE OF WOOL-CHARACTERS IN SHEEP 391 Elphick, B. L. 1932. The Detection and Estimation of Medullated Fibre in New Zealand Romney Fleeces. J. Text. Inst., 23 (12). Ewart, J. C.1919. The Intercrossing of Sheep and the Evolution of New Varieties of Wool. Scot J. Agric., 2, 159-69. Hill, J. A. 1923-4, 34th Ann. Rpt., Wyoming Agric. Exp. Sta. Hirst, H. R., and King, A. T. 1926. Some Characteristics of Mohair Kemp. J. Text. Inst., 17, T. 296-T. 303. Horlacher, L. J., and Good, E. S. 1922. Breeding Experiments with Kentucky Mountain Ewes. Kent. Agric. Exp. Sta., Bull. No. 243,199 pp. Ivanov, M. F., and Belehov, P. P. 1923. Inheritance of Quality of Wool by F1 from Crosses of Various Breeds with Lincolns (t. t.) Chapli Zoot Exp. Sta., Bull. No. 3,7-48. Ivanov, M. F., Belehov, P. P., and Greben, L. K. 1931. Results of Inter-breeding Coarse-wooled Lincoln : the F2 (t. t.). Chapli Zoot. Exp. Sta., Bull. No. 6, 15-44. Ivanov, M. F., etal. 1932. F1 Hybrids from Lincoln 392 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, IV. Pazzini, F. 1915. Contributo allo studio del miglioramento delle pecore nella Media Valle del Tevero. Le stazione sperim. agrar. Italiane, 48, Pucci, C. 1915. Alcuue esperienze sulle leggi Mendeliane della eredita. II. Moderno Zooiatro, 4,145-53. Roberts, J. A. F. 1924. Colour Inheritance in the Sheep. I. Black Colour and Badger-face Pattern in Welsh Mountain Sheep. J. Genet., 14, 367-74. INHERITANCE OF WOOL-CHARACTERS IN SHEEP 393 Vassin, B. 1928. The Genetics of the Sheep. I. Inheritance of colour and pattern (t. t.). Trans. Centr. Stat. Genet. Farm. Animals, No. 2, 67 pp. Warwick, B. L. 1931. Breeding Experiments with Sheep and Swine. Ohio Agric. Exp. Sta., Bull. No. 480. Warwick, B. L., and Bell, D. S. 1929. Inheritance of Chalk Face in Merino Sheep. Proc. Amer. Soc. Anim. Prod., 38-9. Wood, T. B. 1905-06. Note on the Inheritance of Horns and Face-colour in Sheep. J. Agric. Sci., 1, 364-5. NOTES The International Yearbook of Agricultural Statistics, 1931-32. The International Institute of Agriculture at Rome has recently published the 1931-32 edition of the " International Yearbook of Agricultural Statistics ". This volume of about 800 pages is the result of the most extensive and detailed inquiry made in the domain of international agricultural statistics and constitutes a work of the greatest importance to all those who are interested in questions having a direct or indirect relation to production and commerce of agricultural products. In the first part of the Yearbook are classified the figures for area and popula- tion in the years nearest to 1927 and 1931 for 208 countries : the presentation of these figures throws light upon the world situation from the geographical, political and demographical points of view during the post-war period. The second part is composed of a series of tables comprising for nearly 50 countries the available data concerning the uses for which, the total area is employed, the apportionment of cultivated areas between the different crops, agricultural production, numbers of the different kinds of livestock and the products derived from them. In the tables constituting the third part of the volume, have been indicated for nearly 40 agricultural products, the area, production and yield per acre in each country during the five years 1923-27 and during each of the years from 1928 to 1931. For each kind of livestock all available figures in the different countries have been grouped for the years 1927 to 1931. A large part of the volume is devoted to statistics of the commercial movement of 43 vegetable products and 13 products of animal origin. The figures published relate to the imports and exports during the calendar years and for the cereals also during the commercial seasons. It may be added that the tables of production and commerce not only specify details for each country but also the totals for the different continents and hemispheres and for the whole world, allowing the formation of a general idea of the changes taking place during the periods under consideration in the area under crop, quantities harvested and the commercial movement in each product. The part devoted to prices contains the weekly quotations of 25 agricultural products on the principal world markets for the period January 1927 to July 1932. In the freights section will be found the quotations for the transport of wheat, maize and rice on the most important shipping routes, and in the section reserved for fertilizers and chemical products useful in agriculture are published statistics of production, trade, consumption and prices for 15 products. In the Appendix (394)
NOTES 395 have been brought together special chapters on the distribution of agricultural holdings according to their size and mode of tenure. The Forestry Statistics have been extended and developed and will be published in a separate volume under the title of: International Year-book of Forestry Statistics. The Maynard-Ganga Ram Prize. In 1925 the late Sir Ganga Ram, Kt., C. I. E., M. V . O., R. B., Lahore, with that generosity for which he was so well known, handed over to the Punjab Government a sum of Rs. 25,000 for the endowment of a prize of the value of Rs. 3,000 to be called the Maynard-Ganga Ram Prize and to be awarded every three years, for a discovery, or an invention, or a new practical method which will tend to increase, agricultural production in the Punjab on a paying basis. The competition is open to all throughout the world. Government servants are also eligible to compete for it. Applications for the next award were invited by the 31st December, 1932. The response was, however, poor, and it has been decided, by the Managing Committee of the above-mentioned prize that the award should be postponed for another year and that further applications should reach the Director of Agriculture, Punjab, Lahore, on or before the 31st December, 1933. * * * * * * Applications are invited for " The Maynard-Ganga Ram Prize " of the value of Rs. 3,000 which will be awarded for a discovery, or an invention, or a new practical method tending to increase agricultural production in the Punjab on a paying basis. The prize is open to all, irrespective of caste, creed or nationality and Government servants are also eligible for it. Essays and theses are not eligible for competition and applicants should prove that some part of their discovery, invention, etc., is the result of work done after the prize was founded in 1925. The Managing Committee reserves to itself the right of witholding or postponing the prize, if no satisfactory achievement is reported to it. All applications in competition for the next award should reach the Director of Agriculture, Punjab, Lahore, on or before the 31st December 1933.
CORRESPONDENCE. AN UNUSUAL CASE OF CHRONIC RINDERPEST WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO THE CARRIER PROBLEM IN THIS DISEASE. To The EDITOR, The Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry. DEAR SIR, 1. The allegation in this article* that chronic cases of Rinderpest can and do occur is of such far-reaching importance that I have been led to peruse the article most closely to see if all the cases quoted can be accepted in the way they were read by the authors or if they can be explained on the basis of other suppositions. 2. Taking the article in its references to cattle : from page 365 to the top of page 368 no evidence of the existence of carriers is adduced. Evidence is produced, merely, that Indian cattle can suffer from Rinderpest, practically without exhibition of clinical symptoms. 3. Coming next (P. 368) to the introduction of Rinderpest to Belgium and Brazil by the agency of Indian cattle there is no evidence that excludes the existence of a series of cases on boardship, particularly when we know that these cattle were, or were said to be, highly resistant to the disease and that such Indian cattle can suffer from the disease practically without showing symptoms. 4. Coming (P. 368) to Delpi's 1930 record it would appear that the calves in question were A. infected en route through food or water, B. spent the incubation period and course (in series possibly) on board the canoes and arrived in the recovery stage or C. the infection was not due to them at all but occurred subsequent- to their arrival. B is the most likely explanation and necessitates no carriers. * An Unusual case of Chronic Rinderpest with special reference to the Carrier Problem in this Disease, by Capt S. C. A. Datta, B. Sc., M. R. C. V. S., and V. R. Rajagopalan, G. M. V. C., Published in the Ind. Jour : Vety. Sci. and An. Hus. Vol. II, Pt. 4, pp 357CORRESPONDENCES 397 5. Taking next (p. 369) Schern's cases, there is no proof that all the animals reacted to their original inoculation, but instead proof that 34 head did not. It may, and does, sound extraordinary to suppose, as 1 am here doing, that inocula- tion of virulent blood may not cause reaction in susceptible animals but it happened during Schern's work and I shall quote my own experience when in Keyna Colony. While I was in charge of a certain large quarantine station I saw natural cases of Rinderpest amongst cattle which had (twice as far as I remember now) undergone serum simultaneous inoculation some months and about 6 to 7 weeks previously. These might have been considered as chronic cases by some. On a virulent blood test of cattle in the quarantine station, thereafter, twelve head died of Rinderpest. All this was due to the fact that the quarantine station was too far from the centre of production of virulent blood which was therefore too old on use. Here, indeed, we had anti-serum to counteract the weak infection but Schern's virulent blood may have been still older and have reached a stage where infection was uncertain or it may have been collected before the virus maker had reached the peak of its reaction. We are not informed whether Schern's observations excluded later reaction to infection by contact or only extended over the usual period of reaction to the inoculation. Another weak spot in our information is as to whether the animals fed with organs of the inoculated animals were quite free from infection from other sources. Ruppert (2) indeed pointed out that Schern actually had Rinderpest in the neigh- bourhood of his experiment. 6. The quotation from Bliss is merely one of pure theory. 7. On page 370 dealing with Curasson's 1926 and Jacotot's 1932 work, one must either conclude that carriers do exist, though rarely, or that the experimental animals became infected from other sources. 8. In this connection I may state that I do not see that any conclusions of the nature of Curasson's or Jacotot's can be accepted if conducted in, or anywhere near, an area where the disease exists. Jacotot's one notable case (p. 371) may have been the one where infection occurred from some other source than the experiment- al one. 9. Coming next to the original case of bull No. 288 dealt with in this article. While the second bull (No. 315) inoculated from the same goat at the same time exhibited all the usual clinical symptoms of Rinderpest (terminating in recovery), bull No. 288 did not and on the contrary merely showed a temperature reaction, slight loss of appetite and some diarrhoea.
398 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, IV. Some Theileria parasites were present in its blood (and may have caused the reaction). The animal died later showing then full clinical symptoms of Rinder- pest the lesions being in the stage suggestive of recent infection and not in the stage of recovery consistent with a long-standing infection. All the case of this bull No. 288 indicates to me is proof that goat virus, being attenuated, does not necessarily infect 100 per cent. of susceptible bovines on inoculation. The reaction after inoculation, in absence of proof by subinoculation that it was due to Rinder- pest and in absence also of the pathognomic lesions of Rinderpest, cannot be accepted as having been due to that disease. Death was due to Rinderpest and apparently by subsequent infection by contact. The statement (on page 376) in the discussion " there being no room for an accidental second infection " does not appear to be correct when on discontinuation (August 27th, 1931) it was (page 373) " sent to a tin shed a few furlongs away from the main rinderpest station since this tin shed is set aside for housing all the animals that have passed through rinderpest pending eventual disposal". It did not die until 25th October, 1931. I should have imagined the conditions mentioned to have been very favourable indeed for contraction of infection by contact. The time interval was well over sufficient tor contraction of infection by this means and the full course of the disease. SUMMARY. (1) Evidence is produced that Indian cattle can suffer from Rinderpest almost without exhibition of clinical symptoms. (2) In cases where Rinderpest has been carried to great distances a series of such cases may have occurred on ship-board which would sufficiently explain the remote outbreaks without necessity of the introduction of theories as to the exist- ence of carriers. (3) Any work on Rinderpest which is designed to show that certain substances are infective must, to be acceptable, be carried out at a great distance from any known centre of infection and in an area known to be uninfected. As far as one can ascertain all previous inoculation or feeding experiments on which the evidence of chronicity of Rinderpest is based have been conducted in the near vicinity of Rinderpest infection so that the possibility of infection by contact is insufficiently excluded. (4) In the case of bull No. 288, the main subject of the paper by Capt. Datta and Mr. Rajagopalan under review, there is quite insufficient evidence that the animal reacted to Rinderpest when inoculated with goat virus.
CORRESPONDENCE 399 The case of this bull denotes, rather, that Rinderpest goat virus will not neces- sarily infect 100% of susceptible adult cattle on inoculation. REFERENCE. Datta and Rajagopalan 1933 : Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Hus- bandry, 2, 357400 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ III, IV. One has been struck time and again during this outbreak by the fact that once rinderpest was introduced into a village it spread with great rapidity among the buffaloes but showed little tendency to spread among the cattle ; a few cattle would contract rinderpest and die but the rate of spread was very slow. The dis- parity between the number of cases reported from the field in buffaloes as against cattle in the Dry Zone of Ceylon was so great that at first I was inclined to doubt the diagnosis. Personal investigation showed that there was no mistake in diag- nosis, which I confirmed by clinical examination, post-mortem examination, and by inoculation of blood into healthy animals. The difference in the rate of spread could not be explained as due to different susceptibility, as the cattle which contracted the disease, were very severely affected and the mortality almost as high as in the buffaloes. Both cattle and buffaloes grazed over the same areas and one was at a loss to explain how so few cattle became infected as compared with buffaloes. Observation of the animals leads one to suspect that biting flies (Stomoxys and Tabanid species) can under certain circumstances convey infection. I do not suggest that they act in any way as intermediate hosts nor that they carry infection over any considerable distance, but I strongly suspect that they do spread disease from animal to animal in a herd once it is introduced. The habit of the buffaloes of lying for hours in the middle of the day in closely packed groups in swamps and mud wallows would facilitate this. Stomoxys and Tabanids are very numerous in the areas I have in mind and when the buffaloes are herded together one can observe the flies passing freely from one buffalo to another. They bite so severely that small drops and driblets of blood can be observed on the skin of the buffaloes. A fly biting a buffalo on being disturbed has only to fly a distance of a foot or two to alight on another buffalo, If the first buffalo bitten is in the highly infective stage of rinderpest it is quite conceivable that that there will be sufficient virus on the proboscis of the fly to infect the second. Where biting flies are very numerous this movement from one buffalo to another can be observed to occur frequently. The cattle as compared with the buffaloes do not herd together so closely save at night. During the day they are more evenly distributed over the grazing and flies would have a much greater distance to cover to get from one animal to another. There is certainly something more to be learned about the method of spread of rinderpest under natural conditions. It often seems to spread with much greater rapidity in the field than in experiments to transmit it by simple contact. This fact taken in conjunction with the great certainty and facility with which infection can be transmitted by subcutaneous injection of virulent blood would suggest that
CORRESPONDENCE 401 possibly biting flies or other insects may play a part. The conditions under which contact experiments are carried out, namely, in bare enclosures or in sheds, may not be favourable for the presence in numbers of biting flies. These are generally most numerous on swampy grazing grounds such as the bed of a tank, at watering places, or in the neighbourhood of mud wallows. It would be of interest to know if the larger biting flies were numerous at the time Mr. Cooper's experiments were carried out, and if not, would the same experiment give different results if carried out at a time when the larger biting flies were numerous ? I notice that Capt. Datta in his article in the same Journal dismisses insect vectors as of no importante in the transmission of rinderpest, to my mind on rather insufficient evidence. He cites leeches, ticks, mosquitoes, house flies and lice, but beyond stating that Curasson had negative results with a fly (Tabanus) he does not seem to have given much consideration to the possibilities of Stomoxys and Tabanus. If Glossina can transmit infection, as Hornby thinks, I should imagine that the much larger and deeper biting Tabanus and Stomoxys could do so too. Yours faithfully, W. CRAWFORD, Government Veterinary Surgeon, Ceylon. Dated 18th February 1933.
402 Erratum to Volume III, part 3 of the Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry. Page 296, line 13 from bottomINDEX TO AUTHORS PAGE A ANANT NARAYAN RAO, M., "A Preliminary Report on the Adult Tre- matode Obtained from Cercariae indicae, XXIII, Sewell, 1922 " 317 ii THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY PAGE DATTA, S. C. A., " The Diagnosis and Treatment of Sterility in the Stallion and the Bull" . . . . . . . . 185 INDEX TO AUTHORS ii PAGE M MAHAJAN, M. R., " Bovine Nasal Granuloma (Snoring Disease of Cattle) in Hyderabad State " . . . . . . . . 346 MAROTEL, " The Best Vermifuges for the Large Intestine of the Horse " (Abstract) . . . . . . . . 309 MELLOR, G., See Datta, S. C. A . . . . . . . . 254 MILLER, WILLIAM C., "A General Review of the Inheritance of Wool- characters in sheep " . . . . . . . . 370 MOE, L. H., See Sanborn, C. E . . . . . . . . 309 O OLVER, A., " Osteoporosis in North India " . . . . . . . . 350 P PARAMESWARA AYYAR, L. S., See Anant Narayan Rao, M . . . . . . . . 321 PURVIS, G. B., "An unusual case of Chronic Rinderpest with special reference to the carrier problem in this Disease "iv THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY PAGE SEN,K. C., Haddow, J. R . . . . . . . . 149 INDEX TO SUBJECTS PAGE A Abomasum of cattle in India, two unrecorded nematodes from . . 166 Abortion, bovine contagious, chemotherapy of . . . . . . . . 271 Aeroplanes, transmission of animal diseases by . . . . . . . . 291 Agricultural Statistics, 1931-32, International Year-book of (Review) . 394 Anaplasmosis, experiments in the transmission of, by horse-flies . 309 Andropogon contortus (Spear grass), studies in seasonal variation in the mineral and nitrogen content of . . . . . . . . 65 Animal diseases, the transmission of, by aeroplanes . . . . . . . . 291 Anthelmintic treatment, some modern aspects of . . . . . . . . 311 Anthelmintic value of k amala for tapeworms in chickens . . . 211 Antibody containing protein of anti-rinderpest serum, fractional preci- pitation of . . . . . . . . 149 Anti-rinderpest serum, fractional precipitation of the anti-body contain- ing protein of . . . . . . . . 149 Ayrshire bull on Saniwal cow, cross-breeding with . . . . . . . . 325 Ayrshire bull on Scindi cow, cross-breeding with . . . . . . . . 325 B ' Bayer 205 ' (Naganol), treatment of surra in equines by . . . 85 Bihar and Orissa Veterinary College, Patna . . . . . . . . 129, 216 ' Blindness ' congenital, of calves . . . . . . . . 254 Bovine abortion, contagious, chemotherapy of . . . . . . . . 271 Bovine nasal granuloma in Hyderabad State . . . . . . . . 346 Bovine nasal schistosomiasis in the Madras Presidency . . . 29 Bull, diagnosis and treatment of sterility in . . . . . . . . 185 Bull virus cum serum method against rinderpest, duration of immunity in calves inoculated by . . . . . . . . 131 Bulls, healthy, rinderpest attacked and recovered, variation of serum proteins in . . . . . . . . 39 Bursati, etilogy of . . . . . . . . 217 C Calf-feeding, role of minerals in . . . . . . . . 174 Calves, congenital 'Blindness'of in India . . . . . . . . 254 (V)
vi THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY PAGE Calves, report on successful infection with nasal schistosomiasis in . 160 Calves inoculated by bull virus cum serum method against rinderpest, duration of immunity in . . . . . . . . 131 Calves inoculated by goat virus cum serum method against rinderpest, duration of immunity in . . . . . . . . 338 Canine piroplasmosis due to P. gibsoni, vector of . . . . . . . . 356 Capillaria bilobata, n. sp., as a parasite of cattle . . . . . . . . 166 Carbon tetrachloride and tetrachlorethylene, a comparison of . . 211, 294 Cattle diseases arid pestsINDEX TO SUBJECTS vii PAGE Cattle diseases and pestsViii THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY PAGE. E Elephant, trematode parasites of . . . . . . . . 103 Elephas indicum, trematode parasites of . . . . . . . . 103 Equines, (See Horse) . . . . . . . . 1,85, 217, 309, 350 Euparyphium malayanum Leiper 1911 . . . . . . . . 319 F Farm animals, mineral metabolism of . . . . . . . . 276 Fasciola gigantica, life-history of . . . . . . . . 120 Feeding and feeding stuffsINDEX TO SUBJECTS ix PAGE Haemonchus similis Travassos, 1914, as a parasite of cattle in India . 170 Helminths, comparative pathology of . . . . . . . . 310 Hickey, S. G. M., Obituary notice . . . . . . . . 315 Horse, a case of osteoporosis in . . . . . . . . 350 X THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SOIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY PAGE M Madras, a new species of schistosome found in pigs in . . . . . . . . 321 Madras Presidency, bovine nasal schistosomiasis in . . . . . . . . 29 Milk, cross-breeding for . . . . . . . . 325 Milking capacity, lactation yields as measures of . . . . . . . . 240 Mineral content of spear grass, seasonal variation in . . . . . . . . 65 Mineral metabolism of farm animals . . . . . . . . 276 Minerals, role of, in calf feeding . . . . . . . . 174 M. R. C. V. S., the course of study for . . . . . . . . 298 Muktesar, nematodes parasitic in goats at . . . . . . . . 163 N Naganol (' Bayer 205 ') treatment of surra in equines by . . . 85 Nasal granuloma, bovine, in Hyderabad State . . . . . . . . 346 Nasal schistosomiasis (bovine), in the Madras Presidency . . . 29 Nasal schistosomiasis, successful infection with, in experimental calves . 160 Nematodes from the abomasum of cattle in India . . . . . . . . 166 Nematodes, parasitic, the cultivation of . . . . . . . . 312 Nematodes, parasitic, in goats at Muktesar . . . . . . . . 163 Nitrogen content of spear grass, seasonal variation in . . . 65 Nutrition in relation to reproduction with special reference to sterility . 198 Nutritional state of the sheep on its susceptibility to infestation with stomach worm . . . . . . . . 310 O Obituary notice of Captain S. G. M. Hickey . . . . . . . . 315 Obstetrics and Zootechnics, Veterinary (Review) . . . . . . . . 214 Osteoporosis in North India . . . . . . . . 350 P Parasites, trematode, of the Indian elephant . . . . . . . . 103 Parasitic nematodes, the cultivation of . . . . . . . . 312 Pasture plants, effect of climate on the composition of . . . 364 Pastures (South Indian), studies in seasonal variation in the mineral and nitrogen content of spear grass . . . . . . . . 65
INDEX TO SUBJECTS xi PAGE Pathology of helminths, comparative . . . . . . . . 310 Persistent debility in equines in India, Schistosoma indicum, M. as the cause of . . . . . . . . 1 Pigs in Madras, a schistosome found in . . . . . . . . 321 Piroplasma gibsoni in canine piroplasmosis . . . . . . . . 356 Poultry diseases and pestsxii THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY PAGE Schistosomiasis (nasal), successful infection with in experimental calves 160 Scindi and Saniwal cows, cross-breeding of, with Ayrshire bull . . 325 Serum, anti-rinderpest, precipitation of antibody containing protein in 149 Serum-method cum bull virus, duration of immunity in calves inoculated by . . . . . . . . 131 INDEX TO SUBJECTS xiii PAGE V Vector of canine piroplasmosis due to Piroplasma gibsoni . . . 356 Vermifuges for the large intestine of the horse . . . . . . . . 309 Veterinary Bulletin, Vol. III, part I (Review) . . . . . . . . 214 Veterinary College, Patna . . . . . . . . 129, 216 xiv Errata to volume III of the Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry. Page 138, Table I, Serial No. 61. For Harniana read Hariana. Page 183, Headline. For Life-history of tabanus speciosus Ric. read Life-history of Tabanus speciosus Ric. Page 296, line 13 from bottom. For balace read balance. GIPD