NCAG-VSI/32. Vol. II 1932 THE Indian Journal of Veterinary Science AND Animal Husbandry Issued under the authority of The Imperial Council of Agricultural Research [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Published for The Imperial Council of Agricultural Research Delhi : Manager of Publications 1934 Price annas 2 or 3d.
Government of India Publications are obtainable from the Manager of Publications, Civil Lines, Delhi, and from the following Agents :ORIGINAL ARTICLES A GENERAL ACCOUNT OF THE HELMINTH PARASITES AFFECTING DOMESTIC ANIMALS IN INDIA, WITH METHODS OF COLLECTION, PRESERVATION, STAINING, ETC. BY G. D. BHALERAO, M.Sc., Helminthologist, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on 22nd August 1931.) Helminth parasites fall into two main phyla of the Animal kingdom : PLATY- HELMINTHES (flat worms) and NEMATHELMINTHES (round worms) which, together with the classes they consist of, can be distinguished from one another with the following keys :2 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I red or fleshly coloration. They inhabit the various organs of the body such as ali- mentary canal, liver, bile-ducts, gall-bladder, pancreas and even the vascular system. Shape. They are usually flat, leaf-like or tongue-shaped, but not infrequently they are barrel-shaped, conical, cylindrical and occasionally triangular, with the posterior extremity truncated as in Pseudamphistomum. In some forms, e.g., Fasciola, the cephalic portion is separated from the rest of the body by distinct shoulders, and in the genus Gastrodiscus the cylindrical anterior portion is distinctly set off from the rest of the body which is broad and flat. In some species of the genus Eurytrema there is a distinct triangular appendage at the posterior portion of the body folded ventrally so as to form a gynæcophoric canal in which the female finds its lodgment permanently. Some forms, e.g., Fasciola jacksoni, have tendency to curl their extremities ventrally. The surface of the body on which the genital opening is situated is considered to be the ventral surface. Cuticle. The entire body is covered with a cuticle of varying thickness. It may be either smooth or armed with spines or scales. Occasionally papillæ are present either surrounding the mouth or ventral sucker or they may occur on the entire ventral surface of the body as in the genus Gastrodiscus. In Schistosomidæ some species have a part or the whole of their body covered with tubercles bearing a varying number of spines. Musculature. Underneath the cuticle there is a development of a muscular layer of varying thickness. Special development of the musculature may be observed in connection with the suckers, the pharynx and occasionally the cirrus. In some forms the development of the musculature as well as the cuticle may be so poor that almost the whole of the internal anatomy may be distinguished with a low magnifation under the pressure of a cover glass only. Parenchyma. The central portion of the body is filled with loose parenchy- matous cells in which all the essential organs are embedded. Alimentary canal. The opening of the mouth may be terminal, being situated at the extreme anterior end, or subterminal, in which case it is situated on the ventral side, a short distance from the anterior extremity. It is usually followed by a globular, muscular, pharynx, but occasionally interposed between the two may be a short tubular portion of the alimentary canal known as the pre-pharynx. The pharynx is usually followed by an HELMINTH PARASITES AFFECTING DOMESTIC ANIMALS 3 the cæca unite posteriorly to form a common intestinal cæcum which may again bifurcate and unite two or three times in their course. The intestinal cæca are usually straight, but occasionally as in Fasciolopsis buski they may be disposed in a sinuous manner. Usually the intestinal cæca are simple, but in some cases, e.g., in the genus Fasciola, they may be branched and these branches may again be subdivided into secondary branches or diverticula. In the genus Tagumaea they are divided into broad anterior and slender posterior portions. Organs of attachment. In addition to the cuticular spines which serve the function of attachment there are other organs which chiefly aid the parasites in holding themselves securely in the body of their hosts. These organs are the oral sucker, the ventral or the posterior sucker and in some cases the ventral pouch in addition. The oral sucker, as its name implies, surrounds the oral aperture and may as such be terminal or subterminal in position. This is usually simple, but occa- sionally it may have two outgrowths known as the oral diverticula. In the family Echinostomidæ it is surrounded by a kidney-shaped collar, discontinuous ventrally. This latter bears a varying number of spines disposed in one or two rows which, in some cases, are interrupted dorsally. Almost in every case these collar spines may be distinguished as " corner spine or spines " and " marginal spines ". In the genus Schistosoma the oral sucker is usually armed with spines. There is another sucker which is usually situated ventrally in the anterior half of the body, but in Paramphistomidæ this is situated at the extreme posterior end, being either terminal or subterminal. In the former case it is termed the ventral sucker and in the latter, the posterior sucker. The ventral sucker may be situated quite close to the oral sucker or may be far removed from it. The posterior sucker of the Paramphistomidæ is usually very large. Both the ventral as well as the posterior sucker are occasionally drawn out posteriorly and in some cases the latter may have papillæ developed on it. In the genus Schistosoma the ventral sucker projects from the body very prominently on the ventral surface and in some species of Opistorchis it may occasionally be raised along with the genital aperture on a distinct process called the padicel. In addition to the usual two suckers, there is in the genera Gastrothylax, Fischoederius and Carmyerius a ventral pouch, occupying almost the entire ventral portion of the body and opening ventrally somewhat posterior to the oral aperture. Besides serving as an additional powerful organ of attachment, it acts as a receptacle for the accumulation of the genital products which are discharged in it through the genital aperture opening into it.
4 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I Nervous system. The nervous system consists of two large ganglia situated on the dorsal side of the HELMINTH PARASITES AFFECTING DOMESTIC ANIMALS 5 From each testis originates a fine duct, the vas efferens. Sooner or later the vasa efferentia unite to form a common duct, the vas deferens, which usually enters a sac, the c irrus sac. This organ may be absent in Opisthorchidæ and in some Paramphistomidæ. Among the members of the latter family, the absence of a cirrus sac is accompanied by the presence of a pars musculosa. The cirrus sac is situated on the dorsal side and opens to the exterior by a genital pore. The portion of the vas deferens enclosed in the cirrus sac is differentiated into a vesicula seminalis, a pars prostatica and the terminal muscular portion, the cirrus. The vesicula seminalis is usually a swollen, sac-like portion which may be divided into two parts, one of which is coiled and the other sac-like. Following the vesicula seminalis is a small portion of the vas deferens, the pars prostatica, into which the unicellular prostatic glands open. The terminal portion of the vas deferens is the thick muscular organ called the c irrus which is capable of being protruded out of the cirrus sac and act as an organ of copulation. Occasionally the cirrus may have fine spines on it. Female genitalia. The female genitalia consists of an ovary situated near the middle line, sometimes to the right side and sometimes to the left. It may be either anterior or posterior to the testes. It may be round, oval or kidney- shaped as in Pseudamphistomum. Its outline may be entire or lobed or it may be a branched structure as in the genus Fasciola. From the ovary a short oviduct proceeds towards the centre where it is joined by the excretory ducts of the vitelline glands. These are grape-like glands, lying on each side of the body and extending to a variable extent. They may extend ventrally and dorsally and occasionally meet in the middle line in the posterior part of the body. Each gland is composed of a varying number of smaller or larger groups containing small acini. The function of these glands is to secrete yolk material which is deposited over the eggs. From each group of vitelline glands a small duct is given off. Many such ducts unite to form large anterior and posterior ducts. These meet together and form a transverse duct. The transverse ducts of each side unite in the centre of the body, slightly posterior to the ovary and pour their contents into the oviduct. Occasionally a yolk sac of varying size is noticed at the junction of the two transverse vitelline ducts. Near the point of union of the common vitelline duct with the oviduct a small thin Laurer's canal opens, which begins on the dorsal surface. Very occasionally Laurer's canal has no external opening. On the inner side of Laurer's canal, near its opening into the oviduct, is found a small sac filled with sperms, which is called the receptaculum seminis. Occasionally the receptaculum seminis may be absent. At the point of the union of the oviduct
6 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I with the vitelline duct and Laurer's canal or very close to it are numerous, radially disposed, unicellular glands, the shell-glands which pour their secretion into the dilated portion of the oviduct. In this dilated portion of the oviduct, the ootype, the ova are fertilized and the yolk cells and the shell material is deposited over them. The fertilized ova pass into the uterus which is the direct continuation of the oviduct. It is usually coiled, but occasionally it may be straight. The uterine coils are either confined to the central field of the body, disposed transversely or irregularly or they may first pass posteriorly and then turn anteriorly. The terminal portion of the uterus, occasionally differentiated into a muscular vagina, passes by the side of the cirrus sac or the open vesicula seminalis, whenever the former is absent, and opens to the exterior by the side of the male genital pore. Usually both the male and female ducts open into a common genital atrium which in its turn communicates with the exterior by the genital pore. Eggs. The eggs are usually oval, but in Schistosomidæ they are sometimes elliptical. They are yellowish brown or deep brown in colour. At one of their poles there is usually an operculum, through which the embro escapes after it is fully developed. The eggs of the genus Schistosoma have a terminal or lateral spine. Development. Among the trematodes both cross and auto-copulation is known. The terminal portion of the uterus, known as the metraterm is used for copulation. After copulation the spermatozoa travel up the entire length of the uterus and are stored up in the receptaculum seminis. After fertilization which takes place in the ootype, the segmentation begins and in some cases the embryo is tully formed while the egg is still in the body of the parent. The digenetic trematodes have alternation of generations (Metagenesis) as well as an alternation of hosts. The adults are usually parasite of vertebrates and intermediate hosts are molluscs. Occasionally in addition to the molluscan intermediate host there is a second intermediate host, frequently an arthropod or a lower vertebrate. Sometime after the eggs are laid, the larvæ are formed if their development has not been already completed in the body of the parent. When the eggs come in contact with water, the larvæ escape into it by opening the operculum or by splitting up of the shell whenever the former is absent. The larva escaping from the egg is called the miracidium. It is mere or less triangular in shape, with a ciliated epithelium covering the whole body and a stilet at the anterior end. It has a simple, sac-like gut with the secretory glands opening into it, the eye spots, the nerve ganglia, a pair of excretory tabules with flame cells and a group of germinal cells and the perthenogenetic ova. The miracidium swims in water by means of its cilia and as soon as it comes in contact with a mollusc of an appro-
HELMINTH PARASITES AFFECTING DOMESTIC ANIMALS 7 priate species, it makes its way into its body. It soon enters its lymphatic system and is carried to its apical portion, the liver. In the meanwhile it loses its cilia and all other organs and is transformed into a sac-like body known as the sporocyst which contains only the germ cells. These latter may give rise to other sporocysts, but usually they give rise to the second generation known as the redia. These have a pharynx, a sac-like gut, an excretory system and the germ cells. Some redia have, in addition, a birth pore and a pair of appendages in the posterior half. The redia inside the sporocysts, usually more than hundred, grow larger in size and rupture the wall of the sporocyst and lie freely in the lymphatic fluid of the mollusc. Here they develop rapidly and give rise again to redia or usually to the larvæ of the third generation, the cercaria. These may vary in structure in diffe- rent species, but usually they have a long tail which may be simple or bifid. The rest of their anatomy resembles very much that of the adults excepting the geni- talia, which are still undeveloped. The cercaria, when mature, escape from their mother sporocysts or redia, by either rupture of the wall or through the birth opening, if the latter is present. By their active movements they make their way through the tissues of the molluscan host and come to lie between its shell and the mantle covering. From here they escape into the water from time to time and swim about actively in it. The cercaria of the blood-flukes actively penetrate the skin of their final hosts and thus reach their destination, but in all other cases they are passively transferred to them either through the second intermediate hosts or through food or drinking water. The cercaria affecting the herbivorous animals are encysted and deposited on vegetable matter, and the infection is acquired when the latter is taken in by the animal. After their arrival in the ali- mentary canal of an appropriate host, the cyst capsule is dissolved by the digestive juices and the adolescaria or miniature adults emerge and migrate to their favourite place of residence. CESTODA. Cestodes, popularly known as tapeworms, are parasites also belonging to the phylum PLATYHELMINTHES. With the exception of Stilesia hepatica, which occurs in the liver and the bile-ducts of sheep and goats, all the adult cestodes inhabit the intestines of their hosts. The larval forms are, however, found in other loca- tions, such as lung, liver, brain, muscles, eye, body-cavity, etc. The body of a Cestode is usually distinguishable into three regions : the head or scolex, the neck and the body proper or the strobila. Scolex. This is the anterior-most portion of cestodes and bears the organs of fixation. Except in Ligula it is a fairly conspicuous portion of the body. In
8 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I Fimbriaria a true scolex is not present, but it is replaced by a pseudoscolex. Occa- sionally, e.g., in Stilesia globipunctata, it is deeply buried in the mucousa of the gut and produces a button-like nodule. Organs of fixation. In the order Cyclophyllidea the scolex bears four muscular, cup-shaped suckers which, in some cases, e.g., in Rallietina echinobothrida, are covered with spines. In addition to the suckers, hooks of varying shape and size may be present. In Tænidæ a crown of smaller hooks alternates with that of larger ones. The hooks are usually borne on a retractile structure called the rostellum which is situated at the anterior end of the scolex. In some cases, e.g., in Anoplocephalidæ and Mesocestoididæ, the rostellum is altogether lacking and in such cases the scolex is without any hooks or spines. In the order Tetraphyllidea the scolex bears four ear-like lappets or bothridia which may bear on them accessory suckers, or they may be divided into areolae by transverse and longitudinal septa. In Ichthiotaenidæ a fifth sucker may be developed in addition. In Pseudophyllidea the scolex bears two longitudinal, shallow, sucking grooves called the bothria. In Diphyllobothridæ the margins of a bothrium fuse to form a tube. The bothria may occasionally be replaced by a terminal sucker. Neck. In some cases, e.g., in Avitellina, there is an unsegmented region behind the scolex, which is called the neck. Strobila. This term is applied to the general body of a cestode consisting of segments or proglottides. In Fimbriarinæ external segmentation is obscured by secondary divisions of folds, and in Ligulinæ it may be very rudimentary. Proglottides. Great variations are noticed in the size and shape of proglot- tides, not only in the different forms but even in the different regions of the same individual. They may be longer than broad and sometimes broader than long. They may be arranged one after the other in succession or a portion of the posterior margin of a proglottis may overlap the anterior margin of the succeeding one. Occasionally between the successive proglottides are seen interproglottidal glands which may be arranged in a line or be diffuse. It is conventional to consider the side on which the ovary is situated as the ventral one. Cuticle. The body of a cestode is covered externally by a cuticle which may occasionally bear spines. Musculature. Three kinds of muscles are found among the cestodes. The outermost layer consists of longitudinal muscle fibres, and internal to this there
HELMINTH PARASITES AFFECTING DOMESTIC ANIMALS 9 is a layer of circular muscle fibres. Besides these two kinds of muscles there are also transverse or dorso-ventral muscle fibres. Parenchyma. This is the connective tissue which, as in trematodes, fills up the major portion of the body of cestodes. It is divided by the circular muscle fibres into medullary or central and cortical or outer portions. All the essential genital organs are usually situated in the medullary parenchyma while the nerves, excretory canals, longitudinal muscles and the terminal portions of the genital ducts are situated in the cortical portion. Certain cells of the cortical parenchyma have in them concretions of carbonate of lime, which are called the calcareous corpuscles. An alimentary canal and cilia, except in the onchosphere of Pseudophyllidea, are completely wanting in cestodes. Nervous system. The nervous system of cestodes consists of the ganglia situat- ed in the scolex, from which nerves are given off to the suckers, and longitudinal nerves passing posteriorly throughout the entire length of the body, externally to the muscular layers. The latter are connected with each other by numerous transverse commissures. Excretory system. The excretory system consists of a pair of excretory canals on each side of the body. One of the excretory canals on each side is situated dorsally and the other ventrally. All the four canals open into a vesicle situated in the last proglottis. When the latter is shed, the excretory canals open directly outside. In some cases the dorsal pair may be lacking or may be present only in the anterior portion of the body as in Avitellina. The excretory canals give out many side branches which divide into capillaries ending in the characteristic flame-cells. Reproductive system. All the tapeworms of the domesticated animals are hermophroditic and each mature proglottis contains a complete set of male as well as female genitalia. Usually the male genital organs develop before the female ones. The proglottides in which the genitalia are not developed or partially deve- loped are called immature proglottides; those in which they are fully developed and are functional are called mature proglottides and those in which the uterus is filled with fertilised eggs are called ripe or gravid proglottides. In the large majority of cestodes a single set of male and female genital organs is present; but in some genera, e.g., Dipylidium, Moniezia, Cotugnia, etc., double sets of genitalia are found. Genital pores. The external opening of the vas deferens is the male genital opening and that of the vagina is the female genital opening. Usually the male
10 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I and the female genital openings open close together in a common genital atrium which in turn opens to the exterior. In the order Pseudophyllidea the male and the female pores are far apart. In Cyclophyllidea and Tetraphyllidea the uterus is a closed sac, but in Pseudephyllidea it possesses a distinct opening to the ex- terior. With the exception of Mesocestoides in which, like Pseudpohyllidea, there is a ventral genital opening, the genital pore in Cyclophyllidea and Tetraphyllidea is situated on the lateral margin of a proglottis. In these two orders all the pro- glottides may have genital pores opening on the same side as in Hymenolepsis, when they are described as unilateral, or they may be regularly alternating, in which case the consecutive segments have these opening on the opposite sides in a regular manner. In the species of the genus Tænia they open on one side of the proglottis margin or the other in an irregular manner and for this reason they are described as irregularly alternating. They may open in the centre of the proglottis margin or anterior or posterior to it. Male genitalia. These consist of the testes which are rounded bodies, situated on the dorsal side, usually in the medullary portion. In the family Anoplocepha- lidæ they may lie even outside the excretory canals. Their number is very variable : in the genus Diorchis they are only two, in Hymenolepsis they are three, but in the species of Tænia their number may be as large as 500. From each testis a minute duct called the vas efferens is given off. The vasa efferentia unite together to form a v as deferens, which usually runs towards the proglottis margin in a zigzag manner. Its terminal portion is capable of eversion to a more or less degree and is called the cirrus. Occasionally the cirrus may have spines on its surface. The cirrus is enclosed in a muscular sac called the cirrus sac. This is usually small, but occasionally, as in some species of Hymenolepsis, it may be a very prominent structure. In some cases the vas deferens may have one or more dilations on it, each one of which is called the vesicula seminalis. The cirrus sac is usually situated anterior to the terminal portion of the vagina, but the order may occasionally be reversed. It may also be situated dorsal or ventral to the terminal portion of the vagina. Female genitalia. These consist of an ovary, which is usually a bilobed struc- ture united by a transverse isthmus and situated in the centre of a proglottis. In some genera, e.g., Avitellina and Stilesia, it is more or less globular and is situated asymmetrically on the poral side of a segment. In the genera with two sets of genitalia in each proglottis the ovaries are not central, but nearer the lateral margins. Proceeding from the ovary is a short duct, the oviduct. The ova dis- charged from the ovary pass into it and are fertilized in its proximal portion which is called the ootype. In this portion also open the ducts from the vitelline and shell
HELMINTH PARASITES AFFECTING DOMESTIC ANIMALS 11 gland wherever these are present. The distal portion of the oviduct divides into two branches, one of which continues as the uterus and the other as the vagina. This latter is a curved duct running from the isthmus of the ovary towards the genital pore. Near the ovarian isthmus it has a small dilatation, which is called the receptaculum seminis, for the storage of the sperms. The distal end of the vagina may occasionally be slightly swollen when it is called the vulva. In Diplo- posthe there are two vaginae in each segment. In Aporina the vaginal pore is altogether lacking. In regard to the arrangement and disposition of the vitellaria, there exists a great diversity. In Cyclophyllidea they form a compact gland, lying posterior to the ovary in the centre of the proglottis. They are double in the forms having a double set of genitalia. In the genera Avitellina and Stilesia they are absent. In Tetraphyllidea they are present in two lateral rows or in two broad dorsal and ventral layers. In the order Pseudophyllidea they are scattered in the cortical parenchyma. The shell gland is usually situated posterior to the ovary. The function of this gland is not known with certainty. The earlier helminthologists regarded it to be concerned with the formation of the shell of the ova. A great diversity exists in regard to the structure and disposition of the uterus. It may be a central tube with horizontal branches as in the genus Tænia, a hori- zontal sac as in Hymenolopis, a reticulate structure as in Dipylidium or like a horse- shoe as in Paronia. It may be replaced by parenchymatous capsules as in Dava- ineidæ. In the genera Avitellina and Stilesia it is replaced by a fibrous capsule, the paruterine organ. In Pseudophyllidea it consists of a convoluted tube which in some cases assumes the form of a rosette. In Cyclophyllidea the uterus has no external opening, the ova escaping from it by the disintegration and rupture of the parenchymatous tissue. The genitalia in this order atrophy as the uterus develops. In Pseudophyllidea the uterus has an external opening and the genital organs do not atrophy even after its complete development. Copulation. The protrusible cirrus transmits the spermatozoa to the vagina, which are stored up in the receptaculum seminis. In Aporina, where the vaginal pore is absent, the cirrus has to penetrate the tissues of a segment during copulation. The actual fertilization takes place in the ootype. The ova of one proglottis may be fertilized by the spermatozoa of the same or another proglottis or of a different individual altogether, if several individuals are present in the same host. The ovum after fertilization receives the secretions of the vitelline and shell glands, wherever they are present, and is enclosed by a shell. Development begins imme- diately and before the egg is deposited a hexacanth embryo is already formed in it.
12 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I Eggs. The structure of the eggs in Cestoda is very variable. Usually the hexacanth embryo is surrounded by one or more envelopes. Its immediate cover is called the embryophore and the outer covering is the egg-shell. The space between the two is filled by the third envelope of the egg. In the genera Moniezia and Anoplocephala the embryophore develops two processes at one end which cross each other. This is called the pyriform apparatus. In the genus Tænia the egg shell is lost and its place is taken by the embryophore which becomes very thick and radially striated. In some genera of Pseudophyllidea there is an operculum at one end of the egg. The eggs may be colourless as in Hymenolepis and Dipylidium, light yellow as in Diphyllobothrium, or brownish as in Tænia. Development and life-history. All the species of Cyclophyllidea and Tetraphyll- idea parasitic in domesticated animals, so far as is known, require two hosts for the completion of their life-history. The intermediate hosts become affected by swallowing the eggs passed out by the primary hosts in their fæces. The develop- ment does not proceed beyond the larval stage in the intermediate host. The final host acquires infection by feeding upon the intermediate hosts or their affected parts. In Pseudophyllidea, so far as is known, three hosts are required for the com- pletion of the life-history. The first intermediate host is a cyclops or some other crustacean, the second is a fresh-water fish and the third is the final host in which the adult form develops. Be the intermediate host a vertebrate or an invertebrate, when the egg is swallowed by an appropriate host the egg-shell is dissolved in the digestive juices and the embryo escapes out of it. It penetrates the intestinal wall and establishes itself in its normal habitat, which varies in different cases. If the intermediate host is a vertebrate one, it usually enters the vascular or lymphatic system and establish- es itself in various organs, such as muscles as in the case of Tæniarhynchus sagina- tus and Tænia solium, liver as in the case of Tænia taeniformis, lungs, liver, spleen, etc. as in the case of Echinococcus granulosus, in the body cavity as in Tænia hydatigena, or brain as in Multiceps multiceps. When, however, the inter- mediate host is an invertebrate, the larval stage is found in the body-cavity, e.g., Diphyllobothrium latum and Amoebotænia sphenoides. Growth. After the scolex is attached to the wall of the alimentary canal b y means of the suckers or hooks, wherever these are present, it buds off segments posteriorly. As the segments pass further posteriorly, they develop genitalia and later become mature and ultimately the uterus is filled with eggs and the segments become gravid.
HELMINTH PARASITES AFFECTING DOMESTIC ANIMALS 13 Larvæ. 1. Solid larvæ. There are two kinds of these larvæ, globular and elongated. The former is called a Plerocercus and the latter a Plerocercoid. 2. Bladder larvæ. In these the cells in the centre of the segmentating embryo liquify. Three main types of the bladder larvæ can be distinguished :14 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, I NEMATODA. Nematodes, popularly known as round worms, are parasites belonging to the phylum NEMATHELMINTHES. They inhabit various organs of the body. Form of body. Nematodes are elongated, cylindrical animals usually attenua- ted at one or both ends. In the genus Trichuris the anterior end is much elongated and drawn out into a thread-like portion; while in Oxyuris the posterior end is drawn out into a whip-like prolongation. In some cases the head is tilted either dorsally or ventrally. The posterior end of the male is, in some cases, spirally coiled. Cuticle. Covering the entire body externally there is a tough, elastic, resist- ant cuticle, the thickness of which varies from two to several layers. It is usually marked with transverse striations and in some genera there are longitudinal lines in addition. In some genera, e.g., Gnathostoma, the cuticle is spiny and in the genus Gongylonema the body is covered anteriorly with tubercles called plaques or bosses. In the genus Nematodirus the female has a pointed process at its posterior extre- mity. In the genus Dracunculus the anterior dome-shaped extremity is provided with a cuticular thickening or shield and the genes Parabronema has dorsal and ventral shields anteriorly. Some forms have cuticular c ordons anteriorly. In some genera, e.g., HELMINTH PARASITES AFFECTING DOMESTIC ANIMALS 15 Syncytial layer and Musculature. Underneath the cuticle is a syncytial protop- lasmic layer from which the former is secreted. Below it there is a single layer of muscle cells whose fibres are arranged longitudinally and produce contraction in a transverse direction. Locomotion is performed by a series of up and down undulations. The musculature of the body-wall is, as a rule, divided into four parts by the four thickenings of the subcuticular layer, two of which lie laterally and are more prominent than the other two which lie on the dorsal and ventral sides respectively. The musculature may be either of " polymyarian type " or " monomyarian type ". Mouth. The mouth is situated at the anterior extremity, being either terminal or subterminal and is directed forwards. It may be tilted dorsally or ventrally, depending upon the position of the head. It may be guarded by lips or a few or more papillæ. Buccal capsule. The mouth, in some cases, leads into a specialised cavity sur- rounded by chitinoid walls, which is called the buccal capsule. It may be short and ring-shaped, globular, subglobular, infundibular or elongated and cylindrical. It may be divided into anterior and posterior portions by a transverse groove. It may have one or more teeth on its walls or these may project into it from the 16 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I the centre of a chain of cells placed end to end, but usually it is club-shaped and its anterior portion is provided with powerful muscles surrounding a triangular lumen with cuticular lining, the stomodæum. The lumen of the HELMINTH PARASITES AFFECTING DOMESTIC ANIMALS 17 ducts to the exterior. They are loosely attached in the body cavity and occupy most of the body space. Male genitalia. Testis. In all the forms dealt with here there is only one testis which is a straight or a coiled tube. At its free end it is solid and consists of cells which are destined to give rise to the spermatozoa. Towards its other end, the spermatocytes at successive stages of development are found attached to a central axis or rachis. The testis is connected with a male duct which can be differentiated into a vas deferens, seminal vesicle and a muscular ductus ejaculatorius opening into the cloaca. Opening into the ductus ejaculatorius, in many forms, is a pair of cement glands, the secretion of which serves to attach the male firmly to the female during copula- tion. The spermatozoa of nematodes are, as a rule, unlike those of most of the other groups of animals in being rounded or am18 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I Telamon. In some genera, e. g., Synthetocaulus, there is a chitinoid structure developed in connection with the ventral wall of the cloaca, which is called the telamon. Bursa. Males of the super-family Strongyloidea have a cuticular expansion more or less completely surrounding the posterior extremity, called the bursa, serving as a prehensile organ during copulation. The typical bursa of the strongy- lidæ is divided into a dorsal and two lateral lobes. It is supported by a series of rays which represent the stalks of the modified caudal papillæ. The bursal rays have a definite number and arrangement although modifications may be met with occasionally. Usually supporting the dorsal lobe is a median, unpaired dorsal ray which may be variously branched or subdivided. In each lateral lobe there are three rays: the ventral ray, the lateral ray and the externo-dorsal ray, supporting its anterior, median and posterior margins respectively. The ventral ray springs from the body and is divided into the two rays: the ventro-ventral and the latero-ventral rays. The lateral ray also springs from the body and is divided into the three rays: the antero-, medio-, and postero- or externo-lateral rays. The externo-dorsal ray is undivided and may spring from the base of the stem of the dorsal ray or independently from the body. The bursa may be symmetrical as in the genus Strongylus, or it may be asym- metrical as in Hæmonchus and Bunostomum. In Trichistrongylidæ the lateral lobes are well developed, but the dorsal lobe is either vestigeal or absent. In Metastrongylidæ the dorsal lobe is very small. In Syngamidæ the bursa is very short. In the genus Nematodirus the dorsal lobe is divided into two small lobules. Another super-family which is characterised by the possession of a bursa is Dioctophymoidea. In this the bursa is bell-shaped, muscular, and is not supported by rays. In the genus Ostertagia within the bursa on the dorsal side is an accessory bursal membrane with its free posterior edge supported by two slender diverging rays. The cloacal aperture is sometimes raised on a prominent structure situated in the centre of the bursa, which is called the genital cone. In Trichonema it has a well developed dermal collar and in some of the species of this genus it may bear appendages. Genital sucker. Among the males of the family Heterakidæ and the sub-family Ascaridinæ there is a sucker situated in front of the cloaca, which serves the func- tion of holding the female during copulation. Female genitalia. In the super-families Trichuroidea and Dioctophymoidea and the family Attractidæ there is only a single set of female genitalia. In all
HELMINTH PARASITES AFFECTING DOMESTIC ANIMALS 19 other forms there are two sets of the female reproductive organs. Each set con- sists of a tubular ovary where the ova are manufactured, and oviduct and a uterus. A central rachis is generally present in the ovary as in the testis. Uterus. This is a sac-like receptacle in which the ova liberated from the ovary are stored. It may be a single sac or it may have two, four or many branches as in Physolopteridæ, in which case it is described as di-, tetra-, and poly-delphys respectively. The uteri may run parallel to each other or they may go in opposite directions in the body when they are described as divergent or opposed. In some cases the uterus may have a specialised muscular portion called the ovijector, the function of which is to eject the ova from the uterus. In Dracunculidæ the uterus is enormous in size and completely fills up the body. Vagina. This is usually a muscular duct leading from the vulva to the point where the two uteri unite. Occasionally, e.g., in Trichinellidæ, it is difficult to differentiate it clearly from the uterus. Its length is very variable. It may be a short duct or a very long tube as in Dioctophyme. It is atrophid in Dracunculus. Vulva. This in an orifice by which the female genital ducts communicate with the exterior. Its position varies considerably. In Filaroidea it usually opens in the 20 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I The egg-shell subsequently splits up into an outer and an inner shell. In some cases, e. g., Ascaris, the segmentation of the ovum starts after the eggs are laid by a female. In most of the Strongylidæ a few segments are formed in the uterus and the eggs are laid in this condition. In both these cases the embryos are formed in the eggs after their deposition and the species are classed oviparous. In some cases, parasitic generation of Strongyloides stercoralis, for example, a complete embryo is formed within the egg while the latter is still in the uterus and is ready to be hatched soon after the egg is laid; in such cases the species are called ovoviviparous. In other cases, e.g., Dracunculus medinensis and Trichinella spiralis, the embryos are hatched in the uterus and the species are called viviparous. During the growth of the embryos of nematodes usually four moults or ecdyses take place, at which the outer cuticle along with the lining of the mouth, HELMINTH PARASITES AFFECTING DOMESTIC ANIMALS 21 through the skin and reach the alimentary canal through the circulatory or lymphatic system. In the genus Trichonema the infective larvæ after reaching the alimentary canal penetrate the mucus membrane where they produce nodules and undergo development up to sexual maturity; after this they again enter the lumen of the alimentary canal and pass the rest of their existence. In the genus Strongylus, on the other hand, the infective larvæ after reaching the alimentary canal undergo a course of migration through some organs of the body, such as the liver, lungs and circulatory system before they settle down finally in the alimentary canal and develop into adults. ( c) In Strongyloides stercoralis the parasitic female deposits ova containing embryos. From these the larvæ hatch in the fæces or in the soil, and they may develop either into infective larvæ or give rise to a bisexual generation, whose progeny develop into infective or " filariform " larvæ. The definitive host gets the infec- tion either through the mouth or the skin. In the latter case the larvæ reach the alimentary canal either through the vascular or lymphatic system as in Ancylostoma. II. Without an intermediate host. ( a) In Spiruridæ and Dracunculidæ an intermediate host is usually required for the completion of the life-history. This is generally an Arthropod or a lower vertebrate. The second stage larva becomes encapsuled in its organs or its body cavity and there undergoes a second moult and is converted into a third stage or infective larva. The final host becomes infected by the ingestion of the inter- mediate host containing an infective larva. In Filariidæ the larvæ are present in the vascular system of the host and are taken up by some blood-sucking insect along with its feed. They migrate from the stomach of the insect to the muscles where they grow to the infective stage, after which they pass to the proboscis. The final host becomes infected when bitten by such an insect. (b) In Trichinella spiralis the fertilized female penetrates the intestinal wall and enters the lymph spaces. Here it produces a large number of embryos which pass to the voluntary muscles and become encapsuled there. These when ingested by another suitable host develop to sexual maturity in its intestine. TECHNIQUE. Collection. The helminth parasites are notorious for infecting all the soft organs of the body and body cavities of their hosts. Great, care must therefore be exercised when searching for them. Large parasites offer no difficulty in being detected and
22 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I can be picked up with ease from the site of infection. Very often, however, they inhabit the minute passages of an organ such as bile-ducts or alveoli of the lungs or are embedded in an organ in a very obscure manner. In such cases several parallel cuts must be made with a knife in the organ which should afterwards be pressed gently with the hands, when the parasites will be squeezed out of their resting places. The organ should then be washed in a basin of water. The con- tents should be allowed to stand for about five minutes, when the parasites will sink to the bottom of the basin. The supernatant liquid having been decanted off, the parasites may be collected. Those which produce nodules in the connective tissue may be collected after cutting open the nodules, and exposing the parasite. Sometimes, however, especially in the case of larvæ, the nodules produced are very minute and extreme care should be exercised in teasing out the larvæ from them. Frequently, however, when collecting parasites of the alimentary canal of a large animal their presence remains unnoticed on account of the bulky contents of the gut. In such cases the gut should be cut into several portions and the contents of each portion emptied into a large enamelled basin and mixed with water. The contents should then be passed through three sieves having increasingly fine meshes, the sieve with the finest mesh being used last. The material arrested in the sieves should be carefully searched for larger parasites. The filtrate after the last sieve should be collected in a basin and allowed to stand for about five minutes. After decanting off the supernatant liquid, careful search should be made for parasites in the residual contents of the basin. Having dealt with their con- tents, the portions of the gut should be washed vigorously in a basin of water. The washings should be allowed to stand, as before, for five minutes, and after decanting off the supernatant liquid, search should be made for parasites in the remaining portion. The parasites in all cases should be collected in a dish containing normal saline solution. If ordinary tap water is used instead of normal saline solution, the cuticle of many nematodes will burst and the worms rendered unfit for a detailed examina- tion. Examination in the living condition. The value of examining worms in the living condition cannot be over-estimated. In the case of trematodes and those nematodes in which the cuticle is very thin, nearly the whole of their anatomy can be distinguished under the low power of a microscope if examined after the applica- tion of a cover slip on the parasite. Some details, such as the excretory system of trematodes, especially the movements of the cilia, cannot be studied after the parasites have been killed. Similarly, among the nematodes, a few structures such as the various papillæ and the rays of the genital bursa are seen to greater advan- tage in the living condition.
HELMINTH PARASITES AFFECTING DOMESTIC ANIMALS 23 Fixing. This term is applied to the killing of the living tissues in such a manner that the details of their structure will be retained as closely as possible to that found in the living condition. The parasitic worms fall under two phyla: the PLATYHELMINTHES consisting of Trematoda and Cestoda and the NEMA- THELMINTHES comprising Nematoda and Acanthocephala. The fixatives used for these two naturally different groups of animals also fall into two distinct categories. Before fixing, the parasites should be shaken vigorously in normal saline solu- tion, so as to free them completely of the mucus or other foreign matter adhering to them. 1. Fixatives for PLATYHELMINTHES. ( a) For ordinary examinations and toto-preparations, the best fixative is 5 per cent. formalin which should be warmed to steaming point when used. The worms fixed in this fluid may either remain in it, or be transferred to 70 per cent. alcohol after washing away the whole of the formalin in running water. ( b) For histological examinations, however, one of the following fixatives may be used :24 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I 2. Fixative for NEMATHELMINTHES. These should be fixed in a steaming mixture of 70 per cent. alcohol and 5 per cent. glycerine. The specimens after being fixed in this fluid may be left in it. The tissues intended for section cutting should be fixed in Zenker, Bouin or Mann's fluid as described above or in 10 per cent. formalin, after which they should be washed in running tap water for twenty-four hours. Flattening. In the case of large PLATYHELMINTHES it has been observed that the specimens undergo contraction when transferred to a fixative. This is avoided in the case of cestodes, as recommended by Meggitt, by taking hold of the tail end of the worm by means of a pair of forceps, immersing the worm in a beaker containing a fixative, and then drawing it along the edge of the beaker. By repeating this process a few times, complete flattening and extension of the worm is ensured. The large trematodes can be fixed in their natural form by placing them between two glass slides and tying the latter with a fine cotton thread. The slides should then be transferred to a fixative. Special care should be exercised so as not to damage the worms by putting too much pressure upon them. Thick cestodes, e.g., the species of Anoplocephala, may also be fixed in this manner. Preservation. Although the method of preservation is known to every student of Biology and hints on it would appear to be superfluous, the writer wishes to record here an experience of his own. Specimens are usually preserved in 70 per cent. alcohol and are stored in glass tubes with corks. When the alcohol comes in contact with the cork, the tannin of the latter is dissolved in it and stains the specimens black. This black coloration of the specimens renders them incapable of being stained by the usual agents, and the internal anatomy remains obscure in such cases. In order to avoid this, it is better to store the specimens in stoppered phials, but in cases where the storage in the corked tubes cannot be avoided, it is advisable to use 5 per cent. formalin as the preservative. In order to bleach the specimens which have become black, the following procedure, recommended by Baylis, may be adopted. Soak the specimens for 3 to 4 days in pure beech-wood creosote, then transfer for the same period to 5 per cent. hydrochloric acid in 70 per cent. alcohol. Staining. This may be done successfully in the case of trematodes and cestodes. In the case of nematodes and acanthocephala it is rendered impossible on account of the thick cuticle that usually covers the body. The internal anatomy of these is studied by clearing them in one of the media given later. Small speci- mens of nematodes and acanthocephala may, however, be stained successfully by any one of the methods given below, provided a few punctures are previously made in the cuticle.
HELMINTH PARASITES AFFECTING DOMESTIC ANIMALS. 25 1. * Acetic alum carmine. Dilute solutions of this stain should be used. The exact degree of dilution is determined by adding to distilled water just sufficient concentrated stain until the mixture attains the colour of port wine. The speci- mens to be stained may be left in it for 24 to 48 hours. 2. *Delafield's hæmatoxylin. This stain also should be used in very dilute solutions. The exact degree of dilution is determined by adding to a tube of distilled water a few drops of concentrated stain until the mixture becomes violet in colour. The specimens to be stained may be left in this solution for 24 hours. Differentiation. The specimens stained in any one of the methods are not, as such, good for mounting. The excess of stain of certain organs should therefore be removed by acidulated water (water 100 c.c. and 0.5 c.c. hydrochloric acid) or acidulated alcohol (70 per cent. alcohol 100 c.c, hydrochloric acid 0.5 c.c.). This removal of the excess of stain from certain organs so as to distinguish them from others is called " differentiation ". It is advisable to differentiate hæmatoxylin stained specimens in acidulated water for they can be converted to brilliant blue coloration by washing them after differentiation with ordinary tap water. The trace of alkali usually present in tap water brings about this change from red to blue. The specimens stained with acetic alum carmine should be differentiated in acidulated alcohol. Permanent mounting. The specimens after staining and differentiating in the manner stated above should be dehydrated successively in the graded alcohols (30, 50, 70, 90 per cent. alcohols and absolute alcohol); the grades of alcohol already covered before differentiation should be avoided. They should then be cleared in clove oil, cedar-wood oil or xylol until they become perfectly transparent, and then mounted in canada balsam. Section cutting. For studying the histology of the worms recourse has to be made to section cutting. Occasionally the specimens may be inextricably buried in the tissues of the host or the specimens may be so thick, e.g., various Amphistomes, that section cutting is indispensable, in order to distinguish even the gross features of the anatomy. It is therefore thought necessary to describe the process briefly. The fixed material should be dehydrated in graded alcohols, cleared in clove oil, cedar-wood oil or xylol and embedded in a paraffin bath. The time required for embedding in the paraffin bath will vary according to the thickness of the specimens. After embedding, the specimen should be placed in melted paraffin poured into a rectangle composed of two metal L-pieces. After orientating it * For preparation see A. Bolles Lee's Microtomist's Vade mecum, revised by Gatenby & Cowdry (1928).
26 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, 1 properly, the paraffin should be cooled suddenly by immersion in cold water. The paraffin, containing the specimen is easily extricated in the form of a block after cooling. If required, the block may be trimmed and sections of it cut with a micro- tome. They should then be floated in luke-warm water on a slide smeared with Mayer's albumen (50 c.c. glycerine, 50 c.c. white of an egg and 1 gm. of sodium salicylate mixed and filtered). When the sections have become completely flat, the slide should be placed for 24 hours in an oven maintaining an even temperature of 40° C., when the water will have completely evaporated and the sections will be found well fixed to the slide. The slide should then be immersed in a trough of xylol in order to dissolve the whole of the paraffin. It should then be passed down through absolute alcohol, 90, 70, 50, 30 per cent. alcohols and distilled water (ten minutes in each medium being sufficient). The slide should then be placed in a dilute solution of hæmatoxylin (of the same strength as was used for staining in toto) for 24 hours, differentiated in acidulated water, dehydrated in graded alcohols, cleared in xylol and mounted in canada balsam. If it is desired to have a double stain, the slide after staining with hæmatoxylin as described above should be kept for some time in eosin solution, after which it should be washed, dehydrated, cleared and mounted as in the former case. Clearing. It has already been remarked that the nematodes and acantho- cephala cannot be stained. Their anatomy can, however, be well elucidated if they are cleared in some suitable medium. The clearing agents usually used are beech-wood creosote, carbolic acid and lactophenol (40 c.c. glycerine, 20 c.c. carbolic acid, 20 c.c. lactic acid and 20 c.c water). Of these three, lactophenol clears the specimens to a moderate degree and is useful in some cases. Carbolic acid can be used as it is, at higher temperatures only. In order to make it serviceable at lower temperatures, it is usually mixed with a varying quantity of 70 per cent.alcohol. Beech-wood creosote is a very good clearing agent, but if the specimens are kept in it for a long time they are turned black. In order that the specimens may be quickly cleared it is advisable to dehydrate them in 70 per cent.alcohol before transferring them to a clearing medium. Spines and hooks in Platyhelminthes are much more clearly observed after clearing the specimens in any one of the above media. Rapid examination of trematodes and cestodes. It will be seen from the above that the processes of fixing, staining and mounting require at least a few days for completion. The examination has therefore to be necessarily delayed by that period. It is, however, sometimes desired to examine the specimens in a very short period. For this purpose the " rapid method " recommended by Meggitt [1924] may be followed. 97 parts of saturated solution of carmine in 45 per cent.
HELMINTH PARASITES AFFECTING DOMESTIC ANIMALS 27 acetic acid and 3 parts of saturated solution of ferric acetate in glacial acetic acid are prepared immediately before use and mixed. The living specimens may be transferred to this fluid and allowed to remain there from 5 to 30 minutes. They may then be dehydrated in absolute alcohol for 5 minutes, cleared and mounted. The whole process does not require more than 45 minutes even in the case of a thick specimen. Urine examination. Eggs of Schistosoma and Dioctophyme are discharged in urine. In order to detect these, the urine is centrifuged and the sediment examined on a slide under a microscope, when the characteristic eggs will be seen. Fæces examination. It is a well known fact that the eggs of parasitic worms harboured by the host are passed out with the fæces. By examining these the kind of worms infesting the animal can be determined. The procedure adopted for examining the eggs differs according as they are operculated and heavy or light. ( a) For operculated and heavy eggs. Dilute the fæces with 10 to 20 times its volume of water. Pass the solution through a fine sieve, centri- fuge the solution and examine the sediment. ( b) For lighter eggs. The method recommended by Sheather [1923] is found very useful:28 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I necessary to preserve the fæces for the examination. Southwell [1930] recommends the following procedure for this :THE CONTROL OF BLOOD-SUCKING INSECTS IN INDIA. BY S. K. SEN, M.Sc., F.E.S., Assistant Research Officer, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on 5th November 1931.) The problem of the control of blood-sucking insects has now assumed a position of paramount importance in Veterinary Entomology in view of the fact that several species of these insects have, during recent years, been definitely incriminated as the carriers of certain tropical diseases of animals. The most notable of such diseases is surra, which has been repeatedly demonstrated by Nieschulz [1928, 1929], in Java, to be capable of being conveyed mechanically through the bite of Tabanus rubidus, whilst Moutia [1928-29], in Mauritius, has brought forward what would appear to be fairly convincing evidence in support of his contention that the same disease is conveyed through the agency of Stomoxys in that country. In India, the disease has been shewn by Cross and his collaborators [1922, 1924] to be capable of being transmitted through the bites of several species of Tabanids, including T. rubidus. The fact that in all cases the disease has proved to be trans- missible mechanically makes every single biting insect a potential carrier not only of surra, but, possibly, of several other blood-borne infections of animals. The problem of the control of Tabanids will be discussed at length in another article which it is proposed to submit shortly for publication in this Journal,* so that in the present note, it is only necessary briefly to deal with this subject, but to consider in some detail the more important measures advocated by different workers for the control of biting flies other than the Tabanidæ. A brief mention will also be made of some of the known methods for combating house-flies (Muscidæ) and blow-flies (Calliphoridæ), inasmuch as these methods may prove to be of value in devising measures for the control of blood-sucking insects. The more important of the measures hitherto recommended for the control of insect pests of animals may be classified under the following categories :30 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I introduced into the field of Applied Entomology. Several of these have fish-oil as one of their constituents, this oil having been given an extensive trial by the United States Bureau of Entomology and found to possess sufficiently repellent properties to keep away flies for a length of time, perhaps not exceeding 2 or 3 days. Graybill [1914], who would appear to have carried out extensive trials with repellents, considers fish-oil as one of the best, but he stresses the importance of application being made lightly, as otherwise poisoning may result. Of other smelly substances used for the same purpose, mention may be made of a recipe consisting of 5 oz. assafCONTROL OF BLOOD-SUCKING INSECTS 31 mosquitos. Thus, Crumb [1922] mentions having observed that a joint of a stove pipe placed in the woods and heated by an alcohol lamp attracted many mosquitos, but that the crude components of blood and of perspiration apparently produced only faint and erratic responses. Similarly, Howlett [1910], in India, showed that certain species of mosquitos ( e.g., Aëdes ( Stegomyia) albopictus) could be readily induced to bite at a tube containing water heated to the requisite degree. Accord- ing to Metz [1920], Anophelines react sufficiently to certain stimuli to be enticed into traps, and he recommends a study of their sensory reactions combined with chemical analyses and experiments with a view to discovering a substance that will prove sufficiently attractive. III. TRAPS. During the past two decades, a large variety of traps have been designed and sought to be introduced into the field for the purpose of combating certain species of insect pests of animals, notably, mosquitos, tsetse-flies ( Glossina), Muscidæ and blow-flies (Calliphoridæ), the last having received perhaps the largest share of attention. In a short note of this kind, it is only possible to give a bare outline of the designs of some of these traps and to indicate briefly the extent of success obtained from their use. (a) Traps for mosquitos. Lefroy [1911] and Fletcher [1912], in India, have recommended the use of simple wooden boxes with a lining of dark cloth inside. When it is kept open in an unfrequented corner of the house, large numbers of mosquitos may be found congregated inside the box during the day time when they can be readily destroyed. Recently, Bath [1931] has recorded highly satisfactory results from the use of a trap placed on the screens of dwellings, the inmates of which served as the bait. The trap consists of a V-shaped ridge of screening with a slit in the top, inside which is a similar ridge with a smaller slit to prevent the exit of the trapped mosquitos, the whole being surrounded by screening to prevent the mosquitos from entering the house. An efficient method of combating mosquitos is to leave, as suggested by Galli- valerio [1921], a few collections of stagnant water to serve as traps for the mos- quitos to oviposit upon. The larvæ and the pupæ resulting from the eggs may be periodically destroyed. (b) Traps for Tabanidæ. A perusal of the available literature shows that trapping has seldom been resorted to as a method for combating Tabanidæ C 2
32 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I Mitzmain [1913], in the Philippines, mentions trapping of Tabanids with tanglefoot applied to the trunk and larger branches of the rain trees which form their favourite resting places. A measure which has been extolled by a number of workers, e.g., Portchinsky [1915], is the pouring of some oil, such as kerosine, on the surfaces of pools usually frequented by these flies. The Tabanidæ have the habit of skimming, while on the wing, the surface of pools and taking up water with their proboscis, so that, if the pools were oiled, the flies would have some of the oil clinging to the underside of their bodies when they came in contact with the water, and this would eventually cause their death. In an article which has been seen only in abstract, Hewitt [1920], in Canada, states that the results of experiments with a small wire insectary used as a trap for Tabanidæ indicated that such a trap might be of great practical value in the vicinity of cattle yards. In the absence of further details, it is not possible to express an opinion upon the extent to which such traps could be used with advan- tage for combating Tabanids in this country. The use of dummy animals has been suggested by certain workers for attract- ing tsetses and also certain species of Stomoxys and Tabanids, and their use is claimed to have yielded a notable degree of success ( Journ. Dept. Agric. Union S. Africa, 7, pp. 11 and 20 ; 1923). (c) Traps for Tsetse-flies. Although Africa and certain parts of Arabia are the only localities where tsetses are known to occur, a brief consideration of the traps hitherto designed to combat these flies would be of interest for workers in India, inasmuch as both in respect of size and feeding habits, the tsetses present some similarity to certain species of Tabanidæ. As early as in the year 1914, Zupitza devised the rather fantastic method of trapping tsetses by means of a sort of armour consisting of a plaited wire- screen of oxidized metal with a mesh of 1 cm. The trap was donned by a native and smeared with a sticky material. As one would expect, the trap proved thoroughly unsatisfactory, only Glossina in the immediate vicinity being caught by this method. What, in principle, was the same as the Zupitza trap was recommended by Shircore [1920] in the course of a correspondence arising out of a suggestion made by Carpenter concerning the provision of artificial shelters as breeding places for Glossina. He suggested for this purpose the use of logs smeared with an adhesive substance and propped up on supports 2 or 3 inches off the ground.
CONTROL OF BLOOD-SUCKING INSECTS 33 Recently, Harris [1931], working in Natal, has introduced a type of trap which, judging from the results reported to have been obtained from its use, would appear to represent a very notable advance towards the formulation of measures for the control of Glossina. The construction of the trap, as described by Harris, is as follows : "It consists of a platform, 6 feet by 3 feet, across which is an opening 6 inches wide, extending from side to side. Attached to the ends are folding legs which taper from 3 feet in width at the top to 6 inches at the bottom. The whole of this table-like shape is then covered with double hessian forming a hollow bulk. The legs are kept apart by a wooden stretcher inserted between them. Covering the 6 inches opening in the platform is a cage fitted with a non- return passage through which the flies go, to become entrapped in the cage. The trap is painted white and suspended from a wire about 3 feet above the ground surface ". The habit of the fly which it has been sought to exploit in the cons- truction of this trap is described as follows : " When they alight on the animal, according to Mr. Harris, tsetse-flies crawl down towards the under parts, possibly to get out of reach of the tail or muzzle, possibly in search of softer skin " ( Times Weekly Edition, March 26, 1931). The trap, therefore, would appear to hold out very little prospect of proving successful for the purpose of combating Tabanids, inasmuch as these flies are seldom observed to behave in the manner of the tsetses as described above ; on the other hand, they would appear, as a rule, to get engorged at the very spot where they alight on their host's body. (d) Traps for other Biting Insects. For the control of fleas, Delanoe [1922] recommends the use of a fairly large receptacle containing water covered with oil. In the centre of this receptacle a night lamp is placed, and the fleas are stated to be attracted to the light and get drowned in the oil. In one locality in Morocco, about 300 fleas are reported to have been entrapped by this method. The same author [1922] mentions live sheep as being quite a practicable trap, as the wool asphyxiates the fleas. Further, Delanoe quotes Weisgerber as having stated that a sheep skin, even if washed, can be used as a flea trap, the reason being probably that the flea is held captive by the hairs. The control of the minute species of blood-suckers, such as sand-flies (Phleboto- mus) and the midges, is a matter of considerable difficulty. However, Cathcart [1923], in Iraq, records having obtained good results in attracting and destroying sand-flies, by the use of hurricane lamps smeared with vaseline. (e) Traps for House-flies. Several methods have been recommended for entrapping the larval forms of Muscidæ, but as a consideration of these methods would have but little bearing
34 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I upon the problem of the control of blood-sucking flies, it is proposed to mention here only the more important types of traps designed to capture the winged forms of Muscidæ. For the capture of adult house-flies, Burnett [1918] recommends the use of a barrel, of which both the ends have been removed. One end of this is covered with netting and to the other is fixed a funnel made of wire screen, the opening at the point, ¼ to CONTROL OF BLOOD-SUCKING INSECTS 35 (f) Traps for Blow-flies. Although blow-flies are not, as yet, known to be a serious pest in India, never- theless it would seem desirable to give a passing consideration to some of the methods of trapping these flies as practised in other countries, inasmuch as these methods represent a wide range of designs in the making of traps and might be found to furnish indications for devising measures for combating other insect pests of animals. A simple trap for the sheep-maggot fly (Lucilia sericata), devised by Beach [1916], consists of a galvanized sheet-iron pan, with perforated sides and a close- fitting weather-proof cover. The pan contains a layer of sand over which swings another pan in which bait is placed. The perforations in the lower pan are covered with wire-gauze large enough to allow L. sericata to enter. The flies enter the trap, oviposit and die. The pupæ resulting from the eggs are collected from the sand and may be fed to poultry. Froggatt [1917] recommends a simple trap made by covering the open end of an empty kerosene tin with a sheet of wire-gauze. Through the centre of this gauze is let a funnel, the opening of which at the apex is inside the tin. The trap is baited. Adams [1918] suggests destruction of the flies by attracting them to baits kept constantly moist by means of strips of flannel, one end of which is in contact with the bait placed in the lower part of the trap and the other end dipped in an arsenical solution kept in the upper part, the whole being hung by wire from a tree. Babcock and Bennett [1921] record having used, with much success, a trap consisting of a cylinder of wire-gauze 24 inches high and 18 inches in diameter, with a screened top and, at the bottom, with a cone measuring 22 inches high, with a 1½- inch opening at the top. The trap is set in a platform and placed on a tree, about 4 or 5 feet above ground. It is baited. Place [1922] would seem to consider any elaborate measures unnecessary for the purpose of entrapping blow-flies, the object being achieved by means of the simplest of traps, e.g., a kerosene tin with the top cut off and replaced by a piece of cheese cloth, with 2 or 3 small holes along one edge. The tin is laid on its side with a bait and is stated to be very effective. Blow-fly traps have undergone very material modification in their design in the hands of Edwards, and later, in the hands of Wahl and du Plessis [1923]. The Wahl and du Plessis trap has been described and figured in a number of periodicals, and it is only necessary to indicate here the general outline of this
36 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I trap. It consists of two petrol tins placed one above the other and suitably held in this position. The upper tin is provided with a wire-gauze pyramid and serves as the trap proper, while the lower tin contains the bait. Entrances are provided for the flies by making suitable slits on each of the four faces of the lower tin. The top of the upper tin is cut out leaving a one-inch strip all round, this opening serving as the source of light, which will attract the flies in the lower tin after they have fed. The pyramid has a small hole at the apex pointing towards the top of the upper tin. The trap is suitably baited and has provision for the removal of dead flies. Details are given for the construction of the pyramid and fitting together the various parts of the trap. Before concluding this section, a few general remarks would seem called for concerning the utility of traps, as also their limitation in combating insect pests of animals. While the introduction of traps has registered a definite advance in the field of Applied Entomology, their application is only indicated in the case of insects whose habits preclude the adoption of the more effective method of direct destruction. A typical example of an insect of this kind is provided by the tsetse- fly, for, as is well known, this fly is pupiparous in its breeding habits, i.e., it deposits full-grown larvæ which pupate shortly after extrusion, and since the pupae usually lie secreted in the soil in the midst of bushy undergrowth, practically the only stage of the fly that is available to deal with for control purposes is the adult stage. On the other hand, the horse-fly (Tabanid) provides an example where trapping would appear least likely to yield results comparable to what- would be achieved by organized campaigns directed towards the destruction of its eggs, for, unlike the tsetse, the horse-fly is typically oviparous, depositing its eggs in clusters on vegetation overhanging water, and the fact that its eggs need be looked for only in the vicinity of collections of water, very materially simplifies the work of such campaigns. The effectiveness of this measure is strikingly illustrated by the fact that Hine [cited by Mitzmain, 1913] reports having had as many as 433 egg-masses collected in the short space of one hour, a simple cluster being estimated to contain, on an average, about 250 eggs. Even in the case of tsetses where trapping of the adult flies is reported to have yielded highly encouraging results, some workers would appear to regard the destruction of the pupæ as a more effective method of combating this pest. Thus, Hegh, in a communication presented at the International Congress of Tropical Agriculture held at Antwerp in July 1930, suggested that " experiments should be undertaken to test the value of searching out the breeding places of tsetse flies and periodically destroying the pupæ contained in them, as a local measure for reducing their numbers to a negligible minimum ".
CONTROL OF BLOOD-SUCKING INSECTS 37 The general disadvantages of trapping have been stressed by more than one worker. These have been well summarized in the Report of the Special Blow-fly Committee of Queensland [1922], and their remarks, although specifically intended for blow-flies, may be regarded as applicable to traps in general. The Report observes that trapping does not cause any appreciable reduction in the number of flies in a paddock, that owing to the cost, it is not possible to have recourse to it on a large scale and that the labour needed for attending traps is considerable. In this connection, it is of interest that, in the article in the Times Weekly Edition, cited earlier in this note, the Harris trap for tsetse-flies is stated to cost about 30 s., and in a paper by Harris [1930] himself, the cost is estimated at 32 s. 6 d. per trap, and it is further stated: " Although this might be reduced by employing cheaper materials, the ultimate cost would probably be greater owing to the need of repairs and replacements, and the more constant supervision required ". Furthermore, as pointed out in the Report of the activities of the Agricultural Department of the Union of South Africa for 1924, traps are liable to be broken by animals and damaged by rain, whilst the. possibility has also to be reckoned of their being " pinched" by human bipeds. But, perhaps, the chief difficulty that confronts the working of traps, designed to combat biting flies is the question of the appropriate bait, although, judging from the results claimed to have been obtained with the Harris trap in combating tsetse-flies, it is possible that, at any rate, certain species of biting flies are attracted to an animal b y sight rather than by scent. Harris's own findings in the case of tsetses would appear to lend support to this view, for this worker is stated to have observed that when a dummy was tested side by side with a living ox, the latter attracted more than double the number of flies, but when a tame zebra was substituted for the ox, the majority of flies were attracted to the dummy (Journ. Dept. Agric. Union S. Africa, 7, 38938 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I be kept down to a negligible minimum. Of such measures, the one which, at the present moment, would seem to be regarded with much favour by certain entomolo gical workers is the so-called " biological method of control ". Writing about the Tabanidæ in Java, Nieschulz [1927] states that experience having shown that it is impossible (" unmoglich ") to control these flies by artificial means, he made a study of their natural enemies, which included birds (e.g., Bubulculus coromandus), poultry, a predaceous wasp, a Libellulid, and Proctotrupids of the genus Phanurus, which last were the only ones found by him to be of importance, having parasi- tized 60 per cent. of a total of 1,216 egg-masses, in the course of two months. Similar observations have also been recorded by several other workers, including Neave [1914-15], in Nyasaland; Girault [1916], in U. S. A.; Nicholls [1920], in Australia ; and, more recently, by Fischer [1929], in Brazil. At Pusa, species of Phanurus have been repeatedly observed to parasitize a considerable proportion of Tabanid egg-masses deposited on vegetation along banks of a river (Pusa Reports, 1920, et seq.). Perhaps, an effective means of controlling, at any rate, certain of the blood- sucking species of insects might ultimately be found in the discovery of methods whereby their natural enemies, such as those mentioned above, might be numerically increasedCONTROL OF BLOOD-SUCKING INSECTS 39 Cathcart, G. E. (1923). Notes on the Use of Artificial Light in Sandfly Destruction. Journ. Roy. Army Med. Corps., 41, 44740 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I Nieschulz, O. (1928). Wietere Surraübertragungsversuche mit Tabanus rubidus, Wied. Arch. Protistenk., 61, 92TUBERCULOSIS IN GOATS IN INDIA. BY P. R. KRISHNA IYER, G.M.V.C., Veterinary Inspector, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on 21st September 1931.) (With Plates I and II.) A perusal of the available literature shows that tuberculosis in goats has never been recorded in India, although it is by no means unknown in other countries. Thus, according to Karl Hertha, cited by Calmette, [ 1923 ], 0.77 per cent. of goats killed for meat in Germany are found tuberculous, whilst Morel, cited by Calmette, [ 1923 ], found 5 (0.17 per cent.) tuberculous goats out of a total of 2,843 slaughter- ed at the abattoir of Saint-Etienne (France) during the first eight months of the year 1911. Morel's findings are of especial interest from the view-point of the hygiene of milk in that four out of the five tuberculous goats showed generalized lesions with infection of one or several retro-mammary glands. In Great Britain, the first fully authenticated instance of tuberculosis in the goat was recorded by Edgar [ 1892 ], and it has since been shown by the Royal Commission on Human and Animal Tuberculosis [ 1907 ] that goats are very susceptible to inoculation in small doses of the bacillus of bovine tuberculosis. In view of the findings, as cited above, of workers in other countries, it would seem remarkable that not one case of the disease in goats has till now been recorded in India. On the other hand, it would appear to be even held by some people that the goat is a species of animal which is not only immune to tuberculosis but that its products can be used as a remedy for human tuberculosis. Quacks have widely advocated the use of goat's milk for children affected with tuberculosis and even a " goaty " smell has been regarded as being endowed with therapeutic properties against human tuberculosis. At first sight the absence of the disease in goats in India would seem to be attribut- able to the outdoor life led by these animals in this country, as compared with what obtains in European countries where they are maintained in a state of more or less intensive domestication. This was at one time also considered to be a pos- sible explanation for the relative freedom enjoyed by bovines in India from the same disease [ Agric. Jour. India, 18, 394, 1923 ], but, as was revealed by the results of later inquiries, the incidence of bovine tuberculosis in India is by no means as low as was originally supposed to be, for, according to Edwards [ 1927 ], the examination of cattle slaughtered in a certain abattoir in India showed the inci- dence to be as high as 16 per cent. As regards tuberculosis in goats, six cases were ( 41 )
42 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I encountered by the writer of the present note in 1928, in the course of his routine post-mortem duties at this Institute, out of a total of 943 goats (about 0.64 per cent.) examined by him during the same year. It is of interest that all these six cases were female goats, and this would seem to be in conformity with what has been recorded by previous workers, for, as already mentioned, at least 4 out of the 5 tuberculous goats mentioned by Morel were females, whilst the case described by Edgar [ 1892 ] was also of the same sex. Similarly Lydtin, Detroye and Konig, cited by Nocard [ 1895 ], have all recorded the occurrence of tuberculosis in milch goats, the disease in some cases causing a diminution in the milk supply. None of the authors just quoted, however, records having examined male goats for evidence of tuberculosis, whilst the very few male goats, which the present writer has had an opportunity to examine, were all found free from the infection. The observa- tions recorded in the present note and those of previous workers can therefore hardly be regarded as of any significance in regard to the question of the relative incidence of the disease in the two sexes. Nevertheless, that a proportion of females do develop the disease is of importance in view of the traditional belief prevalent in India that goat's milk is pre-eminently adapted for use in the treat- ment of tuberculosis in human beings. The writer takes this opportunity to express his gratitude to Mr. Hugh Cooper, Veterinary Research Officer at this Institute, for helpful guidance and eucouragement in making these observations. I. PROTOCOLS OF NATURALLY INFECTED GOATS AND OF SMALL ANIMALS AND BIRDS SUBINOCULATED FROM THEM. Case 1. She-goat No. 121. AgeTUBERCULOSIS IN GOATS IN INDIA 43 them, the tuberculous material not completely filling them up. Hepatic lymph glands much enlarged and entirely caseated with calcareous changes. The liver parenchyma itself showed a few caseating lesions, varying in size from that of a pea to that of a play-marble. Spleen with a play-marble-sized tough nodular lesion, with calcareous changes. Left atlantal lymph gland with a gram-sized tubercle partly calcified. In addition to the tubercle lesions, the anterior halves of both the lungs were pneumonic in character. Smears from the lungs and the other lesions showed a few acid-fast organisms indistinguishable from tubercle bacilli. Material from the lesions was emulsified in normal saline solution and the infec- tivity of the emulsions was tested on two rabbits and two fowls with the following results :44 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I Tuberculous lesions were found in this animal as described below:PLATE I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Advanced tubercle with calcareous changes surrounded by a zone of epitheloid cells (Goat No. 86) × 120. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. Young tubercle with caseating centre surrounded by a zone of epitheloid cells and giant cells (Goat No. 364) × 60. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 3. Tubercles. Mesenteric gland (Goat No. 626) × 60. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 4. Tubercle lesion. Mesenteric gland (Goat No. 626) × 120.
PLATE II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Same as Pl. I, fig. 4 showing the central giant cell (Goat No. 626) × 550. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. Miliary tubercles, Lungs of rabbit No. 78.
TUBERCULOSIS IN GOATS IN INDIA 45 Post-mortem findings. Lungs showed a large number of caseating tubercles of various sizes. Posterior mediastinal gland congested. No other lesions found. Smears of lesions failed to reveal the presence of any acid-fast organisms. How- ever, histological examination confirmed tuberculosis. [ Plate I, Fig. 1. ] Case 5. She-goat No. 364. Hill-breed. History. Was not put to any experiment. Died on 7th August 1928. In this animal, the anterior and intermediary lobes of the right lung were consolidated with over a dozen millet-seed to pea-sized yellowish-white caseating lesions. Smears from these lesions failed to reveal the presence of any acid-fast or- ganisms. However, histological examination confirmed the lesions being of tubercu- lous origin. [ Plate I, Fig. 2. ] Case 6. She-goat No. 626. Hill-breed. History. Used for rinderpest experiment since 11th August 1928. Showed a severe temperature reaction and died on 17th August 1928. Post-mortem findings. About half-a-dozen of the mesenteric glands enlarged and their cortices showed caseating tubercles varying in size from a millet-seed to a gram seed [ Plate I, Figs. 3 and 4, and Plate II, Fig. 1 ]. The portal lymphatic glands showed a few tubercles. Mediastinal lymphatic glands enlarged and con- gested, but without any tubercle. Smears from the affected mesenteric and portal lymphatic glands showed very few acid-fast organisms. II. CULTURAL CHARACTERS OF A STRAIN OF BACILLUS TUBERCULOSIS DERIVED FROM ONE OF THE NATURALLY INFECTED CASES. Materials from the first two goats were not submitted to cultural examination as smears from lesions in these animals already showed acid-fast organisms. Attempts were made unsuccessfully to obtain cultures from materials derived from the other four goats, smears from two of which, as already mentioned, showed only rare acid-fast organisms, while smears from the other two did not show any. How- ever, materials obtained from the lesions of Rabbit No. 31, one of the small animals inoculated with emulsion of lung lesion from the first goat, were submitted to cul- tural examination and a strain of Bacillus tuberculosis was recovered. According to Mr. Mobbs, Laboratory Assistant, (Upper Grade), at this Institute, who kindly D
46 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I carried out this examination, "the strain does not appear to be an avian type; it has bovine rather than human cultural characters ". Successful sub-cultures were also obtained from the original strain. In serum glycerine agar, the three- week old culture showed a filiform, dry, dull, scanty, grayish growth. In serum agar, the growth was of the same type as in the preceding, but it was more scanty. Histology. The tuberculous lesions in the affected portions of the lungs and glands showed a central caseating area surrounded by a zone of epithelioid cells and giant cells. In advanced lesions calcareous deposits were present. A consider- able amount of tissue destruction was evident in very advanced cases. Results obtained from the inoculation of cultures into small animals. The growths in the tubes were emulsified in physiological saline solution and the emulsion inoculated into 3 rabbits, 3 guineapigs and 3 fowls, as shown below:TUBERCULOSIS IN GOATS IN INDIA 47 Liver congested. Spleen highly enlarged. Smears from all the internal organs showed numerous acid-fast organisms. Etiological diagnosis. Tuberculosis. Guineapig 374. Inoculated 9th July 1929. Died 18th July 1929. Peritoneal cavity with about 5 c.c. turbid, sero-sanguineous fluid. Spleen con- gested and distinctly enlarged. Liver found adherent to the stomach by means of a thick yellowish-white caseating mass, with numerous granular deposits. Pea-sized caseating lesion found around the seat of needle-puncture subcutaneously. Lungs congested. Smears from all the internal organs showed acid-fast organisms. Etiological diagnosis. Tuberculosis. Guineapig 375. Inoculated 9th July 1929. Died 20th July 1929. A caseated area, about 1½ inches square, found subcutaneously, around the needle puncture point. Parietal peritoneum studded with petechial marks. Visceral peritoneum with marked capillary blood-vessel injection and masses of adherent fibrinous flakes. Peritoneal cavity with about 15 c.c. turbid sanguineous fluid. Yellowish- white, fibrinous adhesion between liver and stomach. Diaphragm studded with yellowish-gray minute nodular lesions. Smears of all the organs showed acid-fast organisms. Etiological diagnosis. Tuberculosis. Guineapig 376. Inoculated 9th July 1929. Died 20th July 1929. Same lesions as in Guineapig No. 375. In addition, about half-a-dozen yellowish-gray nodules on the liver were found. Smears from all the organs showed acid-fast organisms. Etiological diagnosis. Tuberculosis. Fowl No. 223. Inoculated 9th July 1929. Died 12th July 1929. No macroscopical lesions found. Smears negative for tubercle bacilli. Fowl No. 224. Inoculated 9th July 1929. Died 17th August 1929, of " Ranikhet fowl disease ". Smears from all the internal organs negative for tubercle bacilli. Smears from the seat of inoculation showed a few acid-fast organisms. Fowl No. 225. Inoculated 9th July 1929. Destroyed 4th September 1929. A four-anna coinsized, pale-yellow lesion found at the seat of inoculation, the lesion extending to a depth of about half-an-inch in the underlying muscles. No other lesions. Smears of all internal organs found negative for tubercle bacilli, but the local lesion showed a few acid-fast organisms. III. THE SPECIFIC NATURE OF THE TUBERCLE BACILLUS AFFECTING GOATS. As is well known, fowls are easily infected with tubercle bacilli of the avian type and they are highly resistant to experimental infections with tubercle bacilli D 2
48 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I of both the human and bovine types, although they may develop minimal local changes at the seat of inoculation when mammalian tubercle bacilli are employed. As the three fowls used in this experiment could not be infected, the possibility of the goat strain of tubercle bacilli being of the avian type is excluded. On the other hand, it has been stated that guineapigs are highly susceptible to infection with both the human and bovine types of tubercle bacilli, but that rabbits are more susceptible to the latter than to the former form of infection. The strain of tubercle bacilli isolated in the present experiments proved to bo particularly virulent for rabbits, as evidenced by the occurrence of extensive miliary lesions in the lungs of these animals [Plate II, fig. 2]. This would appear to point to the conclusion that the strain was of the bovine type. REFERENCES. Calmette, A. (1923). Tubercle Bacillus Infection and Tuberculosis in Man and Animals. Edgar, W. A. (1892). Jl. of Comp. Path. and Ther. 5, 80. Edwards J. T. (1927). R eport of the Impl. Inst. of Vety. Research, Muktesar, for the year ending 31st March 1927, p. 20. Nocard, Ed. (1895). The Animal 'Tuberculoses and their relation to Human Tuberculosis. Royal Commission on Tuberculosis (Human and Bovine). Second Interim Report, Part I, p. 70, 1997.
RHINOSPORIDIOSIS IN EQUINES.* BY V. KRISHNAMURTI AYYAR, I.V.S., Ag. Principal, Madras Veterinary College, Madras. (Received for publication on 23rd September 1931.) (With Plates III to V.) The earliest recorded occurrence of Rhinosporidiosis in man dates back to the year 1900 when Seeber discovered the parasite in growth from the nasal cavities of two men living in Argentina. Since then cases have come to be recorded in man in India and other parts of the world by various workers. Most of the cases recorded in India were from the Madras Presidency and in the great majority of such cases the lesions, which were of the nature of a polypus, were found in nasal cavities, and naso-pharynx, while in a few others they were present on the uvula, conjunctiva, lachrymal-sac, penis and the ear. As regards its prevalence in animals, its occurrence was, for the first time, recorded in the nasal tumour in a horse in South Africa by Zschokke in 1913. It is reported that the tumour was round and was of the size of an egg, reddish in colour and hard with a rough outer surface and that inside were found cysts which were filled with a parasite allied to Rhinosporidium Seeberi. He designated the parasite as Rhinosporidium equi. Two more cases in mules came to be recorded in the same country in 1928 by Quinlan and deKoch. One of the mules showed a number of pinkish tumour-like growths with irregular masses in the nasal mucous membranes, the smallest measuring about 2 mm. in diameter and 1 mm. in height, and the largest, which appeared to be formed by the coalescence of smaller growths, measuring 2 cm. in diameter and 1.5 cm. in height. The other mule made a roaring sound and exhibited signs of dyspnoea when trotted, and in the left nostril was found a large granulation-like mass practically filling the whole of it. In both these cases on histological examination spore morulæ of rhinosporidium have been reported to be present. Recently the attention of the author was drawn by Professor J. H. Ashworth of Edinburgh to a record of a nasal polypus of the horse due to Rhinosporidium found in the Veterinary School in Montevedeo (Cordero and Vogelsang). * Paper read at the 18th Session of the Indian Science Congress held at Nagpur in January 1931. ( 49 )
50 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I Beyond these cases its occurrence has not been reported in equines or in other animals in any other country or in India, except those which I have recorded in cattle in India in 1927. Towards the end of November 1929, a specimen of growth was received from Veterinary Assistant Surgeon T. K. Sreenivasan, in charge of Veterinary Dispensary, Mayavaram, purported to have been removed from the nasal septum of a pony with the following history sheet:PLATE III. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Specimen of growth showing irregular surface. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. Specimen of growth examined under magnifying lens showing the papillose character and the cysts. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 3 (Horse). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 4 (Cattle). Section of growth showing the appearance of the epithelium under low power (horse) compared with that in cattle.
PLATE IV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Section of growth showing the thinning of the surface epithelium and rupture. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. Section showing the branching of connective tissue cells between two sporangia. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 3. Section showing a sporangium with its well defined capsule and immature sporangia by its side. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] No. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] No. 5. Figs. 4 and 5.PLATE V. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Showing the rupture of the sporangium with the escape of its contents. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. Some of the discharged spores are also seen escaping into the adjacent connective tissue.
RHINOSPORIDIOSIS IN EQUINES 51 Close to these invaginations were found sporangia in different stages. The epithelium was found getting thinned in some fields and showed ruptures in others associated with the rupture of sporangium discharging spores and leucocytes. (Plate IV, figures 1 and 2.) The sub-epidermal tissue was found vascular and myxofibromatous in character. The branching of the connective tissue cells between the sporangia was very marked. Sporangia of different sizes in different stages of development were well seen. They were frequently met with in the connective tissue of the polypus. They were either spheroidal or oval in outline with a well defined capsule of varying thickness. Immature sporangia could be well seen by the side of mature ones. (Plate IV, figures 3, 4 and 5.) The spores contained in the sporangium were in different stages. Fully developed spores were found centrally placed and they were found enclosed by a chitinous envelope with refrangent spherules inside them. With the increase of sporangium in size and the development of spores inside it, stretching and the consequent thinning of the envelope were found to occur and these led eventually to the rupture of the epithelium and the sporangium discharging the spores. (Plate V, figures 1 and 2.) From the facts recorded above, it will be seen that the situation of growth, its gross appearance, histology of the polypus, and structure of the sporangium, have all a very close similarity to the human Rhinosporidium. Prof. J. H. Ashworth, to whom the author sent a portion of the above growth, has been kind enough to confirm the findings and added that in a few sporangia the first breaking up of the cytoplasm was rather different from that of the human material but that the final spores appeared, however, like those in the human form. DISCUSSION. The disease popularly known as "Infective Nasal granuloma or Snoring disease " has been in existence in different parts of India since a very long time, in cattle, characterised by the occurrence of growths in the nostril and in a paper by this author entitled " Nasal Granuloma in Cattle " and published as one of the Memoirs of the Department of Agriculture in India, the cause of the disease was traced to a Streptothrix which resembled closely Actinomycosis bovis but differing from it in being acid and alcohol fast. Though this appeared to be the cause of the disease in most of the cases examined, in a paper read by the author at the Seventh Congress of the Far Eastern Association of Tropical Medicine held in Calcutta in 1927, was recorded for the first time the occurrence of Rhinosporidium
52 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I in such nasal growths in cattle unassociated, however, with any streptothrix and its striking identity with Rhinosporidium seeberi and the importance of its signi- ficance was discussed therein. Prof. Ashworth, to whom the author sent the specimen of growth from cattle subsequently, while confirming the finding, agrees that the finding of Rhinosporidiosis in cattle raises an important issue, and that further investigation may probably throw light on the method of infection. The case described in this paper is the first of its kind to be recorded in a horse in India and although it is not possible definitely to say whether it is the same as either human or cattle Rhinosporidium, yet this finding, when taken with its occurrence among cattle, is of interest in a country where cases of human Rhinos- poridiosis are now and then met with. The fact also remains that in view of the mode of infection in man not having been understood, the possibility of the disease being included among those fully recognised to be common to man and animals should be kept in view. Two interesting points remain also to be mentioned in this connection and they are :TUBERCULOSIS IN A COW-BUFFALO WITH A REVIEW OF THE DISEASE IN INDIA. BY R. N. NAIK, G.B.V.C., Assistant Veterinary Research Officer, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on the 6th October 1931.) During recent years, tuberculosis in cattle has received a good deal of attention from medical workers in India in view of its transmissibility to human beings. Until recently, the disease in cattle had been regarded by certain workers as a rare condition, and Joshi [1914] records having consistently failed to detect Bacillus tuberculosis in samples of milk examined by him and also refers to his failure to prove the disease in guinea-pigs after inoculation with milk samples in which tubercle bacilli were detected. On the other hand, Soparker [1929] records having succeeded in producing tubercle lesions in guinea-pigs by inocula- ting them with material derived from a slightly enlarged spleen of another guinea- pig which had failed to reveal B. tuberculosis in its tissues, after it had been inocula- ted with bovine B. tuberculosis recovered from a human patient. Other findings especially those of Taylor [1918] showed that the disease was by no means uncom- mon at least in the Punjab, whilst Soparker has very recently brought forward considerable evidence in support of Taylor's statement. The latest findings of Soparker and Dhillon [1931] show an incidence of 22.85 per cent. in cows, bullocks and buffaloes slaughtered at Lahore. As the greater quantity of milk consumed in India today comes from the buffaloes, it would be interesting to discuss the extent to which this species of animal has been found susceptible to tuberculosis infection. In 1925, Soparker detected a case of tuberculosis in a buffalo when examined post-mortem at Muktesar and the same observer in collaboration with Dhillon [1931] records having found at the Lahore slaughter house that 23.6 per cent. of buffaloes showed either tubercular lesions or reacted to the tuberculin test. According to the same author [1925], the susceptibility of buffaloes following upon artificial inoculation worked out at 88.8 per cent. in the case of Jafferbadi buffaloes and 87.5 per cent. in the case of Murrah buffaloes and he was thus led to ( 53 )
54 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I regard the buffalo as being somewhat more susceptible to tuberculosis infection than the cow. These facts would seem to indicate that the incidence of the disease in buffaloes under natural conditions is likely to be higher than in cattle, although such cases have hitherto remained unrecorded owing to the general ignorance of stock-owners and the difficulty of arranging post-mortem examinations particularly in aged buffaloes under field conditions. In view of the very striking paucity of records concerning natural clinical cases of tuberculosis in buffaloes, the following observations made by the present writer in 1922 upon a case of generalised tuberculosis in this species may be of interest. The subject was a Jafferbadi buffalo-cow aged 9 years. She was purchased by the owner about 4 years previously from a Gowli who was residing in Poona City. When bought, she was yielding eleven seers of milk and was in a very good condition. When dry, she used to be sent to Rahatani, a village 10 miles away from the Poona City for grazing. She calved normally about the beginning of December 1921. A few days later she contracted Foot and Mouth disease and recovered but after that she was noticed to be losing her condition. On the 29th December 1921 she was off feed, had constipation and was brought to the Poona City Veterinary Hospital on the 2nd January 1922, for treatment as an out-patient, when she was found suffering from diarrhTUBERCULOSIS IN A COW-BUFFALO 55 right lung weighed 20 lb. 8 oz. The surface of both the lungs was crammed with small gray nodules. Palpation revealed hardened granules and a few small areas of fibrous consistency in the superficial layer. Sections through the lung substance revealed numerous unsoftened miliary tubercles at many points confluent, at others separated by hepatised or indurated pulmonary tissue. A certain number of sections which appeared grayish and of a firm consistency, such as is observed in chronic pneumonia, contained enormous numbers of whitish or yellowish gray granules, masses of broken down tubercles and irregular cavernous spaces, varying up to 2 inches in size containing creamy pus. A few sections showed irregular greenish gray areas of necrotic tissue. In fact, there was very little of the normal lung tissue left to carry on the physiological functions. The mucous membrane of the bronchi was inflamed and thickened. The pleura was devoid of its usual glistening appear- ance and had developed excrescenses particularly at the point of its adhesion to the lung. The mediastinal, prescapular, bronchial and submaxillary glands were enlarged oedematous, congested and showed caseated centres. The heart showed hypertrophy and contained clotted blood in both ventricles. It weighed 8 lb. 12 oz. The pericardium showed deposition of lymphy material. The liver and spleen were congested and contained miliary tubercles. The gall bladder and bile ducts showed concretions of bile and particles of injesta from the duodenum. The weight of the liver was 9 lb. 6 oz. and that of the spleen 1 lb. 12 oz. Both the kidneys were congested, slightly enlarged and weighed 4 lb. 6 oz. Some of the mesenteric glands were enlarged, oedematous and congested and showed caseated centres. A few species of Amphistoma cervi were present in the rumen ; the reticulum showed, as usual, an accumulation of rubbish ; the omasum contained semi-liquid injesta which presumably was due to its atonic condition ; whilst the abomasum was full of injesta and this along with the small intestines showed congested patches. The urinary bladder and the uterus appeared normal. The posterior mammary glands were enlarged, oedematous and contained tubercular nodules in the interstitial tissues. Smears made from the lungs were teeming with B. tuberculosis, their identity being also confirmed by the Principal, Bombay Veterinary College. The writer desires to express his thanks to the officer in charge of Veterinary Hospitals of Bamburda and Poona City for the history of the case and to Mr. B. B.
56 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I Joshi of the former hospital for assistance rendered in conducting the post-mortem examination. REFERENCES. Joshi, L. L. (1914). Observation on the Bacteriological and Chemical examination of the milk supply, p. 15. Soparkar, M. B. (1925). Ind. J. Med. Res. 13, 755. DOUBLE CAECUM IN A GOAT58 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I through an attack of experimental rinderpest and which eventually died of peri- tonitis and pneumonia. The larger caecum was twenty centimetres long and three centimetres in diameter and this appeared to be the caecum proper. The accessory caecum was a little smaller in size being fourteen centimetres in length and 3.5 cm. in diameter at its broadest part. Both the caeca opened separately into the in- testinesPLATE VI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Double caecum in a goat.
PLATE VII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
CASES OF POISONING IN THE HORSE WITH RATTI SEEDS (ABRUS PRECATORIUS), BY ORAL ADMINISTRATION. BY MAJOR K. S. SIMPSON, R.A.V.C., AND P. C. BANERJEE, G.B.V.C., Offg. Veterinary Deputy Superintendent, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on 13th November 1931.) (With Plate VII and 2 text-figures.) In the early part of 1930 there occurred a mysterious outbreak of sickness among the horses of a Regiment stationed in Northern India. A horse was reported to have fallen down in the Squadron Lines, and was unable to get up. The case seemed one in which an injury, involving the spinal column, had taken place. Attempts to get the animal to stand failed, so the stall was made as comfortable as possible, stimulant liniment applied to the spine, and a dose of Ammon Carb. and Nux Vomica administered. Orders were given to the Veterinary Assistant Surgeon to extract the faeces by hand, and give enemata and saline purges. The temperature was normal and the pulse slow. There was a general lassitude and the hind quarters appeared to be paralysed, food and water were taken in small quantities. The pupil was dilated and there was a slight twitching of the facial muscles. The following morning the horse had not improved, but the diagnosis of spinal injury was abruptly abandoned, when two more horses were reported to be showing exactly the same symptoms. This pointed to food poisoning, and samples of all forage were sent to experts for examination. The results were negative. Exa- mination of samples of drinking water also failed to give any result. Saline purges were given to all the affected animals, but they soon refused food and in ten days' time were in such an emaciated condition that it was decided to destroy them. ( 59 )
60 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I Post-mortem revealed a general inflammatory condition throughout the ali- mentary tract associated with blood extravasations, icteric staining of the pyloric portion of the stomach, and a marked inflammatory condition of the bladder. The contents of the stomachs were sent to the Public Analyst, at Lahore, Major D. R. Thomas, I.M.S. His report proved negative. By this time five more animals had developed the same symptoms. Convinced that the cause was some virulent poison, drastic measures were adopted. As soon as the onset of symptoms was observed, a hypodermic injection of Arecoline Hydro- bromide was given, followed, a few hours later, by saline purges. The results were astonishing. Within 12 hours the animals could stand. Moved slowly, they evinced inco-ordination of movement in the hind quarters, but this gradually improved and within a month they were all doing their normal routine work. No more cases occurred. All this time the grain, hay and grass were subjected to a rigid examination, but no explanation accrued. The matter remained a mystery for at least six months and then, in consequence of some information gleaned about the action of Ratti seeds, it was decided to carry out some experiments. The object of these was to determine whether the seeds would produce symptoms analogous to those seen in the affected animals, if administered by the mouth to the horse. No trace of poisoning in animals by oral administration of the seeds could be found in the text books consulted. The Ratti seed or Abrus precatorius was first described by Warden and Waddell [1884]. In Bengal it is called " Kunch " or " Gunj " and its Hindustani name is " Ratti ". It is also indigenous to Brazil where it is called " Jequirity ". It is some- times called the Indian liquorice plant. The seed is spherical, smooth, of a bright, shining red or white, with a black mark at the eye, or more rarely, black with a white eye. Three varieties of the plant have been met with in India :POISONING IN THE HORSE WITH RATTI SEEDS 61 From a Veterinary point of view, its chief interest lies in the fact that C hamars inject it under the skin to kill cattle. In this way it is given in the form of a puncturing needle (Sui poisoning), which is made up of a mixture of the decortica- ted seeds pounded into a paste with water. The seeds contain a Toxalbumen called " Abrin ", which is more or less allied to " Ricin ", from the Castor Oil seed ; or " Crotin " from the Croton seed. This " Abrin " is easily destroyed by heat and when absorbed in a wound caused by " Sui " poisoning, the symptoms resemble snake poisoning together with the agglutination of the Red blood-corpuscles of the blood. Death takes place in this way in about two days, with intense local reaction, and if in the neighbour- hood of the throat, suffocation generally supervenes. It is used by " malingerers " in Hospitals to bring on conjunctivitis, and in Indian medicines as a tonic or aphrodisiac. The method of extracting " Abrin " is by physiological saline at blood heat. Nadkarni [1910] states that the dose of the powder for human beings is 1 to 3 grs. If administered uncooked, the seeds act as a strong purgative and emetic. When used in large doses, they are an acrid poison, giving rise to symptoms like those of cholera. Warden and Waddell [1884] state that the seeds given by the mouth are harm- less. They quote Dr. M. Thomas, who says, " The seed, even when finely ground, does not seem to be a poison when given by the mouth. I have repeatedly given it to dogs in as large doses as 2 to 3 drachms, but with no ill effect ". A Dr. Center is also quoted and he states that he has given the seeds to dogs in doses varying from ¾ to 1 oz. without poisoning symptoms. There appears to be no trace of an animal being poisoned by oral administra- tion of the Ratti seeds. However, in spite of the weight of evidence against the probability of a definite result, it was decided to carry out some experiments by feeding the seeds to horses and also by administration in the form of a bolus. Experiment I. A " cast " Artillery horse, 16 hands. Two ounces of the Ratti seeds were finely ground in a mortar, and the whole made into a mass, and given as a bolus. After 8 hours the animal showed signs of violent pain and temperature 104°, followed by a period of lassitude and subnor- mal temperature. Food was refused and the horse was unable to rise. Arecoline and saline purges were administered and the animal recovered. E
62 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I Experiment II. A " cast " Cavalry horse, 15.1 hands. Two ounces of Ratti seeds were finely ground in a mortar and given in the ordinary feed. The same symptoms were observed as in experiment I. The horse died about the 16th hour. Post-mortem. A general inflammatory condition of the alimentary tract asso- ciated with blood extravasations. The contents of the stomach as well as samples of the Ratti seeds were sent to Major Thomas and an extract from his report reads " You will note that fragments of these berries were detected by means of the microscope in the stomach contents of the horse, which died as a result of your experiment. There are no known chemical tests for Abrus precatorious (Ratti seeds). Your experiment was very interesting and as the same symptoms were observed before death, it proves, more or less conclusively, that these Ratti seeds, in the powdered form, given to a horse are poisonous ". With a view to establishing definitely the toxicity of the seeds by oral adminis- tration and their effect, fed in that way, on different species of animals, further experiments were conducted at the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. Two ponies, Nos. 79 and 178, were offered ¼ ounce of the crushed seeds in the grain feed for 8 days (1st February 1931 to 8th February 1931). They both refused the grain from the third day, so on the 11th February 1931 they were given ¼ ounce of the seeds in bolus formation. Pony No. 79 became dull and off feed with a temperature of 104° on 12th February 1931, but was. normal on the 13th February. The dose was continued daily up to 6th March when a daily dose of ½ ounce in bolus was given up to the 14th March. This was increased from the 14th March to 20th April when 2 ounces from the 21st April to 26th April were given. The pony survived and showed no untoward symptoms. Pony No. 178, after the initial dose of ¼ ounce in bolus form showed exactly the same symptoms as No. 79, i.e., rise of temperature to 103°, dull, off feed, and normal on 13th February. The same amounts were given as to No. 79 and on the same dates. The animal appeared normal throughout. Two more ponies, Nos. 283 and 195, were given two ounces of the drug in bolus form in the afternoon of the 21st April and were both dead by the early morning of the 22nd April. Their temperatures were not recorded.
POISONING IN THE HORSE WITH RATTI SEEDS 63 Post-mortem examination of Ponies Nos. 283 and 195 revealed :64 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, All these animals exhibited the same symptoms and post-mortem appearances as Ponies 283 and 195. Charts of ponies Nos. 4 and 321 are herewith reproduced (Figs. 1 and 2). PONY No. 4. Administered 2.30 ozs. or 66.08 grms. of powdered ABRUS PRECATORIUS In the form of Bolus on 27-7-31 at 12 noon. MARE No. 321. Administered 1.28 ozs. or 36.33 grms. of powdered ABRUS PRECATORIUS In the form of Bolus on 27-7-31 at 12 noon. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2.
POISONING IN THE HORSE WITH RATTI SEEDS 65 Dogs. No. 5AA CASE OF RUPTURE OF HEART IN A HORSE. BY G. A. AJWANI, M.Sc., D.V.M., D.V.H., Officiating Lecturer in Pathology and Bacteriology, Madras Veterinary College, AND R. VENKATARAMA AYYAR, G.M.V.C., Pathological Assistant. (Received for publication on 9th December 1931.) HISTORY. Bay Waler gelding No. 34, aged 7 years, belonging to the Madras City Police, was sent to the College for post-mortem examination on 19th Novem- ber 1930 at 3 P.M. with the history that he suddenly dropped down dead in the morning while on parade at the Marina. The possibility of anthrax infection was suspected but the blood smears taken after death revealed no anthrax bacilli. GROSS PATHOLOGY. The autopsy was conducted at 4 P.M. The carcase was markedly tympanitic with bruises over the back and face and slight hæmorrhage from the nostrils. The abdominal cavity contained about two pints of serous fluid. In the thoracic cavity no effusion was observed, but the pericardial sac was fully distended with fluid and was intact. On slitting open the pericardium, about one and one-half pints of semi-clotted blood with a few blood clots were present. There was a rupture about one inch in diameter in the wall of the right auricle, the areolar tissue surrounding the common aorta was hæmorrhagic and the rest of the chambers of the heart were empty. The heart was doughy, inelastic and presented a boiled appearance. The weight of the heart-without blood was 5¾ lbs. Both the lungs were congested. All the rest of the body organs were apparently normal. There was a rupture of the diaphragm at its muscular portion and a portion of the abdominal organs was forced forwards into the thoracic cavity. The rupture of the diaphragm was probably due to the extreme tympany and a post-mortem one, as neither hæm- ( 66 )
PLATE VIII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 1. Section of the heart of a horse (low power). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 2. Section of the heart of a horse (high power). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 3. Hypertrophied oviduct of a hen containing the impacted egg-yolk.
RUPTURE OF HEART IN A HORSE 67 orrhage nor blood clots were present in either the thoracic or abdominal cavities. The stomach and intestines contained a fair amount of ingesta. No parasites were detected. The smears from the heart and spleen revealed no pathogenic organisms. Histological appearances of the section from the wall of the right auricle of the heart revealed a swollen and granular condition of the muscular fibres with partial disintegration of the fibrils, the appearances being suggestive of paranchymatous degeneration of the heart (Plate VIII, figures 1 and 2). The cause of death was recorded as rupture of the heart.
OBSTRUCTION OF THE OVIDUCT IN A HEN. BY G. A. AJWANI, M. Sc., D.V.M., D.V.H., Officiating Lecturer in Pathology and Bacteriology, Madras Veterinary College, AND G. R. VISWANATHAN AND M. NOOR AHMED, Pathological Assistants. (Received for publication on 9th December 1931.) HISTORY. Leghorn hen in a live condition was received at the laboratory on 17th July 1931 from the Veterinary Assistant Surgeon in charge, Veterinary Hospital, Octacamund, for examination. The only history furnished was that the hen was one of the dozen kept by a lady at Octacamund and all of them have been very good layers. He also reported that the bird which he sent was gradually getting thin and dropsical and suspected it to be suffering from tuberculosis. The bird died after a week. GROSS PATHOLOGY. At autopsy, the abdomen was found hard and distended. The vessels of the subcutis were found injected and on incising the abdominal muscles, a hard and organised tumour of the size of a cocoanut, weighing 1 lb. and 12½ oz., was present impacted in and adherent to the oviduct which at that region was found hyper- trophied (Plate VIII, figure 3). On incision into the oviduct, yellowish semi-solid mass of the egg-yolk was found to occupy the whole of its interior. The liver was found slightly congested and some congestion of the intestines was also noted. The other body organs were apparently normal. There were no signs of tubercular lesions in any of the organs. Smears from the oviduct did not reveal acid-fast organisms. There was no obstruction of the cloaca and the bird was passing normal fæces. The point of interest is the extraordinary development of the egg in the oviduct and the bird having lived for a number of days without further complica- tions. The cause of death was recorded to be due to the obstruction of the oviduct or the condition commonly known as " egg-bound ". ( 68 )
FRACTURE OF THE PELVIC BONE IN A DOG. BY G. A. AJWANI, M.Sc., D.V.M., D.V.H., Officiating Lecturer in Pathology and Bacteriology, Madras Veterinary College, AND R. VENKATARAMA AYYAR, G.M.V.C., Pathological Assistant. (Received for publication on the 9th December 1931.) HISTORY. Dog, aged 4 years, in-patient No. 1137, belonging to Mr. Weston, was admitted for treatment in the Veterinary College Hospital as in-patient on the 27th August 1931 with the complaint that it was run over by a motor car. The clinical diagnosis was shown as partial fracture of the hip. The animal died on the 28th August 1931 at 1 P.M. GROSS PATHOLOGY. The autopsy was conducted on the same day at 2-45 P.M. There was presence of contused wound under the buttocks with the subcutaneous hæmorrhage at the scrotum. On opening the abdominal and thoracic cavities presence of 1½ lbs. of sero-sanguineous fluid in the former and about 3 oz. of similar fluid in the latter was found. The bladder was found acutely congested and a punctured wound about ¾" in length was present inferiorly and clotted blood of semi-solid consistency was seen escaping from the rupture. The bladder further presented a number of peeled ( 69 )
70 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I off areas on the serous surface. On examination of the pelvic bene a communited fracture was noticed (Text figure 1). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. I. Fractured pelvic bone. The left ileum bone presented a communited fracture a little above the shaft. The right ileum showed oblique fracture (complete) commencing from above the shaft to the anterior angle. The right pelvic bone was fractured about the middle and a little below the acetabulum. The ischium was fractured at the extreme upper part of its external border, a little behind the acetabulum; besides it was found fractured close to the symphysis ischii. The parts were found displaced. In the sacrum the extreme anterior part of the lateral border, i.e., the auricular facet showed a partial fracture. The other body organs were found apparently normal except the intestines which showed patches of congestion but no worms. The cause of death was recorded as rupture of the bladder consequent on fractured and displaced pelvic bone.
SELECTED ARTICLES THE RELATIONSHIP OF PICA IN CATTLE TO TRYPANOSO- MIASIS.* BY WILLIAM HENDERSON, M.R.C.V.S., D.V.S.M. (Vict.), Director of Animal Health, Northern Nigeria. (Reprinted from the Veterinary Journal, November 1931.) Pica or geophagy is the condition in which a depraved appetite develops, and in itself it is not a disease sui generis. It is well known to the Fulani cattle owners of Northern Nigeria, and they call it " mudu ". The condition may be present in many disorders of livestock, the outstanding case being osteomalacia. Hutrya and Marek give the condition a special description of its own in their monumental " Special Pathology and Therapeutics of the Diseases of Domestic Animals ", and call it "licking sickness ", which well describes the main sign. The present investigation was undertaken as the first piece of co-operative work arising out of the formation of an Animal Health Committee for Nigeria. At the discussion which initiated the work, it was maintained that trypanosome infection was the cause of pica in Nigerian cattle. This seemed such an unusual view as to the ætiology of the condition that it was decided to attack the problem as amongst the first on which work must be done. PICA AS FOUND IN NIGERIAN CATTLE. One of us (N. B.) submitted the following on the condition as seen by the veterinary officers who are working in the field amongst the nomadic cattle of the country: ' Mudu ' is a peculiar symptom observed in cattle infected with trypano- somes in which the animals eat large quantities of earth. It has been stated that cattle show preference for ant-hill over ordinary earth, but this has not been my experience. I have seen affected cattle eating earth close to an ant-hill without touching the latter. In advanced cases of the disease the affected animals have been seen to eat earth as ravenously as a cow at home will eat a well prepared mash. * Animal Health Committee of Nigeria: Report, Series No. 1, Part I. ( 71 )
72 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I Occurrence. This condition has been recognised by the Fulani for many years. It is worth while mentioning that almost all the Fulani cattle owners associate ' mudu' with trypanosomiasis. The disease has not been observed in suckling calves, but seems to affect old milch cows more severely than others. Distribution. Mudu appears to be fairly widespread amongst trypanosome infected herds in Kano, Katsina, and Zaria Emirates, and throughout large areas of Adamawa. It has so far rarely been observed amongst trypanosome infected cattle in the Plateau Province. Symptoms. Mudu cattle show symptoms identical with those shown in chronic trypanosomiasis, and are as follows: The first symptom noted is the star- ing coat, some loss of condition, loss of milk supply in the cow, appetite good, but the animal seldom fills itself. The abdomen becomes tucked up, and the visible mucous membranes become pallid. The superficial lymph glands are seen to be enlarged, and are somewhat softer than usual. Only rarely, and then only in very advanced cases of the disease, have RELATIONSHIP OF PICA IN CATTLE TO TRYPANOSOMIASIS 73 largement of the liver and the spleen. The small amount of fat at the base of the heart and in the grooves is yellow and gelatinous in appearance. The heart and liver surfaces are very pale. The liver usually shows some indication of either a fatty degeneration of infiltration. The kidneys do not appear enlarged, but the capsules strip easily. The alimentary canal is normal, no diarrh74 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I associated with some lack in the mineral constituents of the rations. In America and in Kenya it is known, and acted upon, that salt-licks rich in sodium carbo- nates have a prophylactic effect. Cathcart (1921) ascribes the prophylactic value of the edible earth from the cases at Lumbwa to its richness in sodium oxide; but Foster points out that sodium chloride alone has not been found to eradicate pica, although it does appear to decrease the craving for salt-licks. This means that supplying any possible sodium chloride deficiency is not sufficient to cure pica, and therefore the condition does not depend, at any rate, on these deficiencies alone. Further, Foster mentions the fact that the Lumbwa earth contains as much as 5.25 per cent. tricalcic phosphate. Ostertag and Zuntz (1906) have considered that alkali deficiency plays a part in licking sickness, and Foster states that Zuntz now suspects that abnormally high potassium sodium ratio will cause the disease. In all the recorded cases which have been investigated it has appeared that some inorganic constituent of the dietary is incriminated, and yet in Nigeria the symptoms and signs have invariably disappeared when the overlying disease of trypanosomiasis has been treated by tartar emetic, which is a combination of an organic acid that can have no important part in nutrition (because of its constitution), and a metal which has not yet been shown to be of first rate importance in the nutrition of herbivores. It would appear that the preponderance of evidence points to pica being caused by a deficiency of those minerals that preserve the alkali reserve of the blood. All observers are agreed that the herbage in Nigeria is deficient in mineral constituents. Several varieties of grasses have been analysed by McCulloch, and the composition varied between the following limits, on a dry matter basis; pro- tein, 7.5 to 3.8; total ash, 7.6 to 4.3; sol. ash, 2.1. to 1.4; insol. ash, 5.5 to 2.9 ; CaO, 0.64 to 0.21; P2O5, 1.27 to 0.11. The very exceptional grass that con- tained 1.27 per cent. of P2O5 was reputedly a good grass for cattle, but it contained only 0.37 per cent. of CaO. The amount of silica in these grasses is worthy of note. Woodman and Evans (1930) give the following average composition of a "mineral deficient herbage'', on a dry matter basis: Crude protein, 13.00; true protein, 12.67 ; amides, 0.33 ; ether extract, 1.90; N free extractives, 46.39 ; crude fibre, 35.15; ash, 3.57 ; silica, 0.58; silica-free ash, 2.99; lime, 0.27; phosphoric acid, 0.25; potash, 1.19 ; soda, 0.15; chlorine, 0.43 ; magnesia, 0.32. The Nigerian grasses are seen to be very poor in protein and very rich in silica, while the lime and phosphoric acid contents are on the whole slightly higher than the above figures, but still definitely very deficient. The low content of the Nigerian grasses in soluble ash points to a general deficiency of minerals in them as a whole territorial group. The phosphorus content of the grasses seems to follow
RELATIONSHIP OF PICA IN CATTLE TO TRYPANOSOMIASIS 75 the rule for other Nigerian food stuffs, that it is not as low relatively as the calcium content. Woodman and Evans (1930) have also given the composition of an average meadow hay after a very full review of the literature on this matter. They con- clude that an average meadow hay should conform to the following composition on a dry matter basis:76 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I and later, Mr. Clarke. Twelve animals were brought, and divided into four groups of three. In every case the animal was observed to be eating earth, and in every case trypanosomes were found in the gland juices. Group I: Given bone meal, oz. iv. daily, as a bolus. Group II : Given rock salt ad libitum, as a lick. Group III: A combination of groups I and II. Group IV:Treated for infection by tartar emetic. No minerals supplied. All animals were allowed to graze within the limits of the camp, and had no other supplements beyond water or those listed above. Two animals which arrived in extremis were allowed to die, and their femora and ribs were preserved for analysis. Group I (bone meal, oz. iv). All continued to eat earth at irregular periods (two to four days), and all had died by the twenty-fifth day. Group II (rock salt ad libitum).RELATIONSHIP OF PICA IN CATTLE TO TRYPANOSOMIASIS 77 Analyses of Bones of Untreated Animals. Femora Ribs. Ash. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63.265 50.8 Organic matter. . . . . . . 36.735 49.2 CaO. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26.77 24.56 P2O3. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20.4 20.0 CaO2/PO5. . . . . . . . . . . 1.3 1.23 A/R. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.71 1.03 The ash to organic matter ratio is clearly one of a rachitic or osteomalacic character (adult rickets), Merely the fact that the skeleton is fully grown pre- vented any of the stigmata of rickets being present. As the animals had grown to adult form in the normal manner, these analyses can only mean that there was a tremendous loss of calcium phosphate going on from the bones before the animals finally succumbed to the loss. Physically it was observed that the cortical portions of the bones were much thinner than the corresponding bones from the slaughter place. Hutyra and Marek (1926, third edition) remarked that any calcium deficiency is aggravated by any excess of phosphoric acid in the dietary, as this merely causes a further excretion of calcium. The tendency appears, on average, with many exceptions, for plants to be much richer in phosphorus than calcium in Nigeria, and so there is a strong probability that any calcium deficiency in the herbage is intensified by the higher proportion of phosporic acid present, even though, as has been pointed out, the phosphoric acid present is really in itself deficient in amount. But calcium deficiency, whatever its cause, cannot cause any drain on the pre-formed long skeleton except under certain conditions. Bunge's hypothesis that potassium salts in excess lead to an abnormally high excretion of sodium salts is generally used to explain the craving of livestock for sodium chloride. This hypothesis seems to depend on the generally accepted fact that livestock are not likely to suffer from deficiency of potash when fed on any type of pasture, while all grasses tend to be poor in sodium. Another reason for the drain of sodium from the system is a dietary in which there is a marked acid imbalance. A large acid supply with a low alkali content of the blood will lead to a combination of sodium and postassium with these acids, and so the combining power of the calcium ions present is reduced merely by the absence of substances with which to combine. Were the cause of the pica the very low calcium content of the feed, we should have found that bone meal would have stopped the disease. Salt and bone meal, however, did stop the condition in Group III. Now Foster has pointed out the F
78 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I effect of alkaline salt licks in preventing pica, and that observation assumed a new importance. Pica in Nigerian cattle is stopped by supplying sodium ions along with calcium ions, but not by either alone. That must mean that the sodium base is used to neutralise excess acids in the circulation, and that excess has to be supplied to overcome this acidosis, and so permit of the retention of the calcium ions. But does an acidosis exist in animals suffering from trypanosomiasis ? Linton (1930) found that in an acute trypanosome infection there is an early acidosis which eventually ends in a sub-terminal breaking down of the kidneys. He also showed, of course, that the CO2 combining power of the serum was markedly lowered early in the infection. Kligher, Geiger, and Comaroff (1929) found that lactic acid is so rapidly produced that it cannot be eliminated, and so the whole process of oxidative metabolism is upset, with a depletion of the alkali reserve, and consequence acidosis. Bocka (1929) in his paper on the nature of osteomalacia defines the disease a pathological type of calcium metabolism which eventually becomes an acidosis and bases his treatment by magnesium hydrate on these grounds. An important confirmatory point of the acidotic origin of the pica is the disappearance of the pica when the trypanosomes are not present, and therefore not multiplying in the blood stream. CALCIUM LACTATE INJECTIONS. It now seemed that if intravenous injections of calcium lactate cured the condition that the case was proved. Accordingly a fifth group of animals was obtained and five animals were chosen. All were eating earth daily, and all were infected with trypanosomes. No. 1. This beast was given altogether five injections directly into the jugular vein, each consisting of 1 gramme cali lactate in solution. The first injection was given on December 23rd, and two days after this injection the animal ceased eating earth. It was given a second injection similar to the first on December 30th ( i.e., seven days later), and two days after this second injection the animal ceased eating earth. It was given a third injection on January 2nd, and subsequently two more at intervals of three days. These injections did not appear to have any effect on the condition, the animal continued to eat earth, and gradually became more and more emaciated, and eventually died three days after the last injection. Nos. 2, 3, 4 and 5. The four beasts were each given four injections consisting of 1 gramme of calcium lactate in solution. The second injection was given seven days after the first, and the other two at the intervals of three days. No. 2 ceased eating earth the day following the second injection, and did not recommence.
RELATIONSHIP OF PICA IN CATTLE TO TRYPANOSOMIASIS 79 Nos. 3, 4 and 5 ceased eating earth three days after the first injection, and did not recommence. Although these four beasts ceased eating earth, they continued to lose condition rapidly, becoming very emaciated, and, at the request of the owners, after the fourth injection of calcium lactate they were given the usual treatment for trypanosomiasis (i.e., three intravenous injections of a solution of pot. antimonii tartrate and sod. chloride). They very quickly recovered, and were sent away cured. From these series of experiments it therefore appeared that the condition of pica could be stopped either by feeding bone meal and salt or by intravenous injections of calcium lactate, and that the only conditions that fitted the facts found were an acute acidosis, accompanied by a deficiency of sodium and calcium in the feed of the animals. EXPERIMENTAL (b): AN ATTEMPT TO INDUCE PICA ARTIFICIALLY. R. S. MARSHALL, M.R.C.V.S., H. M.O. LESTER, B.Sc, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., AND F. KANE, M.D. It has been decided that the part of this research to be undertaken by the tsetse investigation should consist of an attempt to induce pica artificially at Gadau. Experiments were planned to show whether trypanosomiasis played a part in the development of pica, and, if so, whether this could be obviated by giving extra salt in the diet. The animals available for this work consisted of a mixed group of twenty Fulani cattle, viz., two heifers, an aged cow, and the remainder, bulls of varying ages. These had been obtained from different local herds., and had been brought into very good condition by supplementing their grazing with a dry mash made from guinea-corn and cotton seed. They continued to receive this dry mash throughout the experiment. Gland juice, fresh and thick- stained blood films from all the cattle were examined for trypanosomes and all proved negative. At the end of July these healthy animals were divided into two groups, Group 1, Nos. 1-10, being kept on the ordinary diet without salt, while Group II, Nos. 11-20, had the same diet with rock salt ad lib. On August 30th, five animals from Group I, Nos. 1,4, 5, 7, and 10, were given an estimated dose of I X 10 trypanosomes (T. Vivax) subcutaneously, and five animals from Group II, Nos. 11-15 inclusive, were given a similar dose. The trypanosomes were obtained from a goat, on whose blood a count had been made, the blood being drawn off into the requisite amount of citrated saline, and given immediately (within two minutes). The control animals did not receive any infection artificially. F 2
80 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I Temperatures were taken twice weekly, the blood being examined for trypanosomes by the fresh and thick-stained film methods. Weekly estimations of the blood calcium and chlorides were made also. Trypanosomes were first observed in the blood of animals 14 and 15 after an incubation period of seven days, and in all the other infected animals within a few days later. The appearance of trypanosomes in the blood was coincident within a rise in temperature up to 105° (range 103.2°-105°). Thereafter trypanosomes could be demonstrated in the blood in irregular waves, the temperatures showing similar gradations. No difference in the course of infection as indicated by the incubation and clinical picture could be detected in either group. There were no significant variations in the blood calcium and chlorides, even up to the point of death. An unfortunate development arose in the control animals: No. 18 in Group II died after two days' illness. No trypanosomes could be demonstrated in the blood or lymph glands, the post-mortem picture being that of an acute hæmorrbagic septicæmia. This was followed by the death of No. 3, after twenty-four hours' illness. Again no trypanosomes could be demonstrated microscopically, and the post-mortem appearance was similar to No. 18. Animal No. 16 then became ill, and a blood examination was made of all the controls; all except No. 2 showed either infection with T. vivax, T. congolense or both. This examination was made microscopically and by mouse inoculation, all the mice inoculated showing pure infections with T. congolense. The one animal in which trypanosomes could not be demonstrated, No. 2, was an aged cow which was pregnant at the time. As this beast gradually went down hill and died later, it is almost certain that it was infected with trypanosomiasis with the others. The accidental infection of the controls was probably acquired by their being bitten by wild Glossina morsitans while grazing in the bush. Late in the wet season the spread of these tsetse is very considerable, and they were found in close proximity to the station. This occurrence does not affect the validity of the experiment, as it can be shown that all the cattle seemed quite healthy when first purchased, and certainly exhibited no signs of pica, although they were being given no increase in their diet. Moreover, it is well known that the local healthy Fulani cattle do not show pica in the ordinary course of events. During the latter half of November, animals Nos. 2, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10, all in the no-salt group, were seen to be eating ant-hill, and they continued to do so on and off throughout the remainder of the experiment. No animal in Group 2 was seen at any time to exhibit this appetite for earth. This occurred three and a-half months after salt was withdrawn, and two and a-half months after infection.
RELATIONSHIP OF PICA IN CATTLE TO TRYPANOSOMIASIS 81 Table I shows the course of the disease in three typical animals in Group L while Table II gives that of three animals from Group II. TABLE I. Group I.82 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I (2) That animals infected with trypanosomiasis may exhibit pica, but that this does not occur if they are given salt ad lib. It seems probable that animals suffering from trypanosomiasis owing to changes in their general metabolism require increased quantities of salts; when these are not available in their ordinary diet, they attempt to make up the deficiency by eat- ing earth. These experiments clearly bring out the effective ' buffer' action of sodium ions, if they are supplied to animals during the course of being infected. This could not occur if the conditions were other than an acidosis, as the administration of salt after infection does not prevent pica. CONCLUSIONS. It is concluded that:SARCOPTIC MANGE IN CAMELS. BY MAJOR G. K. SHAW, R.A.V.C. (Reprinted from the Veterinary Record, No. 43, Vol. XI, October 24,1931.) Officers of the R. A. V. C. naturally prefer suporting their own Journal with articles of a clinical and other nature, and it was hoped that in due course the subject matter of this communication would be found there. But I am prompted to send it to the Veterinery Record for two reasons. (1) Because of the paper read by Dr. Arthur Whitfield on ' Scabies and Ringworm as Transmissible between Animals and Man,' and which afterwards, appeared in No. 30, Vol. XI, dated July 25th, 1931, of that organ, and (2) because, in the subsequent diseases, it was stated that ' it was almost impossible to cure the camel of sarcoptic mange when once it had contracted it '. During the operations in Waziristan on the North-West Frontier of India I spent the greater part of the years 1921-22 in command of a Camel Hospital, in which the daily number of sick was rarely below 800, and generally in the neigh- bourhood of from 1,200 to 1,500. Three-fourths of these animals were undergoing treatment for sarcoptic mange. One day I noticed some of the sarwans (camel men) picking at their bodies and scratching, and on making inquiries was informed by my Indian Officer that they had mange, but that it was nothing unusual amongst attendants on mangy camels. I reported the matter to the medical authorities and on a subsequent inspec- tion parade it was found that the majority of the hospital personnel (some 400 men in all, including sarwans) were affected. Scrapings were taken from a number of them and sarcopts indistinguishable from the camel variety were demonstrated. A few days' treatment with sulphur ointment and hot baths cleared up the whole business. The line of treatment in this hospital for camels suffering from mange was similar to that used in the Great War for equines, except that, for reasons of conformation, the camels were not plunged into a swimming dip. They were led into a shallow bath and made to squat down and then scrubbed all over with the hot solution of calcium sulphide. This treatment was quite effective, but with so many camels to handle it was slow and numerous other time-saving methods were ( 83 )
84 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I tried. I had heard that crude oil (mineral) had been used in Mesopotamia on camels, but knew nothing of the method of application. We decided to experiment with it and the results were so striking that I cannot do better than quote verbatim from a copy of a report which I sent to higher authority after the treat- ment had proved itself, and which, I believe, resulted in the method being used in other veterinary units of the Waziristan Field Force. 'Dated May 16th, 1922. " . . . .In January of this year 120 proved mange cases were selected out of a batch of camels received from the forward area, and isolated, with a view to trying experimental treatment with different oils and comparing results with those obtained from calcium sulphide treatment. Out of these, 40 were treated with the calcium sulphide dip in the usual manner, 40 with taramira oil and 40 with crude mineral oil. " Of these three methods the crude oil treatment gave undoubtedly the best results. " The following was the procedure adopted: The camels were clipped and un- diluted crude mineral oil applied to the whole of the body and limbs. This was left on for four days, the camel being groomed as usual. At the end of the fourth day the camel was smeared with a thin plaster of mud which was left on for 24 hours and then washed off. This removed a great deal of the hard scales and corrugated skin which the crude oil had softened. The camel was then groomed as usual for two days when a second dressing of the oil was applied, mud plaster again being used at the end of the fourth day and washed off as before. This second dressing removed most of the corrugated skin and hard scales, leaving the skin soft and pliable. "A third dressing of oil was applied and after four days the animal is washed with soap and water, no mud being used. " The majority of cases required no further treatment except grooming and occasional washing. ADVANTAGES OF CRUDE OIL TREATMENT. " 1. Economical. Average period under treatment, 21 days, i.e., three dress. ings. The supply Depot stock book rate for crude oil (mineral) is rupees two per four gallon drum. Used undiluted, four gallons is sufficient for the complete dressing of four camels, or one camel four times, so that the cost of treatment is very small. " 2. After one dressing itching and rubbing cease. " 3. Easily applied. It is rubbed on with a piece of cloth or old sacking.
SARCOPTIC MANGE IN CAMELS 85 " 4. Stimulates the skin and growth of hair. " 5. Disinfects Jhools (rugs) and grooming kit. " 6. Keeps of flies. This is a great factor in its favour, especially if the animal is suffering from injuries or septic wounds in addition to mange. " 7. Does not blister. A number of camels have been kept tied in the open after dressing to find if the sun caused blistering. In no cases did this occur. "8. Easily obtainable. Out of every batch of camels admitted since this treatment was tried, a number of the worst cases have been dressed in the fore- going manner with the same excellent results." Some people may, perhaps, consider the application of mud unusual and not highly hygienic. To these I would suggest the more expensive Fuller's earth or kaolin, but those who know India will be familiar with the fact that the average Indian is never happier than when he is plastering mud on something, whether it be his own body or the path leading up to the Sabib's office. But mud has its uses. Native camelmen in the Punjab apply a dressing of taramira oil to their mangy camels in the evening, and next morning smear a thin coating of mud over the dressing, as taramira oil blisters the skin when exposed to the sun. With the crude oil treatment blistering does not occur, the mud being used simply as an adjunct, as when it has baked hard and is then washed off the oil- softened dead scales and dirt come away with it.
INFECTIVITY OF SHADE-DRIED HIDES FROM RINDERPEST INFECTED CATTLE. BY W. G. BEATON, M.R.C.V.S., Veterinary Laboratory, Vom, N. Nigeria. (Reprinted from the Veterinary Journal, November 1931.) In most of the large towns in Northern Nigeria, where the slaughter of cattle and the flaying of hides is under Government supervision, the hides are dried in the shade in a shed, which is roofed only. The drying is continued for forty-eight hours, after which they are released for sale. These measures are part of a success- ful endeavour to improve the type of hide for export. After forty-eight hours drying, however, there are still small areas in the folds of skin around the cut edges of the hide which remain somewhat softer and moister than the bulk, which is dry and hard. This is especially the case in the rainy season. It is well known that the hide of a rinderpest infected animal, which is dried in the open sun, is no longer infective after a few hours' exposure, but in the case of similar hides shade-dried, is forty-eight hours long enough to render them a virulent ? All the hides used in the following experiments were from rinderpest virus producers, bled to death on the seventh day after inoculation with virulent blood, and having shown a satisfactory thermal reaction. Experiment 1. Bovine, 3,360. Hide removed within an hour of death and shade-dried. Approximately twenty-four hours later a portion was removed from one edge. This was still slightly moist. It was emulsified in saline 1 in 4, and 10 c. c. of the fluid was inoculated subcutaneously into rinderpest susceptible bovine No. 3,377. At forty-eight hours a similar process was gone through, and bovine 3,378 received 10 c.c. These bovines were isolated from each other and all other stock, and daily temperatures taken. Result. There was no thermal reaction for seven and six days respectively, and both were given known rinderpest virulent blood, and both reacted to rinderpest. Bovine 3,378 developed a local swelling from the original inoculation, but death was due to rinderpest from the test dose. Conclusion. Neither twenty-four hours old hide, nor forty-eight hours old was infective in this case, but no control of the fresh hide was used, though this hardly seemed necessary. ( 86 )
INFECTIVITY OF SHADE-DRIED HIDES 87 Experiment 2. The process of the first experiment was repeated, using a con- trol to the fresh hide. Bovine 3,457 inoculated S/c with 10 c.c. fresh hide; reacted to rinderpest. Bovine 3,456 inoculated S/c with 10 c.c., twenty-four hours hide; reacted to rinderpest. Bovine 3,479 inoculated S/c with 10 c.c., forty-eight hours hide; no reaction. Bovine 3,507 inoculated S/c with 10 c.c., forty-eight hours hide; tested with virulent blood; reacted to rinderpest. Conclusion. That forty-eight hours old shade-dried hide is not infective. A possible reason for the infectivity of the hide at twenty-four hours in this experi- ment and non-infectivity at the same period in the first experiment, is that the first experiment was conducted during the exceedingly hot and dry period just prior to the breaking of the rains, while in the second test some 21 days later the rains had begun and the air was moist, and considerably cooler, there by retard- ing drying. The above conclusion was confirmed by this repetition experiment carried out during the cooler season. Experiment 3. Bovine No. 3,567; inoculated S/c with 10 c.c. fresh hide; reacted; died of rinderpest. Bovine No. 3,565: inoculated S/c with 10 c.c. twenty- four hours dried hide ; reacted; died of rinderpest. Bovine No. 3,559: inoculated with S/c 10 c.c. thirty-six hours dried hide; reacted; died of rinderpest. Bovine No. 3,566 : inoculated S/c with 10 c.c. forty-eight hours dried hide ; no reaction ; tested twelve days later with virulent blood ; reacted. Bovine No. 3,568 : inocu- lated S/c with 10 c.c. forty-eight hours dried hide ; died eight days later of other causes. Conclusion. The period of infectivity reached at least thirty-six hours, but not forty-eight hours. The two days concerned during which the hide was drying were exceedingly wet and undoubtedly retarted desiccation considerably. In spite of these circumstances, however, the hide was not infective at forty-eight hours. Summary. It has been shown that forty-eight hours' drying in the shade, but exposed to the wind, is sufficient to render non-infective the hides from rinderpest mortalities.
NATURAL IMMUNITY AND DISEASE RESISTANCE : THE GENETICAL POINT OF VIEW. BY F. FRASER DARLING, PH.D., N.D.A., N.D.D., Chief Officer, Imperial Bureau of Animal Genetics. (Reprinted from the Imperial Bureau of Animal Genetics Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 2, No. 4.) One of the foci of attention when improvement of live stock is being considered, is the immunity of certain species and the resistance of certain stocks to the multi- farious diseases which beset the path of the animal breeder. The question and its attendant problems are inevitably to the fore with those engaged in the uphill task of raising economic stocks of domestic animals in tropical and sub-tropical countries. It had long been observed that in the tropics European breeds of cattle and sheep were infinitely more susceptible to certain types of infection and contagious diseases than the indigenous breeds, when the science of genetics made its advent into the world of affairs ;.yet, apparently, it was only from this time on that interest centred upon the possibilities of breeding resistant strains and stocks of animals, of embody- ing in the same animal high qualities of disease resistance and economic performance. In the past three decades it cannot be said that this laudable ideal has been attained, in fact success has been so meagre that one wonders at the still optimistic conjectures regarding the production of naturally immune and disease resistant stocks. The time is ripe for a survey of what we mean exactly by the terms immunity, resistance and susceptibility, of what critical evidence exists as to the possession of immunity and resistance, and of the problems involved in any attack on the genetical front. It is possible that impartial consideration may destroy much of our optimism. Immunity to a disease, which may be exhibited by an animal, means that under no natural conditions of environment can the animal contract the disease, no matter how close to infection it may come. Such immunity is often a specific character ; for example, cattle may have rinderpest but the disease is never found in man or the horse. Tuberculosis is common in cattle, but is an exceedingly rare disease in sheep in proportion to the opportunities of infection. This specific immunity may be due to serveral factors such as temperature of the animal, specific action of the body fluids other than the blood, the condition of the skin and mucous membranes. The blood is an important factor in many ways. Its phagocytic capacity towards a certain organism may be all-powerful, the blood serum may ( 88 )
NATURAL IMMUNITY AND DISEASE RESISTANCE 89 itself be inimical or there may be present natural anti-toxins. There may also be lack of suitable nutriment in the blood for a given organism to establish itself and produce the diseased condition. At the same time, it would appear that varieties or strains within a species and individuals within a family do exhibit definite immunity, but such a condition, probably, is rarer than the ostensible examples brought forward from time to time. From the genetical point of view, species immunity is of little importance, unless it is ever found possible to promote fertility in certain hybrids, or to supplant one species by another in husbandry. The rarity of racial immunity has been emphasised already. For all practical purposes it would be better to dispense with the term and speak of racial resistance to given diseases or groups of diseases. Leaving absolute immunity entirely alone, there seems to be much reliable data relating to the degrees of resistance or susceptibility. For instance, it will not be questioned that the Negro is more susceptible to tuberculosis and pulmonary complaints than the white man. Holmes has found, however, that diseases of the nose and throat are not so common in American Negroes as amongst the rest of the population, and he attributes this to the tougher mucous membranes of the nose and throat in the Negroid race. Among the white peoples, the Jews enjoy a high degree of resistance to tuberculosis, whilst from American figures the Irish appear more than ordinarily susceptible. Lundborg, in 1920, enunciated that racial homogeneity was a powerful factor preventing certain diseases, including predisposition to tuberculosis. Pure-bred Jews and gypsies have a high resistance under very unsanitary conditions, but the resistance is dissipated when they intermarry with other stocks. Mortality from tuberculosis is high in the North of Sweden where Swede, Finn and Lapp intermix. In the South of Sweden, its incidence is much less. Similarly, the disease is less common in Iceland, Sardinia and Sicily, where the populations are relatively pure, but it is rife in Poland and Austria, where the populations are very mixed. This hypothesis tends to cut across that which postulates a much higher incidence of tuberculosis in the blonde races than in the darkhaired sallow-skinned ones. According to Kozelka, tetanus in the Chinese is very rare, measles is considered a mild disease among Caucasian people, but in North American and Melanesian peoples it is very severe. Negroes do not show such a high mortality to yellow fever as Europeans and the Japanese seem resistant to scarlet fever. It is probable, and in fact the only reasonable explanation for such resistances recorded above seems to be, that races have acquired resistance to certain diseases because they have been subjected to infection over a long period of time and they have become groups raised from stocks which have successfully lived through infection. They are rigorously selected populations. An example of the effect of selection on later
90 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I resistance is given by the history of the outbreak of an acute type of swine erysipelas in East Anglia in 1921-1922. During this time 70 to 80 per cent, of the young stock affected succumbed to the disease, but after a few years the death rate fell to the normal 10 to 15 per cent. Even so, there are environmental factors, known and unknown, which have to be considered. The saprophytic causal organism may have found conditions suitable for its spread at that time, or it may itself, for unknown reasons, become more virulent in its action. Again, the proportion of the survivors in the subsequent population was not determined, for the assessment of its genetical significance in influencing the degree of resistance displayed by the present popula- tion. We must consider the rôle played by diatheses in the resistance of disease. Crew has given this definition :NATURAL IMMUNITY AND DISEASE RESISTANCE 91 Grasset studied the various factors relating to the transmission of acquired immunity and he came to the conclusions, that contrary to the natural immunity of fixed character, equally transmissible by male or female, the transmission of acquired immunity is confined to the female since, owing to the filtering action of the placental barriers, antibodies are allowed to pass through while antigens are retained and prevented from reaching the f92 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I a particular outbreak, thus pointing to the elaboration of antibodies being a func- tion of metabolic activity. Again, it has been frequently asserted that some strains of " zebu " cattle are immune to rinderpest. Such has yet to be substantiated. However, the differing degrees of resistance and susceptibility exhibited by different Indian cattle types provide an interesting study. For example, the cattle of the hills are more susceptible to many diseases than the cattle of the plains. In fixing the dose of anti-rinderpest serum for the simultaneous method it has been found necessary to give a much larger dose of serum to hill cattle than to plains cattle. According to Walker, this resistance of the plains cattle does not seem to be due to enzootic causes entirely, the diseases being as rife in the hills as in the plains. Pool has stated that in Indian rinderpest outbreaks, Himalayan hill cattle free from admixture with plains cattle show very nearly a 100 per cent, mortality rate, whereas most plains breeds show a mortality of 20 to 30 per cent. European cattle in India appear to have as high a mortality rate as the Himalayan cattle and require more than four times the dose of serum per unit weight for immunisa- tion. It is interesting to note, however, that McCall in Tanganyika found that it was just as easy to immunise half-bred and three-quarter bred European cattle as it was to immunise full-blooded " zebus." Concerning the temperature factor in disease resistance it may not be out of place to mention that McCall found that the body temperature of native cattle averaged about 101° F., whilst that of imported European stock kept under similar conditions averaged just on 103° F. Imported Afrikanders registered an average of almost 102° F. There has been much controversy and loose talk in relation to trypanosomiasis and the possibility of breeding immune strains of domestic stock. This disease seems to be found throughout the tropics wherever the tsetse fly can find a habitat, and most species of domestic animals seem prone to infection by one or other member of the protozoan group responsible for the condition. The high resistance of certain native cattle types has, from time to time, led to assumption of the existence of absolute immunity. An experiment carried out a few years ago by the Nigerian Veterinary Service shows the rashness of any such assumption. In certain badly infested fly areas of the West African coast there lives in apparent good health a dwarf, humpless type of cattle, and the Nigerian Department considered this believed immunity to be worthy of further investigation. To quote the story as given in the Report:NATURAL IMMUNITY AND DISEASE RESISTANCE 93 " The first lot of three was immunised against rinderpest by the method of double inoculation and all reacted severely and died, the cause of death being, in every case, due to a breakdown to a previous infection of trypanosomiasis in combination with the rinderpest reaction. " The second lot of six were immunised against rinderpest by a combination of the methods of formalised spleen pulp vaccination and double inoculation. No reaction followed this method of immunisation, but in four out of the six trypanosomiasis was observed on blood examinations. " The result of these two experiments clearly demonstrates that these dwarf cattle do not possess an immunity to trypanosomiases and in reality harbour the infection in a dormant form which can become revivified as the result of an attack of some other disease, such as rinderpest. Many of the humped cattle of the Northern Provinces of Nigeria are in the same state of premunisation against trypanosomiasis." Similarly it is reported that the humpless West African Shorthorn cattle of the northern territories of the Gold Coast show remarkable absence of clinical symptoms of trypanosomiases. Stewart, in the 1929-30 Report of the Veterinary Department of the Gold Coast, says that, " Crossing experiments between West African Shorthorn cattle and English or Zebu bulls tend to show that the resistance is transmitted, though much diluted in the English crosses." The story of an interesting individual herd comes from Tanganyika. In 1913 a native took his herd from a fly-free area into a dense fly belt. Heavy mortality resulted, but his herd was not completely wiped out. Until 1920 he was joined by others, whose cattle shared the same fate. Calves were born from the survivors but unfortunately the death rate exceeded the birth rate. The Report says :94 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE ANE ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I be used in future, rather than introduced males which would be susceptible to the disease. Another group of diseases which may be roughly classed as tick-borne diseases are analogous to trypanosomiases in that a host other than the domesticated animal is usual for the completion of the life cycle of the parasite. Piroplasmosis or redwater is a good example of such diseases and it is present throughout the tropics. The condition of resistance of tropical cattle is well described by an excerpt from the Report of the Veterinary Department of the Gold Coast for 1929-30, which says :NATURAL IMMUNITY AND DISEASE RESISTANCE 95 genetic analysis of disease. The absence of the disease from a stock in a given environment does not allow one to presuppose a high resistance. It may be that the germ has not been introduced, or that the environment itself or the methods of husbandry are not such as will allow establishment of the disease. Miller has drawn attention to this point by instancing the reputed comparative infrequence of tuberculosis in the Hereford compared with the Shorthorn. The Hereford is largely grass bred and fed, whilst the Shorthorn is frequently housed and is thus laid open to infection in a greater degree. Similarly, tuberculosis has a greater incidence in dairy than in beef cattle. The dairy cow probably receives more housing than the average beef animal, and the intensified physiological strain of lactation in the dairy cow is only too often inadequately met by a low standard of nutrition. Naturally, such a condition lowers resistance and would account for the high incidence of tuberculosis in dairy cattle, yet it could not be stated critically that they are more inherently susceptible to tuberculosis than are other types. Relative to this point we may mention the observed high resistance of tubercle- free Shetland cows brought to the mainland where, because of this, they are much used as nurse cows, in beef Shorthorn herds. Over a long period of time they have become genetically adapted to a low standard of nutrition in the islands. As nurse cows on good land where nutrition is adequate and is understood, the Shetland cattle attain, possibly, a state of physical well-being far above the normal, which provides them with a high degree of resistance to tuberculosis. As possible evidence of racial resistance to this disease among cattle. Miller has cited the statements of Kitasato, that a definitely greater resistance to controlled artificial infection is exhibited by certain Japanese breeds of cattle, than is shown by European breeds under the same conditions. Hutyra and Marek record that the Steppe cattle of Southern Russia, comparatively free from tuber- culosis in those parts where they are indigenous, show a very pronounced resistance against artificial infection. Dechambre and Guérin report that certain races of cattle possessed of a light-coloured coat and hide contract tuberculosis more easily than do those with dark skins, even when they are placed in the same infected byres. The most susceptible appear to be the light roan Shorthorn and the French Race des Landes. From the foregoing general discussion it would seem that two main observa- tions are worthy of consideration, though it must be realised that the interpreta- tion of these is difficult since the phenomena are superimposed upon other factors such as an inherent or acquired immunity or again the mode of infection. Firstly, it would appear that there is much evidence that the quality of the feeding and the power to metabolise the food are associated with a capacity to
96 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I resist disease. This will be dealt with further. Again another observation which does not appear to have been stressed, is the question of resistance and pigmenta- tion. Light coloured animals, it is well known, are deficient in pigment and it is generally accepted that a highly pigmented skin prevents the entry of light rays into the deeper tissue. Ultra-violet is a most potent tissue damaging agent, and even although it is also lethal to bacteria it damages the tissues and lays open the way for an organism to enter, gain foothold and give rise to an infection. From another point of view pigmentation may be regarded as a function of metabolic activity and hence might be said to have a dual rôle in the causation of immunity. The rôle of nutrition in raising the resistance of animals to disease is shown very forcibly by the results of a recent experiment at the South-Eastern Agricultural College, Wyc. A hatch of over five hundred chicks was divided into two parts. One was fed on a " store " ration and the other was given the usual College ration. Both lots of chicks were allowed equal chances of infection by the protozoa caus- ing coccidiosis. At the end of the seventh week 256 birds out of 272 fed upon the " store " ration had succumbed and the remaining birds were too unthrifty to make rearing profitable. At the end of the eighth week only 39 birds fed on the College ration had died from the disease and in the following week 11 more were killed; 222 were drafted to the fattening pens. As an example of actual constructive breeding for a disease resistant strain we may mention the work of Roberts and Card commenced in 1926 at the Illinois Agri- cultural Experiment Station, with reference to the production of a strain of poultry resistant to that usually fatal disease of young chickens, bacillary white diarrhNATURAL IMMUNITY AND DISEASE RESISTANCE 97 mortality was 62.4 per cent. In 1928, nine different sires were used each one having been mated with several selected females. The differences in the ability of sires to transmit resistance varied from 7 to 48 per cent. These results, however, are from comparatively small numbers and cannot be accepted as anything more than an indication of the heredity of resistance to this disease. At the same College, experiments were conducted with swine. Ten pigs from " naturally immune " stock were tested for resistance to hog cholera. Three, were given pen exposure and the others injections. All the pigs proved non- resistant and died, from which it was concluded that resistance to this disease is a complex recessive character. We have offered sufficient instances to show the extremely unsatisfactory state of our knowledge regarding the heredity of natural immunity and disease resistance. It will be as well to indicate, now. the enormous difficulties from the purely genetical point of view, confronting those who consider breeding immune or highly resistant stocks of animals to be a feasible project. In the first place, only too often do we find that the capacity to resist certain diseases is possessed by unimproved stocks which are of inferior economic worth. In such instances, the lesser of two evils may be to continué with non-resistant stock, inviting all the aids of artificial immunisation. For example, no matter how disease resistant certain strains of Indian cattle may be, the great work of the Military Dairy Farms could not have been achieved with Indian cattle alone. Expediency has necessitated the constant use of Friesian and Ayrshire dairy cows, even with their lowered resistance to rinderpest, foot-and-mouth disease, tick- borne diseases and trypanosomiasis. Secondly, we cannot assume that resistance or susceptibility are dependent upon single hereditary factors. Indeed, all the evidence goes to show that multiple factors are concerned. It would be extremely difficult to identify and select individuals known to be highly resistant, simply because clean-cut Mendelian inheritance is not apparent. Thirdly, we must consider the causal organisms of the diseases not as static species, but as ones subject to variation and mutation like the higher living things. To breed for resistance to a given disease as found in a certain country implies to some extent the assumption of a lack of adaptation on the part of the causal organism. For it must be realised that in some organisms great variation is noticeable ; e.g. B. diphtheria, fifty-eight different strains are found, the virulence being a function of the electrical potential difference between the bacteria and the surrounding medium. The virus of foot-and-mouth disease is another good case in point.
98 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, I There are known to be at least three well-recognised immunological types of the virus, A, O and C, and it is probable that there are many strains of each type. Immunity, natural or acquired, against one variety does not carry with it immunity against the others. In Britain there have been found forty strains of the virus, mostly of the O type. Fresh strains may develop and progress alongside the laborious efforts of the animal breeder who is trying to breed a resistant stock. To assume that such mutation would occur is only biological commonsense and not mere pessimism. Fourthly, there is a large number of diseases with which to contend, to each of which diseases high resistance is desirable. Taking for example, an ideal animal for the Tropics; we should desire an efficient animal for its particular purpose, whether milk, meat or draught, which would include the character of early maturity; an animal dark in colour, of short dense coat, showing immunity to rinderpest, foot-and-mouth disease, trypanosomiasis, piroplasmosis, East Coast fever and other tick-borne diseases, tuberculosis and contagious abortion. Here, regardless of many more, we have ten characters at least. Supposing that each of these depended for inheritance upon a single factor which would facilitate segrega- tion (the evidence is against such a supposition), to incorporate all the ten characters in one super-individual we should need an F2 generation of well over a million individuals. The problem would still remain of stocking the Tropics with such a strain. To steadily fix one character after another into a stock is almost an interminable business, yet it would seem to be the only way. However, these points are not offered to engender a spirit of hopelessness. Vigilance must never relax in taking advantage of any mutation in our domestic stocks which, compatible with economic performance, will enable them to live more naturally free from disease in the environment in which they are placed. REFERENCES. 1. Crew, F. A. E. 1925. Animal Genetics. Oliver and Boyd, Edinburgh. 2. Crew, F. A. E. 1928. Genetical Aspects of Natural Immunity and Disease Resistance Edinburgh Medical Journal, 35, 6 and 7, 301NATURAL IMMUNITY AND DISEASE RESISTANCE 99 7. Iowa Experiment Station. Report, 1928 and 1929. 8. Kozelka, A. W. 1929. The Inheritance of Natural Immunity among Animals. Journ. Heredity, 20, 11, 519ABSTRACT Recommendations of the Bureau of Animal Industry on Problems of Livestock Production.- J. R. Mohler.( U. S. Department Agr. Misc. Pub. No. 81, Aug. 1930). The following abstracts are taken from U. S. Department of Agriculture Miscellaneous publication No. 81, dated August 1939, written by Dr. J. R. Mohler, the experienced veterinarian who, as Chief of the Bureau of Animal Industry of the United States of America, has revolutionized the livestock situa- tion of that country since the commencement of the present century. Being the mature conclusions of a scientifically trained expert in animal husbandry who has had unique experience, in dealing with approximately 200 million domesticated animals in the United States of America, and unparalleled opportunities for recording the results of practical breeding and experiments of all kinds, they are of exceptional authority. Dr. Mohler's work has been of immense economic benefit to the United States of America and his conclusions, which moreover are in striking accord with the principles evolved by the practical stock-breeders of old, may safely beadopted by all concerned with livestock improvement in India. 1. ' Community effort in raising the same breed or variety of stock offers many advantages'. 2. ' In general selection should depend on suitability of a breed for local requirements'. 3. ' The crossing of established breeds of livestock of different types seldom gives the results expected and is usually an undesirable practice'. 4. ' Similar types of livestock, particularly swine, when crossbred, often make excellent animals for general utility and market purposes, but their offspring have such mixed heredity that they are practically useless in systematic herd improvement. Consistent work with one well chosen breed is more likely to give satisfaction and be profitable than attempts at cross-breeding'. 5. ' The establishment of new breeds of livestock involves years of the most skilful effort as well as extensive resources in funds and in large numbers of specially selected breeding animals'. 6. ' Persons inclined towards breeding activities along original lines can render more valuable service to the industry by developing improved types of the established breeds '. 7. ' The bureau advises the castration and dehorning of market cattle'. 8. ' Silos are a valuable means of providing economical and succulent feed during winter and at times when pastures are indequate '. 9. ' Research by qualified investigators is considered the most satisfactory way to solve many classes of livestock problems '. 10. ' The judging of livestock by competent authorities at fairs, shows, and other exhibitions is an important means of bringing about high standards of excellence '. 11. ' Accurate statistical information is an important basis for planning livestock operations wisely and for verifying or correcting one's judgment of conditions bearing on the industry '. [A. O.] ( 100 ) MGIPC- S3 ORIGINAL ARTICLES MAJOR KENELM HEWLETT, O.B.E. (Military), M.R.C.V.S., I.V.S. AN APPRECIATION. In the days to come little may be known or remembered of the years that are gone, but let it not be said of the professional brothers of Kenelm Hewlett, on the eve of his departure from this country, and from the service he has honoured so many years, that we already forget him. For, "in to-day already walks to-morrow ", and he who could forget the honesty of purpose, the kindness and the courtesy that dwells in this personality, is himself forgotten. In the early years even his experiences were varied, for, after leaving Bedford Grammar School, he proceeded, in 1893, to British Columbia to ranch, returning to England some two years later. In 1896, he entered the London Veterinary College, and qualifying in 1900, he made several trips to and from South Africa in charge of horses. In 1902, he was appointed and arrived in Bombay as one of the first batch of officers, of the then newly created I. C. V. D. Of his companions to join the service then (now I. V. S.), Stockman, Jethiji and Oliver have left the trials of this world for ever, and only Rennie remains. Although only a few months of Hewlett's service were spent in the Punjab and Kashmir, the writer has never been more interested than when listening to his recollections and reminiscences of those early times; of the country as it then appeared, its people and chiefly of the brother officers whom he knew so well, and we younger fry, never did, excepting in name. Not the least of his qualities and gifts is that of word-painting and it can be truly said that even now, the pictures of several appear before us102 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [II, II. of Principal till to-day. For one cannot deny the knowledge and ability he possesses, and was able on many occasions to display, on all matters academic in the profession. His choice as representative of the Advisory Board of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research on its Governing Body since its inception, is sufficient index of his worth and of the estimation of his value by his brother officers and Government. As a man he is human; a strong and steadfast friend and a happy and merry one withal, " within the limits of becoming mirth ". He has gone through life as he walks, uprightly and bold; with energy and with foresight at times surprising. Kindly and courteous to a degree, we shall miss him greatly; but in our loss, we must grant him unselfishly, the rest he has earned as we trust he will accept the respectful memory we hold him in, along with the good wishes of the service for a long and happy life in the future. [ A. D. M.]
THE CONTROL OF FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE BY IODINE. BY F. WARE, F.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., Director, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, AND P. C. BANERJI, G.B.V.C., Officiating Veterinary Deputy Superintendent, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on 21st January 1932.) Although Foot-and-Mouth Disease in India is not looked upon with the same dread as it is in European countries, owing to the comparatively low value of the animals commonly affected, yet when it appears amongst valuable working bullocks or in a Dairy of milch cows, as it does only too often, it causes considerable inconvenience, not to mention actual financial loss, and any efficient method of cutting short such outbreaks, whether by biological or chemotherapeutical means, would be greatly welcomed by stock-owners in this country. Incidentally, it may be observed that this disease interferes considerably with the experimental work of this Institute, where several hundred animals are constantly maintained ; for it breaks out amongst the new purchases, usually in a virulent form, several times a year with monotonous regularity. It was, therefore, with great interest that Veterinary Bulletin No. 17 of the Punjab Agricultural Department, afterwards reproduced in the Veterinary Record, detailing a method of treating outbreaks of Foot-and-Mouth Disease by the intravenous injection of Lugol's solution of Iodine, was received, for the authors, Walker and Taylor [1926], after a series of experiments carried out in animals at the Lahore Veterinary College claimed that this method permitted outbreaks of Foot-and-Mouth Disease to be dealt with effectively and economically, as treated animals showed no obvious lesions of the disease, their general health was little affected, and there was no appreciable loss in weight and condition. Confirmation of this work soon appeared, for Hunt [1927] reported that it was applied by Major G. F. Steevenson, R.A.V.C., during an outbreak of the disease at the Military Dairy Farm at Lahore, and the summary of that officer's report was that the treatment considerably lessened the number of clinical cases and thereby ( 103 )
104 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II saved a very considerable loss of milk. It was further stated that as a result of this and other reports it had been decided to give the method a more extended trial, but no further report appears to have been published. A further testimony to the efficiency of this form of treatment is given by Jones [1931], who used it amongst animals in the Bangkok Quarantine Station, but he qualifies his remarks by saying that too much importance must not be attached to these trials, as no attempts were made to control them. An opportunity of giving this method of control a field trial occurred at this Institute soon after the appearance of Walker and Taylor's original paper, and since then it has been repeated on several occasions. As these tests were carefully controlled and the results obtained were in direct conflict with these of previous reporters it was considered desirable to publish them, but while this paper was under preparation we received the Fourth Report of the Foot-and-Mouth Disease Research Committee in England, in which it is stated that Andrews [1931] has given a thorough trial to Iodine, both on guinea-pigs and cattle, and obtained no confirmation of the success claimed with this drug as a therapeutic agent by workers in India. The fact that our results agree so closely with those obtained by Andrews seems to be an additional reason for their publication, so that workers in the field, in those countries where Foot-and-Mouth Disease is of common occurrence, may know the true position in regard to this rather troublesome method of treatment, the previous good reports of which cannot be confirmed when it is put to a carefully controlled test. One practical difficulty encountered in carrying out the treatment, which has been referred to by other workers, was the absence of an appreciable interval between the initial rise in temperature and the appearance of lesions; in fact in some cases the latter phenomenon appeared first. This is not in accordance with the observations of Walker and Taylor, who state that contrary to the findings of the Departmental Committee on Foot-and-Mouth Disease, 1912, there was always a decided rise in temperature before lesions appeared. This may be due to the fact that these authors were dealing with artificially infected cases, and this fact may also account for the beneficial effects of the Iodine treatment which they report. Another possible although not very probable explanation of the diverse reports is that Iodine acts differently with the different types of virus which are known to exist in this disease, and in this connection it may be observed that no work has yet been done, as far as we know, on the types of virus prevalent in India. It was emphasised at the discussion on Foot-and-Mouth Disease at the Eleventh Inter- national Veterinary Congress [1930] that this is a matter of the greatest importance
CONTROL OF FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE 105 in every country and it is hoped that sufficient scientific staff will become available in the near future for it to be undertaken in India. The solution of Iodine used in the following experiments was the same as that advocated by Walker and Taylor [1926], viz.:106 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II TABLE I. No. of animals 14th April 1926 15th April 1926 16th April 1926 17th April 1926 18th April 1926 Temp. Lesions Temp. Lesions Temp. Lesions Temp. Lesions Temp. Lesions A.M. P.M. F M A.M. P.M. F M A.M. P.M. F M A.M. P.M. F M A.M. P.M. F M Calf No. 115 . . . . * 105.2° CONTROL OF FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE 107 TABLE I. No. of animals 19th April 1926 20th April 1926 21st April 1926 Remarks. Temp. Lesions Temp. Lesions Temp. Lesions A. M. P.M. F M A.M. P.M. F M A.M. P.M. F M Calf No. 115 . . . Not recorded - - - - - - - - - - Received 50 c. c. of the Solution. Calf No. 35 . . . 100.4° - - + Not recorded - + Not recorded - + 108 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II It will be observed that it was only in one case that lesions did not develop, but as comparatively small doses of the drug had been administered the results were considered inconclusive. On the 27th September 1926, 5 or 6 out of 30 bulls accommodated in the Silinguri Kraal on the Muktesar estate were reported to be suffering from Foot- and-Mouth Disease. The bulls were examined on the following day and 22 of them were found to be showing well-defined lesions of the disease. A method regarded by Walker and Taylor to be worthy of consideration for the purpose of con- ferring immunity against Foot-and-Mouth Disease is to inoculate all contact animals with virus and inject them with Iodine, as soon as they have begun to show an elevation in their temperature. In the present outbreak an attempt was made to test the value of this method on the remaining 8 bulls, which as yet showed no signs of the disease, but instead of inoculating them with virus, infec- tive material, consisting of saliva and material from lesions from the affected animals, was rubbed into the mucous membrane of their mouths. They were then divided into two lots of 4 each. One lot was immediately injected with 100 c.c. of Lugol's solution intravenously, and this was followed by two more injections on the 30th September 1926 and 11th October 1926 respectively, the injections in all cases being well tolerated. The animals of the other lot were kept as controls and received no treatment. The results are recorded below :CONTROL OF FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE 109 TABLE II. Treated Animals. No. of Animal. 28th September 1926 29th September 1926 30th September 1926 1st October 1926 2nd October 1926 Temp. Lesions Temp. Lesions Temp. Lesions Temp. Lesions Temp. Lesions A.M. P.M. F M A.M. P.M. F M A.M. P.M. F M A.M. P.M. F M A.M. P.M. F M H. B. 924 .... * Not record- ed. 110 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II TABLE IICONTROL OF FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE 111 TABLE II112 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [ II., II. The temperatures of the animals were not recorded on the 28th September 1926 at the time of injection, but all the animals showed a rise the following day and one of the controls had developed mouth lesions. It is not possible to say, therefore, whether the animals received their infection naturally or through the infective material rubbed into their mouths but this is immaterial for the purposes of this test. The important point is that the 4 treated animals received their first dose of Iodine before the appearance of lesions. It will be seen that out of the 4 animals injected with Iodine, Nos. 924 and 939 did not develop the disease, whilst No. 913 showed lesions on the 30th Septem- ber, and No. 916 on the 1st October. The attack in these two cases was, however, mild and the foot lesions were very slight. Both bulls completely recovered from the disease on the 15th day and the 13th day respectively. The two controls, Nos. 915 and 925, which developed the disease, had it in a slightly more severe form than the two injected bulls, but they recovered in 18 days. Although the disease failed to appear in two of the treated animals, it would seem hardly pos- sible to ascribe this to the effect of the drug, seeing that two of the untreated animals also escaped infection, so that the possibility is not excluded that both the two treated and untreated animals were naturally resistant to the disease. An outbreak was also reported from Bhulmaria Kraal on 30th September 1926, and on examination on the following day, 20 bulls out of 29 were found to have developed conspicuous lesions of Foot-and-Mouth Disease. The remaining 9 bulls, which were without lesions, were artificially infected on this date by means of saliva and material derived from lesions in the same manner as described in the preceding outbreak. Five of these were then immediately treated with Iodine, the treatment being repeated two days later; the other 4 were kept as controls. In the course of 24 hours, following the first injection of the drug, two of the treated animals developed mouth lesions, while two others eventually developed both foot and mouth lesions. The remaining treated animal did not develop any symptoms of the disease throughout the entire observation period. The average period taken for recovery by the above 4 animals was 15 days. All the 4 controls developed the disease, three of them showing lesions on the 1st day and the fourth on the 3rd day. All had both the feet and mouth affected, the lesions were much more severe than in the case of the treated animals, and one of them died. The results in the above two tests lend some support to the view that, although the drug will not with certainty avert the development of lesions, as claimed, it may, if given in good time, exert sufficient tonic action to help an animal over an attack of this disease. The details of the Bhulmaria outbreak are seen in Table III.
CONTROL OF FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE 113 TABLE III. Treated Animals. No. of Animal 1 st October 1926 2nd October 1926 3rd October 1926 4th October 1926 Temp. Lesions Temp. Lesions Temp. Lesions Temp. Lesions A.M. P.M. F M A. M. P.M. F M A.M. P.M. F M A.M. P.M. F M H. B. 905 . . . ... * 102.4° 114 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [ II, II. TABLE IIICONTROL OF FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE 115 TABLE III116 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II Concurrently with the above experiments, the therapeutic effect of Lugol's Iodine solution was tested upon the 22 animals at Silinguri and the 20 at Bhul- maria that had developed lesions of the disease before treatment could be applied to them. The 22 animals of Silinguri received two injections of the drug intra- venously of 100 c.c. each, one on the 28th September 1926 and the other on the 11th October 1926. All the animals recovered in the course of an average period of 20 days, although the lesions in most cases were rather severe, being observable on both the feet and mouth. The 20 affected animals at Bhulmaria received a single injection of 100 c.c. of Lugol's solution each, intravenously, but the outbreak took a virulent form and 9 out of the 20 animals, all of which were already in a poor and debilitated condition, eventually succumbed to the disease. This seems to indicate that the drug is of no use when applied under the above conditions. No further work was carried out to test the efficacy of Walker and Taylor's method until 1930. In April of that year, 83 hill bulls were purchased and ac- commodated in Sitla Kraal attached to this Institute and on the 26th of that month, 19 of the animals were found to have developed mouth lesions of the disease. It was therefore decided to give an intravenous injection of Lugol's solution to a proportion of the remaining 64 animals as soon as they exhibited a temperature of 102° F. or above. Accordingly, 35 animals which showed the re- quired elevation of temperature received single injections of the drug on various dates between 26th April and 4th May, in accordance with the following scheme of dosage:CONTROL OF FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE 117 The remaining 29 animals were left untreated as controls along with the 19 originally affected animals. The entire lot of 83 animals may, therefore, be classified under the following categories :118 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II TABLE IV. Lot Particulars of lot Number of deaths Number of animals survived Number of animals that developed lesions Number of animals that did not develop lesions Average duration of lesions in animals that survived Average duration of lesions Remarks TREATED. A. 7 animals treated dur- ing febrile stage before appearance of lesions. 0 7 or 100% 6 or 85.7% 1 or 14.3% 30.3 } 25 B. 28 animals treated on day of appearance of lesions. 4 or 14.3% 24 or 85.7% 28 or 100% 0 23.6 UNTREATED. C. 29 animals left untreated as controls. 7 or 24.0% 22 or 76.0% 22 or 76.0% 7 or 24.0% 23.5 .. D. 19 animals found affect- ed with lesions shortly after purchase. Left untreated as controls. 2 or 10.5% 17 or 89.6% 19 or 100% 0 .. .. These animals were found affected with lesions shortly after purchase, and it was not possible to as- certain the exact day on which these had developed.
CONTROL OF FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE 119 An examination of Table V shows that out of the 7 animals (Lot A ) which received treatment during the febrile stage of the disease, only in one was the development of lesions prevented, and it would seem hardly possible to regard this single instance as illustrative of the beneficial effect of the drug, seeing that as many as 7 animals in Lot C, that had received no treatment, also failed to develop symptoms of the disease. The protocols of the 7 animals of Lot A, together with those of 7 badly-affected untreated animals for comparison, are summarised in the Table below and it will be seen that there is little to choose between the symptoms displayed by the 2 lots :120 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERNARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II TABLE V. Treated Animals. Serial No. No. of Animal 26th April 1930 27th April 1980 28th April 1980 29th April 1980 Temp. Lesions Temp. Lesions Temp, lesions Temp. Lesions A.M. P.M. F M A.M . P.M. F M A.M. P.M. F M A.M. P.M. F. M 1 89 100.6° 102.2°* CONTROL OF FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE 121 TABLE V122 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, 11 TABLE VCONTROL OF FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE 123 TABLE V124 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II The observations on these 7 treated animals are of special interest inasmuch as these animals were the only ones in the present trial that received treatment in strict accordance with the suggestions of Walker and Taylor. An examination of Table IV shows that considered by the rate of healing of the specific lesions, the advantage lies with the untreated animals, for while the average duration of lesions in the case of treated animals (Lot A) is 30.3 days, it is only 23.5 days in the case of the untreated animals of Lot C. A further test of the efficacy of Iodine treatment was made in November and December 1930, and on this occasion an attempt was made to control the disease by giving injections at 3-day intervals during the early stages of the outbreak. Twenty-six bulls were purchased from a contractor on the afternoon of 12th November 1930. One of them had a typical mouth lesion of Foot and Mouth Disease at the time of purchase, and 2 others showed mouth lesions on re-exami- nation on the following morning. The remaining 23 bulls were then carefully exa- mined and were found to be free from lesions or febrile symptoms of the disease. Twelve of these animals were each given an intravenous injection of 100 c. c. of Lugol's Iodine solution, which was repeated on the 16th, 19th, 22nd and 25th November and the other 11 animals, which were utilized as controls, were not given any injection. The observations made in this test are given in the Table below :CONTROL OF FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE 125 TABLE VI. Treated Animals. Serial No. No. of Animal. 13th November 1930 14th November 1930 15th November 1930 16th November 1930 Temp. Lesions Temp. Lesions Temp. Lesions. Temp. Lesions A. M. P. M. F M A. M. P. M. F M A. M. P. M. F M A. M. P. M. F M 1 1113 99.8°* 101.6° 126 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II TABLE VI CONTROL OF FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE 127 TABLE VI128 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II TABLE VICONTROL OF FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE 129 It will be observed that no mortality occurred in either lot and that 3 of those treated, and 3 of the controls proved resistant to infection. Three of those treated developed mouth lesions only and 6 developed both foot and mouth lesions, as compared with 5 and 3 of the controls respectively. Mouth ulcers appeared in treated animals on an average in 2.9 days after the first inoculation, and in controls in 2.5 days. Counting from the 13th November 1930, foot lesions occurred in the treated in an average of 6.3 days after the first injection and in the untreated in 3 days. Reckoning from the 13th November mouth ulcers in the case of treated animals persisted on an average for 11.9 days and in the case of controls 12.75 days; foot ulcers, 12.5 days and 12 days respectively. Treated animals suffering from mouth lesions only took an average of 11.7 days for complete recovery and controls 12.3 days. Treated animals suffering from lesions both in the feet and in the mouth took an average 18 days for complete recovery and controls 18.3 days. It will, therefore, be seen that although each of the treated animals received 500 c. c. of the drug, the period required for the healing of the different types of lesions was approximately the same in both lots. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS. The method of controlling an outbreak of Foot-and-Mouth Disease by the in- travenous injection of Iodine, which is described by the originators as never failing, has been put to a field test under controlled conditions at the Muktesar Institute on five occasions during the last few years, but the claims made for it have not been substantiated. In the case of two outbreaks there is some evidence to show that the symptoms were rendered less severe by the use of Iodine, but the development of lesions was not arrested. It is considered that there is no justification for the use of Iodine in this disease, other than for its general tonic effects, for it appears to have no specific action on the virus of Foot-and-Mouth Disease, or at least not the type of virus responsible for the natural outbreaks of this disease which occur in the Kumaon hills. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. The authors wish to acknowledge the great help they received from many members of the technical staff of the Institute during the course of these tests, and in particular to mention the name of Mr. Balwant Singh, Veterinary Inspector, who carried out many of the injections.
130 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II REFERENCES. Andrews, W. H. (1931), Fourth Progress Report of the Foot-and-Mouth Disease Research Committee, His Majesty's Stationery Office, London, pp. 126-128. Hunt, Col. F. W. (1927), Annual Administration Report of the Army Veterinary Service in India for 1926-27, Government of India Press, Simla, p. 5. International Veterinary Congress (1930), Proceedings of the Eleventh, London, 1, p. 211. Jones, R. P. (1931), Report of the Veterinary Division, Bangkok, Siam, for 1924-29, page 16. Walker, Col. G. K., and Taylor, W. (1926), The Veterinary Record, 6, (New Series), pp. 611-613.
THE ETIOLOGY OF BOVINE NASAL GRANULOMA. BY CAPT. S. C. A. DATTA, B.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., Temporary Veterinary Research Officer, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on 2nd April 1932.) (With Plates IX-XII.) INTRODUCTION. There exists in India a peculiar chronic disease of the nostrils of cattle which in certain areas affects large numbers of animals and causes considerable loss to culti- vators. The disease is known to exist in Assam, Bengal, Bihar and Orissa, Bombay, Central Provinces, Madras, Mysore and probably also in Sindh. It has existed in certain places for decades but it shows no tendency to spread as an epizootic. The condition would appear to be confined to India as no reports are available from any other part of the world. The peculiar immunity of the buffalo against this nasal affection has been particularly commented upon in every province of occur- rence from time to time. Interesting information is available from a certain enzootic area of the Bombay Presidency that although nearly all the animals in the village are watered from a common watertrough, no horses or buffaloes have ever been known to be affected with the disease. Although there is little doubt that this condition has existed in India for a long time, the earliest printed reference in English to this so-called " Snoring Disease " would appear to be by Jeya Singh Raj [1910]. Krishnamurti [1922] was the first to demonstrate certain eosinophile, rosette-form bodies in histological sections, and he contended that the disease was a form of actinomycosis, since each of these bodies was considered by him to be a characteristic " ray-fungus ". Cooper [1923] con- firmed the above histological findings by studying tissues obtained from various provinces and further he [1923 and 1931] recovered repeatedly in pure culture a streptothrix organism from the lesions. Extensive experiments were carried out by him [1925] to transmit the disease artificially to healthy cattle, by housing in contact with naturally affected cases and by infection in various ways with a streptothrix isolated culturally from the lesions but with negative results. Das [1929] also carried out experiments in the field regarding the mode of infection and obtained negative results. With regard to treatment, Das [1929] showed that ( 131 ) C
132 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II although Potassium Iodide exerted no beneficial effect, the curative value of Tartar Emetic, as claimed by Parthasarathi Naidu [1921] when working at Saidapet in the Madras Presidency, was undisputed. In commenting on the failure of Potassium Iodide, Edwards [1929] stated :PLATE IX. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Photograph showing growths on the mucosa of the lateral wall of the nasal chamber in its anterior third. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2 (× 400). Microphotograph of the " Spindalis " type of egg, found in the nasal discharge obtained from clinical cases at Muktesar. Note that one end is pointed and the other blunt. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 3. Microphotograph of a pair of adults in copula in the fresh state, removed from the growth from a clinical case at Muktesar.
ETIOLOGY OF BOVINE NASAL GRANULOMA 133 CLINICAL DISEASE. A constant running generally of both the nostrils, associated with noisy- breathing and an occasional sneezing serves as the first indication of the disease. Apart from the symptoms of snoring and respiratory distress, which are markedly increased at work, there is no evidence of systemic ill health. The character of the nasal discharge varies with the development of the disease, being either thin serous, thick mucous, muco-purulent or sanguineous. The lesions of the disease first make their appearance at the alar margin of the nose and gradually make inroads posteriorly. Although the condition is a localised disease of the anterior nares, which is extremely well-suited for the extrusion of the mature egg, in ad- vanced cases the middle region or even the posterior region may be encroached upon. At the Museum of this Institute, there are mounted specimens of Nasal Granuloma showing growths (1) on the mucosa covering the septum nasi to about the middle, (2) on the turbinated bones to near their posterior limit, and (3) on the mucosa of the lateral walls of the nasal chamber in its anterior third. Plate IX, fig. 1 shows the last mentioned specimen, which was obtained through the courtesy of Mr. W. Harris, M.R.C.V.S., Superintendent, Civil Veterinary Depart- ment, Assam. Initially the nasal mucosa shows patches of congestion and exceedingly minute vesicular and papular elevations, which develop into rounded granular patches of inflammatory thickening. Palpation of the abnormal surface gives one the impression of roughened crocodile skin. On the " mulberry like '" processes of granulation, yellowish areas are seen, the surface epithelium of which gives way producing minute shallow ulcers, through which the ova make their exit. In the course of the present investigations, the writer had the opportunity of examining at Muktesar six clinical cases of Nasal Granuloma, three of which were obtained from Jubbulpore in 1930 and the other three from Bihar in 1931. Examined under the microscope, a caustic potash preparation made from the shreds of mucus contained in the nasal discharge of affected animals reveals vary- ing forms of Schistosome eggs, and young forms of the parasite. In addition to the above-mentioned six cases, nasal discharges from 3 clinically affected animals at Jubbulpore have recently been received and examined and eggs of the " Spindalis " type have been seen in each case. Examination of the urine reveals certain rudimentary forms of the parasite but the fæces have been found on the other hand to be negative. It is to be noted that no mature ova have been discovered in the urine and no symptoms of bladder affection have been observed. The urine from these animals has been negative to the benzidine test for blood. Roughly speaking, the varying ova found in the nasal discharge were ( a) a non- spined globular egg ( b) a rounded or ovoid egg with a single terminal spine which C 2
134 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II may be short or long, slender throughout the length or broad at the base (c) an ovoidPLATE X. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1 (× 200). Microphotograph of a section of the growth showing the epithelium thinned down and raised due to the pressure exerted by the subjacent ova, about a score of which can be seen here. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2(× 80). Microphotograph of a section of the growth showing follicles with giant cells and " granules "
ETIOLOGY OF BOVINE NASAL GRANULOMA 135 The most characteristic microscopic lesions of Nasal Granuloma are represented by the follicles (Pl. X, fig. 2), the central core of which presents what has been considered by Krishnamurti [1925] to be " actinomycotic granules " surrounded by a characteristic " ray fungus " or " club " formation. The lesions are observed to follow a sequence of events, starting with a destructive abscess around the offend- ing parasitic mass. The individual microscopic lesions that are formed in this manner are nodular abscesses, which are mainly cellular in character, being composed of small round cells, endotheloid cells and polymorphonuclears. Having failed to extrude the irritant by a destructive process, an attempt to completely encapsulate the irritating ova is made and the process of repair as manifested by eosinophile cells and fibroblasts sets in. In places certain follicles are seen being exclusively composed of small round cells without any remnant of the parasitic element being discoverable in the centre. The appearance of some follicles would appear to be due to the section having passed through the periphery of the nodule. In early follicles, the young ova are seen surrounded by many layers of typical endotheloid cells with the formation among them of huge giant cells immediately surrounding the ova or in their neighbourhood. Evidence of degeneration with diffuse staining and broken down nuclei is seen in the centre of some follicles, in others the parasitic mass has been removed with a few giant cells still persisting, notwithstanding the maturity of the fibrous tissue supporting the follicles. In advanced lesions, the ova undergo calcification or are resorbed or totally digested by the " foreign body" giant cells and no eosinophilia may be present in the altogether fibrosed nodule. "With the simultaneous fibroblastic activity and eosinophilic infiltration, concentric rings of fibrous tissue gradually invade from the periphery inwards until the lesion may be considerably fibrosed. From the above description of what have been designated as follicles by Krishnamurti [1925], in association with the presence of " foreign body " giant cells, it will be observed that the follicles appear to be identical with " a typical bilharzial pseudotubercle " of Fairley [1920]. Now in regard to the peculiar bodies, "the clubs ", Krishnamurti [1922] has considered them to be specific and of causal significance. These bodies are quite gram136 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II " Spindalis " type of an egg and contains in most cases a granular body or may even be empty, depending upon the angle at which the egg is sectioned and upon whether the enclosed larva is sufficiently differentiated for well defined structure to be recognisable inside it. In some shells, however, definite structures of the parasitic embryo can be seen. The author agrees with Colebrook [ 1930 ] who states :PLATE XII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1 (×400). Microphotograph of a transverse section of male worm in the tissue showing cuticular tubercles. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2 (× 80). Microphotograph of mature worms in copula lying in . the tissue. No remnants of vessel endothelium or glandular epithelium is recognisable. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 3 (× 120). Microphotograph of a deep section showing mucous glands and blood vessels, which contain several pairs of worms in copula. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 4 (× 400). Microphotograph showing a gland, impacted with eggs and the commencement of changes for the production of a pseudotubercle.
PLATE XI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1 (×400). Microphotograph of the " Spindalis " type of egg in the tissue, showing the blunt and the pointed ends. Note its similarity with microphotograph No. 2, Plate IX. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2(×400). Microphotograph showing a fully matured mira- cidium still attached to the spiny portion of the egg, lying in the space left by the egg. The caudal extremity of the embryo can be seen inside the eggshell. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 3 (×400). Microphotograph of an " actino " body in section. The central cavity contains the cellular elements of the embryo.
ETIOLOGY OF BOVINE NASAL GRANULOMA 137 cells and their nuclei are pressed together into one or more solid masses and take the stain deeply." In the different parts of the matrix of the growth, empty spaces of various shapes, rounded, oval, or spindle-shaped, are occasionally seen. These are presumably a kind of mould left by the eggs. The resemblance of the shapes to those of the actual ova discovered in the nasal discharges is worthy of note. The matrix reveals groups of embedded eggs or empty irregular capsular shrunken shells. Various stages of the embryo within the egg shell can be made out. Some appear to be fully developed, other show a distinct segmenting embryo whilst some egg shells are altogether collapsed and contain little or no organised material. Judging by the appearance, shrunken and blackened shells with dark amorphous content would appear to be eggs that have died due to unfavourable conditions. Inside the shell of viable eggs, a distinct envelope (vitelline membrane) may be seen enclosing the embryo. Some ova contain cells staining at the periphery, while others show cells staining at the centre. In one ovum, at least, a fully matured, miracidium was seen still attached to the spiny portion of the egg shell (PI. XI, fig. 2). In some sections, spaces which were originally occupied by the eggs are seen occupied by mature or immature miracidia, a few of which are seen as leaf- shaped bodies with an anterior cone, eosinophilic cephalic glands and a distinct constriction between the cephalic and caudal regions. Some miracidia were observed to have a blunt caudal extremity terminating abruptly, and these presumably were the females. In deeper sections, many coiled mucous glands and large blood vessels are included. Some of the glands are apparently normal although containing some discharge. Others may show hyperæmia. The glandular epithelium quite frequently is noticed to undergo fatty degeneration and vacuolisation in many places. In two samples of histological tissue, the discharges in the nasal gland have been found to contain typical Bilharzia worms. Some glandular tubules were definitely impacted with clusters of ova (Pl. XII, fig. 4), which would appear very suitable to form the nucleus of "bilharzial pseudo-tubercles". It is difficult at times to say definitely whether a pseudo-tubercle was initially formed by the deposition of eggs in the tubules of nasal glands or within dilated capillaries or in the matrix of the connective tissue itself. Apart from the changes in the connective tissue of the nose described above, the blood vessels show marked lesions in the shape of varying degrees of endar- teritis, the lumen of some being altogether obliterated. The blood vessels in deeper sections are generally larger and contain mature healthy worms, either singly or in copula (Pl. XII, fig. 3), and may present considerable dilation and degrees of
138 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II end-arteritis. As the worms in these vessels appear quite healthy and undegener- ated, the changes in the endothelium and the wall of the vessels would appear to be due to bilharzial toxins. It is interesting to note that the lower margin of the field in a microphotograph (Fig. 2, Plate V) in Krishnamurti's [1925] Memoir shows what would appear to be a healthy Schistosome worm. Some blood vessels reveal a perivascular reaction. If the mature worm or embryo undergoes death or degeneration, the parasite remnants serve as the commencing nucleus for thrombus formation. With an attempt at organisation of the thrombus so formed, the lesion in the blood vessel involves the other coats as well and is not restricted to the endothelium alone. The stages in the formation of pseudotubercles, characterised by huge giant cells, eosinophiles and fibrosis as already described, are also seen in the case of a capillary vessel containing bilharzial elementsETIOLOGY OF BOVINE NASAL GRANULOMA 139 affected animals, and the adult parasite also resembles Schistosoma spindalis, Montgomery, but unfortunately fully mature specimens have not yet been obtained so that a definite opinion on this point cannot yet be expressed. However, certain facts have come to light which suggest that it may be a new species. It is interest- ing for example, to note that Fairley and Mackie [ 1926 ] conveyed infection of Schistosoma spindalis to buffaloes, which they believe to be the natural hosts of the parasite, but the buffalo appears to be strongly resistant to attack by the parasite of Nasal Granuloma. Liston and Soparkar [1918] and other workers on Schistosoma spindalis infec- tion mentioned above, have not encountered eggs of any other type than " Spinda- lis,'' although these workers have studied infection by this parasite in such animals as cattle, young goats, guinea pigs, buffalo and the monkey ( Macacus sinicus) . They have also stated that Schistosoma spindalis affects only the alimentary tract or its appendages and its ova are voided solely with the faeces. Further investigation into the specific identity of the parasite and its inter- mediate host, together with the reproduction of the disease, drug therapy, and prevention will be taken up as opportunities occur. CONCLUSIONS. A few cases of Rhinosporidiosis of cattle have been recorded in India, but Bovine Nasal Granuloma proper is a separate entity and is a Schistosomiasis. Nasal Granuloma presents an altogether new localisation of Schistosomiasis, as compared with the hitherto known urinary and intestinal forms. The parasite resembles Schistosoma spindalis, Montgomery, but certain differen- ces, which are under study, have been observed. The true nature of the " granules " previously described in this condition has been shown to be closely connected with the invading parasite, which sets up reactions, resulting in the formation of the so-called " follicles " and actino-bodies. Examination of nasal discharges in caustic potash preparations should be of great value in the diagnosis of the disease in future. With the definite information now available regarding the etiology of this condition, further experiments with the intravenous administration of such drugs as Tartar Emetic, Emetin, Antimosan, etc., are indicated. Acknowledgments. My thanks are due to Mr. G. D. Bhalerao, M.Sc., Helmin- thologist at this Institute, for giving me the value of his expert opinion and con- firming my findings with regard to the parasitic elements discovered.
140 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II In conclusion, I take this opportunity of placing on record my great indebted- ness to Mr. F. Ware, F.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., the Director of this Institute, for his keen interest and helpful encouragement and for affording me all facilities, without which the present investigation would not have been possible. REFERENCES. Beaver, D. C. (1931). Granulomatous abscess of the liver of pyogenic originSOME DIGESTIBILITY TRIALS ON INDIAN FEEDING STUFFS, PART VIII. (SOME PUNJAB HAYS, III AND WHEAT BHUSA). BY P. E. LANDER, M.A., D.Sc., A.I.C., I.A.S., Agricultural Chemist to Government, Punjab, Lyallpur, AND PANDIT LAL CHAND DHARMANI, L.AG., B.Sc. (Agri), Assistant to Agricultural Chemist to Government, Punjab, Lyallpur. [Received for publication on 25th February 1932.] It has been shown in two earlier papers [Lander and Lal Chand Dharmani, 1928-29] of this series of digestibility trials that grass hays gathered from different parts of the Punjab differ very widely in chemical composition and that some of them constitute maintenance rations for animals at rest, while others do not, and the amounts of wheat bran required to be added to non-maintenance ration hays to bring them up to maintenance standards were worked out. The present paper deals with the nutritive value of six grass hays supplied by the Military Grass Farms at Jhelum, Ferozepur, Kasauli, Dalhousie, and Multan (two grasses), and their comparison with wheat bhusa as a cattle feed. The method of conducting the trials was similar to that described in previous papers of this series and the trials were continued from January to September 1929 using six Montgomery hei- fers from 2 to 3 years age and similar in all other respects. Data concerning these heifers designated by numbers 122, 128, 133, 123, 124, and 129 are given below :142 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II The experimental periods and the rations used are indicated below :DIGESTIBILITY TRIALS ON INDIAN FEEDING STUFFS 143 The grasses were cut rather late, and much of the inflorescence was lost. The inflorescence of Andropogon contortus Lin. locally known as Saryala contained many fine spiral spikes, which caused some inconvenience to the animals and perhaps detracted from the digestibility of the feed. 5. Kasauli Hay.144 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II almost half, but the fibre showed a higher digestibility coefficient. The daily nitrogen balance of 0.14 to 2.01 grammes as against 6.35 to 13.33 for Ferozepur hay showed it to be a maintenance ration. The fact must not be lost sight of that different animals vary to some extent in their powers of consumption and assimila- tion, e.g., the Ferozepur and Jhelum hays were tried on the same animals, namely, heifers Nos. 122, 128 and 133, but while heifer No. 122 ate the greatest quantity of Jhelum hay, the digestibility coefficients were almost parallel with those obtained with the other two animals. A daily nitrogen retention, however, of 2.01 grammes, in the case of No. 122 compares favourably with the figures for the other two animals showing a daily nitrogen retention of 0.14 and 0.33 grammes respectively. Kasauli Hay. (Heifers 123, 124, 129) 15th January 1929DIGESTIBILITY TRIALS ON INDIAN FEEDING STUFFS 145 Nos. 124 and 129, which were respectively losing 3.42 and 4.18 grammes of nitrogen daily should have had 0.8 lbs. each of added bran for effecting a maintenance ration. Nos. 123, 124 and 129, weighed 379, 360 and 389 lbs. respectively. It may, therefore, be suggested that dry cows weighing 350 to 400 lbs. require for maintenance 1 to 1½ lbs. added bran in addition to the Kasauli grass hay of the above composition when fed ad-lib. Dalhousie Hay. (Heifers Nos. 123, 124 and 129) 13th May 1929146 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II bran used was poorer in portein than the one fed with Dalhousie hay but richer than that fed with Kasauli hay, 1 lb. of added bran therefore effects a daily nitrogen retention of 6.1 grammes and therefore 1[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
CURVE SHOWING FLUCTUATIONS IN DAILY BODY WEIGHTS OF THE ANIMALS NON-EXPERIMENTAL PERIOD EXPERIMENTAL PERIOD [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
DIGESTIBILITY TRIALS ON INDIAN FEEDING STUFFS 147 This addition converted the negative daily nitrogen balances of the heifers Nos. 122, 128 and 133 to positive 4.76, 4.65 and 6.55 grammes respectively and the upward tendency of the body weight curves shows that the animals also improved in their body weights. These figures show that 2 lbs. of bran have effected a daily addition of 14.19, 12.34 and 14.53 grammes of nitrogen in case of heifers Nos. 122, 128 and 133 respectively, or 7.10, 6.17 and 7.27 grammes of nitrogen per lb. of bran added. The average of the above figures shows that 1 lb. of added bran can repair a nitrogen deficiency to the extent of 6.85 grammes with wheat-bhusa fed ad-lib to the animals of the given description. On the basis of the above calculations, in order to effect a maintenance ration, from a nitrogen equilibrium point of view, the heifers, 122, 128 and 133 should have been given 1.3, 1.2 and 1.1 lbs. of added wheat bran respectively in addition to the wheat- bhusa fed ab-lib. Heifers weighing from 350 to 450 lbs. should thus require for their maintenance from 1 to 1.5 lbs. of added bran when fed on bhusa alone, as a roughage. The following Table gives the analytical and digestibility coefficient figures of wheat-bhusa obtained from trials at Lyallpur in the years, 1921, 1922 and 1929:148 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II The chemical composition of the various wheat-bhusa samples (other than the percentage of protein in the 1922 sample) does not present sufficiently marked differences to warrant any definite distinction being made in them. The low per- centage of protein in the 1921 and 1929 samples is reflected in their negative diges- tibility coefficients for protein. The digestibility coefficients of ash are also negative in the same samples, but the negativity is less in case of the 1929 sample, possibly due to a higher percentage of protein. The 1922 sample compares favourably with some of the grass hays both from the point of view of chemical composition and also digestibility coefficients. Wheat- bhusa, which varies in composition from year to year due to seasonal variations, is seldom a maintenance ration. SUMMARY. Digestibility trials carried out on grass hays collected from the Military Grass Farms at Jhelum, Ferozepur, Kasauli, Dalhousie and Multan have revealed very wide variations in chemical composition and nutritive value from the view point of maintenance rations. This variation is due to a number of factors chief of which are firstly the variation in the composition of the grasses themselves and secondly, and perhaps most important of all, variations due to the fact that the hays are made from grasses collected when in different stages of maturity. Emphasis must be laid on the fact that when a grass is cut in the late or post-flowering stage, it has lost much of its nutritive value and the resulting hay will be a poor one. Difficulties are undoubtedly experienced in collecting grasses at a period when it contains the maximum nutritive ingredients, but it is important both from an economic and nutritive point of view to collect grass for hay at the proper stage of development. The Ferozepur hay is richest from the chemical and mineral points of view and proved to be a maintenance ration giving a very high positive daily nitrogen balance. Jhelum hay was the next best being just a maintenance ration (the condition which was also met with, in the hays collected from Amballa and Sialkot experimented upon in previous years), probably due to the fact amongst others that these hays contained a high proportion of Anjan grass ( Cenchrus biflorus) . Data have been obtained to throw light on the quantities of added bran per day required to bring these grasses upto a maintenance standard for heifers of from 350 to 450 lbs. of weight. Hays of the composition represented by Dalhousie and Kasauli hays required 1 to 1.5 lbs. of added bran per day to effect this, whereas the Multan Musel and Janewa hays required somewhat less, namely, 1.00 to 1.25 lbs. of added bran.
DIGESTIBILITY TRIALS ON INDIAN FEEDING STUFFS 149 Wheat- bhusa varies in composition from year to year and is not usually a maintenance ration and would require from 1 to 1.5 lbs. of added bran to effect a maintenance ration for heifers of the weight and description used in these trials. Acknowledgment is made of the valuable assistance given in this work by Mr. Akbar Ali, B.Sc. (Agri.), of the Chemical Section, and the Director, Military Grass Farms, Simla, for kindly providing us with the various grass hays. REFERENCES. Lander and Lal Chand Dharmani (1928). Mem. Dept. Agri. India, Chemical Series, 9, 7. --------------------------------------- (1929). Mem. Dept. Agri. India, Chemical Series, 10, 5. D 2
150 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II TABLE I. A.DIGESTIBILITY TRIALS ON INDIAN FEEDING STUFFS. 151 TABLE I. B.152 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II TABLE II. Digestibility Factors. Period. No. of heifer Average of daily body weight Food eaten per day Digestibility co.efficients Nutrients digested per day Dry matter Ash Fat Fibre Protein Nitrogen free extract Dry matter Ash Fat Fibre Protein Nitrogen free extract lbs. lbs. 15th January 1929 to 28th February 1929. 122 419 Jhelum hay 8.5 56.27 18.92 33.33 64.18 35.90 61.02 4.30 0.14 0.03 1.47 0.14 2.52 Ditto 128 423 Ditto 8.0 55.91 15.94 33.33 64.18 32.43 60.92 4.02 0.11 0.03 1.38 0.12 2.37 Ditto 133 341 Ditto 6.9 56.29 20.00 37.50 64.52 34.38 60.59 3.49 0.12 0.03 1.20 0.11 2.03 15th January 1929 to 28th January 1929. 123 379 Kasauli hay 6.1 39.57 ... 40.00 53.73 8.70 39.40 2.16 ... 0.04 1.08 0.02 1.04 Ditto 124 360 Ditto 6.6 46.71 7.69 40.00 60.09 20.00 46.16 2.76 0.04 0.04 1.31 0.05 1.32 Ditto 129 389 Ditto 6.5 51.55 9.80 40.00 65.12 29.17 51.07 3.00 0.05 0.04 1.40 0.07 1.44 12th February 1929 to 28th February 1929. 123 385 Kasauli hay . Bran . . 5.8 3.0 } 53.96 11.67 42.86 56.52 50.00 59.23 4.29 0.07 0.06 1.30 0.26 2.60 Ditto 124 361 Kasauli hay . Bran . . 6.2 2.0 } 50.33 8.47 46.15 54.79 39.54 55.33 3.72 0.05 0.06 1.26 0.17 2.18 Ditto 129 380 Kasauli hay . Bran . . 6.5 1.0 } 55.59 7.14 50.00 60.19 35.30 53.34 3.41 0.04 0.06 1.37 0.12 1.84 12th March 1929 to 31st March 1929. 122 428 Multan hay (Janewa). 5.8 47.17 10.35 14.29 60.00 6.25 48.20 2.58 0.06 0.01 1.29 0.01 1.21 Ditto 128 426 Ditto . 5.5 48.75 7.27 16.67 62.07 6.25 50.00 2.58 0.04 0.01 1.26 0.01 1.19
DIGESTIBILITY TRIALS ON INDIAN FEEDING STUFFS. 153 Ditto . 133 347 Ditto . 4.9 42.85 ... 33.33 56.90 154 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II TABLE IIDIGESTIBILITY TRIALS ON INDIAN FEEDING STUFFS. 155 TABLE III. Dietary Standards. Period Number of heifer Average of daily body weight Feed eaten per day Per 100 lbs. of food Albumin- oid ratio. 1 : Daily Nitrogen balance in grammes Starch equi- valents per day Protein per day Starch equiva- lents Protein lbs. lbs. lbs. lbs. 15th January 1929 to 28th February 1929. 122 419 Jhelum hay . . 8.5 33.63 1.65 29.0 2.01 2.86 0.14 Ditto 128 423 Ditto . . 8.0 33.52 1.50 31.8 0.14 2.68 0.12 Ditto 133 341 Ditto . . 6.9 33.64 1.59 30.0 0.33 2.32 0.11 15th January 1929 to 28th January 1929. 123 379 Kasauli hay . . 6.1 17.41 0.33 110.6 156 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II TABLE c ontd. Dietary StandardsDIGESTIBILITY TRIALS ON INDIAN FEEDING STUFFS. 157 13th May 1929 to 19th July 1929. 122 465 Ferozepur hay 12.1 26.86 4.96 8.1 13.33 3.25 0.60 Ditto . . . 128 439 Ditto 9.7 27.96 4.95 8.4 6.61 2.71 0.48 Ditto . . . 133 357 Ditto * 8.3 26.73 5.06 7.9 6. 35 2.22 0.42 13th May 1929 to 3rd June 1929. 123 393 Dalhousie hay 4.3 19.92 0.23 17.5 158 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II TABLE IV. Showing details of daily nitrogen balance in grammes. Period No. of heifer Feed In-take Out-go Total in-take Total out-go Balance Hay Concent- rates Dung Urine Brush. inga 15th January 1929 to 28th February 1929. 122 Jhelum hay . . 28.54 ... 18.00 8.53 Traces 28.64 26.53 2.01 Ditto . . 128 Ditto . . 26.86 ... 17.72 9.00 DIGESTIBILITY TRIALS ON INDIAN FEEDING STUFFS 159 12th March 1929 to 31st March 1929. 123 Multan hay (Musel) 12.15 ... 11.23 6.67 A NOTE ON AN OUTBREAK OF LEPTOSPIRAL JAUNDICE AMONG THE MADRAS HOUNDS.* BY V. KRISHNAMURTI AYYAR, I.V.S., Professor of Pathology and Bacteriology, Madras Veterinary College. (Received for publication on 25th February 1932.) (With Plates XIII-XVI.) The Madras Hunt Club maintains a pack of hounds and fresh imports are obtained from England whenever required. Every precaution is taken towards maintaining the hounds in proper condition and health under strict veterinary supervision, and the slightest indication of any one of them being unwell is at once noticed and timely treatment adopted. The usual complaints from which these hounds suffered in the past had been either helminthic infections, such as Ancylostomiasis, Spirocercosis, or Protozoon infection of either Babesia canis or gibsoni, the latter being more frequent. When there was the slightest suspicion of infection with Babesia gibsoni, the practice had been to inject the hounds with a dose of Novarsinobillon even though the parasites may not be detected in their blood. During the Madras Hunt season between October 1928 and April 1929, the pack to start with consisted of fifty-four hounds which included fresh imports, from England for the season and nothing was found unusual with any of them until about the 21st December 1928. On that date one of the hounds of the pack " Harpy " was sent over to the Madras Veterinary College as suffering from Babesia gibsoni for the usual treatment and this hound was reported to have died on its way back to the kennels after the injection. Following the death of this hound two more hounds succumbed on the 23rd and the 26th December 1928. Later, many more hounds were found to be unwell and began to succumb one after another in quick succession. It was suspected at first that the cause of death of these hounds occurring in such a quick succession might be even due to poisoning of some kind. At this stage, Mr. F. Ware, the then Director of Veterinary Services, Madras, was kind enough to give the author an opportunity to investigate the outbreak and this paper records the findings of that investigation. Table I shows the number of hounds on which post-mortem examination was conducted with the dates of their deaths and the total number that died each day from the commencement of the outbreak. * Paper read at the 17th Session of the Indian Science Congress, 1930, held at Allahabad, ( 160 )
OUTBREAK OF LEPTOSPIRAL JAUNDICE AMONG MADRAS HOUNDS 161 TABLE I. No. Name of the hound Date of death Total number died on each date 1 Harpy . . . . . . . . . 21-12-28 1 2 Hound . . . . . . . . . 23-12-28 1 3 Hound . . . . . . . . . 26-12-28 1 4 Radiant . . . . . . . . . 27-12-28 } 4 5 Speedy . . . . . . . . . 27-12-28 6 Whimsical . . . . . . . . . . 27-12-28 7 Scanty . . . . . . . . . 27-12-28 8 Cheerful . . . . . . . . . 28-12-28 1 9 Darling . . . . . . . . . 29-12-28 1 10 Daylight . . . . . . . . . 30-12-28 } 3 11 Novelty . . . . . . . . . 30-12-28 12 Worthy . . . . . . . . . 30-12-28 13 Solitude . . . . . . . . . 31-12-28 1 14 Wimfred . . . . . . . . . 1-1-29 1 15 Violet . . . . . . . . . 2-1-29 } 3 16 Scavion . . . . . . . . . 2-1-29 17 Colony * . . . . . . . . . 2-1-29 18 Dainty . . . . . . . . . 8-1-29 1 19 Brilliant . . . . . . . . . 10-1-29 1 20 Racket * . . . . . . . . . 13-1-29 1 21 Crafty * . . . . . . . . . 27-2-29 } 2 22 Hound . . . . . . . . . 27-2-29 23 Brevity . . . . . . . . . 7-3-29 1 24 Cronie * . . . . . . . . . 12-3-29 1 25 Septool . . . . . . . . . 18-3-29 1 26 Planet * . . . . . . . . . 19-3-29 1 27 Raylis . . . . . . . . . 27-3-29 1 28 Valentine * . . . . . . . . . 1-4-29 } 2 29 Rakis * . . . . . . . . . 1-4-29 * The asterisks refer to the deaths of the hounds that were kept under observation in the Madras Veterinary College hospital.
162 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II Of these, twenty-two were received for post-mortem examination after death, while the remaining seven were kept under observation in the hospital and died during the period of observation. SYMPTOMS. At the initial stage of the outbreak, symptoms observed were sudden off-feed, discharge from the nostrils which was sanguineous in character, conjunctivitis, passing of fæces with blood, and death occurring in a few hours. These symptoms were very soon followed at a later stage of the outbreak with the appearance of icterus in the mouth, lips and region of the abdomen, associated with hæmorrhages in the lips (Plate XIII, fig. 1) and under subcutis in the region of the sternum and flank. Vomition was also noticed in a few cases. The temperature in most of the cases was reported to have not gone above the normal but in a few it went up to 105° F. or over and dropped before death. (Fig. 1.) TEMPERATURE CHART. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Temperature Chart of Hounds " Crafty " and " Rakis ".
PLATE XIII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Areas marked A denote haemorrhages Fig. 2. Portion of the subcutis of the flank dissected out from one of the hounds showing haemorrhagic areas.
PLATE XVI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Lungs of one of the hounds showing haemorrhagic areas.
PLATE XV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Bladder from one of the hounds showing haemorrhages. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. The above specimen highly magnified.
PLATE XIV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1. Po rtions of small intestines from one of the hounds showing haemorrhages. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. Stomach from one of the hounds showing haemorrhages on the mucosa.
OUTBREAK OF LEPTOSPIRAL JAUNDICE AMONG MADRAS HOUNDS 163 POST-MORTEM LESIONS. In the hounds that died during the early part of the outbreak, the post-mortem lesions present were very striking and more or less uniform in all of them. Hæmorrhagic areas in the sternal regions and in the flank (Plate XIII, fig. 2) were present. There was sero-sanguineous effusion ranging from two to twelve ounces in the abdominal and thoracic cavities. The intestines showed hæmorrhages which were either punctiform or in streaks or confluent in large areas (Plate XIV, fig. 1). The contents of the intestines were dark red in colour and hæmorrhagic in character. The portions of the intestines affected were mainly those of the jeju- num and ileum. The duodenum in most of the cases showed no change. The stomach appeared normal but in a few of them intense congestion and hæmorrhages were observed and the contents were dark red in colour similar to those observed in the intestines (Plate XIV, fig. 2). The liver showed very characteristic changes in all cases. It was icteric and fatty in nature. The kidneys showed similar appearances but in some cases they were found congested. The spleen did not present anything unusual. The bladder was found empty in most cases and showed punctate hæmorrhages (Plate XV). The lesions observed in those hounds that died in the latter part of the out- break were the same as described above but presented also characteristic jaundiced appearance of nearly all the tissues of the body. The wall of the abdomen, inside of thighs, ears, and lips showed varying shades from a faint yellow tinge to a deep yellow colour and in these regions as well as in the subcutis of the sternum, elbow and flank hæmorrhages were prominent. The serous coats of the stomach and intestines also showed varying degrees of yellow colour and hæmorrhages on the mucosa could be seen through the coats in the intestines. The lymphatic glands were dark-red in colour and hæmorrhagic in character. The lungs showed hæmorrhages scattered over the surface and were either punctiform or irregular (Plate XVI). They were found along the apices in some cases while in others major portion of the lobes were found involved. The appear- ances presented by them resembled the butterfly-appearance so characteristically described in leptospiral infections. METHOD OF DIAGNOSIS ADOPTED. Examination of the materials in the initial stages of the outbreak was not attempted. A chemical analysis was, however, made of the viscera from a few of E
164 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II them which was found negative to any kind of poisoning. Later, when the author commenced investigations, the post-mortem appearances were so striking and uniform that it suggested itself to the author that the outbreak simulated that due to leptospiral infection. Examination of the ground up liver and kidney under dark ground illumination from the different hounds that died was regularly resorted to and in the specimen from the hound " Darling " forms indistinguishable from lcptospira were detected. Inoculations into guinea-pigs and rats of different materials such as hæmorrhagic effusions, urine, ground up liver emulsion and de- fibrinated blood from different hounds were then made. Only two of the guinea- pigs inoculated revealed definite leptospiral forms, although in some others that died, lesions very characteristic of leptospiral infection were present. Table II shows the details and results of such inoculations. DISCUSSION. Okell, Dalling and Pugh [1925] have described a condition of leptospiral jaun- dice in dogs and the symptoms reported by these workers appear to be identical with those found by the author in the outbreak referred to in this paper. In dealing with the etiology of this condition in dogs, these workers have compared the symptoms and lesions presented by the dogs naturally infected, with those experimentally produced by them by inoculating dogs both with a known rat strain of Leptospira icterohæmorrhagiæ sent to them by Dr. George Buchanan and with a dog strain of leptospira recovered from a naturally infected case. The symptoms observed by them in both the naturally and experimentally infected cases resembled each other and only in three out of ten naturally infected cases, they were able to isolate leptospira which agreed with the known rat strain of Leptospira iclerohæmorrhagiæ used by them in their experiments. They also add in that connection that the finding of leptospira even in cases which have been definitely infected with a known strain of leptospira has been difficult. " Darling " was the only hound in the outbreak in which leptospiral forms were detected by the author and this, as will be seen from the list of hounds that came for post-mortem examination, was the earliest one from which the author had the oppor- tunity to examine materials for detection of leptospira. From the history of the outbreak it is highly probable that the other hounds that came in for examination must have been suffering for some time as was indicated by nature of the symptoms they showed and it is possible that the failure to detect leptospira in them might have been due to the examination of materials having been undertaken at a later stage of the disease in them. In a paper entitled '' Recent work on Leptospirosis, Tsutsugamushu Disease, and Tropical Typhus in the Federated Malay States " Fletcher [1927] has described a
OUTBREAK OF LEPTOSPIRAL JAUNDICE AMONG MADRAS HOUNDS 165 condition naturally occurring in dogs due to leptospiral infection and the symptoms recorded by him resemble also to a great extent those described by the author in this paper. Fletcher has in that connection also brought forward evidence of the exis- tence of a number of species of leptospira which could be serologically distinguished from each other and has stated that the strain of leptospira recovered from Natural Leptospirosis in dogs in Malaya was not L. icterohæmorrhagiæ but serologically identical with L. hebdomadis of Akiyama A type. In view of the fact that leptospira were detected by the author in only one hound and in two guinea-pigs experimentally inoculated and also of the fact that the lesions described could be set up in dogs by different species of leptospira, sera from four hounds that recovered from the natural attack in the outbreak were sent by Mr. F. Ware, the then Director of Veterinary Services. Madras, to Dr. Lewthwaite, Medical Research Institute, Kuala Lampur, for serological test to determine the species of leptospira with which the Madras Hounds were infected, and all the four samples have been declared to have given positive results to infec- tion by L. hæmorrhagicæ. The outbreak in the Madras Hounds described in this paper is therefore un- doubtedly due to L. hæmorrhagiæ and is the first of its kind to be recorded in India. Thanks are due to Mr. F. Ware, F.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., for the very kind oppor- tunity and facilities afforded to the author for the investigation of this outbreak. REFERENCES. 1. Fletcher, W. (1927). Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 21, p. 265. 2. Okell, C. C., Dalling, T., and Pugh, L. P. (1925). The Veterinary Journal, 81, p. 3. F 2
166 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II TABLE II. (a) Inoculations made direct from hounds. No. Name of the hound. Date of post- mortem exami- nation. Kind of animal inoculated. Nature and quantity of the material injected. Kind of inocu- lation. Date of inocula- tion. Date of death. Duration of obser- vation in days. *Result of post- mortem exami- nation. Remarks. 1 Darling . . 29-12-28 Guinea-pig No. 714 2 c.c of sero- sangui neous fluid from thoracic cavity. Subcu- taneous- ly. 29-12-28 1-1-29 2 OUTBREAK OF LEPTOSPIRAL JAUNDICE AMONG MADRAS HOUNDS nbsp; nbsp; nbsp; nbsp; nbsp; nbsp; 167 TABLE II. ( a) Inoculations made direct from hounds168 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMALS HUSBANDRY [ II, II TABLE II. ( a) Inoculations made direct from houndsOUTBREAK OF LEPTOSPIRAL JAUNDICE AMONG MADRAS HOUNDS 169 TABLE II. (b) Inoculation from Guinea-pigs. Serial No. Number of the Guinea-pig. Date of post- mortem examina- tion. Kind of animal inoculated. Nature and quantity of the material injected. Kind of inocula- tion. Date of inocula- tion. Date of death. Dura- tion of obser- vation in days. *Result of post- mortem exami- nation. Remarks. 1 Guinea-pig No.725 5-1-29 Guinea-pig No. 736 1 c.c. of liver Subcuta- 5-1-29 21-1-29 16 + emulsion. neously. Ditto 737 Ditto . . Do. . 5-1-29 7-1-29 2 SELECTED ARTICLES NICOTINE IN THE CONTROL OF ECTO-PARASITES OF POULTRY. BY F.C. BISHOP AND R. D. WAGNER, Division of Insects Affecting Man and Animals, Bureau of Entomology, U. S. Department of Agriculture. (Reprinted from the Journal of Economic Entomohgy, Vol. 24, No. 1, February 1931.) [ Abstract.NICOTINE IN THE CONTROL OF ECTO-PARASITES OF POULTRY 171 NICOTINE SULPHATE AGAINST THE FEATHER MITE AND COMMON CHICKEN MITE. In 1929 Mr. C. R. Outright1 published a note on the use of nicotine sulphate against the feather mite, Liponyssus silviarum. Some tests of nicotine sulphate against this mite have also been reported by Professor L. F. Payne,2 and Mr. E. L. Taylor3 states that an infestation of this mite in a poultry house in Dorchester, England, disappeared as a result of two treatments of the perches with nicotine sulphate and paraffin. Our experience with the feather mite indicates that a single treatment of the roosts with nicotine sulphate cannot be relied on to clear out an infestation. The number of treatments necessary for eradication depends on the extent of infestation and whether supplemental control steps, such as removing the litter, and spraying or dusting the house and nests, are carried out at the same time the roosts are treated. Nicotine sulphate was found to be very effective against the common chicken mite, Dermanyssus gallinae L., when applied pure or diluted with 9 parts of water. Tests carried out by the senior author several years ago showed that nicotine sul- phate when used as a spray in mite-infested chicken houses in such strengths as are usually employed against insects on plants was ineffective. W. M. Davidson4 made tests against mites with aqueous solutions containing 0.07 and 0.12 per cent. free nicotine with the addition of 4 pounds of whale oil soap to 100 gallons. He con- cludes that these sprays 'were of some value, especially the stronger solution'. Most of our practical tests with mites consisted of thoroughly spraying infested chicken houses with 1 part of 40 per cent. nicotine sulphate in 9 parts of water; then closing the houses up for about eight hours. These tests were carried out in July when the temperatures were high. On the day following the application it was noted that the mites were greatly reduced in numbers and by the end of the third day no live mites could be found and there was no recurrence of the infestation. One similar test of 40 per cent. nicotine sulphate diluted 1 to 50, with 1 ounce of soap per gallon added, gave satisfactory control. That the mites are killed by the fumigating effect of the nicotine as well as by direct contact is shown by a test in which small double wooden strips were painted with nicotine sulphate; then the mites were put between these on the unpainted 1 Cutright, C. R. A valuable aid in the control of the feather mite, Liponyssus silviarum. Jour. Econ. Ent., V. 22. p. 422. Apr., 1929. 2 Payne, Loyal F. A new method of controlling feather mites. Jour. Econ. Ent., V. 22. pp 819- 820. Oct., 1929. 3 Taylor, E. L. Liponyssus silviarum injuring poultry in this country. Parasitology, V. 22, No. 3, p. 313. June, 1930. 4 Davidson, W. M. Results of experiments with miscellaneous substances against the chicken mite. Dept. Bull. No. 1228, U. S. Dept. Agr., p. 10, 1924.
172 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II surfaces. All those introduced 24 hours after the application died in a few hours, of those introduced 48 hours after the application, 50 per cent. died and none of those were killed which were put on 96 hours after the treatment. Other tests also clearly indicate that mites are slowly killed if confined in boxes the floors of which have been lightly treated with nicotine sulphate. The mites in these tests had no contact with the treated surfaces. TEST AGAINST THE FOWL TICK AND STICKTIGHT FLEA. Two tests of 40 per cent. nicotine sulphate, 1 part to 9 parts of water, were made against the fowl tick, Argas miniatus Koch. The material was applied to the infested poultry houses with a sprayer. Satisfactory control resulted. Even those ticks which were protected from the direct application of the spray were killed, apparently by the vapor. The treatment, however, is more expensive and the effects less lasting than when anthracene oil is used. In experiments with nicotine sulphate against the sticktight flea, Echidnophaga gallinae Westw., it was found that the application of nicotine sulphate to the perches did not destroy the adult fleas attached to the heads of the fowls. Spraying the floors of infested poultry houses with 40 per cent. nicotine sulphate diluted with from 4 to 9 parts of water and making a moderate but thorough application destroyed all adults present. EXPERIMENTS IN CONTROL OF CHICKEN LICE. The method of treatment generally used against lice consists of making a light application of 40 per cent. nicotine sulphate to the upper surface of the perches about half an hour before the fowls go to roost. There is little opportunity for the material to come into direct contact with the lice and evidently their destruction is brought about largely by fumigation. The feathers cover a considerable part of the roost beneath the fowl, and body heat hastens volatilization; and evidently the fumes pass upward through the feathers and.hence rather promptly reach the lice on the legs, bodies, and wings. If there is any nicotine sulphate which has not thoroughly dried into the perches when the fowls go to roost it is distributed through the feathers to some extent by the scratching of the fowls, and some of it gets smeared on the feathers by contact. The lice may begin to crawl to the surface of the feathers in about half an hour after the fowls go to roost and some begin dropping off practically dead soon after they appear. Free nicotine is rather more rapid in its action, as lice may begin to drop off fifteen minutes after exposure to it.
NICOTINE IN THE CONTROL OF ECTO-PARASITES OF POULTRY 173 Most of our experiments were carried out under practical poultry farm condi- tions in the vicinity of Washington, D. C. The houses used were built of lumber, and the construction was fairly tight with ample ventilation secured through the open fronts. The nicotine sulphate or free nicotine was applied lightly with a brush to the entire upper surface of the perches from one-half an hour before to immediately prior to the roosting of the fowls. In each test a number of fowls were leg-banded and examined prior to treatment, and a record made of the species of lice found and degree of infestation of each. Papers were spread on the dropping boards under some of the fowls, and the dead lice were collected the following morning, counted, and the species determined. The leg-banded chickens and others were then examined the day following the treatment and at intervals for weeks or months thereafter. Other tests were made on groups of heavily in- fested fowls kept in coops in the laboratory yard. Mr. Harold S. Peters carried out one of these tests in the fall of 1928, and the others were made in 1930. The temperature in the hen houses at the time of application ranged in different tests from 60° F. to 91° F., and the minimum temperatures during the night following the treatments ranged from 43° F. to 85° F. In most of these tests the flocks were very lightly to heavily infested with five species of lice: the body louse, Eomenacanthus stramineum (Nitzsch); the shaft louse, Menopon gallinae (L.) ; the fluff louse, Goniocotes hologaster (Nitzsch); the wing louse, Lipeurus caponis (L.) ; and the head louse, Lipeurus helerographus (Nitzsch). A large percentage of the lice were killed during the first night following an application, some were killed the second night, and a few the third night. The eggs were not all killed; in fact, the precise effect on the eggs was not determined. Although some of the lice which dropped off the fowls were found to be alive, these were noticeably affected by the treatment and soon died. In all tests the treatment was more effective against the body, shaft, and fluff lice than against the wing louse, and the head louse was least effectually controlled. Doubtless the location of the last named species on the birds, mainly on the head and neck, exposes it less to the concentrated vapor of the nicotine, especially if the head is not kept under the wing. In no case were all head lice killed except in laboratory tests, in which the fowls were kept in rather tightly closed boxes. A series of tests was conducted to determine the interval between applications which would be most effective and the possibility of completely destroying lice by repeated treatments. These tests were not conclusive owing to the practical difficulty in keeping all fowls on the roosts the night following each treatment and
174 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II in making sure that no mixing of fowls from different pens took place during the long period required for the tests. It was evident, however, that an interval of six days was too short. Many eggs were observed to hatch after the second treatment. Intervals of 12 and 20 days apparently gave an opportunity for some of the lice to mature and lay eggs between the treatments. The 8-day interval gave best results, as with this interval no hatching was observed after the second treatment. Tests were made of different methods of application, such as: tacking a strip of cloth soaked in nicotine sulphate to the top of the perches; applying the nicotine with an oil can; applying the material with a brush to the bottom sides of the perches; and making general applications to the roosts, dropping boards, and walls with a sprayer, as would be the case in treating for mites. The even distri- bution of the material with a brush over the entire upper surface of 2-inch perches seemed to be as effective as any of the other methods. Painting the dropping boards or bottoms of the perches only was effective. The results secured by the use of free nicotine were practically identical. with those obtained by use of nicotine sulphate, but the application of the former is more disagreeable, and its greater volatility makes it necessary that more ventila- tion be provided for the fowls than when nicotine sulphate is used. EFFECT OF NICOTINE ON POULTRY. Numerous tests of nicotine sulphate by poultry departments of several experiment stations and by practical poultry owners as well as those conducted by us, indicate that no noticeable injury to the fowls results if the applications are properly made and there is sufficient ventilation. Some reports of injury or death of fowls have reached us, these being due apparently to excessively heavy applica- tions or poor ventilation or a combination of the two. No reports appear to have been published on the effect of the treatment on egg production. In our ex- perience, a drop in the number of eggs produced the day following an application was observed in some cases, but the next day the decrease was usually made up, and then normal production was resumed. Free nicotine has produced no markedly injurious effects in our tests, but it is certain that its use is fraught with some danger. The toxic effects of the fumes when fowls are kept in close confinement are much more quickly apparent than in the case of nicotine sulphate. This also suggests the need for caution when nicotine sulphate is applied to poultry houses which have been whitewashed or limed, since lime in combination with nicotine sulphate releases free nicotine.
NICOTINE IN THE CONTROL OF ECTO-PARASITES OF POULTRY 175 SOME ADVANTGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF THE USE OF NICOTINE SULPHATE AGAINST LICE. The short time required for the application of nicotine sulphate to the perches as compared with the individual treatment of the fowls with sodium fluoride or sodium fluosilicate is a distinct advantage, as is also the fact that the fowls are less agitated by the nicotine treatment than when handled individually. The cost of a single application of nicotine sulphate is also less than a treatment with sodium fluoride owing to the saving in labour. Certainly many poultry owners would carry out this simple treatment when they would not take the time to dip or dust the fowls individually. There are several disadvantages to the nicotine sulphate treatment as compared with that of sodium fluoride. The principal one is that eradication of all lice is not accomplished, by one treatment; in fact, even with many repetitions of the treatment some head lice may persist. It is difficult to get poultry owners to apply a second treatment at the proper time, if at all. If all fowls do not roost on the treated perches, the infestation will soon spread from those fowls which are not subjected to the fumes. Moreover, effective control with nicotine sulphate is dependent upon having the flock in a comparatively tight house, free from strong drafts, yet with proper ventilation to protect the fowls from injury. In very open houses, such as are commonly used in the South, still nights must be selected for treatment. There is a valid argument in favour of individual treatment of fowls over mass treatment, especially when it is only required once or twice a year or even less frequently; this is that the flock owner has to handle every bird and can do culling and become familiar with his stock at the same time he treats for lice. Mr. C. R. Cutright.N-BUTYLIDENE CHLORIDE, A NEW DRUG FOR THE TREATMENT OF EQUINE STRONGYLIDOSIS. BY WILLARD H. WRIGHT, Associate Veterinarian, H. B. RAFFENSPERGER, Associate Veterinarian, JOHN BOZICEVICH, Junior Zoologist, and PAUL C. UNDERWOOD,. Junior Veterinarian, Zoological Division, and JACOB M. SCHAFFER, Chemist, Biochemic Division, Bureau of Animal Industry, United States Department of Agriculture. (Reprinted from the Journal of Agricultural Research, Vol. 43, No. 4, August 15, 1931.) PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS. In critical tests made with a large number of chlorinated alkyl hydrocarbons for the purpose of studying the relationship between their anthelmintic efficacy and their chemical structure, Wright and Schaffer ( 14) found that n-butylidene chloride was 100 per cent. effective for the removal of ascarids and 95 per cent. effective for the removal of hookworms from dogs. Normal butylidene chloride, CH3. CH2. CH2. CHCI2, is obtained by the action of phosphorus pentachloride on n-butyric aldehyde. For the present experiments a high-grade, commercially prepared product was washed first with a 2 per cent. sodium bicarbonate solution and then with water, after which it was dried and distilled. Thus purified, the n-butylidene chloride was a clear, colourless, sweet- tasting liquid with a pleasant odour and possessed the following constants : Boil- ing point, 115° to 116.5° C. (760 mm.); specific gravity, 1.084 (25°/25°); solubi- lity, 1 gm. in 2,000 gm. of water. Normal butylidene chloride was found by Wright and Schaffer (14) to be well tolerated by dogs in doses up to 10 c.c. per kilogram of body weight. It produced only salivation and a slight muscular trembling, the animals returning to normal within a few hours. In dogs, n-butylidene chloride does not produce the central necrosis of the liver which commonly follows the administration of chlorinated hydrocarbons such as carbon tetra-chloride and some of those investigated by Wright and Schaffer. From the results obtained with n-butylidene chloride on dogs, there was reason to believe that the use of this compound might prove to be an effective treatment for strongylidosis of horses perhaps better than chenopodium, the drug most com- monly used but which has been objected to because of its toxicity. Because of the ( 176 )
N-BUTYLIDENE CHLORIDE 177 fact that n-butylidene chloride is less soluble than carbon tetrachloride (solubility 1; 1,250), it was believed that a greater proportion of the n-butylidene chloride might possibly be carried into the cæcum and colon, the site of strongyle infesta- tion in horses. The fact that n-butylidene chloride in large doses is well tolerated by dogs and is not followed by severe liver lesions in such animals indicated the possibility that it might safely be administered to horses, in relatively large doses. Accordingly in the tests reported in this paper doses of 0.207 to 0.333 c.c. per kilo- gram of body weight were given. These were followed by no deleterious effects. Of the chlorinated alkyl hydrocarbons, only two, carbon tetrachloride and tetrachlorethylene, have been tested on horses. Hall (4) tested carbon tetrachloride alone and also a mixture of carbon tetrachloride and carbon disulphide. He found that carbon tetrachloride alone in doses of 25 to 50 c.c. was partially effective in removing bots, entirely effective in removing the ascarids present in the two test animals that had these parasites, entirely effective in removing strongyles. and partially effective against cylicostomes. De Blieck and Baudet ( 1), using somewhat larger doses than those employed by Hall, confirmed Hall's results with carbon tetrachloride. Demnitz (2), using a dose of 100 gm., carried out tests with carbon tetrachloride on six horses. One of the animals died after treatment and the others were severely intoxicated. Dem- nitz concluded that carbon tetrachloride was effective but unsafe for horses. How- ever, he administered the drug by passing the stomach tube only one-third the length of the esophagus; the fatality and the intoxications may possibly have resulted from aspiration of the carbon tetrachloride into the trachea and lungs. Shul'ts and Raevskaia (12) reported a series of experiments with carbon tetra- chloride on horses. They recommended a routine dose of 150 to 200 c.c. for strong mature animals and stated that the smaller doses recommended by American inves- tigators are not sufficiently effective. They concluded that at best the treatment with carbon tetrachloride can be expected only to lower the degree of infestation and that complete elimination of the strongyles cannot be accomplished with this drug. After treating a considerable number of animals in the clinic of the Berlin Veterinary College, Neumann-Kleinpaul and Pelckmann (8) gave, as symptoms produced by the administration of carbon tetrachloride, the following: Apathy, anorexia, increased thirst, colicky symptoms, tremor, bloating, evidences of pain, fluctuating temperature, variation in the pulse and respiration rates, cough, diar- rh178 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II calcium level, computed from the daily average, sank from 4 to 14.56 per cent. below its original level after treatment with carbon tetrachloride in doses of 0.15 to 0.33 gm. per kilogram of body weight, indicating that the relation of calcium to the toxicity of carbon tetrachloride in horses is substantially the same as in dogs, as demonstrated by Minot (7). Neumann-Kleinpaul and Pelckmann found also that the toxic symptoms produced by carbon tetrachloride in horses, especially variations in the temperature, pulse, and respiration, occur in the main at the time of the declining blood-calcium level, although the duration and intensity of the toxic symptoms correspond in no evident way with the degree of decline in the blood-calcium level. By feeding a sufficient quantity of calcium chloride starch (a proprietary preparation) before the administration of carbon tetrachloride these authors were able to prevent entirely the reduction of the blood-calcium level and to diminish the toxic symptoms commonly observed by them after the use of the drug. The feeding of ultra-violet-treated vitamin yeast before the administration of carbon tetrachloride diminished the reduction of the blood-calcium level and lessened considerably the duration and intensity of all toxic symptoms. Grassnickel (3) found that the bilirubin content of the blood of the animals used in the experiments of Neumann-Kleinpaul and Pelckmann was increased in every case after carbon tetrachloride administration and that the increase was 1.2 to 4 times the normal bilirubin content. In 9 of 15 horses the strongest intoxica- tion reactions corresponded with the high point of the bilirubin level, or the high point of the bilirubin level fell on the day of the toxic symptoms. The lowest blood-calcium level coincided with the highest bilirubin level in two of the animals, although the reduction of the blood-calcium level and the rise in the bilirubin content stood in no evident dependent relationship to each other. In substance, the investigations of the abovementioned authors indicate that the horse is no less susceptible to carbon tetrachloride intoxication than are other animals and that, as with other animals, before the administration of carbon tetra- chloride the diet should be regulated in such a way as to provide a high calcium intake in order to offset lowering of the blood-calcium level and the retention of guanidine. Schlingman (10) tested tetrachlorethylene on three horses and found that the drug, when given in doses of 0.066 to 0.15 c.c. per kilogram of body weight, pro- duced drowsiness and, in one animal, marked incoordination of movement. The anthelmintic was about 50 per cent. effective against bots. Schlingman states that none of the horses passed any roundworms and that only one roundworm was found post-mortem. As the term " roundworm " is not specific, it is not clear what species of parasite resisted the action of the drug; probably it was an ascarid.
N-BUTYLIDENE CHLORIDE 179 Schlingman's tests, therefore, throw no light on the efficacy of tetrachlorethylene for nematode parasites of the horse. Raffensperger, in a paper as yet unpublished, has reported on critical tests of tetrachlorethylene alone and in mixtures with oil of chenopodium for parasites of the horse. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE. With the exception of the first experiment reported in this paper, where visual examination of the feces was made after treatment, the method employed was that developed by Hall and commonly used in all anthelmintic work carried out in the Zoological Division. This method consists of screening all feces passed after the administration of the anthelmintic in order to recover all parasites removed by the treatment, the slaughter of the animal after a suitable number of days, and the screening of the contents of the digestive tract to recover worms not removed by the treatment. RESULTS OF EXPERIMENTS. EXPERIMENT 1. Horse No. 1, an 8-months-old colt weighing 282 kgm. (620 pounds) was fasted 24 hours and dosed by stomach tube with 0.21 c.c. of n-butylidene chloride per kilogram of weight, a total of 60 c.c, in 480 c.c. of raw linseed oil. There was no reaction to the treatment. The animal passed the following parasites :180 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II but presumably all worms removed by the anthelmintic would have been passed by the sixth day. The following parasites were recovered post-mortem:N-BUTYLIDENE CHLORIDE 181 of the drug. For this reason, in the remaining experiments in which oils were used they were given five hours after the administration of the n-butylidene chloride. EXPERIMENT 2. Horse No. 2, a 22-years-old gelding weighing 484 kgm. (1,060 pounds), was fasted 24 hours and dosed by stomach tube with 0.207 c.c. of n-butylidene chloride per kilogram of weight, a total of 100 c.c., followed in five hours by 960 c.c. of raw linseed oil. There was no reaction to the treatment; the animal refused feed the day after treatment, but the second day consumed the usual quantity. The follow- ing parasites were passed :182 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II horse was not killed until 15 days after treatment. The treatment was entirely ineffective for the removal of bots. EXPERIMENT 3. Horse No. 3, a 2-year-old colt weighing 324 kgm. (712 pounds) was fasted 24 hours and dosed by stomach tube with 0.309 c. c. of n-butylidene chloride per kilogram of weight, a total of 100 c. c., followed in five hours by 480 c. c. of raw linseed oil, also given by stomach tube. There was no reaction to the treatment. The following parasites were passed:N-BUTYLIDENE CHLORIDE 183 after the administration of the drug and were found there post-mortem, although in view of the number found it would be reasonable to assume that at least some of these worms were present as adult forms in the large intestine at the time of treatment. EXPERIMENT 4. Mule No. 430, a female about 18 years of age, weighing 295 kgm. (649 pounds), was fasted 36 hours and dosed by stomach tube with 0.3 c.c. of n-butylidene chloride per kilogram of weight, a total of 88.5 c.c. followed in five hours by 180 c.c. of castor oil in 540 c.c. of liquid petrolatum, also given by stomach tube. The animal did not consume all the feed the next day, but on the second day after treatment it ate normally and continued to do so thereafter. The following parasites were passed:184 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDBY [ II, II spp.), 0 per cent. for oxyurids, and 0 per cent. for bots. One S. vulgaris found in the large colon was embedded in the wall of that organ, the head end projecting for a distance of 6 mm. above the mucosa. Obviously no anthelmintic could have removed this specimen. An aneurism in the anterior branch of the anterior mesenteric artery contained 3 larvae of S. vulgaris and a second aneurism in the right branch of the anterior mesenteric artery contained 15 larvae of S. vulgaris. In the animals used in the first three experiments, n-butylidene chloride failed completely to remove any specimens of Strongylus vulgaris, but in the present experiment the drug removed a larger percentage of this species than of any other. This fact indicates that S. vulgaris is not necessarily resistant to the action of n-butylidene chloride, although it might be inferred from the three previous experiments that it is. Apparently the drug will remove a majority of these forms when they exist as adults in the lumen of the intestinal tract at the time the anthelmintic is administered. The results against cylicostomes in the present experiment are at variance with those obtained in the previous tests. The purgative in this test was different from that used in the three previous ones, a fact which may have influenced the efficacy of the n-butylidene chloride against cylicostomes. This point is more fully dis- cussed later. It will be noted that the drug removed all these parasites from the caecum but left a large number in the double colon. This circumstance suggests that by the time it reached the double colon the drug was so diluted that it was not present in sufficient concentration to act on the worms. EXPERIMENT 5. Horse No. 466, a 10-year-old mare weighing 459 kgm. (1,010 pounds), was fasted 36 hours and dosed with 0.3 c.c. n-butylidene chloride per kilogram of weight, a total of 137.7 c.c., administered in capsules followed immediately by 1 ounce of aloes in capsule. Several capsules containing n-butylidene chloride were broken in the mouth, but the animal suffered no reaction from these accidents. There was no reaction to the treatment. The following parasites were passed;N-BUTYLIDENE CHLORIDE 185 The animal was killed on the fifth day after treatment; 640 cylicostomes were recovered from the small colon and must be considered as having been removed by the anthelmintic. Total worms passed: 3.920 cylicostomes, 11 Strongylus edentatus, 1 S. vulgaris, and 1 oxyurid. Parasites not affected by the anthelmintic were recovered post- mortem, as follows:186 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II returned to normal, the pulse being 40 and the respiration 10. The following parasites were passed:N-BUTYLIDENE CHLORIDE 187 The animal was killed 9 days after treatment and the following worms reco- vered post-mortem: Location. Number and kind of worms found post-mortem. Stomach . . . . . . 13 Gaslrophilus intestinalis. Caeoum . . . . . None. Double Colon . . . . . 1 Triodontophorus tenuicollis. Small colon and rectum . . . None. There were 3 larvae of Strongylus vulgaris in an aneurism of the anterior mesenteric artery. Efficacy of the treatment: 100 per cent. for cylicostomes, 100 per cent. for Strongylus spp., 0 per cent. for Triodontophorus tenuicollis, and 0 per cent. for bots. EXPERIMENT 8. Horse No. 452, a 12-year-old gelding weighing 482.7 kgm. (1,062 pounds), was fasted 36 hours and given in capsules 0.3 c.c. of n-butylidene chloride per kilogram of weight, a total of 144.8 c.c, followed in five hours by 960 c.c... of raw linseed oil in a drench. There was no reaction to the treatment. The following parasites were passed :188 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II these parasites must be considered as having been removed by the anthelmintic. No other parasites were found post-mortem. Efficacy of the treatment: 100 per cent. for Strongylus spp., cylicostomes, and P. ratzii. OTHER TESTS. Dr. Robert Bardwell, Mereworth Stud, Lexington, Ky., offered to conduct tests with n-butylidene chloride, and a quantity of the compound was forwarded to him. The following is his report of one such test:N-BUTYLIDENE CHLORIDE 189 A roan mare, about 15 years old and weighing about 800 pounds, was dosed at 8-20 A.M. with 60 c.c. of n-butylidene chloride in capsules. There was no reaction to the treatment. The mare was killed at 9-50 A.M. The mucosa of the stomach was slightly inflamed. Nine Habronema muscae were found in the organ, 4 being alive and 5 dead. The percentage of efficacy was therefore 55.5. A black gelding, about 15 years old, and weighing about 1,100 pounds, was dosed with 60 c.c. of n-butylidene chloride in capsules at 8-50 A.M. There was no reaction to the treatment. The animal was killed at 11-10 A.M. Although the animal was said to have been fasted for 12 hours before treatment, the stomach was engorged with food. One hundred and nine Habronema microstoma were recovered, of which 3 were alive and 106 dead. In this test, n-butylidene chloride was 97.2 per cent. effective for the destruction of H. microstoma. In the last test the interval of time between dosing and slaugther of the animal was greater than in the two other tests, and it is possible that the additional time gave the anthelmintic greater opportunity to act on the parasites present in the stomach. It would appear from these tests that n-butylidene chloride is partially effective against Habronema spp. ; no doubt the efficacy of the drug would be materially increased if it were preceded by gastric lavage with an alkaline solution as has been shown to be the case with carbon disulphide. It has been impossible to determine this point because of the unavailability of suitable test animals. DISCUSSION OF RESULTS. In these tests, n-butylidene chloride administered in doses of 0.207 to 0.333 c.c. per kilogram of body weight, followed in five hours by 960 c.c. (1 quart) of raw linseed oil for a 1,000-pound animal (experiments 2, 6, 7 and 8), gave good results against Strongylus spp., cylicostomes, and Poteriostomum spp. In experiment 2, the drug removed 93.8 per cent. of all Strongylus spp., all of the cylicostomes, and all Poteriostomum spp. In experiment 6, 50 per cent. of the Strongylus spp., all of the cylicostomes, and all Poteriostomum spp., were removed. In experiment 7, all Strongylus spp., and cylicostomes were removed. In experiment 8, all Strongylus spp., cylicostomes, and P. ratzii were removed. The administration of n-butylidene chloride in raw linseed oil in experiment 1 resulted in reduced efficacy for the anthelmintic, as none of the Strongylus spp., present were removed and only 80.2 per cent. of the cylicostomes. In experiment 3, in which the drug was followed in five hours by 480 c.c., of raw linseed oil for a 712-pound animal it is apparent that the dose of linseed oil was insufficient to insure adequate purgation and possibly the reduced efficacy in this test is correlated with the use of an inadequate amount of purgative.
190 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II A castor-oil mineral-oil mixture, as used in experiment 4, also failed to provide adequate purgation, and apparently this mixture is not advantageous for use as a purgative in connection with n-butylidene chloride. The results against cylicos- tomes were disappointing in this experiment and also in experiment 5, in which aloes was used as a purgative, although respective efficacies of 52 per cent. and 60 per cent. were obtained for Strongylus spp. N-butylidene chloride in these two experiments removed nearly all worms from the caecum but failed to have an adequate effect on those in the double colon, a fact which suggests that the pur- gative used was not of a nature suitable to carry the anthelmintic into the double colon in sufficient quantity or concentration to act effectively on the worms located there. It may be assumed from a theoretical standpoint that most of the n-buty- lidene chloride was absorbed before it reached this portion of the gut. It will be noted that extremely variable results were obtained with n-buty- lidene chloride against Strongylus spp., the percentage of efficacy ranging from 0 to 100. As these parasites wander as larvae into the tissues, develop to fully grown agamic froms at points outside the lumen of the large intestine, and ultimately return to the lumen and promptly assume the appearance and character of mature worms, it cannot be said with certainty that strongyles found post mortem 5 to 10 days after treatment were present in the gut at the time of treatment. No doubt this return of strongyles to the lumen of the gut is a more or less continuous process, especially in the case of S. vulgaris, the agamic forms of which are found in aneurisms usually present in the anterior mesenteric artery or its branches. As such aneurisms were present in nearly all the test animals used in these experi- ments, it is possible, and even probable, that the ineffectiveness of n-butylidene chloride against S. vulgaris in some of the tests was in part due to the fact that adult forms found in the large intestine at necropsy had reached that location after the administration of the anthelmintic. Of one thing we can at least be sure, that n-butylidene chloride is as effective as indicated in these tests ; probably it is much more effective against Strongylus spp., than some of the tests would indicate. In this connection Hall ( 4, p. 521) reports : * * * * * We are, therefore, safe in con- cluding that the drugs which remove all or almost all of these worms are effective, that those which remove few or none and leave many behind are ineffective, and that those removing any given fraction based on the number collected from the manure and the number found post-mortem are substantially as effective as the indicated fraction stated in percen- tage figures, with the qualifying statement that they may be somewhat more effective than the findings indicate.
N-BUTYLIDENE CHLORIDE 191 ASCARIDS. The colt used in experiment 1 was the only test animal infested with ascarids. Only 11 per cent. of these worms were removed. However, as all ascarids found post-mortem were immature and the animal was not killed until 17 days after the administration of the anthelmintic, it is possible that many of these worms reached the small intestine after the treatment was given. In this test, n-butylidene chloride was given in raw linseed oil, a method which probably greatly reduced its efficacy. Evidently this test does not afford a basis for drawing final conclusions, as in Dr. Bardwell's test an efficacy of 100 per cent. was apparently obtained against ascarids. BOTS. The results against bots were very unsatisfactory. In experiment 1, only 1 per cent. of the bots were removed and in experiment 6, 46.7 per cent. In five other tests, n-butylidene chloride failed to remove any of the bots present. It is apparent that the drug possesses little efficacy against these parasites. HABRONEMA SPP. N-butylidene chloride failed to kill the one specimen of H. muscae present in one animal but showed an efficacy of 55.5 per cent. against this species in another animal. In a third test, the drug proved to be 97.2 per cent. effective for the destruction of H. microstoma. In this test, a greater period of time elapsed between treatment and killing of the animal, a circumstance which no doubt permitted the drug more time to act on the parasites. Probably the use of a preliminary gastric lavage would increase the efficacy of n-butylidene chloride for Habronema spp. STRONGULUS SPP. In experiments 1, 2, 3, and 6, n-butylidene chloride failed to remove any specimens of S. vulgaris; the drug removed 60 per cent. of this species in experi- ment 4 and 100 per cent. in experiment 5. The efficacy of n-butylidene chloride against S. edentatus varied from 44.4 per cent. in experiment 4 to 100 per cent. in experiments 2, 6 and 7. In experiment 4, the drug removed 50 per cent. of S. equinus and in experiment 8, 100 per cent. The efficacy against all species of Strongylus varied from 0 to 100 per cent., the most consistent being in those cases where n-butylidene chloride was followed in five hours by a dose of raw linseed oil adequate for the individual animal. CYLICOSTOMES. In experiments 2, 6, 7 and 8, where the anthelmintic was followed in five hours by an adequate dose of raw linseed oil, 100 per cent. effectiveness was obtained
192 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II against cylicostomes. In experiment 3, where the dose of linseed oil was not sufficient, the treatment removed 97 per cent. of these forms. The administration of n-butylidene chloride in raw linseed oil gave only 80.2 per cent. efficacy in experiment 1 In experiment 4, where a castor-oil mineral-oil mixture was used, and in experiment 5, where aloes was used, the results against cylicostomes were decidedly inferior. When properly administered, n-butylidene chloride apparently can he depended upon to remove all or nearly all cylicostomes. TRIODONTOPHORUS SPP. These parasites were present in only four of the eight test animals. In experi- ment 2, n-butylidene chloride removed all of the T. tenuicollis present. It failed to remove any of this form in experiments 1 and 7 or any of the specimens of T, serratus present in horse No. 466 (experiment 5). POTERIOSTOMUM SPP. In experiments 1, 2, 6, and 8, n-butylidene chloride removed all Poteriosto- mum spp. present. It was only 75 per cent. effective in experiment 3, where an adequate dose of raw linseed oil was not given. With a castor-oil mineral-oil mixture in experiment 4, the drug removed only 37 per cent. of these forms, and in experiment 5, where aloes was used as a purgative, the results were negative. PROBSTMAYRIA VIVIPARA. Probstmayria vivipara was present in only one animal (experiment 1); n-buty- lidene chloride administered in raw linseed oil failed to remove any of these forms. CRATEROSTOMUM SPP. The drug removed all Craterostomum spp. present in test animals in experi- ments 2 and 3. OESOPHAGODONTUS ROBUSTUS. N-butylidene chloride removed the one specimen of O. robustus present in the test animal in experiment 3. OXYURIDS. In experiment 1, n-butylidene chloride removed 2-oxyurids but left hundreds of larvae, being less than 1 per cent, effective. In experiment 3, the drug was 43 per cent. effective, and in experiment 5 it was 50 per cent. effective. Followed by a castor-oil mineral-oil mixture in experiment 4, n-butylidene chloride failed to remove the one larva present. These results are not conclusive, as this species
N-BUTYLIDENE CHLORIDE 193 was not present in any of the animals in which, n-butylidene chloride was followed by a dose of raw linseed oil sufficient for adequate purgation, a method of treat- ment which might have been productive of better results of the efficacy of the drug can be judged by its effects against other parasites when it was administered in this way. MICROSCOPICAL PATHOLOGY. The microscopical pathology of the liver and kidneys of three of the animals used in these tests was studied. Portions of these organs were obtained immediate- ly after slaughter and fixed in 10 per cent. formalin solution. The sections were stained with haematoxylin and eosin. A study of these sections indicated the following :194 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II marked or extensive. The acute kidney lesions in the first two animals were con- fined to a hyperemia, but in horse No. 452 the lesions were more pronounced. The liver of this animal also had a greater accumulation of fat than did the livers of the other two animals. Horse No. 452 was apparently suffering from constipation at the time of treatment; no feces were passed on the day after treatment, and it was necessary to give an additional dose of purgative on the afternoon of that day. It seems reasonable to assume that the inadequate elimination in this animal resulted in an increased absorption of the anthelmintic from the intestinal tract with the production in the liver and kidneys of lesions more severe than those in the two animals in which proper elimination was obtained. It is probable, there- fore, that in those cases where the n-butylidene chloride would be rapidly elimina- ted from the intestinal tract by the action of the purgative, damage to the liver and kidneys would not be sufficient to militate against the use of this drug as an anthelmintic for the horse. In fact, in this respect n-butylidene chloride seems to possess some advantage over some anthelmintics now in use. SUMMARY. N-butylidene chloride administered to four animals at a dose rate of 0.207 to 0.333 c. c. per kilogram of body weight and followed in five hours by 960 c. c. of raw linseed oil for a 1,000-pound animal resulted in efficacies of 50 per cent., 94 per cent. and 100 per cent, respectively, against Strongylus spp., and of 100 per cent. for cylicostomes in all four animals. The anthelmintic removed all of the Poterios- tomum spp. present in the three animals that harbored these parasites. In other tests the efficacy of n-butylidene chloride for the abovementioned parasites was considerably lowered where the drug was administered in raw linseed oil or where it was followed by aloes or by a castor-oil mineral-oil mixture. When administered in raw linseed oil, n-butylidene chloride was relatively ineffective for the removal of ascarids, but when given without oil the drug was apparently effective for the removal of this species. N-butylidene chloride, administered to three animals weighing from 800 to 1,200 pounds, in doses of 60 c. c. in capsules, failed to destroy one Habronema muscae in one animal; was 55.5 per cent. effective for this species in a second animal; and was 97.2 per cent. effective for H. microstoma in a third animal. It seems probable that a preliminary gastric lavage would add to the efficacy of n-butylidene chloride against Habronema spp. The drug was relatively ineffective against bots. Species of parasites other than those mentioned above were not present in sufficient numbers to warrant final conclusions.
N-BUTYLIDENE CHLORIDE 195 N-butylidene chloride was well tolerated and produced no gross pathological alterations. Microscopical pathology in the livers of treated animals was confined to cloudy swelling with some fatty degeneration but no central necrosis. In two of three animals, the drug produced only a hyperemia of the kidneys, but in the third animal cloudy swelling and degeneration of the tubular epithelium were present. The severity of the lesions in this animal was apparently associated with increased absorption of the anthelmintic due to insufficient purgation. LITERATURE CITED. (1)Blieck, L. De, and Baudet, E. A. R. F. 1923. Tetrachloorkoolstof als middel tegen Gastrophiluslar- ven, Ascaris, strongyliden on oxyuris bij hot paard. Tijdschr. Diergeneesk. 50 (1): 140. (2)Demnitz. A. 1923. Uber die cignung des chlorkohlenstoffes als wurmmittel beim pferde. Deut. Tierarzll. Wchnschr. 31: 573-575. (3) Grassnickel, W. 1930. Der Bilirubinspiegel des blutes nach Tetrachlorkohlenstoffgabe beim pferde. Arch. Wiss. u. Prakt. Tierbeilk 62 (1): 76-88. (4) Hall, M. C. 1921. Treatment for removing the Gastro-intestinal parasites of horses, with some tests of carbon tetrachlorid and of mixtures of carbon tetrachlorid and carbon bisulphid. North Amer. Vet. 2 : 512-524, 550. (5)------------------------------1922. Carbon Tetrachloride as an anthelmintic. Amer. Jour. Troup. Med. 2 :373-379. (6)Lamson, P. D., Robbins, B. H., and Ward, C. B. 1929. The Pharmacology and Toxicology of Tetrachlorethylene. Amer. Jour. Hyg. 9 : 430-444. (7)Minot, A. S. 1927. The relation of calcium to the toxicity of carbon tetrachloride in dogs. Soc. Expt. Biol. and Med. Proc. 24 : 617-620. (8)Neumann-Kleinpaul, K., and Pelckmann, K. 1930. Ueber Tetrachlorkohlenstoff-vergiftun-gsers- cheinungen bei pferden, deren zusammenhang mit dem blutserumcalciumspiegel and aber versuche, die vergiftungsercheinungen durch erhohen des blutkalkgehaltes abzuschwachen. Arch. Wiss. u. Prakt. Tierheilk, 62 (1): 1-75, illus. (9)Robbins, B. H. 1929. The absorption, distribution and excretion of carbon tetrachloride in dogs under various conditions. Jour. Phrmacol. and Expt. Ther. 37 : 203-216, illus. (10) Schlingman, A. S. 1926. Miscellaneous tests of Tetrachlorethylene, a new anthelmintic. Jour. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc, (n. s. 21) 68 : 741-754. (11)RESEARCH WORK ON FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE. [The conclusions of the research work appearing on pp. 8-31 of the Fourth Progress Report of the Foot-and-Mouth Disease Research Committee are reprinted with the kind permission of the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, England.]RESEARCH WORK ON FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE 197 work has of necessity consisted in the examination more exactly and with a view to practical application of principles and hypotheses enunciated in former years. At the experimental Station at Pirbright only has work on the large farm animals been carried out, and preliminary, parallel or confirmatory experiments have also been made there on small animals. In the laboratories of the Lister Institute of Preventive Medicine and the Nation- al Institute for Medical Research at Hampstead, much essential work has been made possible by the use of guinea-pigs and other small animals. By these means aspects of the problem have been submitted to test, for which large animals could not have been used on account of the much greater space required and the relative- ly longer time and greater labour involved. The more important conclusions have been confirmed by all our workers in the different laboratories as far as the con- ditions permitted. A.198 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II Somewhat similar results have also been obtained by Hecke (1930) working on the island of Riems, but his work and that of the Maitlands has been entirely independent. The Maitlands reported to the Committee that they had arrived at the tenth culture in series in October. 1929. At this stage the work was unavoidably in- terrupted, but after the virus from the flask containing the tenth culture had been kept for three months in the cold room it was found to be still active and the series of cultures was resumed from the stored contents. In some cases a greater bulk of virus was obtained by culture in larger flasks. The animal tissues used in the culture flasks were derived from embryo guinea-pigs. Chicken embryo which had been used for similar propagation of vaccinia virus was not found to be suitable for foot-and-mouth virus. For purposes of culture the skin of the guinea-pig appeared to be the best tissue, but the hairy skin was found to be as good a culture medium as that from the sole of the guinea-pig's foot, though the latter is the only part of the external skin in which the virus has been observed to multiply during life. CRESEARCH WORK ON FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE 199 He has found that the best conditions for survival of the virus in a given medium at 37°C. vary within narrow limits, and the most favourable degree of acidity in a strongly reducing medium may be more acid than that in one which provides less reducing conditions. In simple solutions of phosphates the reducing conditions in an anaerobic chamber in the absence of oxygen were found to be distinctly more hostile to the virus than when it was exposed to the air, if the liquid medium was kept at the degree of alkalinity usually considered most favourable to survival. At a lower level of alkalinity, however, survival was more prolonged in the absence of oxygen than when it was present. A slight increase in the oxidising properties of the medium in the presence of air was also harmful. On the other hand, bran infusion, which prolongs life well in the presence of air, is a bad medium for survival when the oxygen is removed, apparently because the reducing properties of the bran are then excessive. Dr. Edwards has compared by the use of dyes the oxidation-reduction poten- tial of liquids made by mixing different substances whose effect on survival has been found experimentally. These mixtures were also tested by means of dyes which indicates the degree of acidity or alkalinity. The properties of some of these mixtures changed quickly on exposure to air and in many instances it was, therefore, necessary to keep the test-tubes in an anaerobic jar with reduced oxygen pressure and to secure sufficiently oxidising conditions by means of additional ingredients. Another expedient was the addition of weak agar jelly and a layer of soft paraffin in the upper part of the test-tube to hinder the penetration of oxygen from the air. As a result of his work he has found that certain substances, such as extracts of hay or bran, which were known to favour survival from previous work done for the Committee, and certain mixtures which he had determined experimentally to have a like effect in promoting survival, had very similar qualities when the oxidation-reduction and the alkalinity or acidity were considered together. He also found that when the indicator-dyes were injected intradermally into guinea-pigs' pads either alone or mixed with virus, as in an ordinary inoculation experiment the state in the skin as regards the above-mentioned properties was comparable to that present in some of the media in which the survival results were the best. These experiments tend to confirm the hypothesis that one of the most im- portant desiderata for survival of foot-and-mouth virus in vitro is the maintenance of suitable oxidation-reduction and acidity alkalinity conditions. Although no definite evidence of multiplication of the virus in vitro in simple media under these conditions has so far been obtained, it is hoped that a step in this direction has been made.
200 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II The success which has attended attempts at propagation in vitro in cultures of living tissues of foot-and-mouth disease and some other viruses, e.g., vaccinia, suggests that the conditions inside the living animal cell must be imitated in order to obtain growth in artificial media. The maintenance of a definite steady oxida- tion-reduction potential is among the conditions known to be characteristic of the living cell. D.RESEARCH WORK ON FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE 201 it may infect calves or pigs which are fed on it. It is well known that the milk given by cows during the acute stage of the disease is infective. Mr. Galloway has examined in detail how long milk to which virus has been added will retain its activity under different conditions. The virus is soon killed when the milk becomes sour, and how soon this happens varies with the bacterial content at the beginning of the experiment and the temperature at which the milk is kept. Virus in milk kept at 18°C. (64.4°F.) remained active for 7 to 9 days. Virus in milk kept at 4°C. (39°F.) remained active for 15 to 17 days. Virus added to sterilised milk kept at 18°C. (64.4°F.) was active after 30 days. Virus added to sterilised milk kept at 4°C, (39°F.) was active for at least 47 days. Milk contaminated with virus and allowed to dry on pieces of wood was inac- tive after 2 days at 18°C. F.202 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II purposes, is easily procured and is unlikely to damage materials with which it comes in contact. When dissolved in hot water at about 60°C. (140°F.) in a strength of 4 per cent. it can be used very effectively for washing butchers' utensils and for scrubbing tables and floors in slaughter houses, etc. Most other disinfectant solutions which were examined, such as acids and metallic salts, were liable to damage metal surfaces or the hands and clothes of those who used them. The disinfection of hides has been given special attention, since these are damaged by alkalis and many other disinfectants. Immersion in a solution of sodium bisulphate (1 in 10,000) for 5 hours or sodium bifluoride (1 in 20,000) for 2 hours killed the virus and did not damage the hide. H.RESEARCH WORK ON FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE 203 vesicle fluid and epithelial tissues of the skin of the feet and of the mucous membrane of the mouth than elsewhere. It has been found, too, that whereas the vesicle fluid can often be diluted five million times and still be infective, the blood cannot be diluted more than five or ten thousand times without losing its activity. If the whole of a guinea-pig's body, excluding the skin, bones and intestine, is ground up with phosphate salt solution so as to make 400 cubic centimetres of emulsion, this cannot be diluted more than 1,000 to 5,000 times and still prove infective. In order to obtain a supply of virus there is, therefore, no obviously great advantage in using the whole carcase, although the blood serum contains a definite amount of virus in addition to the affected parts of the skin and mucous membrane. It is not likely, however, that the actual amount of virus in the whole body would be twice as much as that present at the sites of vesicles on the feet and mouth. The amount of virus which can be obtained is at its highest when the primary vesicles are well developed and the generalised eruption has begun, i.e., in the guinea-pig usually between the 24th and 48th hours after inoculation, but on the third day it has fallen to one-tenth or one-fiftieth of that on the second day. The virus content of the body then falls rapidly, and is usually nil at the end of 7 to 10 days in guinea-pigs or 12 days in cattle. K.204 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, II (Appendix III, p. 284). That the virus usually remains active for very much longer periods when carcases are kept at " chilling " or freezing temperatures has been shown by numerous experiments. It is known that repeated freezing and thawing has the effect of killing some bacteria, and it has been suggested that the same result would follow in the case of foot-and-mouth virus. Mr. Galloway has made many observations on the virus in tap water, in blood, in the skin of guinea-pigs' pads, in bone-marrow, and in the whole carcase, and has not found that the repeated freezing and thawing has any effect in lessening the activity of the virus. Carcases of guinea-pigs with primary or secondary lesions, which were frozen for 26 days and then kept at 18°C. (64.4°F.) for 5 days, contained active virus in the bone-marrow ; virus was also recovered from another carcase after chilling at RESEARCH WORK ON FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE 205 degree of infectivity, i.e., the concentration of virus in the body, is high without testing the blood at the time of death. The first three cattle had so little virus in the blood that the experiment was abandoned. In the second experiment with another strain of virus, the blood proved infective for swine at the time of slaughter. From each of the three carcases, C737, C741, C742, virus was recovered later. From C737 the bone-marrow proved infective when inoculated into pigs on the 13th and 33rd days after slaughter. On the 14th day after slaughter inoculation of the tongue and cheeks of C741 infected one pig each, and on the 33rd day the cheeks infected two pigs by inoculation and two by feeding. The wrapping materials soaked in blood of C741 and of C742 also each infected two pigs by inoculation on the 40th day after slaughter. The remainder of the offal including the bone-marrow of these three animals did not prove infective 13 days after slaughter nor did the salted hides stored at out-of-door temperatures. In the third experiment six cattle were exposed to infection and four of them reacted206 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II virulence, by which is meant that a larger dose of the material or culture is needed to infect an animal on one occasion than on another, and also that the disease produced is much more severe and that sometimes the incubation is much shorter with some samples of virus. The decline in virulence is often a serious obstacle in experimental work. The reasons for this change are for the most part obscure, but in some cases explanations of the difference in bacterial cultures are beginning to emerge. In work with invisible viruses the problem is still for the most part quite unsolved. It is, however, known that a strain of bacteria or of a virus of low virulence is often restored to full activity by infection of one animal after another by direct transmission or passage. (ii) Adaptation. Not only are the changes in virulence just mentioned of common occurrence, but in attempted transmission from one kind of animal to another the agent may completely fail to infect the new species, although highly virulent for fresh members of the species from which it was obtained. In the same way, as in the case of simple loss of virulence, bacteria or a virus may be adapted to the new kind of host by inoculation of two or more individuals in series. Like pathogenic bacteria, strains of virus which are adapted to one species of animal by having infected a number of individuals of the same species in series may have acquired increased virulence for this kind of animal and still only have a very feeble power of infecting other species of animal. It has been observed in the field that outbreaks of foot-and-mouth disease among swine in some cases do not readily spread to cattle and vice versa. A corresponding course of events has been found when artificial inoculation is practised. Certain strains of virus from cattle have only with great difficulty been adapted to guinea-pigs by Mr. Dobson, and with some such strains attempted infection of guinea-pigs has never been successful in spite of repeated trials. A similar delay in adapting a virus was sometimes experienced when a strain which had long been maintained by passage from guinea-pig to guinea-pig was again inoculated into a bovine. Dr. Edwards has encountered the same phenomenon when producing the disease in hedgehogs, for a guinea-pig strain as a rule only gives slight infection in the hedgehog until it has been transmitted through two or three of these animals. The infection of rats with a strain from cattle or the guinea-pig may show the same tendencies. On the other hand some strains are found to infect two or three species with equal readiness, at least as regards artificial inoculation. These differences between strains in respect of " adaptation " to particular species do not appear to be related to the differences of " type " to be discussed later. Observa- tions on adaptation show how dangerous it is to conclude without prolonged trials
RESEARCH WORK ON FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE 207 that a given species is not susceptible, or if attacked is not infective for another species. (iii) Different types of virus. Besides difference in virulence and adaptation of various strains of foot-and-mouth virus there are distinct " types " of virus which have to be reckoned with. It was mentioned in the Third Progress Report that Vallee had described two types of foot-and-mouth disease virus which he called the O and A types, the former being much the commoner, and that later Waldmann and Trautwein (1926) described a third type C. Waldmann originally called his three types A, B and C since he did not know to which of Vallee's types his strains corresponded. It is now generally agreed to retain Vallee's notation for O and A and to use C for Waldmann's new type. The three types all produce cases of disease and epizootics which are nearly or quite indistinguishable clini- cally, but an attack due to one type does not protect animal's against the others. Trautwein (1927) was able to infect with two of the types in succession 100 per cent. of guinea-pigs, 84 per cent. of swine and 58 per cent. of cattle, and with the three types in. succession 100 per cent. of guinea-pigs, 72 per cent. of swine and 37 per cent. of cattle. It appears that in cattle and pigs at any rate there is some overlapping or extension of the resistance produced by one of the types to infection with the other types. Almost the only way of discovering the type to which a newly acquired strain belongs is by inoculating with it animals immune to known types of virus in order to see whether they are susceptible to the new strain. Identification of types is important, because only by this means can it be known whether recovered animals are liable to reinfection from another source of infection, and also as an aid to tracing the origin of an outbreak. Only a few strains have been found so far which cannot be placed into one of the three groups, O, A and C, though in Waldmann and Trautwein's original paper (1927) some slightly divergent variants were described. Professor Ciuca examined four strains of foot-and-mouth virus at the Lister Institute in 1927 from Roumania, and found that while one of these appeared to be identical with the typical GF strain of O virus then in use, the other three strains only showed incomplete agreement with the GF strain and the first Roumanian strain but were certainly not of either the A or the C types. Dr. Andrews, in the past two years, has determined the type of virus of 23 strains from different outbreaks in Great Britain, and 21 of these belonged defi- nitely to the O type ; none corresponded to the A or the C type. The remaining two strains were not like each other, nor could they be assigned to O, A or C. Including those strains of virus previously recorded by Sir Stewart Stockman, 40
208 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II strains have now been examined from outbreaks in this Country. Of these 37 or 92 per cent. conformed to the O types, one to type A, and two belonged apparently to hitherto undescribed types. The type to which each of these strains belonged was first examined by means of guinea-pigs and on the whole this seems to be the most satisfactory procedure, since these animals react more regularly than cattle and it is very much easier to inoculate as many as are required and also to keep in stock guinea-pigs immune to the different types so as to be ready for testing new unknown strains. The only difficulty in using guinea-pigs for this purpose is that it is necessary to make sure that the fresh strain from a bovine is adapted and will readily infect the guinea-pig. Of the 23 strains tested by Dr. Andrews, 20 which had been diagnosed by the use of guinea-pigs as type O were subsequently tested on cattle and the diagnosis of type O was confirmed. Dr. Andrews has also examined 10 strains of virus sent from the Argentine in September, 1928, through the kindness of Dr. Fernandez Beyro of the Ministry of Agriculture at Buenos Ayres. When tested on cattle three of them appeared to belong to the type O, though by tests on guinea-pigs the result was not quite so clearly defined, probably because of incomplete adaptation. Seven of the Argentine appeared to be neither O, A nor C, since they caused foot-and-mouth disease in animals which had recovered from attacks of each of these types. A similar occurrence of apparently new types had been observed in the case of the peculiar strains found in Great Britain and mentioned above, but it is not known whether any of the seven Argentine non-conforming strains are of the same type as either of the two unusual strains from this country. It has been claimed by Modrow (1929) that virus type O differs from type A very considerably in the size of the particles of which it is composed. This conclusion was the result of experiments showing that O virus would pass through a collodion filter with very much smaller pores than were required to allow A or C to pass. The result of her experiments and the conclusions are very remarkable, since such a difference between the types would be of great interest if they were confirmed, especially if it could be shown that the difference was really due to the type of virus used and not merely a peculiarity of the particular strain tested. There have been occasional statements such as that of Manninger (1930) that a strain of one type has changed its character and become assimilated to another type. Such observations are very rare and must at present be accepted with reserve. N.RESEARCH WORK ON FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE 209 first appear and in the epithelial tissues of the vesicles. In guinea-pigs this is especially the case in the primary vesicles at the site of inoculation on the feet. The content of virus in the internal organs and the blood has been shown to be much less. Farm animals. It has long been recognised that animals may be infective in the very early stages of the disease before the symptoms are very obvious. Dr. Andrews made a detailed study of cattle infected by intramuscular inoculation or naturally by contact with inoculated animals. He found that the blood was not always infective at the same stage of the disease, and often not before vesicles had appeared. The earliest stage at which the disease was communicated to others by contact in these experiments, with one exception, was after vesicles had appeared in the mouth and not as early as the first rise of temperature. The same was true of cases in which the disease had been acquired by contact instead of inoculation. Previous workers have stated that the urine and milk of cattle are infective about the same time that virus can be detected in the blood, i.e., during the erup- tion of vesicles and for two or three days later. At Pirbright the milk has been found to be infective, and virus has also been detected some times in the urine, but not with any regularity. O.210 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II On the strength of these observations the isolation of cattle in Germany on an in- fected farm was not continued beyond a fortnight from the recovery of the animals infected by inoculation. It has, however, recently been found necessary to increase the period to three weeks on account of the occasional later appearance of symp- toms in animals which have been inoculated with virus and serum by the so-called combined method. It has, however, been believed that virus may be enclosed in the horn of the hoof during recovery and then again be liberated after four months or more by detrition or paring of the hoof. Though proof of this hypothesis has been sought there is very little direct evidence in its favour. Brandt (1928), who investigated 103 cattle and 9 pigs from this point of view at Riems, believed that if virus was retained it was present in dung or other dirt in fissures of the hoof and was not really shut off from the reach of antiseptics applied externally. In spite of the lack of evidence where virus may lie latent in a recovered animal, Traum and Olitsky, at Strasbourg, found evidence of one animal retaining infection and infecting another after 34 days among 23 cattle investigated, and Brandt observed an infection of one experimental animal in the course of the exa- mination of 103 cattle and 9 pigs in order to see whether any of them were carriers 36-67 days after they had been infected. Burgi (1928), in Switzerland, as the result of prolonged field observations, maintained that recovered cattle retained infection and started fresh outbreaks some months after they had recovered. Such a source for an outbreak is scarcely likely to be operative in this country unless from a con- cealed or overlooked case of disease. There is some reason to suppose that virus might survive dried on the coat of an ox for some days if the animal were not tho- roughly disinfected after recovery. The ultimate source of infection in foot-and-mouth outbreaks has always been considered to be cases of the disease in cattle, pigs and sheep and this is no doubt correct in the main. It has, however, been shown of late years that other animals are more or less liable to foot-and-mouth disease. The susceptibility of the goat was investigated by Rippin (1929), who had no difficulty in communicating the disease by inoculation, and in most animals with which it was attempted three attacks with the three distinct types of virus were given in succession. Some goats have also been artificially infected at Pirbright. R.RESEARCH WORK ON FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE 211 It has been recongised in some countries, but it has been considered as a rule unimportant, that the unexpected occurrence of foot-and-mouth disease in animals other than ruminants and pigs might sometimes be the means by which infection was spread. Such infections have been occasionally discovered or suspected in several different species and this possibility has now and then been investigated by laboratory experiments. (i) Foot-and-Mouth Disease in Man. The susceptibility of man to foot-and- mouth disease has seldom been conclusively proved, but two accidental infections have occurred at Riems and been recorded by Pape (1921) and Trautwein (1930) in which laboratory workers cut their hands with broken glass vessels containing virus and suffered in consequence from a pronounced vesicular eruption, chiefly on the injured part. In the latter case the nature of the disease was confirmed by animal inoculation. A few other fairly well-substantiated cases are recorded, especially one by Pancera (1921) at Como. Dr. Arkwright (1929) reviewed and published a sum- mary of the chief recent evidence of this subject. Kling and Hojer (1926-1928) suggested that the disease was spread in Sweden by men who were infected without overt signs of disease and carried the virus in their throats. They obtained no direct evidence in support of their hypothesis, and Waldmann and Trautwein (1928) examined 40 men employed at Riems without finding any reason to endorse Kling's views. (ii) Rats. In the Second Progress Report, pp. 16 and 103, it is recorded that it was found possible to infect wild rats by inoculation, but no increased adaptation of the virus to the rat was obtained by passage of the virus through these animals, nor did they infect one another when kept in the same cage. Since then Beattie, Morcos and Peden (1928) at Liverpool, continuing the former work by Beattie and Peden (1924), have succeeded in infecting wild rats by feeding them with virus from guinea-pigs. This was mixed with crushed bones, in order to increase the liability to inoculation by producing injuries to the mucous membrane with spicules of bone. Four rats, F. 1, 2, 3, and 4, with suspicious sores which were caught on a farm in Yorkshire have been examined at Pirbright. Inoculation of material from one of them, F. 3, resulted in the production in a guinea-pig of both generalised and local vesicles which were with little doubt due to foot-and-mouth disease but the attempt to pass the disease on to other guinea-pigs was unsuccessful. These four rats were sent to Pirbright for examination because the Inspector of the Ministry in charge of operations at a farm, the site of a foot-and-mouth disease outbreak, noticed that the rats which were being destroyed there were lame and had abrasions or ulcers on the feet. The rat from which the guinea-pig was infected had a small vesicle on the tongue and abrasions on the toes. K 2
212 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II On another occasion a rat, S. 1, was caught at the experimental station at Pirbright, and from this animal foot-and-mouth virus was obtained. With this virus guinea-pigs, wild and albino rate and swine have been infected and the virus recovered from the infected animals has been passed through others in series. The nature of the virus in this case was established beyond doubt by the character of the vesicles in guinea-pigs and swine and by the subsequent immunity of the animals infected. It was shown that the virus from S. 1 belonged to the type O. A stock strain of O. virus from cattle and strain S. 1 both produced disease which gave protection to animals when they were subsequently inoculated with either of these two strains. Swine were infected by feeding them with the bodies of guinea-pigs inoculated with the rat virus S. 1. Wild rats were infected by simultaneous inocu- lation into the skin of the hind feet and into the muscles, and both local vesicles on the feet and generalised vesicles in the mouth resulted. Rats were also infected by feeding them with material from infected guinea-pigs mixed with crushed bone. The signs of infection in rats consisted of vesicles on the feet and toes, on the ton- gue and lips and on the tail. The diseased areas on the tail were mostly inconspi- cuous and were indicated by small ulcers or crusts on any part of the tail. Virus was obtained from lesions on the tail which were not very characteristic in appear- ance. Altogether 132 rats caught at the experimental station at Pirbright and in the immediate vicinity of the infected compound have been examined and six in all have been found to be infected. Further experiments showed that not only virus S. 1 from the wild rat but also another strain, Virus 1, which originally came from a bovine in Great Britain, readily infected rats by inoculation. Three other strains of virus from cattle were also communicated to rats, though less easily. These three additional viruses were Virus 52, an O. type from cattle in England, a strain sent from the Argentine, and the type A strain which originally came from Profes- sor Vallée. Experimentally, the disease was found to spread from inoculated rats to others which were kept in contact with them and from these contacts again to others through association in the same cages. Not only wild rats but also albino rats were infected by similar methods. It was found that infection of rats could not readily be obtained unless they were adults or at least half grown. This observation is comparable to the well-known greater susceptibility of large guinea-pigs. The difficulty in infecting rats in previous experiments as well as the failure to pass the virus from one of the Yorkshire rats F3, to guinea-pigs in series was probably largely due to the well-known obstacles to adapting some strains of virus to a different species of animal from that to which it has been accustomed. ( iii) Rabbits.RESEARCH WORK ON FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE 213 pp. 71, 114, experiments with tame rabbits are recorded. It was found that the disease occasionally spread from infected to healthy rabbits, probably as the result of bites when they were kept at close quarters. In Appendix II to the present Report, experiments are recorded by Mrs. Gibbs showing that wild rabbits can also be given a mild infection by inoculation, but although healthy wild rabbits were kept in a hutch with those showing vesicles, no spread of infection could be observed. Further experiments with tame rabbits by Mr. Galloway are also recorded. (iv) Hedgehogs.214 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II same cage as infected hedgehogs did acquire the infection, which was believed to enter through pricks made on the guinea-pigs' feet by the hedgehogs' quills. Earlier experiments with other small animals have shown that rabbits, long- tailed field mice, dogs, cats and hamsters can be infected in the laboratory, but the disease has usually been mild and has not spread by contagion. House mice and white mice have almost completely resisted attempts to infect them. (v) Cats.RESEARCH WORK ON FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE 215 vaccinia commercially, caused an outbreak in that country. Recently in Norway, vaccine lymph again was believed to be the source of foot-and-mouth virus which infected cattle (Magnusson, 1930). The vaccine lymph had been used to vaccinate cows against cow-pox and the foot-and-mouth virus which it contained had not been detected earlier because calves on which it had been used were slaughtered as soon as the lymph had been collected and were not kept with other cattle. It is noteworthy that although presumably foot-and-mouth virus had been included in this strain of vaccine lymph for some time it had not caused foot-and-mouth disease in man. Magnusson also refers to similar occurrences in Switzerland in 1908 and in Hungary in 1917. The effect of inoculating a mixture of the two viruses was investigated on guinea-pigs by Mrs. Gibbs in 1929. The occasion was an outbreak of foot-and- mouth disease near a station used for the manufacture of vaccine lymph in Great Britain. It was considered therefore, advisable to make sure that the vaccine did not contain foot-and-mouth virus. No evidence of any such contamination of the lymph was obtained. The details of the experiments by Dr. Andrews and Mrs. Gibbs are recorded in Appendices I and II. In further experiments no difficulty was experienced in separating the two viruses from a mixture made intentionally in the laboratory. T.216 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II in this way allowing the animal to acquire the more lasting kind of resistance which usually follows an attack of the disease. The severity of the attack following this kind of inoculation is variable but is said to be seldom serious. However, the active and lasting immunity which results is apparently proportional to the amount of illness produced. There is also a stage of infectivity during the mild attacks. By this means all the cattle rapidly pass through the disease, but in some cases the eruption of vesicles is unusually late, being delayed by the serum injected, and the period of quarantine has in Prussia been extended officially from 14 days to three weeks after the presumed date of disappearance of infectivity of the local lesions resulting from the combined inoculation. Twelve days are allowed for the progress and cure of the disease, making a total quarantine of about five weeks. Since the cattle inoculated by this combined method are infective for a time for other animals, all the cattle in their immediate neighbourhood are given a protective dose of serum in order to prevent them from becoming infected and so spreading the disease. This method of dealing with outbreaks is called the " Ringimfung " in Germany and is considered, especially in Prussia, to give very valuable results, but for various reasons the spread of disease and the renewed occurrence of outbreaks is not always prevented. 3. Several methods of inoculation with attenuated virus have been used at different times. For this purpose strains of virus have been selected which have been adapted to another species of animal with resulting diminution of " virulence " for cattle, in imitation of the attenuation for man of small-pox virus after adapta- tion to bovines. Strains of virus have also been chosen which were causing a mild epizootic in cattle. No method of obtaining a certainly attenuated virus which can be depended on not to produce severe disease has yet been discovered. 4. The inoculation of animals with foot-and-mouth virus which has been killed by treatment with formalin was tried by Vallée and Rinjard (1926). Bedson and Maitland (1927) independently experimented with formalised virus on guinea-pigs. A considerable degree of resistance is regularly produced, but it is necessary to use a virus of high potency and to inject vaccine equivalent to 5,000 or 10,000 minimal infective doses of virus. It is essential that the formalin should not be too strong and the temperature at which the virus is treated should not be too high nor maintained too long otherwise the vaccine becomes inert. When prepared the vaccine will keep for some weeks in the cold room. The protection of guinea-pigs is not complete against a strong dose of virus, but very large doses of virus given intramuscularly are completely resisted for a period of many months. If the virus is inoculated intradermally into a vaccinated guinea-
RESEARCH WORK ON FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE 217 pig local vesicles form but generalisation does not occur if the test is made 2 or 3 weeks later. Experiments by Mrs. Gibbs show that probably the immunity produced by formalised vaccine is of the same kind as that following an attack of the disease, but is of lower grade. Many successful experiments with dead vaccine have been carried out in this country, chiefly on guinea-pigs, but Vallée has demonstrated its efficiency for cattle in a few experiments. The chief objections to the use of vaccine in practice for the immunisation of cattle are two. First the difficulty in obtaining sufficient virus to make a supply of vaccine, and, secondly, the paucity of detailed accounts of properly controlled experiments with cattle on a large scale. It is important that for this purpose the vaccine should be prepared by an exact method, and that it should be thoroughly tested both for loss of infectivity and for its immunising power in guinea-pigs before it is used on cattle. To remedy the first defect Vallée suggested using the whole bodies of guinea- pigs deprived of skin, bones and viscera, ground up and formalised. Laboratory experiments by Dr. M. C. Maitland (1928) showed that virus when ground up with muscle may be rapidly destroyed by the acid produced from the muscle and Mr. Galloway has shown that the amount of virus derived from an infected guinea-pig's feet and mouth with the addition of the blood is not materially increased by adding the rest of the carcase as was done by Vallée. It has been shown that the concentration of virus in the blood serum is about one-thousandth of that in the vesicle fluid. The amount of virus in the blood of infected cattle is very variable ; nevertheless the blood or blood serum appears at present to be the best available source of virus for making vaccine on a large scale. It is possible, however, that vesicle fluid and epithelium might be collected in suffi- cient quantity. Donatien, Leslequard and Pauturieux (1930) claim to have had success in using Vallée's vaccine on 4 calves. Vallée (1930) mentions the use of over 6,000 doses of prophylactic vaccine made in various ways in France and records experiments in the field on several controlled groups of cattle in which a vaccine appeared to protect the animals against an attack of the disease. Skomorokoff (1930) has reported encouraging results from the use of formalised vaccine in 27 cattle tested by inoculation and 24 by exposure to infection from diseased animals ; the exact method by which the vaccine was prepared was not reported. Helm (1930) tested vaccine made by Vallée's method from guinea-pig
218 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II carcases, but obtained no encouraging results in a large series of guinea-pigs. Waldmann (Inter. Kongr. 1930, p. 17) also tested vaccine prepared in the same way, but obtained no evidence of protection. He also tested on cattle a vaccine prepared from bovine infected epithelium without success. Waldmann stated that he and Trautwein had tried many methods of inactivating virus to serve as vaccine but, though no practical results had yet been obtained, he felt more hopeful than in former years that a satisfactory vaccine might be discovered. Details of experiments with formalised vaccine on guinea-pigs are reported in Appendix II. 5. The nature of immunity.RESEARCH WORK ON FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE 219 of virus and no evidence was obtained of a decline of immunity after a period vary- ing from 13 to 32 months had elapsed since the first attack (so called humoral immunity). Four cattle were tested (I. D.), intradermally (the test for so-called " tissue " immunity) after 15 to 20 months. One of these had a vesicle on one foot and another was lame without other signs of disease. These last two animals illustrate the greater severity of a test for immunity by I. D. inoculation. W.220 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II Meat scraps kept at low temperature are also infective. This was found to be the source of the outbreak among pigs in California, reported by Mohler (1929). In this case the pigs first received the meat scraps 57 days after the carcases had been shipped in S. America. It is clear then that importation of infected meat or offals in a chilled or frozen state is a ready means by which infective material can be conveyed to this country and that one way in which the infection may then be transmitted to farm animals is by the feeding of pigs with parts of the carcase, especially with the bones. Whether this undesirable event occurs or not depends on the state of the animals at the time and place where they are slaughtered and on how the carcases are disposed of after arrival in this country. The dissemination of active virus by carcases of infected animals might occur from one part of the country to another as well as by importation from abroad if cases of disease were overlooked.
ABSTRACTS The Etiology of Infections Diarrh222 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, II The anatomical peculiarities of the animal must be known before the administration of the drugs. In order to safeguard the animal against the toxic effects, anthelmintics should be followed by purgatives, such as castor oil, calomel, magnesium sulphate. Fumigation and intra-tracheal injections are recommended for the worms of air-passages and lungs. Tartar emetic and emetin for blood parasites. Extract of male fern for fasciliosis of goats, but not of cattle, hookworms of dogs and sheep, intestinal trematodes of dogs and for HBIHAR AND ORISSA VETERINARY COLLEGE, PATNA. NOTICE. A post-graduate class will be opened at the Bihar and Orissa Veterinary College from 1st July 1932, for the advanced training of Veterinary graduates in (1) Pathology and Bacteriology, including Meat and Milk Inspection and Post- mortem technique, (2) Histology, (3) Veterinary Hygiene, Dietetics and Genetics and (4) Veterinary Medicine including parasitic, contagious and inanition diseases. The course will be held for six months only for which a sum of Rs. 60 will be charged as tuition fee and Rs. 10 as admission fee. Seat rent for the hostel will be at the rate of Rs. 5 per month. Private candidates desiring admission should apply to the Principal, Bihar and Orissa Veterinary College, on or before the 15th June 1932, with the original diploma and a certificate of character. Further particulars, if required, may be obtained on application from the Principal. PATNA; R. T. DAVIS, I.V.S., Principal, The 4th May 1932. Bihar and Orissa Veterinary College.
ORIGINAL ARTICLES SULPHUR AND SULPHATE BALANCE EXPERIMENTS WITH CATTLE BY F. J. WARTH, M.Sc., Physiological Chemist, Animal Nutrition Section, Imperial Department of Agriculture, Bangalore. (Received for publication on 11th April 1932.) While cystine must remain the main factor in sulphur metabolism, we may ask the question : Is the body capable of assimilating any other form of sulphur com- pound than cystine ? The widespread occurrence of sulphatase in the animal body [Neuberg and Simon, 1925 ; Rosenfeld, 1925] signifies some mechanism for the utilization of sulphate ; hence it is reasonable to enquire whether inorganic sulphate can be assimilated. The question has been studied recently by Dennis and Leeke [1925]. These authors, having devised an effective method for determining the total sulphate in tissues, made intravenous injections of hypertonic Na2SO4 in dogs. On examining the tissues of these animals, they found no appreciable accumulation of sulphate in any organ and concluded that there is no evidence to show assimilation. Concern- ing the intestinal absorption of sulphate, the work of Hertz, Cook and Schlessinger [1908] on the cathartic effect of large doses of sulphate must be noted. These workers showed clearly that the ingested sulphate is taken up very efficiently into the blood stream, the liquid stools containing no more than the normal amount of sulphate and the cathartic effect being due to sulphate peripheral to the intestine. They found, however, that the faecal sulphate increased at a later stage, showing that part of the excess in the blood is re-excreted through this channel. The present author's experiments described in the sequel lead to the following conclusions :226 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III The faeces were found to contain traces of sulphide which were negligible. Further, it has been found that the sulphide content of the faeces is related to the nature of the fodder and not to the amount of sulphate lost. To study the possi- bility of conversion to organic sulphur, faeces with added sulphate were incubated. This did not lead to measurable loss of sulphate in 8 days. The evidence from these tests, although the figures show complete recovery of added sulphate, is not conclusive in itself, but it is corroborative. 3. Balance experiments have been carried out to determine the fate of the sulphur in the ration. It is shown clearly that, while the total sulphur is accounted for satisfactorily, there is a loss of inorganic sulphate and a corresponding gain of organic sulphur. The inorganic sulphate lost is, therefore, not lost from the body as H2S, but is represented by organic sulphur in the faeces. 4. There is evidence to show that when small amounts are fed, the organic sulphur of groundnut cake does not appear, to an appreciable extent, in the urine, but is excreted in the faeces. This observation, on which emphasis is laid, seems to be related to work originated by Abderhalden's researches [1905] in which it was shown that cystine assimilated as a dipeptide in conjunction with another amino acid suffers less oxidation than ingested free cystine. In contrast to the above results, it has been found that when the quantity of groundnut cake is considerably increased, the additional organic sulphur, thus introduced, is excreted almost quantitatively as sulphate in the urine. These results indicate that such digestible organic sulphur may be excreted through two channels, the urinary excretion as sulphate apparently representing the fate of a luxury supply. 5. Perhaps it is a significant fact that the lost sulphate (believed to be meta- bolised) and the organic sulphur of groundnut cake (when fed in small amounts and certainly digestible) are both excreted by the same channel, namely, in the faeces. It should be explained that this work originated from an examination, by the author, of cattle urines representing various typical fodders. Only 3 samples out of 20 contained free sulphate, thus indicating a general shortage of sulphur. For brevity, methods will not be described, except one, namely the method for determining sulphate in food-stuffs. The last is an important figure for calculating sulphate balances. Tests showed that simple extraction with dilute HCl is quite as effective for this purpose as the process described by Aitken [1930]. The extrac- tion method finally adopted was as follows :SULPHUR AND SULPHATE BALANCE EXPERIMENTS WITH CATTLE 227 trated, the humin filtered off and sulphate precipitated. Average results with food- stuffs used in these experiments are as follows :228 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III In carrying out this trial, it was expected that, at some stage, the sulphate deficiency would be satisfied and, that, thereafter, the added sulphate would be completely excreted. It is evident that this did not occur. To elucidate this peculiar effect, it was decided to carry out sulphate and total sulphur balance experiments with the two fodders, ragi straw and mature hay. EXPERIMENTS WITH RAGI STRAW. (a) Excretion of volatile phenol and sulphates. The ragi straw ration was fed to two bullocks, G and H without a sulphate supplement. The following are typical results with this ration :SULPHUR AND SULPHATE BALANCE EXPERIMENTS WITH CATTLE 229 be gauged for the present purpose by comparing the amounts ingested with the amounts excreted in the urine. Four sets of determinations were made. In the first three tests the sulphate in- gested was simply the amount present in the straw. In the fourth test additional sulphate was fed. The results summarised in Table III show that invariably a loss of ingested sulphate takes place. TABLE III. Sulphate balance experiments with the ragi straw ration. Expt. Na2SO4 Supplement Sulphate in grms. sulphur per day Intake Outgo Loss 1 0 G . 5.894 4.531 1.163 H . 5.920 4.599 1.320 2 0 G . 5.555 4.366 1.189 H . 6.144 4.646 1.498 3 0 G . 4.909 3.911 0.998 H . 5.504 4.184 1.324 4 6 G . 5.808 4.576 1.232 H . 6.404 5.040 1.364 (c) Total sulphur balance. Two series of tests were carried out. The results are shown in Table IV. The figures agree generally in showing that the intake and outgo are fairly well accounted for. No stress is laid on the final balance. It should be remarked, however, that the results are corroborated in a qualitative sense by the fact that the favourable balances of the first test coincide with a period during which the animals were eating well, while the negative balances were obtained at a time when the animals were somewhat off their food.
230 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III TABLE IV. Sulphur balance experiments with ragi straw. (Sulphate and organic sulphur as grms. S per day). SULPHUR AND SULPHATE BALANCE EXPERIMENTS WITH CATTLE 231 sulphate. Further determinations of sulphates only were then made after incre- ment of the sulphate supplement. The results are shown in the accompanying Table. TABLE V. Urinary excretion of sulphates and phenols with the hay ration. (Sulphate and phenol expressed as grms. S per day). Test Grms. Na2SO4 Supplement Total SO4 Free SO4 Ethereal SO4 Volatile Phenol Other ethereal SO4 1 0 G 1.546 0 1.546 1.380 .. H 1.889 0 1.889 1.700 .. 2 6 G 2.788 0.422 2.367 1.609 0.758 H 2.750 0.512 2.237 1.542 0.695 3 6 G 2.516 0.155 2.361 .. .. H 2.752 0.497 2.256 .. .. 4 9 G 3.062 0.789 2.273 .. .. H 3.081 0.889 2.192 .. .. 6 15 G 4.275 2.016 2.260 .. .. H 4.446 2.026 2.421 .. .. In the first test the sulphate and phenol excretion of H is somewhat above the average for this animal. 1.5 to 1.6 is a fair daily figure for both the animals. The sulphate figures in the first test require attention. It will be noticed that this urine did not contain any free sulphate, the entire amount was present in the ethereal form. In this case, where there is obvious shortage of sulphur, the ethereal sulphates corresponds closely to the amount of volatile phenol (p. cresol). In the second test, the points to note are, firstly, the presence of a small amount of free sulphate, secondly, a very considerable increase of ethereal sulphate, which exceeds the volatile phenol determined simultaneously. In this urine, therefore, there are bodies present, other than p. cresol. which conjugate preferentially with sulphate ; but their avidity for this conjugation is not sufficiently intense to enable them to procure sulphate when there is a shortage of sulphur. The data emphasise the avidity of p. cresol which apparently conjugated completely with sulphate when there was a decided deficiency of sulphur. Tests 3, 4 and 5 show that when excess of sulphate is present, the ethereal sulphates attain a maximum constant which is not affected by greatly increasing the excess of sulphate. The ethereal sulphate is evidently a measure of the total phenolic bodies present in the urine. The volatile phenol being known, the
232 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III difference represents other phenolic substances, which remain remarkably constant in amount, being equivalent to .7 grm. S. The hay urine differs in this respect, in a marked manner from ragi straw urine, in which the phenols were shown above to consist almost entirely of p. cresol. The characteristics of the hay urine may by summarised thus :SULPHUR AND SULPHATE BALANCE EXPERIMENTS WITH CATTLE 233 It should be pointed out that the sulphate in the faeces has been neglected in calculating these balances. Corrected values, however, are shown in a subsequent statement. (c) Total sulphur balances. In order to obtain a striking contrast, two tests, one without a sulphate sup- plement, and one with the maximum sulphate dosage, were selected for this work. Further, to attain the greatest possible analytical accuracy, the corresponding samples from the two tests were analysed simultaneously in every case234 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III (d) Subsidiary experiments with sheep and rabbits.Sulphate balance experiments with sheep. The results of two tests are sum- marised in the accompanying table :SULPHUR AND SULPHATE BALANCE EXPERIMENTS WITH CATTLE 235 The figures make it clear that, with these rations and these animals, sulphate excretion greatly exceeds the sulphate ingested. It would appear that green fodders contain a considerable amount of organic sulphur which is oxidised to sulphate in the course of metabolism. It should be noted, however, that there is a marked difference between the results of the two tests. In the first test much less sulphate was ingested and yet the excretion is almost as high as in the second test. EXCRETION OF INGESTED ORGANIC SULPHUR. From the foregoing bullock experiments the question arises whether organic sulphur must necessarily be excreted as sulphate. Obviously if sulphate is required for conjugation, then organic sulphur would probably be deflected into this channel for this purpose. Therefore the first test was made with an excess of inorganic sulphate in the ration. Groundnut-cake which has been shown by Sullivan [1930] to contain a con- siderable amount of cystine in the protein molecule was used as the source of organic sulphur. The experiment was divided into four parts, the rationing being as follows :236 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III The following points have to be noted :SULPHUR AND SULPHATE BALANCE EXPERIMENTS WITH CATTLE 237 this increase is entirely in the form of ethereal sulphate due to production of more p. cresol. The neutral sulphur is decidedly higher here with the doubled concen- trate. This may be due in part to the fact that immediately preceding experiment 4, the animals had lived in sulphur sufficiency, while experiment 3 was carried out after a period of sulphur deficiency. It must be admitted that the evidence from these experiments is vitiated by the ethereal sulphates. There is an increase in total sulphates and it is impossible to assert, though it seems likely, that this is due mainly to the increase in ethereal sulphates. It can be said definitely, how- ever, that the increase in total sulphates only accounts for a part of the extra organic S (.72 grm.) in the doubled concentrate ration. EXPERIMENT WITH REDOUBLED CONCENTRATE plus MAXIMUM SULPHATE.Only one animal, H, was used for this test. The average results obtained from daily determinations for 6 days were as follows :238 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III. experiment 3, the increase of total urinary sulphate approaches the increase of concentrate sulphur. These results show that a new form of excretion has been attained in the last test. The conclusions to be derived from the series of experi- ments are :SULPHUR AND SULPHATE BALANCE EXPERIMENTS WITH CATTLE 239 There is no trace of the 1.4 grms. of organic sulphur in these urines. The usual loss of sulphate takes place when an excess is provided in the food. The remarkably small loss in experiment (a) with sorghum is no doubt due to the fact established by the author that sorghum produces a large excess of p. cresol, which in this experiment has bound the sulphate effectively and thus prevented loss. (2) Experiments with linseed cake and hay. The following series of tests were carried out :240 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III Test (d). 4 Normal Concentrate + Sulphate. Loss of sulphate is very greatly diminished. Much organic sulphur has been oxidised (1.057 grms.). The results resemble those obtained earlier with groundnut cake. Again up to a certain point the organic sulphur has little or no effect. Feeding in excess of this amount causes a large increase in urinary sulphur. SUMMARY. 1. Total sulphur and sulphate balance experiments have been carried out with bullocks using two types of fodder. 2. The following distinctive features of the urine were noted :SULPHUR AND SULPHATE BALANCE EXPERIMENTS WITH CATTLE 241 That the sulphur from both these sources is excreted in the faeces supports the view that some inorganic sulphate is metabolised. 9. Subsidiary experiments with sheep and rabbits have shown that with the former loss of sulphate can occur as with bullocks. The balance may, however, suffer reversal. With the rabbits and the rations employed with rabbits, sulphate excretion ex- ceeded the intake. It was noted, however, that high excretion may occur when the intake is considerably reduced. These observations suggest that the factors govern- ing sulphate excretion require study. REFERENCES. Abderhalden and Samuel (1905). Z. Physiol. Chem. 46, 187. Aitken (1930). Biochem. J. 24, 250. Dennis and Leeke (1925). J. Biol. Chem. 65, 565. Hertz, Cook and Schlessinger P. R. S. (1908). Med. London 2, 23. Neuberg and Simon (1925). Biochem. Z. 156, 365. Rosenfeld (1925). Biochem. Z. 157, 434. Sullivan (1930). U. S. Public Health, R. Supplement. 66. C
ON SOME NEMATODE PARASITES OF GOATS AND SHEEP AT MUKTESAR BY G. D. BHALERAO, M.Sc., Helminthologist, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar-Kumaon, U. P. (Received for publication on 27th April 1932.) (With Plates XVIIPLATE XVII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG.1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG.2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG.3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG.4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG.5. C 2
NEMATODE PARASITES OF GOATS AND SHEEP 243 to eradicate this infection have been undertaken at this Institute, and these, to- gether with the effects of the parasite produced in the lung tissue, will form the subject of a separate report. The worms are very slender, delicate and of moderate size. The cuticle is smooth without any kind of markings. The anterior portion of the body is some- what tapering. The buccal cavity is very feebly developed and in the majority of cases appears to be even absent. The mouth is surrounded by four lips ; two lateral measuring 0.018*-0.022 in width and a smaller dorso-ventral pair measuring 0.012-0.014 in width. Male.244 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III measures 0.36-0.4 in length. The nerve ring is situated at a distance 0.19-0.25 from the anterior end. The excretory pore is about 0.05-0.7 posterior to the nerve ring. The tail tapers rapidly to a point. The anus is situated at a distance of 0.04-0.045 from the tip of the tail. The vulva is 0.04-0.06 anterior to the anus. It is guarded by two prominent lips, each being approximately 0.023 in breadth. Inserted immediately anterior to the vulva and disposed posteriorly is a cuticular valve measuring 0.065-0.08 in length. It covers the vulva and the anus ventrally. The vagina is approximately 1.41 long. The two uteri run parallel to each other anteriorly. The eggs measure 0.057-0.08×0.03-0.043. They are covered with a very thin shell and are oviparous. The worm described above being a parasite of the respiratory system with a filiform body and possessing a well developed bursa with more or less typical rays is evidently a member of the family Metastrongylidæ Leiper, 1908. Yorke and Maplestone [1926] have included in this family the genera Metastrongylus Molin, 1861, Dictyocaulus Railliet and Henry, 1907, Synthetocaulus Railliet and Henry, 1907 which is a synonym of Protostrongylus Kamensky, 1905, HNEMATODE PARASITES OF GOATS AND SHEEP 245 TABLE I. Metastrongylus Molin, 1861 Dictyocaulus Railliet and Henry, 1907 Protostrongylus Kamensky, 1905 H246 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III TABLE I NEMATODE PARASITES OF GOATS AND SHEEP 247 From the above table it is clear that the position of the vulva at the posterior end of the body and the presence of a telamon separates the present specimens from Dictyocaulus, H248 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III Specific diagnosis.PLATE XVIII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 0.1 mm. FIG. 2. FIG. 3. 0.1 mm. FIG. 4.
PLATE XIX. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. FIG. 2. FIG. 3. FIG. 4.
NEMATODE PARASITES OF GOATS AND SHEEP 249 Female.250 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III wide. The pre-bursal papillæ are approximately 0.95 anterior to the bursa. The accessory bursal membrane is about 0.2 wide and is supported by the rays about 1 mm. long. The gubernaculum is absent. The dorsal ray is about 3.3 long and divides, at a distance of 2 from its anterior end, into two branches. Each of these branches gives out a short lateral branch on its outer side. The externo- lateral ray is stouter than the dorsal and ends at some distance from the margin of the bursa. The postero-lateral ray is the longest of all and reaches almost the margin of the bursa. The medio- and the antero-lateral rays are increasingly stouter than the postero-lateral. The ventral ray divides into two, the ventro-ventral and the latero-ventral, the former being the smallest and the latter the stoutest of all the rays. Both these almost reach the margin of the bursa. The females measure 15.4-21.7 in length and the maximum thickness which is reached in the region of the vulva is 0.19-0.24. The cervical papillæ are situated at a distance of 0.43-0.48 from the anterior extremity. The NEMATODE PARASITES OF GOATS AND SHEEP 251 Specific diagnosis.252 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III Hæmonchus contortus (Rud. 1803.) (Plate XX, Figs. 1-6.) This is a very common parasite of goats and much less so of cattle at Muktesar. A large collection of this worm both from goats and cattle was exa- mined. The male specimens are very constant in regard to their structure and do not reveal any fluctuations. The females, however, exhibit very interesting variations in regard to the structure or structures developed in the vicinity of the vulva. Veglia [1915] remarks that some variations occur in H. contortus and Le Roux [1929, 1, 2] describes some of them in the species H. michelli, H. Vegliai, H. bedfordi and H. longistipes, but in spite of this variable nature of the lingui- form flap covering the vulva and the occurrence of some structure or structures in its vicinity in so many species of the genus Hæmonchus, it appears that the knowledge in regard to these is far from being well-known. The present oppor- tunity is therefore taken to describe these variations with the help of illustrations in the type species of the genus, Hæmonchus contortus, obtained from both goats and cattle :PLATE XX. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 6. D
NEMATODE PARASITES OF GOATS AND SHEEP 253 It appears that the function of all these structures is to aid in the process of copulation. It is my pleasant duty in the end to record here my appreciation of the help given to me by Mr. Sunder Rao Bhutgoswami, the Artist of this Institute, in getting the illustrations ready. All the specimens have been deposited in the helminthological collection of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar-Kumaun, United Pro- vinces, India. EXPLANATION OF PLATES. Plate XVII, Fig. 1. Varestrongylus pneumonicus; Anterior end, dorsal view X 168. 254 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III Gedoelst, L. (1923). Le genre Metastrongylus Molin, 1861. Bull. Soc. Path. Exot. 16, 622PLATE XXI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Cercaria saundersi : showing a few anatomical details. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Photo micrograph of the cercaria.
CERCARIA SAUNDERSI, N. SP. BY M. ANANT NARAYAN RAO, G.M.V.C., Lecturer in Parasitology, Madras Veterinary College, Madras. (Received for publication on 20th June 1931.) (With Plate XXI.) The study of larval trematodes found in the fresh water molluscs of India has not received much attention apparently. Sewell [ 1922 ] published his valuable work on C ercariae indicae wherein he has described about fifteen furcocercous cercariae and has classified them. Soparkar [1921], who restricted himself only to furcocercariae, has described only about five of such found in Bombay. All those include the Pharyngeal and Apharyngeal furcocercus cercariae. The present paper deals with an apharyngeal one. The behaviour of this larva in a tube of water is peculiar. It adheres to the sides of the tube quite firmly with its powerful ventral sucker, occasionally swims, tail foremost, and often in Spasmodic jerks. The larvae do not go down to the bottom of the tube, but remain resting in the vicinity of the snail from which they came. This shows that they are not powerful swimmers. They are positively prototrophic. Each larva has two black vestigial eyes with transparent convex lenses directed upwards and outwards. The whole length of a living cercaria varies from 0.8 mm. to 1.0 mm. In a fixed larva the body measures 300 256 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III. granules, in a mass, behind the ventral sucker which represent the future genital system. The excretory system is made up of the anterior and posterior lateral ducts, or collecting tubes, which unite to form two main tubes which open into a small rounded excretory vesicle at the hind end of the body. There are two patches of cilia in each main excretory tube behind the union of the anterior and the posterior collecting tubes. On each side of the body there are seven flame cells including the one in the tail. In each half of the body they are distributed as follows:CERCARIA SAUNDERSI, N. SP. 257 5. Mucin glands large with stout ducts connected with penetrating spines on top of the anterior organ. 6. The furcal length is more than one half that of tail stem. 7. The furcae have narrow finfolds. 8. Development in long sporocysts. The characters summed up above seem to be common to those cercariae of the " Elvae group" described by Miller [1927]. Therefore this cercaria is placed in that group. It resembles C. macrosoma Brown [1926] in having a spinose body and in having muscular bands between the ventral sucker and the walls of the body. The flame cell formula is similar. It differs from it in having three pairs of mucin glands, and in having the opening in the tips of the furcal rami. It resembles C. milleri Fast [1926] in many respects, but differs from it in the flame cell formula and in the number of mucin glands. Further C. milleri is aspinose. It resembles C. tuckerensis Miller [1924] in having a capillary alimentary canal, but has no intestinal ceca. The number of mucin glands and flame cells is different in C. tuckerensis. It is interesting to note that only one cercaria, C. bombayensis No. 19, Soparkar [1921], found in India has been included in that group. The cercaria in question differs from this in the flame cell formula, and in possessing finfolds on the furcal rami. The cercaria described seems to be a new species, and it is proposed to name it " Cercaria saundersi." Attempts were made to infect a white rat, a fowl and a frog (Rana tigrin) with these cercariae with a view to obtain adults, but the results were unsuccessful. SUMMARY. 1. Cercaria saundersi, n. sp., is an apharyngeal longifurcate cercaria having finfolds on its furcal rami. 2. In its body there are three pairs of mucin glands round a protrusible ventral sucker supported by bands of muscle which run from it to the dorso-ventral walls. 3. The anterior organ is muscular posteriorly and the alimentary canal is only a capillary tube. F
258 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III 4 . The excretory system has 6 pairs of flame cells in all. There are two patches of cilia in each main excretory tube. 5. This cercaria is placed in the " Elvae group " described by Miller [1927]. 6. The cercariae are obtained from Limnea acuminata Lamarck. REFERENCES. Brown, T. J. (1926). Some freshwater larval trematodes with contributions to their life histories.CERCARIA KYLASAMI, SP. NOV. BY M. ANANT NARAYAN RAO, G.M.V.C., Lecturer in Parasitology, Madras Veterinary College, Madras. (Received for publication on 15th March 1932.) (With Plate XXII.) This cercaria was obtained only from Planorbis exustus (Deshayes) during the carly part of this year. Out of over 500 snails collected from the Spur Tank, Egmore, only 22 discharged these cercariae. Round about Spur Tank a fairly large number of dhobis' donkeys and other cattle are seen grazing and they all drink water out of this tank. So far, it has been found that that tank contains mollusca fairly heavily infected with many kinds of cercariae. DESCRIPTION OF THE LARVA. It is a fairly large cercaria, light brown in colour, extremely active and swims vigorously in water with its tail uppermost. The movement is characteristic and is common to all amphistome cercaria. The cercaria while swimming suddenly stops all movements and elongates its body or sometimes curls it ventrally, or contracts it to such an extent as to make it appear reniform and swims again. When viewed under the microscope between a slide and cover-slip, with moderate pressure, its body is lanceolate in shape, with the tail attached to the wide end. The attachment of the tail is slightly dorsal. The body being flexible and extensile, the measurements may not be reliable; hence a camera- lucida drawing of one specimen is appended with scale for making the necessary measurements if one so desires (Plate XXII, fig. 1). The cuticle of the cercaria is thin but fairly rough. Under it, there is a large number of cystogenous cells containing rod-like granules and also pigment granules. There are two conical eyes, each having a beautiful convex lens at the base of the cone and directed upwards and outwards. The oral sucker is at the anterior end of the body and is well developed. It has round it a rim of cuticle with a sinuous margin. The pharynx seems to be fused with the oral sucker making it appear elongated. There are two lateral diverticulae at the commencement of the oesophagus, which begin in an infundi- buliform opening at the posterior end of the oral sucker. The oesophagus bifur- cates into two intestinal cecae, some distance behind the level of the eyes. Just ( 259 ) F 2
260 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III before its bifurcation, the oesophagus becomes muscular with muscle fibres running longitudinally. Two intestinal glands, one from each cecum, open their ducts into a common atrium in the centre of this muscular portion. Each gland floats free in the lumen of the intestinal cecum and is held, apparently, by the end of its duct attached to the muscular portion of the oesophagus. Perhaps, these glands have a digestive function. The two intestinal cecae almost reach the posterior sucker after a fairly wavy course, the ends being bluntly rounded and not coiled up spirally as in Cercaria indicae No. XXI Sewell [1922]. The excretory system is composed of a bladder situated in front of the pos- terior sucker, the excretory tubules opening into it. There is one set of tubules on each lateral half of the parasite. Each main tube can be traced from the excretory bladder going forwards with a tortuous course and replete with excretory granules. It turns backwards just behind the eye and with a more tortuous course it gets broken up into smaller tubules as it turns again forwards near the posterior sucker. The excretory granules are present in the retrograde tubule also, and they disappear, however, in the tubules in the posterior third of the parasite. The finer tubules and flame cells could not be traced out owing to the opacity of the body of the larva. This opacity is due to the presence of brownish pigment and cystogenous cells, under the cuticle. The interesting and important feature is that there is no cross-connection between the main tubules of each side. The excretory pore of the bladder opens dorsally. The tail is fairly wide at its junction with the body of the larva and tapers towards its free extremity which is blunt and rounded slightly. It is muscular and contains a few granules thrown in between the muscle fibres. There is a caudal canal which runs from the bladder, to almost the end of the tail where it dilates into a pear-shaped cavity, from which two small canals open to the exterior. The genital system is seen in the shape of two masses of cells, placed one behind the other, about the median line in front of the excretory bladder. These are perhaps the future testes. Another mass of cells is seen a little to the side of the bladder and this is perhaps the future ovary. These cercariae develop in rediae. Each redia has a mouth which leads into a short gut full of ingested dark material. A few glands are present round about the gut and these open in the mouth. There is a birth pore some distance behind the oral opening. There are two pairs of locomotor appendages. Each redia contains about three or four almost mature cercariae wanting in pig- ment granules and five or six immature cercariae. In young rediae three pairs of flame cells are seen. The anterior pair is a little behind the level of the termination of the gut and the next two pairs are at the level of the anterior and posterior pairs of locomotor appendages respectively (Plate XXII).
PLATE XXII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. C. kylasami showing excretory system. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Redia. C. kylasami.
CERCARIA KYLASAMI, SP. NOV. 261 DISCUSSION. Sewell [1922] divides the amphistome cercariae into two groups, (1) the Pigmentata group and (2) the Diplocotylea group. He was able to discover only one example, Cercariae indicae XXI, which he included provisionally under the Diplocotylea group created by him. The characters of this group are described by him very well and the salient points are as under :AGGLUTINABILITY OF HOMOLOGOUS AND HETEROLOGOUS STRAINS OF BRUCELLA ORGANISMS DURING THE COURSE OF BACILLUS ABORTUS BANG INFECTION* BY R. N. NAIK, G.B.V.C., Assistant Veterinary Research Officer, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on 1st February 1932.) Contagious bovine abortion has of late been receiving a good deal of attention in the hands of veterinary workers, on account of its wide distribution, economic importance in breeding and dairy establishments, and also in view of the close rela- tionship which is believed to exist by some workers between the causative organism of this disease and that of human undulant fever. The agglutination test which is generally applied in the diagnosis of the disease was perfected by such eminent workers in the field as M Fadyean and Stockman [1912] whilst M'Fadyean, Sheather and Minnet [1913] compared the agglutination and complement fixation tests and declared that the results were " broadly concordant." This finding received an universal acceptance and the agglutination test is usually the method resorted to for the diagnosis of this disease at present. It is, however, not un- common to find with the antigen of certain strains of B. abortus Bang a suspicious or only a slight agglutination reaction given by serum samples of cows having a history of contagious abortion. A short study has, therefore, been made of the agglutinability of different strains of the Brucella group. Four strains have been used in the investigation. They wereAGGLUTINABILITY OF BRUCELLA ORGANISMS 263 The antigen used in the test was prepared by growing the organisms on plain agar medium, pH 7.3 at 37° C., emulsifying the 48 hours old growth in physiological salt solution containing 0.5 per cent. carbolic acid and standardising the emulsion to barium sulphate standard opacity No. 32. A hill bull whose serum was negative when tested against the antigens of the four strains of Brucella organisms was subjected to an intravenous injection of 10 c.c. of a suspension of B. abortus English, matching to barium sulphate standard opacity tube No. 8. The bull showed a good thermal reaction, the maximum temperature being 105.0° F. on the third day of injection. The tempera- ture reaction subsided on the 5th day and thenceforward the temperature remained normal throughout a year, during which period the animal was kept under observa- tion. From the fifteenth day of injection his serum was submitted to agglutination test every two months, the results of which are stated in the following table :264 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS. The serum of a bull infected with B. abortus Bang (English strain) gave (1) against the homologous strain a positive agglutination reaction for about 5 months, a suspicious one for the next 5 months, and a negative one at about the end of a year; (2) against B. abortus 4 (Indian strain), more or less the same reaction as against the homologous strain, but the reaction was less marked after about 5 months ; (3) against B. abortus 3 (Indian strain), a positive reaction for a period of about a month and a negative one for the rest of the period ; and (4) against B. melitensis (English strain), a positive reaction for about 5 months, and then a negative one for the rest of the period. A serum of an animal infected with contagious bovine abortion may fail com- pletely to agglutinate heterologous strains when the acuteness of the disease wears off and therefore it is apparent that an early investigation should be made of all the Indian strains of this organism, so that the agglutination test, to which sera from aborted cows are submitted in laboratories in this country, may yield more reliable results than those obtainable at present. The writer desires to express his deep gratitude to Mr. F. Ware, the Director, and Mr. H. Cooper, the Veterinary Research Officer, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, under whose direction the piece of work was carried out. Thanks are due to Mr. Balwant Singh, Veterinary Inspector, for his assistance in this work. REFERENCES. M'Fadyean and Stockman (1912). J. Comp. Path. & Ther. 25, 22. M'Fadyean, Sheather and Minnet (1913). Ibid. 26,142.
AGGLUTINATION REACTION DUE TO MALLEIN INJECTIONS IN HORSES* BY R. N. NAIK, G.B.V.C., Assistant Veterinary Research Officer, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on 1st February 1932.) Miessner [ 1902 ] and Pfeiler and Weber [ 1912 ] have shown that agglutinins appear in the blood in from 5 to 7 days following the subcutaneous injection of mallein. According to Sustmann [ 1908 ] the presence of these agglutinins remains for more than three months. Serum samples of healthy horses subjected to the mallein test as well as those of glandered horses give therefore identical agglutina- tion titres and the results of the agglutination test in animals of the first category can only be relied upon when they have not been subjected to the mallein test during the preceding three months. It is not uncommon to obtain a suspicious reaction with the mallein test in a few horses and in such instances, particularly when early confirmation is neces- sary, one may wish to resort to some form of serological test, such as the comple- ment fixation or agglutination test. But, in view of what has been stated above, the agglutination test in such horses recently tested with mallein may lead to anomalous results. The necessity therefore arose to find out whether there was any sharp demarcation in the titres of serum from horses infected with glanders and from those injected with mallein and also to ascertain the maximum period during which the serum of a horse tested with mallein gave a positive agglutination reaction. An antigen was prepared by using a B. mallei strain, stock culture No. 124 of this Institute. It was grown on glycerine broth medium, pH 7.3 at 37 °C. After incubating for 10 days the culture was killed by autoclaving and was centrifuged at 6,500 revolutions per minute for one hour. The supernatant fluid was thrown off and the sediment was emulsified in physiological salt solution containing 0.5 per cent. carbolic acid and was re-centrifuged at the same speed and for the same period. The sediment was then emulsified and standardised to barium sulphate standard opacity No. 32 in carbolised physiological salt solution. There were available at the moment a certain number of healthy horses that had been recently subjected to the mallein test in this Institute. The sera of these animals were submitted to agglutination tests periodically. The results of these, * Paper read at the 19th Session of the Indian Science Congress, Bangalore, 1932. ( 265 )
266 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III which are summarised in Table I, show that out of nine ponies variously subjected to the mallein test about a month previously (i) three ponies gave a positive agglutination reaction indistinguishable from that usually obtainable in the case of glandered horses ; (ii) two ponies gave a suspicious reaction; and (iii) the remaining four ponies gave a negative reaction. It will be further observed that after about 8 weeks from the date of last injec- tion of mallein all the animals gave a completely negative reaction to the second agglutination test. The problem which now seemed to merit attention was whether repeated injec- tions of mallein were followed by a steady increase in the amount of agglutinins until they reached what might be regarded as the maximum titre, and if the findings in this respect were positive, it seemed desirable further to follow up the question and endeavour to ascertain the exact period during which the agglutinins persisted in the circulation. In order to obtain information on these points, a horse which had shown the minimum amount of normal agglutinins in its blood serum was selected and injected every week subcutaneously with mallein, the serum being drawn during the period intervening between every two injections. The results of these weekly agglutination tests are summarised in Table II. An examination of this Table shows : (i) that a positive agglutination reaction was obtained a week after the injection of mallein; (ii) that the intensity of the reaction, instead of showing an increase due to repeated weekly injections of mallein actually fell slightly in the fifth week ; and (iii) that a negative reaction was exhibited at the end of the third week after the last injection. SUMMARY. 1. No sharp demarcation can be made out between the agglutination titres of serum from horses recently injected with mallein and of serum from horses infected with glanders. 2. The presence of agglutinins induced by an injection of mallein may be found only up to about two months following the date of injection.
MALLEIN INJECTIONS IN HORSES. 267 3. If a healthy horse is subjected to repeated injections of mallein the aggluti- nation reaction simulating that of a positive case of glanders is noticeable a week after the first injection. 4. Repeated injections of mallein do not increase the titre above that which is obtained a week after the first injection. 5. The presence of specific agglutinins in the blood serum of horses repeatedly injected with mallein does not persist longer than three weeks after the last injection. The writer desires to express his deep gratitude to Mr. F. Ware, the Director and Mr. H. Cooper, the Veterinary Research Officer of this Institute, for their guidance and encouragement. REFERENCES. Miessner (1902). Centralb für Bakter, Parasitenund Infekt. Originate, 53, 482. (1902). Ibid, 54,121. Pfeiler and Weber (1912). Berliner tierarztliche Wochenschrift, 785. Sustmann (1908). Diss. Zürich. (Lit. on Aggl.)
268 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III TABLE I. Agglutination reaction due to mallein injection. Serial No. Serum from Details of Mallein test 1st Agglutination testMALLEIN INJECTIONS IN HORSES 269 TABLE I270 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III TABLE I MALLEIN INJECTIONS IN HORSES 271 TABLE I272 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III TABLE II. Agglutination reaction due to repeated mallein injections. Animal Date of Mallein injection Date on which the pony was bled for agglutina- tion test Agglutination Reaction 24 hours 1/25 W. C. 1/50 N. W. C. 1/100 Dist. 1/200 ? App. 1/500 1/1000 1/2000 Pony No. 307 . 26-7-30 { 22-7-30 2-8-30 W. C. V. N. W. C. V. N. W. C. N. W. C. Dist. Adv. App. Dist. ? App. 4-8-30 11-8-30 W. C. W.C. W. C. V. N. W. C. Adv. App. ?App. 11-8-30 18-8-30 W. C. W. C. W. C. N. W. C. V. adv. App. ? App. 18-8-30 25-8-30 V. N. W. C. W.C. W.C. N. W. C. Dist. App. .. 25-8-30 1-9-30 W. C. W.C. N. W. C. V. adv. App. .. .. 8-9-30 W. C. W.C. V. N. W. C. V. adv. ?App. .. .. 15-9-30 W. C. V. N. W. C. N. W. C. App. ? App. .. .. 22-9-30 W. C. V. N. W. C. Adv. App. ?App. .. .. 29-9-30 W.C. V. N. W. C. V. adv. App. ?App. .. .. 6-10-30 V. N. W. C. N . W. C. Dist. App. .. .. .. 13-10-30 V. N. W. C. V. adv. Adv. Dist. .. .. ..
MALLEIN INJECTIONS IN HORSES 273 TABLE IIAGGLUTINABILITY OF DIFFERENT STRAINS OF BACILLUS MALLEI* BY R. N. NAIK, G.B.V.C., Assistant Veterinary Research Officer, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. [ Received for publication on 1st February 1932.] Hutyra and Marek [ 1926 ] quote Ladany's statement that different strains of B. mallei show differences in their agglutinability and that strains which show distinct stringy cultures and cause a bluish red discoloration on potato medium are the best for the preparation of antigen. As the agglutination test has been brought into practice at this Institute and is resorted to mostly when the mallein test fails to give a conclusive evidence of glanders infection in horses, it was considered desirable to make a study of the agglutinability of different stock strains of B. mallei in order to choose the best strains for use as antigen. Three strains of B. mallei, viz., stock strains No. 72, No. 124 and No. 169 were taken for study. These strains had been isolated in this Institute in 1908, 1926 and 1930 respectively from different localities in India. Strain No. 169 produces a slight bluish red discoloration on potato medium and a distinct stringy culture (of. Ladany's statement as cited above) but the other two do not possess this cultural characteristic. Antigen of these strains was prepared by growing the organisms on glycerine broth medium, pH 7.3 at 37°C. After incubating for 10 days the culture was killed by autoclaving and was centrifuged at 6,500 revolutions per minute for one hour. The supernatant fluid was thrown off and the sediment was emulsified in physiological salt solution containing 0.5 per cent. carbolic acid and re-centrifuged at the same speed and for the same period. The sediment was then emulsified and standardised to barium sulphate standard opacity No. 32 in carbolised physiological salt solution. Serum samples were selected from three clinical cases and two healthy animals as follows :BACILLUS MALLEI 275 23 months and re-infected with 1 c.c. of broth culture of strain No. 169 intravenous- ly 5 days after the last administration of the living culture ball. Three months later the animal was found to have developed symptoms almost approaching those of clinical glanders. Donkey No. 38.276 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III TABLE Results of the agglutination test against the ANTI BACILLUS MALLEI 277 antigens of different strains of B. Mallei. GEN 48 hours 1/1000 1/2000 1/25 1/50 1/100 1/200 1/500 1/1000 1/2000 STRAIN NO. 169. Dist. App. W.C. W.C. W.C. W.C. V. N. W. C. Dist. App. V. adv. Dist. W.C. W.C. W.C. W.C. W.C. V. N. W. C. Dist. Dist. ? App. W.C. W.C. W.C. W.C. N. W. C. Dist. ?App. .. .. W.C. W.C. W.C. N. W. C. . ? App. .. .. W.C. W.C. N. W. C. Dist. ? App. .. .. STRAIN NO. 124 Dist. . App. W.C. W.C. W.C. W.C. V. adv. Adv. Dist. Adv. . App. W.C. W.C. W.C. W.C. V. N. W. C. Adv. Dist. App. . App. W.C. W.C. W.C. W.C. Adv. Dist. App. W.C. W.C. W.C. N. W. C. App. .. .. .. .. W.C. V. N. W. C. V. adv. Dist. App. .. .. STRAIN NO. 72. App. ? App. W.C. W.C. W.C. V. N. W. C. Adv. Dist, App. Dist. App. W.C. w. c. W. C. W.C. N. W. C. Dist. App. App. ? App. W.C. W.C. W.C. W.C. Adv. App. ? App. .. .. W.C. W.C. W.C. N. W. C. App. App. .. .. .. .. W.C. V. N. W. C. Adv. .. .. .. .. ABBREVIATIONS USED. Water clear. Very nearly water clear. Nearly water clear. Very advance. Advance. Distinct. Appreciable. Doubtful appreciable. Negative.
PAPERS ON INDIAN TABANIDAE * IX. THE LIFE-HISTORY OF HAEMATOPOTA RORALIS, FB. BY P. V. ISAAC, B.A., M.Sc. (LOND.), D.I.C., Offg. Imperial Entomologist, Imperial Institute of Agricultural Research, Pusa. (Received for publication on the 14th May 1932.) (With Plate XXIII.) Introduction. The life-history of no fly of the genus Haematopota has been studied completely in any country. H. pluvialis L. is well-known all over Europe as a blood-sucker of cattle, but its eggs are unknown in nature and the larval habits have not been studied to any satisfactory extent. Patton and Evans [1929] remark that the common clegPAPERS ON INDIAN TABANIADE 279 The adults. The adult female is easily caught when it preys on animals. The males are rarely seen. The bright eye-colours of the male and female disappear after death, In the accompanying plate the eye-colours were recorded from living specimens. Pre-imaginal stages. The eggs are laid in long, narrow, flat, single-tiered clusters of about 40 to 100. The individual eggs only slightly overlap one-another, and each egg mass forms an elongated patch on the leaf of paddy or other foliage. Each egg is cigar-shaped, 1.5 mm. long, shining and black in colour. The colour of the new laid egg is black. The just hatched larva is 1.5 mm. long. It has no mandibles but has at the cephalic extremity a minute process used by the embryo for cutting open the egg-shell. The full-grown larva is 18 mm. long. It has a retractile head, three thoracic segments and eight abdominal segments. It has a close resemblance to larvae of Tabanus. The terminal segment carries a very short siphon tube at the tip of which is the opening for the tracheal trunks. The two lateral tracheal trunks are narrow and the larva is unable to float in water. The pupa is 13 mm. long, brown and slightly curved in the abdominal region. Life-cycle. H. roralis Fb. is usually found breeding in paddy fields or other low watery tracts in association with narrow channels of running water. The adults are often seen in such places on the foliage in cool shady parts. The egg-masses are found in the open, usually on blades of paddy or wild grasses, on the edges of streams. The eggs hatch in the early morning and the larvae drop into the water below, sink to the bottom, undergo the first moult and then burrow into the soil. The egg stage lasts for four days only. The larvae live in damp soil. After the first instar the larvae possess strong retractile mandibles as in the larvae of Tabanus. The food in nature is apparently any soft-bodied animal they can prey on, tear open and suck. The larvae are not cannibalistic. In the laboratory the larvae were kept in clean damp sand and fed on fly-maggots taken from cow-dung in the fields. The second moult takes place after six days or more from the date of hatching. The larvae that do not encounter winter and hibernate pass through six instars and then pupate. Seven moults were observed in a larva that hibernated.
280 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III One pair of black spots are present in the Graber's organ of the larva of the first instar. With every moult there is an addition of another pair of black spots. In summer the larval stage lasts for about five to seven weeks. The full-grown larvae pupate in the soil close to and a little drier than the larval habitat. The pupal period lasts for about seven to nine days. The life-history may be summed up as: egg, four days; larva, five to seven weeks or if hibernation takes place about eight months; and pupa about eight days. Broods. Three broods in the year are possible if food is plenty and climatic conditions are favourable. The adults of the first brood appear about the month of April, another brood of flies appears in about July to August and a third appears in about October. As starvation or extreme cold causes retarded growth in the larvae the broods are likely to overlap. The largest number of flies are present in the July to August brood. REFERENCES. 1. Cameron, A. E. (1926). Bionomics of the Tabanidae (Diptera) of the Canadian Prairies. Bull. Ent. Res. 17, 25. 2. Cameron, A. E (1930). Oviposition of Haemaopota pluvialis, Linno. Nature 126, 001-602. 3. Flotchor, T. Brainbrigge (1921). Report of the Imperial Entomologist. Sci. Rept. Agric. Res. Inst., Pusa, 1920-21, 46. 4. Pattern, W. S., and Cragg, F. W. (1913). Text-book of Med, Ent., 297. 5. Patton, W. S., and Evans, A. M. (1929). Insects, ticks, mites and venomous animals of medical and veterinary importance. Part I. Medical 52. EXPLANATION OF PLATE XXIII. Haematopota roralis Fb. 1. Egg mass × 3. 2. Single egg × 20. 3. Second instar larva × 20. 4. Full-grown larva × 4. 5. Pupa × 4. 6. Female fly × 4. 7. Side view of head of female fly × 6. 8. Male fly × 4. 9. Side view of head of male fly × 6.
PLATE XXIII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
THE QUANTITATIVE PRODUCTION OF BENZOIC ACID AND PHENOLS IN THE ANIMAL SYSTEM BY F. J. WARTH, M.Sc, AND N. C. DAS GUPTA, B.Sc. (From the Animal Nutrition Section, Bangalore.) (Received for publication on the 4th June 1932.) The substances to be considered originate from the food; they are residues which the body is unable to oxidise and are poisonous. It has long been known that these substances are not excreted in the free state but are first detoxicated by conversion to more complex compounds, benzoic acid being converted to a large extent into hippuric acid, and phenols into ethereal phenolic sulphates. Thus the elimination of benzoic acid and phenols is liable to make demands on the body nitrogen and sulphur. On this account alone the production of these substances is of importance. But they have great significance in other respects also. For example, work done in this section has shown that hippuric acid is a potent factor in the acid-base balance of cattle urine [ Warth and Krishna Ayyar, 1930 ]. Then again, as will be shown in the present paper, the quantity of hippuric acid formed from certain types of ration is significantly high, amounting at times to as much as 4.5 per cent, of the total food digested. Very little work has been done on the determination of the quantitative produc- tion of these substances. The only recent determinations are those carried out by Brigl and Pfahler [1929]. These authors were able to show that benzoic acid production from hay rations was higher than from straw rations. Our experiments described in the sequel establish the following main facts:282 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III PROCEDURE. The determinations were-all carried out on urine samples collected in the course of digestion trials, the food consumption and digestion being determined over a period of 12 days and the urine collected quantitatively for six consecutive days during the digestion experiments. The average excretion of benzoic acid and phenols was ascertained in these samples. The determination of benzoic acid was carried out by our method described in the Bicchemical Journal [Warth and Das Gupta, 1928]. The volatile phenol was determined by a modified bromine titration method which has not yet been described. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS. 1. The quantitative production of benzoic acid.PRODUCTION OF BENZOIC ACID AND PHENOLS IN THE ANIMAL SYSTEM. 283 It is evident from these figures that ragi straw consistently yields low values while jowar yields high values. 2. The quantitative production of volatile phenols (para-cresol).284 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [ II, III TABLE III. Benzoic acid and para- cresol production from typical coarse fodders. Fodders Benzoic acid excretion per 100 fodder Para-cresol excretion per 100 fodder Ratio B: P. Ragi Straw ...... 0.82 0.042 1: .051 Ditto ...... 0.83 0.047 1: .057 Ditto .... 0.86 0.042 1: .049 Ditto...... 0.83 0.037 1 : .045 Jowar fresh (young) . 1.36 0.143 1: .105 Ditto (prime), 1.14 0.125 1 : .110 Ditto (ripe) . 1.21 0.080 1: .066 Jowar hay (young) ..... 1.46 0.131 1 : .090 Jowar silage Do. ..... 1.44 0.226 1 : .157 Bolaram hay ...... 1.06 0.016 1: .015 Ditto...... 1.05 0.020 1: .019 Millet straw...... 1.14 0.042 1: .037 Aurangabad hay ..... 1.22 0.010 1: .008 Tornagallu hay ...... 1.09 0.072 1: .066 3. Other phenolic substances.PRODUCTION OF BENZOIC ACID AND PHENOLS IN THE ANIMAL SYSTEM 285 TABLE IV. Benzoic acid production from typical coarse fodders. Fodders Benzoic acid excreted for 100 fodder fed Ragi Straw . ..... 0.780 Paddy Straw . .... 0.813 Millet Straw . ..... 0.904 Wheat Straw ..... 0.930 Meerut Farm Hay . ....... 1.023 Tornagallu Hay ....... 1.115 Aurangabad Hay, ....... 1.179 Oat Hay ..... 1.208 Rhodes grass Hay . ....... 1.212 Spe ar grass Hay ....... 1.263 Bolaram Hay (Prime) ....... 1.459 Guinea grass . ....... 1.065 Dhub grass ....... 1.144 Jowar (Prime) . ....... 1.172 286 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III 5. Benzoic acid and para-cresol production from concentrates.PRODUCTION OF BENZOIC ACID AND PHENOLS IN THE ANIMAL SYSTEM 287 TABLE VI. Influence of stage of maturity on benzoic acid production. Per cent. benzoic acid excreted. Young Prime Ripe Jowar Hay (1928)... 1.347 1 .541 1.353 Do (1930)...... 1.417 1.472 1.440 Bolaram hay....... 1.033 1.459 0.882 Rhodes grass hay....... 1.150 1.212 1.153 Without laying great emphasis on the figures there is an indication that the prime cut yields the highest amount of benzoic acid. ( b) Effect of curing.288 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III SUMMARY. The production of benzoic acid and phenols from typical foodstuffs has been determined. It has been shown that for any given fodder the production is constant per 100 grms, fodder consumed. A number of fodders examined gave values ranging from 0.78 to 1.51 grms, benzoic acid per 100 grms, fodder consumed. For each fodder there is a constant ratio between the benzoic acid and para. cresol produced. REFERENCES. Warth, F. J., and Ayyar, N. K. (1930). Biochem, J., 24, 1505. Brigl, P., and Pfahler, A., (1029). Tierernahrung 1, 30-6. Warth, F. J., and Das Gupta, N. C. (1928). Biochem, J., 22, 621.
THE CONJUGATION OF BENZOIC ACID BY INDIAN CATTLE BY N. C. DAS GUPTA, B.Sc. ( From the Animal Nutrition Section, Bangalore,) (Received for publication on the 4th June 1932.) Two modes of conjugation of benzoic acid are known, namely, the conjugation with glycuronic acid to form benzoyl glycuronic acid and with glycine to form benzoyl glycine, commonly known as hippuric acid. For the first conjugation the body has to provide glucose, for the second type, glycine, a nitrogenous substance, and for this a demand is made upon the body nitrogen. It has to be emphasised that the nature of the demand is very different for the two types of conjugation. That the conjugation is essential for the safety of the animal is proved by the fact that whenever benzoic acid is ingested it is excreted almost entirely in the conjugated (detoxicated) form. Only when very large doses of the poison are given, is a considerable proportion excreted in the unconjugated form. The literature indicates that the form of detoxication depends to a considerable extent on the species of animal tested. Quick [ 1926 ] showed that the dog produced glycuronic more readily than hippuric acid. Certainly, when large doses of benzoic acid were fed the glycuronic conjugation became by far the most important mechanism for detoxication. Csonka [ 1924 ] found that in the pig both glycuronic and hippuric acid conj ugation take place ; the glycuronic ranging from 9 to 45 per cent. of the whole. Ringer [ 1911-12 ] showed that with the goat the hippuric acid conjugation is important. Regarding cattle it is a well known fact that these animals produce a large amount of hippuric acid. The literature offers no evidence to show that hippuric acid is the only form of detoxication with this species. Experiments described in the sequel prove definitely that with Indian cattle there is only one form of detoxication, namely, the hippuric acid form. Hewitt [1929] has carried out extensive experiments on the detoxication of benzoic acid by cattle. He did not determine hippuric acid but assumed that this conjugation occurred and directed his attention to the extent of the conjugation. He found that some free benzoic acid is invariably excreted. That is to say, the conjugation is not perfect. The present author's results do not agree with this conclusion. Figures will be given in the sequel to show that with the animals employed conjugation was always perfect, the benzoic acid being eliminated entirely in the form of hippuric acid even under conditions of nitrogen hunger. ( 289 ) H
290 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS. The results will be considered under two separate heads, namely, (1) presence of free benzoic acid in urine and (2) the form of conjugation of benzoic acid. 1. The presence of free benzoic acid in urine.CONJUGATION OF BENZOIC ACID BY INDIAN CATTLE 291 After 24 hours Grms. free benzoic acid in 100 c.c. urine . 0.774 0.184 0.079 0.041 Free benzoic acid as per cent. of total 42.1 10.0 4.3 2.2 The conclusion is that tests for free benzoic acid have no significance unless absolutely fresh urine is employed. In the succeeding tests the urine was examined as soon as it was voided. A few typical results are given below : A. With normal concentrate ration Mysore bullocks Ongole heifers Scindhi heifers Half bred Scindhi Ayreshirs Free benzoic acid per 100 c.c. urine . 0.002 0.002 0.001 nil Average total benzoic acid per 100 c.c. urine 1.100 1.500 1.500 1.500 B. With low concentrate ration Average total benzoic acid per 100 c.c. urine Free benzoic acid per 100 c.c. urine Nitrogen balance 1. .....2.000 grms. 0.004 grms. 292 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III ether. The ether is evaporated and the residue added to the precipitate of hippuric acid. The following are typical results from this procedure:CONJUGATION OF BENZOIC ACID BY INDIAN CATTLE 293 (The above animals were on low concentrate for about eight months prior to the experiment.) These figures show that almost the entire amount of benzoic acid present in the urine is accounted for, and that the glycine obtained is equivalent to the benzoic acid. There can be no doubt from these figures that the benzoic acid exists entirely as benzoyl glycine or hippuric acid, and that this is the only form of conjugation which occurs with Indian cattle. SUMMARY. Absolutely fresh urine should be used for the estimation of free benzoic acid in urine. The conjugation of benzoic acid with Indian cattle is always perfect, the benzoic acid being eliminated entirely in the form of hippuric acid. Acknowledgment. My thanks are due to Mr. F. J. Warth for his helpful guidance during the course of this work and in the preparation of this paper. REFERENCES. Quick, A. J. (1926). J. Biol. Chem., 67, 477. Csonka, F. (1924). J. Biol. Chem., 60, 545. Ringer, A. I. (1911-12). J. Biol. Chem., 10, 327. Hewitt, E. A. (1929). Cornell Vet., 19, 318. Warth, F. J., and Das Gupta, N. C. (1928). J. Biochem., 22, 621.
AN EXPERIMENT TO DETERMINE THE EFFECT OF HIPPURIC ACID EXCRETION ON THE NITROGEN BALANCE BY F. J. WARTH, M.Sc., AND N. C. DAS GUPTA, B.Sc. (From the Animal Nutrition Section, Bangalore.) (Received for publication on the 4th June, 1932.) As far as we are aware it has not been definitely established whether hippuric acid excretion does or does not influence the protein metabolism. The experiments of McCollum and Hoagland [1913-14] indicated that the addition of benzoic acid, in amounts equivalent to 40 per cent. of the urinary endogenous protein nitrogen, could be removed in the form of hippuric acid without influencing the amount of protein metabolism. On the other hand, Magnus Levy [1907], Ringer [1911-12] and Delprat and Whipple [1921] have found increased protein metabolism. Our results agree with these workers in showing that hippuric acid excretion (corresponding to 25 per cent. of the digested nitrogen) exerted a small but definite influence on the protein metabolism. Previous work by us has shown that hippuric acid production is dependent upon the fodder. Certain fodders produce large amounts, others produce small amounts. It seemed to be a question of practical importance to determine whether such variations have an appreciable effect upon the nitrogen balance. The experi- ment consisted of a long period feeding test with the two fodders, ragi straw and Bolarum hay, of which the former is known to yield less hippuric acid than the latter. Four bullocks were maintained on each ration. At definite intervals digestion experiments and nitrogen balance determinations were carried out, the protein (ground-nut cake) in the ration being increased or decreased from time to time to adjust the balance. The average total nitrogen content of the food stuffs used was as follows :HIPPURIC ACID EXCRETION ON THE NITROGEN BALANCE 295 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS. 1. Influence of fodders on nitrogen digestion.296 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III In these experiments the digestion of nitrogen from the mixed ration of concentrate and roughage has been determined. The digestibility of the nitrogen in the concentrate is accurately known. Hence by calculation the amount digested from the fodder can be found. The values thus obtained are shown in column 7 for each fodder. It will be seen that, under the most favourable circumstances the net amount digested from the fodders is very little. In less favourable cases the digestion becomes negative. That is to say, that the amount digested is less than the inevitable metabolic loss of body nitrogen passing into the faeces. It is important to notice that there is a close relationship between the amount digested (column 7) and the percentage amount present in the fodder (column 1). In the case of ragi straw when the percentage falls to 0.5 very little is digested, while when the percentage rises to 0.6 appreciable amounts are digested. In the case of the hay ration, a very small amount of nitrogen may be digested when the percentage is 0.4, as the percentage falls below this value negative digestion values are obtained. Similar results have been obtained by the Animal Nutrition Section, Bangalore, [Warth, 1930] for many typical fodders. The averages of the results indicate that the digestibility becomes zero when the nitrogen content of the fodder falls to about 0.4 per cent. The results obtained in the present series of determina- tions therefore corroborate our earlier observations. Table I makes it clear that, in the present experiments, most of the digested nitrogen was derived from the concentrate. 2. The nitrogen balance.HIPPURIC ACID EXCRETION ON THE NITROGEN BALANCE. 297 TABLE III. The nitrogen balance with Bolarum hay ration. 298 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III TABLE IV. The relation between nitrogen digested and nitrogen balance. Ragi straw ration. Animals Average nitrogen digested Average nitrogen excreted Nitrogen balance 1 22.48 21.28 +1.20 2 22.40 19.86 +2.54 3 20.91 19.78 +1.13 4 18.09 18.80 HIPPURIC ACID EXCRETION ON THE NITROGEN BALANCE. 299 It will be noticed that the hay ration produced somewhat more hippuric acid. There can be no doubt that the higher excretion of total nitrogen by this ration (referred to above) is due to the higher excretion of hippuric acid. In fact, the difference in excretion of total nitrogen is practically equal to the difference in the hippuric acid nitrogen. We feel that this Table offers conclusive evidence regarding the direct effect of hippuric acid excretion on the nitrogen balance. As a subsidiary point it is worth noting that when the concentrate allowance is low the hippuric nitrogen may approach or in exceptional cases even exceed the urea nitrogen. This is illustrated by the following results : TABLE VI. Nitrogen excreted as hippuric acid and urea. Nitrogen per 100 c. c. urine Total As hippuric acid As urea Jowar hay .....{ 0.597 0.157 0.260 0.696 0.167 0.331 0.650 0.164 0.293 Ragi Straw .....{ 0.355 0.120 0.057 0.377 0.126 0.052 0.351 0.118 0.056 Table VII shows the hippuric acid found in the individual tests. It may be noted that the hay ration always yielded more hippuric acid than the ragi straw ration. TABLE VII. Hippuric acid excreted per day. Ragi straw ration Bolarum hay ration 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 73.27 69.00 62.47 51.63 98.07 90.38 83.04 79.20 74.09 68.81 61.77 58.39 84.95 79.08 71.45 67.20 66.49 65.06 58.51 54.99 90.00 86.33 80.61 67.54 68.21 64.16 61.48 48.98 84.73 76.49 80.71 69.38 67.08 .. 60.89 55.21 85.16 80.71 82.85 72.99
300 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III SUMMARY. A comparative study of the nitrogen balance with two fodders has been carried out. The conclusions from the experiments are as follows :THE INFLUENCE OF URINARY REACTION ON EXCRETION OF LIME AND MAGNESIA BY N. KRISHNA AYYAR, B. A. (From the Animal Nutrition Section, Bangalore). [ Received for publication on the 4th June 1932. ] Previous work in this Section has shown that the reaction of the urine is dependent upon the nature of the food. For each fodder there is a characteristic reaction, some fodders yielding alkaline urines, other acid urines. [ Warth and Krishna Ayyar, 1930 ]. A long period feeding test with mature bullocks on main- tenance rations carried out for another purpose during the past year gave an oppor- tunity for studying the urinary and faecal excretion of lime and magnesia with two typical fodders, the one yielding an alkaline urine, the other a slightly acid urine. The two fodders tested were ragi straw and mature Bolarum hay. The urine of the first is always alkaline, the urine of the second ranges between neutrality and slight acidity according to variations in the quality of the fodder. During the ex- periments recorded, the reaction remained acid. The characteristics of the two urine types. The characteristics of the two urine types are shown in the accompanying acid- base balance statement, in which two other urine types are included for later reference. TABLE I. Acid-base balance. Average excretion in terms of c.c. normal per day. 302 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III The pH values in this table are averages of numerous closely agreeing results and show that the ragi straw urine was decidedly alkaline, while the Bolarum hay urine was acid. The acid-base balance data are instructive. Considering first each urine separately it is seen that the ragi straw urine contains a decided excess of bases over acids, while in the hay urine acids slightly exceed bases. Comparing the two urines with each other, we find base excretion is very much greater in ragi straw urine, total organic acid excretion is about the same and hippuric acid excre- tion is somewhat greater in the hay urine. The excessive base excretion from rago straw urine is accounted for by the high percentage of basic substances in this fod- der. The following figures for the ash analysis of the two fodders make this point clear. TABLE II. Percentage on dry basis. INFLUENCE OF URINARY REACTION ON EXCRETION OF LIME AND MAGNESIA 303 nesia, while the accompanying organic matter is digested to the extent of 60 per cent. The point to note is that the ragi straw faeces are much richer in lime than the Bolarum hay faeces, as might be expected from the initial difference in the two fodders. These figures for faecal lime and magnesia are given here to avoid possible misunderstanding later. The partition of bases between urine and faeces.304 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III The striking fact revealed by these figures is that the per cent. excretion of lime in ragi straw urine is very low, while in Bolarum hay urine it amounts to 10 per cent. of the entire excretion. Not only is the percentage higher in the hay urine but the absolute amount is nearly four times as much as in the ragi straw urine. The effect becomes more striking when it is recollected that hay contains less lime than ragi straw. It is evident that the deflection of lime into the hay urine is related to the acid character of the urine. A similar but much less marked deflection occurs with magnesia, as the figures show. The result with potash is most peculiar. It appears that potash has a tendency to be deflected more com- pletely into the alkaline urine. No remarks are offered on this observation. Hay sample " A " obtained from a definite locality in two consecutive years.INFLUENCE OF URINARY REACTION ON THE EXCRETION OF LIME AND MAGNESIA 305 SUMMARY. 1. The characteristics of alkaline urine produced by ragi straw and acid urine produced by Bolarum hay are recorded. 2. The important observation was made that lime and magnesia are deflected into the urine, when the urine is acid. 3. A sample of hay similar to Bolarum hay obtained from a definite locality for two consecutive years showed the same tendency for lime and magnesia to be deflected into the urine. In this case the faeces become very deficient in lime and it is possible that this low lime content was the cause of the purging which occurred with this fodder. Finally, my thanks are due to Mr. F. J. Warth, for his helpful suggestions in the preparation of this paper. REFERENCE. Warth, F. J., and Krishna Ayyar, N. (1930). Biochem. Journ., 24, 6, 1595-1600.
NOTE ON THE STIMULATION OF THE REPRODUCTIVE ORGANS OF CATTLE BY P. J. KERR, I. V. S., Veterinary Adviser to the Government of Bengal, Calcutta. (Received for publication on 1st June 1932.) This note is submitted for publication now as I have had several enquiries on this subject since I began working on it some months ago, and I, therefore, presume it will be of interest to others working with livestock, who have been troubled with this slowness to breed of many of the best Indian cattle. Urine hormone. The possibility of using this physiological stimulation of the gonads by the injection of the urine of pregnant animals, to stimulate instead of diagnose pregnancy, occurred to me on seeing the Zondek-Aschheim test repeated in the Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine. Colonel Acton kindly started me off by preparing the urine for me and estimating a dose for cattle. Subsequently I wrote to the Institute of Animal Genetics, Edinburgh, and obtained much useful advice, including a safer method of preparing the urine and the dosage advised in this note. In Bengal we have only begun to apply this injection this year (1932), so it is too early to analyse results and draw conclusions, but so far our results have been very encouraging. I hope by this note to stimulate others to apply this injection and publish their result, so that we may obtain experience of a number of cases more quickly and be in a position to come to conclusions. Whether this injection will be of any value in cases of sterility remains to be proved. We have tried it on 8 cases in which, so far as we knew, there was no (306)
STIMULATION OF REPRODUCTIVE ORGANS OF CATTLE 307 specific cause for sterility. All took the bull for the first time for many months. Three have since proved in calf, three remain under treatment, and two have been discarded. The injection certainly gives encouraging results in cases slow to breed again after calving. Of 7 cows injected 5 came into oestrum within 3 weeks, to ok the bull and have proved in calf. Two took the bull but did not hold, and are still under treatment. Two buffalo cows injected have also come to the bull and held. Technique. In the cases quoted in this note we have used raw urine filtered through a Chamberland L 3 filter, using an exhaust pump. In some cases the dose was very small, and latterly we have adopted the dosage recommended by the Institute of Animal Genetics, and are now using a modification of their technique for the preparation of urine. The urine is collected from a known pregnant cow. The later in pregnancy the better. It may be collected in a clean mug as it is passed, or drawn off by catheter. This is not essential and most cows strongly object to catheterisation. About 400 c.c. are required for each case. The dose being 10 c.c. per 100 lb. body weight, injected on four consecutive days. The urine is placed in a flask and to each 100 c.c. is added 5 c.c. of a 20 per cent. solution of sulpho-salicylic acid and well shaken for ten minutes to precipitate proteins. It is allowed to stand and settle or may be passed through a coarse filter paper. The clear liquid is then acid and must be neutralised by the addition of bicarbonate of soda. We continue adding bicarbonate and stirring until it is faintly alkaline to litmus. It should then be poured into sterile bottles, capped and sealed with parafin wax. One dose in each bottle. If it is to be kept for some time it would be better to pass it through a Chamberland filter L 3, and to run a thin layer of toluol over the surface to prevent oxidation. If it is then kept in cold storage it is believed it will remain potent for several months. Hormone, which is probably a mixture with a predominance of the secretion of the anterior pituitary gland, is not specific and may be used for other animals. It is also active in bulls. We have not tried it in other males. Hormone in bulls. We have used this injection in one old bull, off service from old age, 3 full- grown bulls, off service, and four young ones to bring them on to service. One
308 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III would expect the effect in an old bull to be transitory, but in the case 1 below, the effect has persisted for four months, and he is still active. It was expected that the Steinach operation would be necessary in his case. In the remainder it has been a success. One young bull appears to be ' cow shy' and will not serve, though keen enough to jump other young bulls. (1) Chieftain, a 12½ year old Hariana, body weight 1,000 lbs., off service completely for 7 months. He was given 45 c.c. on four consecutive days: January 25-28th. Effect seen in 16 days, when he served his first cow for 7½ months. He served 6 cows in February-March, 6 in April, and 5 more up to 11th May. During my visit at the end of April he served a cow, taking just 10 minutes to complete the service from the time he was brought in. The dose given him was less than half that since recommended by the Institute of Animal Genetics. (2) Tharparkar Bull, aged 8 years, body weight about 800 lbs., off service. Given one injection of 40 c.c. Effect seen in four days served 5 cows during the first month promptly. Effect began to wane after 8 weeks and he was given four injections of 40 c.c. in March. He again responded at once and served 6 cows in the succeeding month. Dose half that now recommended. (3) Two cross-bred Hariana and local bulls aged 6 and 7 years respectively, very slow to serve. Each given 40 c.c. injections on four consecutive days, in November and January. Both still active in May. In these full-grown bulls it seems that the effect is produced by re-activating the animals' own glands, and the effect has persisted for a useful period of time. We have not yet tried the effect of giving a longer course of smaller doses. On account of the good results of the hormone injection we have not had occasion to try the Steinach operation. From an article published in the Veterinary Journal 7, Special Physiology Number, Vol. LXXXVII, No. 10, I see that cows' urine may be tested for pregnancy, using mice in the usual way. Our first attempt to do so was not successful, though the cows were known to be pregnant. Possibly this was due to the fact that a trace of toluene was added as a preservative, as the samples had to travel 24 hours during the hot weather. Our results are apparently unusually encouraging, and the only explanation I can offer is that we have so far used raw urine, filtred and injected at once. We have only used half doses, and have had no protein reactions. It remains to be seen whether using detoxicated urine will make any difference to our results.
STIMULATION OF REPRODUCTIVE ORGANS OF CATTLE. 309 Our experiments have been carried out by Mr. Gossip, Livestock Expert, Bengal, and the cattle used were those under his charge on the Government Farms. I am greatly indebted to Colonel Acton, Director of the Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine, for his ready co-operation and practical help, and to Dr. Wm. C. Miller, Institute of Animal Genetics, Edinburgh, for the most valuable information and advice in his reply to my letter.
*A NEW METHOD OF MOUNTING SMALL MUSEUM SPECIMENS BY G. D. BHALERAO, M.Sc., Helminthologist, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar-Kumaun, U. P. (Received for publication on 24th April 1932.) (with Plate XXIV) Most of the specimens that are kept for show in museum jars are usually tied with a cotton thread to a piece of glass or celluloid. If the specimens are suffi- ciently large and thick this method acts very well. Considerable difficulty is, however, felt in mounting small and thin objects such as helminths and some larval forms. These cannot be tied to a glass or celluloid plate by means of a thread since they are not sufficiently thick. A new method has therefore been devised to mount such small objects and their dissections for show, taking ad- vantage of the fact that gelatin forms an insoluble compound in combination with formalin. The method consists briefly of the following step :PLATE XXIV.
SELECTED ARTICLE SOME OBSERVATIONS ON THREE COMMUNICATIONS DEALING WITH THE TREATMENT OF GASTRO- INTESTINAL STRONGYLOSIS OF SHEEP BY P. L. LE ROUX, B. Sc. (EDIN.), M. R. C. V. S., Assistant Veterinary Research Officer, Mazabuka, N. Rhodesia. (Reprinted from the Veterinary Journal, vol. 88, No. 5, May 1932.) The treatment of sheep for gastro-intestinal strongylosis still receives con- siderable attention in various parts of the world, and is of the utmost importance to the sheep industry of Australia, South Africa, and other sub-tropical countries. Publications on this subject by Seddon and Ross [1929], Parkin [1929], and Wood [1930], have been contributed from Australia, South Africa, and England respec- tively. A critical study of these communications indicates certain discrepancies which cannot be readily overlooked. When the vermicidal action of a drug or a mixture of drugs is tested against any parasite, it is only reasonable to expect that the sheep selected for the test should be definitely known to be infested, and that the degree of such infestation should be gauged with fair accuracy. Seddon and Ross and Wood did not take these precautions, and this detracts from the value of their reports. The selected sheep which they believed to be infested. The Australian contributors did not infect their animals experimentally, " since it was not found practicable to infect sheep artificially ". Artificial infestation of sheep should always be resorted to when the vermicidal property of any drug or proprietary remedy is to be tested against any particular species. The degree of infestation before and after the treatment of the animal can be readily ascertained by the "cultural" method. The various genera, e.g., Hæmonchus, 312 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III The reports from Australia and England refer inter alia to unsatisfactory results obtained with the use of the mixture of copper sulphate and sodium arsenite, the mixture recommended by Veglia [1918], against Hæmonchus contortus. The authors refer to the findings of Veglia, but their conclusions would seem to suggest that Veglia's results must be accepted with caution. They do not openly state that they doubt his findings. They are not entitled to compare their findings with those of South African workers, since they did not administer the mixture as recommended by him. Their failures to obtain the results claimed by him should probably be attributed to the fact that they administered the mixture in capsules to sheep. This means that the chemicals entered the rumen, but not the abomasum, and the results were similar to those obtained when Veglia ad- ministered it intra-rumenally by an injection through the left flank. The Austra- lians mentioned the fact that Veglia records two cases where a considerable number of wireworms were not expelled by the prescribed treatment. These were in animals one of whom had an impaction of the rumen, and the other an impaction of the abomasum. My personal experience in dosing sheep with tabloids or with drugs enclosed in capsules is that tabloids and capsules invariably pass into the rumen. Bulky powders follow a similar course. It is not evident why Wood [1930] should recommend that the powdered copper sulphate be given in capsules. This is undoubtedly a tedious procedure where hundreds of animals are to be dosed every three weeks. The procedure recommended by Veglia enables four attendants to dose ap- proximately 400 or more sheep per hour. Furthermore, the giving of drugs in capsules would amount to mixing them with the food, as they will pass to the rumen, and it is, therefore, significant to note that Wood tried drugs in food with disappointing results. Where Seddon and Ross used copper sulphate in solution, they claim that some wireworms were killed. The Australians claim the better results when a preliminary starvation preceded the administration of the mustard and copper sulphate in solution draught. From data personally gathered during the last five years, I can substantiate Veglia's findings as to the efficiency of the Union Government wireworm remedy when administered as orginally recommended in the instructions issued to farmers. Recently Monning [1929] recommended a very much reduced starvation period, and there were complaints from farmers who had adopted this that the treatment was not as efficacious as before. This reduction of the starvation period was recommended because it was believed that the starved animals would partake more readily of poisonous herbage when returned to the pastures. It was thought desirable to ascertain the efficiency of the remedy in starved and non-starved
TREATMENT OF GASTRO-INTESTINAL STRONGYLOSIS OF SHEEP 313 animals, experimentally infested with Hæmonchus contortus. The results which are available show that a preliminary starvation of from 18314 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III treatment on experimentally infested sheep. The results were so satisfactory that this is to-day the method recommended to farmers for combating this malady in the Union of South Africa. It has proved very efficacious against nodular worms of sheep at this institute. REFERENCES Parkin, B. S. (1929). " Intra-Abomasal Administration of Drugs to Sheep ", 15th Ann. Rept. Dir. Vet. Services, 2, Sect. 9, October. Seddon, H. R. and Ross, I. Clunies (1929). " Observations on the Treatment of Parasitic Castro- Enteritis in Sheep ", Vet. Res. Rept., Dept. Agric., N. S. Wales, Sydney. Wood, W. A. (1930). " Treatment Experiments on the Treatment Parasitic Gastritis in Sheep and Lambs ", Jl. Agric Sc., 20, Pt. 2, April. Veglia, F. (1918). " Chemotherapy of Hæmonchosis in Sheep " 5th and 6th Rept. Dir. Vet. Res., April. Veglia, F. (1928). " PLATE XXV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Pedal bone of a horse with the keratomatous growth in situ. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Pedal bone showing the cavity in which was lodged the growth, which has been removed.
CLINICAL NOTE KERATOMA IN THE PEDAL BONE OF A HORSE BY P. R. KRISHNA IYER, G.M.V.C., Officiating Assistant Veterinary Research Officer, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar-Kumaun. (Received for Publication on 20th April 1932.) (with Plate XXV) The occurrence of " Keratoma " or horn tumour affecting the horse's foot is an extremely rare condition, which does not seem to have been previously recorded in this country. The present note deals with a specimen of keratoma recovered from the pedal bone of a horse that had to be destroyed on account of chronic and intermittent lameness. The specimen was made available to the writer for examination through the courtesy of Major R. C. G. Thwaytes, R.A.V.C., Officer Commanding, Military Veterinary Hospital, Sialkot, who also very kindly furnished very valuable informa- tion concerning the history of the animal and accorded permission to the writer for publishing this short note. Williams [ 1904 ] says that keratoma occurs on the inner surface of the horny hoof, generally at the toe and occasionally at other situations with corresponding depressions on the pedal bone and that it is caused by the pressure of the toe-clips or side-clips or by some mechanical injury. The condition described by Williams, is designated by Caulton Reeks [1906] as "Keraphyllocele ", which he defines as an enlargement forming on the inner sur- face of the wall of the hoof, and he reserves the term "Keratoma" for horn tumours occurring only on the sole. Professor Walley [1890] records a case of keratoma following upon the operation of " Grooving" the wall " in a case of bad sand-crack. The horse which was killed after some time showed a tumour on the inner surface of the horny hoof correspond- ing to the external fissure, as also some V shaped grooves with corresponding depressions on the bone. (315)
316 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III O'Connor [1922] states that there is a comparatively rare form of keratoma which appears independently of inflammation or irritation of the horn-secreting structures and that it may be adherent or free. History.KERATOMA IN THE PEDAL BONE OF A HORSE 317 surface of the bone [Plate XXV, Fig. 1]. The whole appearance of the tumour, together with the depression at its broad end, was that of a conch. The tumour appears to have grown into the bone at the expense of the latter, the bone itself having been absorbed to an extent corresponding to the progressive growth of the tumour. The trouble in this leg started from a contused and bruised sole received by the animal about 9 months prior to the date of its destruction, and its seems that these injuries led to the formation of this horn-tumour which worked its way into the bone and brought about the condition of pedal ostitis. The cavity was formed by the subsequent absorption of the bone material for the reception and accommodation of the growth. It is of interest to note that this growth was quite free and independant of the horny hoof and that its existence was confined to the Os pedis, where it was found in a self-made cavity. The horny hoof did not present any abnormality, either on its inner or outer surface, and seems to have had no connection with the tumour. All hitherto recorded cases of keratoma, on the other hand, have had their origin in the horny wall of the hoof. The occurrence of intermittent lameness is quite characteristic of this condi- tion, but diagnosis must always be difficult in the absence of any other indications on the outer surface of the horny hoof. REFERENCES. O'Connor (1922)ABSTRACTS Immunity in East Coast FeverABSTRACTS 319 could be prevented if existing knowledge of veterinary science, animal husbandry and sanitation were properly utilised. The Bureau of Animal Industry is divided into 12 major sections each directed by a senior officer. The total stall consists of 4,326 employees, of whom 1,385 are veterinarians. Experimental farms are maintained in various parts of the country in connection with disease research and animal husbandry ; the largest of these farms is situated in Montana and comprises 50,000 acres, while the most important, on account of its varied activities, is at Beltsville, Maryland. The Pathological Division is the oldest established and it formed the nucleus around which the existing organisation has been built. The Federal Meat Inspection Service which was inaugurated in 1906 supervises the inspection of approximately 70 per cent. of the meat and meat products of the country. The Tick Eradication Scheme which was started in 1906 has been successful in freeing from ticks over 600,000 square miles or 83 per cent. of the total area infected. Another Division controls the eradication of bovine tuberculesis, a scheme which Dr. Mohler rightly claims " is the most gigantic undertaking of its kind that has ever been attempted in any country ". During the past 12 years the average incidence of the disease has been reduced from 4.9 per cent. to 1.7 per cent., an achievement which has fully justified the courage and foresight of launching this great eradication campaign. Over 75 million tuberculin tests (single intradermal method) have been carried out and nearly 2 million animals have reacted. [The financial aspect of the scheme is of interest and illustrates effectively the increasing consciousness of the Federal Government of the importance of tackling tuberculosis before it gets out of control as it has been allowed to do in the old world.] The first annual allocation made by Congress was $75,000 which amount has been gradually increased until in the present financial year it reached the sum of $6 million to which must be added $13 million contributed by the co-operating states. Dr. Mohler says that it has now been decided to include avian tuberculosis in the scheme as that disease causes heavy losses to farmers in the middle Western states. This work will have a repercussion on the pig industry as large numbers of pigs are found to be affected with the avian type of tubercle baclillus. One of the most interesting branches of the Bureau is that which supervises biological products whether prepared in America or imported from abroad. The largest items on the list are anti-hog cholera serum and virus, and the efficiency of the control of these products is reflected in the excellent results obtained and in the confidence shown by stock owners in the serum-virus method of immunisation against hog cholera. Under the able guidance of Dr. Maurice Hall, the Zoological Division has developed into one of the most important branches of the Bureau. During recent years an increasing interest has been [evinced in parasitology on account of the serious economic loss caused by various types of parasitic infestation among mammals and birds. That parasites cause unthriftiness and lack of growth and consequently render the raising of livestock unprofitable is being gradually recognised by stock owners, and Dr. Mohler foresees the time when every state in the Union will have at least one veterinary parasitologist on its staff. In conclusion the author points out that new disease problems arise more rapidly than old ones are solved and that, in consequence, the veterinary personnel of the Bureau must be enlarged to meet the increasing demands of agriculture for the assistance of Veterinery science. [T. M. DOYLE.]
320 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III Detailed Report of Work done at the Experimental Station, Pirbright, and at the Veterinary Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, New Haw, Weybridge.ABSTRACTS 321 minutes. Ordinary commercial vinegar was effective in 1: 100 strength after contract for five to nine hours. Ordinary washing soda was found to be a most reliable agent. A 1 per cent. solution destroys the virus within one hour, and a 4 per cent. solution at room temperature kills the virus within 15 minutes. A 4 per cent. solution at 75° C. is effective within five minutes. DETERMINATION OF IMMUNOLOGICAL TYPES OF VIRUS. Strains Derived from British Outbreaks.322 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, III There seems to be no doubt that the maximum infectivity occurs immediately after the rupture of the vesicles. The Decline of Natural Infectivity.REVIEW Special Sheep Diseases Number of the " Veterinary Journal ", April, 1932.ORIGINAL ARTICLES AN EXPERIMENT ON MINERAL ASSIMILATION FROM TWO TYPICAL FODDERS BY F. J. WARTH, M.Sc., A. VISWANATHA IYER, B.A., AND N. KRISHNA AYYAR, B.A. (From the Animal Nutrition Section, Bangalore.) (Received for publication on 6th June 1932.) The great importance of the mineral constituents of the food has been emphasised in recent years by the work of the Rowett Institute [1929], by the researches of Theiler in South Africa [1920, 1924], and by various workers in other parts of the world. There is a feeling that the mineral problem is of particular significance in India, more especially in areas which have been cultivated for a long time and in regions where the soil is exposed to excessive leaching. Many important practical questions await study. The present paper deals with a preliminary enquiry. Two typical fodders, namely, ragi straw and mature hay, have been selected for a comparative test. Before describing the experiment, it is of interest to examine the mineral composition of these two fodders and to compare them with fodders studied elsewhere. (325)
326 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV TABLE I. Showing the average composition of the herbages. EXPERIMENT ON MINERAL ASSIMILATION 327 tions of the mineral balance were made. Variations in the quality of the fodders during the course of the experiment are shown in Table II. TABLE II. Expt. No. Bolarum hay Ragi straw CaO % P2O3 % N% CaO % P2O5 % N % 1 0.854 0.063 0.435 1.206 0.267 0.580 2 0.693 0.054 0.289 1.151 0.331 0.572 3 0.910 0.065 0.389 1.401 0.179 0.646 4 0.799 0.061 0.339 1.202 0.159 0.618 5 0.867 0.059 0.359 1.129 0.125 0.531 6 0.785 0.093 0.496 1.114 0.182 0.391 7 0.758 0.090 0.549 1.013 0.185 0.459 8 0.884 0.103 0.579 1.007 0.169 0.402 9 0.909 0.094 0.565 1.012 0.188 0.425 10 0.895 0.096 0.593 1.127 0.146 0.485 Total 8.344 0.778 4.593 11.362 1.931 5.109 Average 0.834 0.078 0.459 1.136 0.193 0.511 It will be noticed that the Bolarum hay was distinctly better during the latter half of the period. The ragi straw was somewhat richer in phosphoric acid during the earlier stages. Thereafter it remained remarkably constant in composition.
328 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS. The mineral balances during the first period are shown in the following Table. TABLE III. Expt.. No. Bolarum hay Ragi straw In gms. per day CaO P2O5 In gms. per day CaO P2O5 1 { Intake . . 46.12 6.45 Intake . . 60.02 15.53 Excretion . 43.23 6.60 Excretion . 53.14 10.11 Balance . +2.89 EXPERIMENT ON MINERAL ASSIMILATION. 329 present in the food. This seems to be an important point. In the case of ragi straw a steady deterioration of the fodder in respect of its phosphoric acid is evident from the intake figures. An increasing body loss of phosphoric acid is seen to run parallel with this deterioration in the fodder. It appears that the body supply was falling to conform with the reduced supply. The lime assimilation on the ragi straw ration does not fluctuate regularly with the intake as it did on the hay ration. It appears that the phosphoric acid in this fodder is on the border line of sufficiency. There is a distinct indication that some of the lime loss was associated with and in some way brought about by the loss of phosphoric acid. In the same connection it is noteworthy too that the highest recorded lime assimilation occurred when the ration contained most phosphoric acid. The averages for the entire period show that on the hay ration there was a slight loss of phosphoric acid. On the ragi straw ration there was gain of lime and a practical equilibrium of phosphoric acid. The mineral balances during the second period in which the ration was supplemented with calcium phosphate are shown in Table IV. TABLE IV. Expt. No. Bolarum hay Ragi straw In gms. per day CaO P2O5 In gms. per day CaO P2A5 1 { Intake . . 52.49 18.08 Intake . . 59.80 19.90 Excretion . 41.55 11.01 Excretion . 40.79 13.84 Balance . . +10.94 +7.07 Balance . . +19.01 +6.06 2 { Intake . . 49.57 18.13 Intake . . 52.96 19.92 Excretion . 48.72 12.91 Excretion . 48.83 17.36 Balance . . +0.85 +5.22 Balance . . +4.13 +2.56 Average . . +5.90 +6.30 Average . . +11.57 +4.31 In these experiments all the animals received 20 gms. calcium phosphate. The results are remarkable and unexpected. On both rations there has been a large and immediate assimilation of lime. It has to be noted that this assimila- tion occurred.in the absence of green fodder vitamins and when the previous ration- ing had not caused excessive losses of lime. The result seems to have considerable significance. It appears to us that this assimilation of lime must be attributed to some influence by the increased phosphoric acid in the ration. It is interesting
330 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV to notice too that the observed effect is temporary, the assimilation falling off to much lower values in the second test. The assimilation of phosphoric acid, on the other hand, which, from the records of the first period, might have been expected to jump to a very high level, is but moderate. There can be no doubt about the need for phosphoric acid by these animals at this stage, more especially, by the animals on the hay ration. There must be, therefore, some factor at work limiting the rate of phosphoric acid assimilation in the second part. An examination of Table III shows that even under extreme shortage of phosphoric acid the faecal losses amounted to 10 gms. a day. This is evidently the limiting factor. It appears that a certain amount of phosphoric acid is in- evitably lost in the faeces and only quantities in excess of this amount are avail- able for assimilation. The figures of this Table show that the animals on the hay ration continued to absorb considerable amounts of phosphoric acid throughout the second period, while with the animals on the ragi straw ration there is a perceptible slowing down, indicating that the deficiency in this group was less acute. The mineral balances during the third period in which the supplement con- sisted of calcium phosphate and green fodder are given in Table V. TABLE V. Expt. No. In gms. per day Bolarum hay In gms. per day Ragi straw CaO P2O5 CaO P2O5 1 { Intake 55.25 20.64 Intake 52.53 20.95 Excretion 47.79 13.44 Excretion 50.15 20.18 Balance . +7.46 +7.20 Balance . +2.38 +0.77 2 { Intake 58.11 20.36 Intake 53.53 21.75 Excretion 50.75 14.47 Excretion 52.27 19.41 Balance . +7.36 +5.89 Balance . +1.26 +2.34 3 { Intake 57.40 20.97 Intake 61.17 21.09 Excretion 49.95 15.43 Excretion 54.74 20.95 Balance . +7.45 +5.54 Balance . +6.43 +0.14 Average . +7.42 +6.21 +3.42 +1.08 In these experiments all the animals received 20 gms. of calcium phosphate and green fodder.
EXPERIMENT ON MINERAL ASSIMILATION 331 With regard to phosphoric acid the Bolarum hay group is seen to be assimilat- ing steadily. As noted above, there was a considerable deficiency of this element in this group and only a limited excess was provided during the second period. Hence the assimilation found during this third period was to be expected. In the ragi straw group it is evident that assimilation has almost ceased, the deficiency having been made good during the second period and green grass has evidently not induced further assimilation. With regard to lime the Bolarum hay group has continued to assimilate lime steadily. It is not clear whether this is due to the effect of grass. With the ragi straw group there is distinct increased assimilation towards the end of the grass feeding. This may be due to the green grass although it has to be noted that there was a considerable increase in the amount of lime intake at this stage. On the whole the evidence is not conclusive regarding the effect of green grass vitamins. Hart [1921, 1924], Hunt [1923, 1 & 2] and Miller, Brandt and Jones [1924] have shown that the green grass vitamins improve lime and phosphoric acid assimilation. Our results are inconclusive on this point, but we have found that considerable assimilation occurs without the addition of green grass. The results obtained in these experiments appear to have considerable practical significance. It has to be noted that mature bullocks on a ration pro- viding sufficient protein and starch equivalents for maintenance may suffer ap- preciable losses of phosphoric acid with some of our fodders. This raises the question of mineral supplements for working cattle. Probably during the working season when more concentrate is fed, such a shortage would not arise, but in the slack season there is considerable risk of a shortage with consequent loss of condi- tion. The point deserves notice in connection with the preparation of animals for the working season. SUMMARY. The experiment was a comparative test with two fodders, ragi straw and mature hay. The feeding test was divided into the three following main periods. 1st period. The fodder without mineral supplement- 2nd period. Fodder with supplement of calcium phosphate. 3rd period. Fodder with supplement of calcium phosphate and green food. The last test was intended to determine whether green food with its accom- panying vitamins led to further assimilation. During each period numerous determinations of the mineral balance were made. With regard to ragi straw, it may be concluded that this fodder is well
332 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV provided with lime as appreciable assimilation took place in the 1st period. The phosphoric acid seems to be on the border line of sufficiency. The animals on this ration were evidently not suffering from lime shortage, yet in the 2nd period, there is a further very large assimilation of lime. This is an important result probably indicating the influence of phosphoric acid on lime assimilation. With regard to the hay ration the experiments show that this fodder is un- doubtedly deficient in phosphoric acid. It is interesting to note that lime assimila- tion with this ration continues throughout the 2nd and 3rd periods. Again there is an indication that phosphoric acid influences lime assimilation. REFERENCES. Hart, E. B., Steenbock, H. and Hoopert, C. A. (1921). Jour. Biol. Chem. 48, 33-50. A PRELIMINARY EXPERIMENT ON THE DIGESTION OF FATS BY BULLOCKS BY P. A. SESHAN, B.A., (From the Animal Nutrition Section, Bangalore.) (Received for publication on 6th June 1932.) The work being of a preliminary nature it is not proposed to review the subject at this stage. Simple experiments have been carried out to study the nature of the fat ingested and the corresponding fat excreted. The samples were obtained in the course of digestion trials with bullocks. In the present paper results obtained with two rations have been studied, namely, ragi straw and groundnut cake and mature hay and groundnut cake. The digestion of the total ether extractives is given in Table I. The figures show that the digestibility of the insoluble fatty acids is considerable, while the digestibility of the unsaponifiable matter is low. With regard to the digestibility of the unsaponifiable matter, the figures given do not represent the true diges- tibility but only the apparent digestibility. That is to say, some of the unsaponi- fiable matter found in the faeces is derived from the body and is not an undigested fraction of the ingested substance. This explains the negative values when the amount ingested is low. The figures do show, however, the balance of unsaponi- fiable matter. With regard to the character of the insoluble fatty acids, the iodine value may be taken as the first criterion. In Table II, the iodine values of the ingested and. digested insoluble fatty acids are shown. The statement indicates very clearly that the unsaturated acids are more completely digested than the saturated fatty acids. Using the usual convention for expressing the insoluble fatty acids as stearic and oleic according to the iodine value obtained, the results contained in Table II may be restated as in Table III. (333)
334 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV TABLE I. Showing the digestion percentages of total ether extractives. Fodder given. No. of tests. Particulars. Total ether extractives in grms. Total unsaponi- fiable matter in grms. Total insoluble fatty acids in grms. Fodder given. No. of tests. Particulars. Total ether extractives in grms. Total unsaponi- fiable matter in grms. Total insoluble fatty acids in grms. Ragi straw and Groundnut cake 1 Ragi straw . . 40.20 13.84 20.61 Matura Hay and Groundnut cake 4 Bolarum hay . . 53.46 21.50 21.80 Groundnut cake . 18.41 0.36 14.60 Groundnut cake . 30.25 0.36 25.20 Total ingested . . 58.61 14.20 35.21 Total ingested . . 83.71 21.86 47.00 Excretion in faeces . 22.75 15.50 6.35 Excretion in faeces . 28.05 16.05 7.77 Total digested . . 35.86 DIGESTION OF FATS BY BULLOOKS. 335 TABLE II. Showing insoluble fatty acids and corresponding iodine absorption. fodder given. No. of tests. Particulars. Total insolublefatty acids ingrms. Unsaturatedacidsexpressedas totaliodineabsorptionin grms. Fodder given. No. of tests. Particulars. Total insolublefattyacids ingrms. Unsaturatedacidsexpressedas totaliodineabsorptionin grms. Ragi straw and Groundnut cake. 1 Ragi straw . . . 20.61 9.628 Mature Hay and Groundnut cake 4 Bolarum Lay . . . 21.80 7.773 Groundnut cake . . 14.60 6.425 Groundnut cake . . 25.20 7.773 Total ingested . . . 35.21 16.053 Total ingested . . 47.00 15.546 Excretion in faeces . . 6.35 2.865 Excretion in faeces . . 7.77 2.029 Total digested . . . 28.86 13.188 Total digested . . 39.23 13.517 Digestion co-efficient . 81.20% 82.15% Digestion co-efficient . 83.47% 86.95% 2 Ragi straw . . . 22.54 10.650 5 Bolarum hay . . . 19.51 11.680 Groundnut cake . . 15.30 6.736 Groundnut cake . . 50.05 23.870 Total ingested . . . 37.84 17.390 Total ingested . . 69.56 35.550 Excretion in faeces . . 6.34 1.551 Excretion in faeces . . 19.21 6.328 Total digested . . . 31.50 15.840 Total digested . . 50.35 29.220 Digestion co-efficient . 83.25% 91.09% Digestion co-efficient . 72.38% 82.19% 3 Ragi straw . . . 14.31 5.729 6 Bolarum hay . . . 19.32 11.560 Groundnut cake . . 18.00 5.552 Groundnut cake . . 50.05 23.870 Total ingested . . . 32.31 11.281 Total ingested . . 69.37 35.430 Excretion in faeces . . 5.03 1.531 Excretion in faeces . . 14.93 3.873 Total digested . . . 27.28 9.750 Total digested . . 54.44 31.560 Digestion co-efficient . 84.43% 86.44% Digestion co-efficient . 78.48% 89.08% B
336 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV TABLE III. Showing insoluble fatty acids expressed as stearic and oleic acids. Fodder given. No. of tests. Particulars. Total insoluble fatty acids in grms. Amount as stearic in grms. Amount as oleic in grms. Fodder given. No. of tests. Particulars. Total insoluble fatty acids in grms. Amount as stearic in grms. Amount as oleic in grms. Regi straw and Groundnut cake. 1 Ragi straw . . Groundnut cake . Total ingested . Excretion in faeces . Total digested . Digestion co-efficient 20.61 14.60 35.21 6.35 28.86 81.20% 15.14 8.94 24.08 5.66 18.42 76.50% 5.47 5.66 11.13 0.69 10.44 93.80% Mature Hay and Groundnut cake 4 Bolarum hay . Groundnut cake . Total ingested . Excretion in faeces . Total digested . Digestion co-efficient 21.80 25.20 47.00 7.77 39.23 83.47% 18.29 18.02 36.31 7.15 29.16 80.31% 3.51 7.18 10.69 0.62 10.07 94.20% 2 Ragi straw . . Groundnut cake . Total ingested . Excretion in faeces . Total digested . Digestion co-efficient 22.54 15.30 37.84 6.34 31.50 83.25% 16.56 9.37 25.93 5.90 19.97 77.02% 5.98 5.93 11.91 0.44 11.47 96.31% 5 Bolarum hay . . Groundnut cake . Total ingested . Excretion in faeces . Total digested . . Digestion co-efficient 19.51 50.05 69.56 19.21 50.35 72.38% 16.16 31.88 48.04 16.52 31.52 65.61% 3.35 18.17 21.52 2.69 18.83 87.50% 3 Ragi straw . . Groundnut cake . Total ingested . Excretion in faeces . Total digested . Digestion co-efficient 14.31 18.00 32.31 5.03 27.28 84.43% 11.71 12.87 24.58 4.61 19.97 81.25% 2.60 5.13 7.73 0.42 7.31 94.57% 6 Bolarum hay . . Groundnut cake . Total ingested. . Excretion in faeces . Total digested. . Digestion co-efficient 19.32 50.05 69.37 14.93 54.44 78.48% 16.01 31.88 47.89 14.78 33.11 69.14% 3.31 18.17 21.48 1.52 19.96 92.92%
DIGESTION OF FATS BY BULLOCKS. 337 It should be remarked here that the quantity of groundnut cake fed was greatly increased for the last two tests. This alteration in the conditions has not yielded any further information. The author is greatly indebted to Mr. F. J. Warth for suggesting the problem and for valuable guidance throughout. B 2
ON THE IDENTITY OF THE SCHISTOSOME FOUND IN CASES OF BOVINE NASAL GRANULOMA AND SOME OBSERVATIONS ON A FEW OTHER MEMBERS OF THE SCHISTOSOMIDÆ BY G. D. BHALERAO, M.Sc., Helminthologist, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on the 11th October 1932.) (With Plates XXVI to XXXII,) There exists in India a peculiar " snoring disease " of cattle known as nasal granuloma. Up to the present time it has been known to occur in the United Provinces, Assam, Bengal, Bihar, Bombay, Orissa, the Central Provinces, Madras, Mysore and probably Sind. The etiology of this disease has baffled veterinary workers in India for some time in the past. Krishnamurti Iyer [1922] was the first to declare that the disease was a form of actinomycosis, since he regarded the rosette- like bodies found in histological sections of the tissue as characteristic of the " Ray- fungus ". Later, Krishnamurti Iyer [1927] detected cases of a similar condition in cattle which were definitely due to the protozoon parasite, Rhinosporidium. Very recently Datta [1932] has recorded the presence of Schistosome worms in nasal granuloma tissue, and soon after his discovery his findings were confirmed by Malkani [1932] and a few other workers in India. The clinical, pathological and other aspects of the disease have been dealt with by previous workers. The object of the present communication is to deal with the morphological and taxonomical side of the schistosome found in bovine nasal granuloma tissue and offer some remarks on a few other Schistosomes that are at present in the possession of this Institute. THE SCHISTOSOME FOUND IN BOVINE NASAL GRANULOMA TISSUE. (Plate XXVI, figs. 1IDENTITY OF SCHISTOSOME IN BOVINE NASAL GRANULOMA. 339 almost straight and carries two suckers. It is spindle-shaped, being thickest at the site of the ventral sucker and thinnest at the oral sucker and its junction with the rest of the body. The posterior part of the body is folded up, forming a groove along its whole length, the gynæcophoric canal, in which the female is lodged during copulation. This portion of the body has usually a spiral shape, but occasionally specimens are found with a shape of the English letter C. The males measure 6.3340 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV sides of the body. The point of bifurcation lies at a distance of 0.09 from the posterior extremity. Out of the ten toto preparations of males that were studied, two had three testes, five had four, two had five and only one had six. They lie just beneath the cuticle, in one row, on the dorsal aspect, posterior to the union of the anterior portion of the worm with the rest of the body. Their shape and size varies very much. They may be round, oval or somewhat irregular. The smallest of them measured 0.033 × 0.021 and the largest 0.14 × 0.076. In the majority of the specimens it was found that the anteriormost testis was the largest in size. They may lie side by side, overlap each other or may in some cases be separated from one another by some distance. Immediately anterior to the first testis is the vesicula seminalis which in preserved specimens appears oval, elliptical or pear-shaped. It measures 0.032 IDENTITY OF SCHISTOSOME IN BOVINE NASAL GRANULOMA. 341 straight posteriorly and ends at a distance of 0.106 342 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV been offered very recently by MacHattie and Chadwick [ 1932 ] who attribute it to the action of the sphincter which is present at the opening of the duct of the shell gland into the ootype. They have also given actual figures of various novel forms of eggs thus produced in the case of schistosoma bovis [ Sonsino, 1876]. The appear- ance of the hæmatobium-like eggs in the species S. mattheei Veglia and Le Roux, 1929, which is considered as a synonym of S. bovis has also been explained on the same hypothesis. Identity.IDENTITY OF SCHISTOSOME IN BOVINE NASAL GRANULOMA. 343 It will be noticed from this table of comparison that the schistosomes found in cases of nasal granuloma agree in almost all respects with S. spindalis, Montgomery, 1906. A very slight difference is, however, noticed in the dimensions of the body. The schistosomes of nasal granuloma fail to reach the maximum size attained by the other schistosomes. This is governed, in all probability by the site of infection. It is but natural to expect the worms growing in a tough tissue like the nasal septum do not get so much scope for developing as they do in the portal system or mesenteric veins. Apart from this the question of the age of the parasites cannot altogether be ignored. Another noticeable point of difference is the number of testes. In Montgo- mery's specimens they are described as varying from 6344 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV The infection of S. spindalis was first discovered in cattle by Montgomery [1906] at Muktesar. Liston and Soparkar [1918] elucidated their life-history and discovered that the intermediate host involved in transmitting the parasite was Indoplanorbis exustus. Starting on the knowledge of the water-inhabiting propen- sities of buffaloes and their close association with the intermediate host in this habitat, Fairley and Jasudasan [1927] stated that the water-buffalo was the defini- tive host of this parasite, but it has since been found that goats are also capable of being infected with this parasite, and a case of natural infection of sheep due to this parasite is also known to the writer. In view of these facts the immunity of other animals, particularly buffaloes, to nasal granuloma is difficult to explain, but it is possible that the secretions from the nose of other animals than cattle are inimical to the development of this parasite in this location. SOME VARIATIONS OCCURRING IN THE SPECIES SCHISTOSOMA SPINDALIS. (Plate XXVIII, figs. 1IDENTITY OF SCHISTOSOME IN BOVINE NASAL GRANULOMA. 345 Among the specimens of S. indicum from various sources I was able to find a large number of individuals showing moderately developed tubercles, but a few of them had only a very slight development of these. In this connection it may be remarked that the tuberculate or non-tuberculate nature of the cuticle should not be considered as of any value in distinguishing one species of schistosome from another. The uterine eggs of these specimens are somewhat smaller in size than those in the case of typical spindalis ova. They converge more towards the variety africana Porter, 1926, in which case they measure 0.163346 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV Male.IDENTITY OF SCHISTOSOME IN BOVINE NASAL GRANULOMA. 347 Montgomery mentions that the number of testes in this species varies from five to nine, but the specimens at my disposal show that the actual number of testes varies from five to twelve, a large majority, however, have only eight testes. Montgomery is right in regard to the location of the seminal vesicle. It is a spherical or in the majority of cases an oval, clear, refractile body, situated almost immediately in front of the testes. Female.348 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV posteriorly and is surrounded by the IDENTITY OF SCHISTOSOME IN BOVINE NASAL GRANULOMA. 349 Through the courtesy of Major C. R. Chadwick an opportunity was afforded to examine this species of schistosome from Bagdad. The parasites were obtained from a cow and a sheep. Khalil [1924] gave a detailed account of this parasite and very recently MacHattie and Chadwick [1932] examined all the important features of this parasite very thoroughly, basing their observations on an examination of 4,000 specimens collected from sixty different animals in different localities in Iraq. It is intended here to give a short description of this species mainly based upon the specimens at my disposal and also incorporate into it some observations made by MacHattie and Chadwick. Male.350 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV MacHattie and Chadwick have stated that the common cæcum is usually slight- ly less than half the length of the body and rarely it is even one-fourth the body length. The ovary is elongated and is situated immediately in front of the cæcal union in the posterior half of the body. The shell gland lies immediately in front of the ovary. The uterus is long and contains numerous ova. The vitellaria con- sists of follicles slightly elongated transversely and lying on either side of the common intestinal cæcum. They occupy usually a little less than half the body length, but very rarely they may be confined to the last quarter of the body as described by Khalil [1924]. The eggs are spindle-shaped, symmetrical and provided with a blunt spine at one end. MacHattie and Chadwick also found the eggs usually like the typical forms described by Khalil, but in 0.1 per cent. of females they examined the eggs were oval, in 1 per cent. cases typical and hæmatobium-type both together and in 0.2 per cent. of cases hæmatobium-type only. The eggs in the specimens I examined measured 0.124IDENTITY OF SCHISTOSOME IN BOVINE NASAL GRANULOMA. 351 The measurements given by MacHattie and Chadwick are 90352 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCINECE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV very likely that future investigation may prove that S. hæmatobium under certain conditions may be able to produce slightly asymmetrical eggs like those of S. incognitum. Until recently the species S. bovis was known to occur only in cattle, sheep and man (?), but MacHattie and Chadwick's researches have shown that it is found also in goats, horses, mules and donkeys. The species Schistosoma bomfordi Montgomery, 1906 and Schistosoma turkestani- cum Skrjabin, 1913, have been transferred by Price [ 1929 ] to the genus Ornithobilharzia Odhner, 1912, on the basis of their morphological similarity to the other species of the genus. The number and position of the testes in the male and the shape and position of the ovary in the female are so similar to those in O. odhneri Odhner, 1912, type-species of Ornithobilharzia, that they are obviously congeneric. The fact that both O. bomfordi and O. turkestanicum are at present known only from mammalian hosts, is not according to Price, a matter of sufficient importance to justify their retention in the genus schistosoma. Price remarks that "in view of the morphological relationship of O. bomfordi and O. turkestanicum to species occurring in birds, it may be assumed that these parasites, which are of rare occurrence in mammalian hosts, may be only accidental and facultative parasites of these hosts, and it may be surmised that they are normal parasites of birds of some sort". It is proposed here to modify the definition of the genus Ornithobilharzia in order to suit it for the reception of the additional two species O. bomfordi and O. turkestanicum. Ornithobilharzia Odhner, 1912. Synonym.IDENTITY OF SCHISTOSOME IN BOVINE NASAL GRANULOMA. 353 Type-species.354 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV Host.IDENTITY OF SCHISTOSOME IN BOVINE NASAL GRANULOMA. 355 I wish also to record here my deep appreciation of the help rendered me in the collection of some of the above specimens by Mr. M. R. Mahajan, M.R.C.V.S., and Mr. N. G. Shekharan, L.V.P. REFERENCES. Brumpt, E. (1930,1). Ann. Parasitol. 8, 17-50. 356 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV Plate XXIX.PLATE XXVI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4.
PLATE XXVII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] EIG. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3.
PLATE XXVIII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG.1(a). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG.1(b). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG.2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG.3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG.4.
PLATE XXIX. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4 × 33.
PLATE XXX. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1 (a). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1 (b). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3.
PLATE XXXI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2.
PLATE XXXII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3.
AN UNUSUAL CASE OF CHRONIC RINDERPEST WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO THE CARRIER PROBLEM IN THIS DISEASE BY CAPT. S. C. A. DATTA, B.Sc, M.R.C.V.S., Temporary Veterinary Research Officer, AND V. R. RAJAGOPALAN, G.M.V.C., Veterinary Inspector, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on 31st August 1932.) [(With five charts.) INTRODUCTION. Since the earliest times rinderpest has exercised the resources of the scientist and has formed the subject of extensive investigations in many countries on account of the very severe economic loss that it inflicts. Some workers have gone so far as to state that an outbreak " may even result in the almost complete extinction of animals in large territories ". However, great uncertainty still exists with regard to several important aspects of its incidence, causation and control. Among the many problems that still await the verdict of the future, the question of the nature of the virus, the seat of its multiplication and the duration of its viability in the various organs of a recovered animal are by no means settled. When one studies the text-book description of the disease one is liable to gather the impression that this affection occurs invariably as an acute, fulminating type of febrile infecting disease, which is capable of being spread over distances in almost every imaginable manner, as will be seen from a statement of Law [ 1902 ]. " All the secretions of the diseased animal are apparently infecting, and the virus possesses great vitality so that the channels of infection are almost endless. It is carried in the manure, washed in streams and drains, dried up on hay, straw, feathers and other light objects, or in dust, and blown about by the winds, left in stables, in feeding and watering troughs, in railroad cars, steamboats and ferryboats, loading banks and yards; it is carried in the fresh bristles, in hides and bones, in halters and harness, on waggon shafts and poles, on goads, on boots and coats of men and the feet of dogs, birds and other animals, on the wheels or vehicles, various infected products, the runners of sleighs and by vermin and wild animals". On the other hand, (357)
358 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV the more recent periodical literature contains references which throw light on the real nature of the virus, on its fragility and consequent inability to be transported over long distances through natural agencies such as enumerated above. Further, quite a number of reports are available to show that rinderpest occasionally assumes a mild type becoming very difficult to recognize. This latter fact is worthy of being fully realized since it has certain very important bearings in the control of the disease in such a country as India, where rinderpest is known to be enzootic as a result of the indigenous breeds having attained some degree of racial natural immunity through centuries of exposure to it. The primary object of this article is to record a rather remarkable case of a bull as an example of the persistence of rinderpest lesions with accompanying infectivity over a very long period, but the mere reporting of this case can be of but little value unless the full implications involved are properly appreciated. It is desirable, therefore, in the first place, to review the present position with regard to the tenacity of the virus, insect vectors, role of wild animals, carriers among other animals such as sheep and goats, etc. Another reason why a review of the position seems indicated is that the literature on the subject is replete with a considerable amount of unnecessary reduplication of experimental investigations apparently as a result of lack of information as to how much had been achieved by previous workers. Dieckerhoff [ 1890 ] and du Toit [ 1916 ] have reviewed the literature but the position since their articles were published has not been surveyed. Although it is not the intention in this article to attempt any such elaborate or complete review, recent papers concerning some of the connected aspects of the problem must needs be touched upon in passing. In the past, workers in several countries have encountered a number of apparent- ly spontaneous outbreaks of rinderpest, in which a clear scientific explanation of the origin of such outbreaks is not easily found. Again it will be recalled that at one time it was strongly believed that the disease in reality had a spontaneous origin and that its appearance was not dependent upon the introduction of an infected case from the outside. Amongst Indian workers also, there are several responsible authorities who have expressed such views. For instance, McLeod [ 1871 ], a highly qualified medical man of Bengal, remarks "My own impression, derived from a close study of all that has hitherto come to light on the subject is that these diseases (cattle plagues) are enzootic in this country, spontaneously generated by conditions of air and water and not owing to importation from without ". A similar conclusion was arrived at by Veterinary Surgeon Farrel [1869] in the same province "from the fact of the disease being present in all months and seasons in this district (24 Parganas), no trace of its importation from other countries being discovered ". Of the several workers in other countries who
UNUSUAL CASE OF CHRONIC RINDERPEST. 359 have expressed the same opinion a reference to Littlewood [ 1905 ] of Egypt will be made later in this paper. TENACITY OF THE VIRUS. Very conflicting results have been recorded by different workers with regard to the tenacity of the rinderpest virus in blood when kept in vitro and yet it is a question that cannot be left in this unsatisfactory state in view of the practical application such information has in the serum-simultaneous method of inoculation. Even prior to the achievement of Nicolle and Adil Bey [ 1902 ] in establishing the filterability of the causal agent, Koch [ 1897 ] found that the virulence of rinderpest blood is destroyed by prolonged exposure (of 4 hours) to a temperature of 30° C., and that blood so treated produced no " protective action " on being injected into cattle. On the other hand, Theiler [ 1898 ] found that blood when subjected to a higher temperature of 37° C. for 2 or 3 days became avirulent. In testing the practical applicability of the serum-simultaneous method of inoculation, Stockman [ 1905 ] experienced difficulty in maintaining blood from a sick ox virulent for more than 48 hours even when kept in the ice chest under field conditions in both India and South Africa. Again Todd & White [ 1914 ] claimed that virulent blood taken in citrate solution and kept in sealed tubes at 360 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV It has been known for a long time that the virus rapidly becomes inert on dilution with water, as shown by Koch [1897] and Nencki [1898], and Edwards [1924] believes that the most destructive agency is an unfavourable hydrogen-ion concentration of the diluting fluid. It is gratifying to note that the experience gained during the last few years has confirmed the above-mentioned statement of Edwards in that successful serum-simultaneous inoculations have been carried out in very distant field stations in India with blood withdrawn and bottled several days earlier at Muktesar. From the epizootiological point of view, the information concerning the period during which the natural excretions of a diseased animal remain virulent outside the body under various conditions obtainable in nature is of the utmost importance and it is obvious that the success of control measures in the field must be largely dependent upon the correct data. Earlier workers [Müller, Heubner, Dieckerhoff, Friedbergher and Fröhner] held that the infectivity could persist in stables, on hay and in manure for four months or more. Controlled experiments carried out by Ward, "Wood and Boynton [1914] with a view to determine the nature of the rinderpest virus have shown that it is very fragile and perishes soon after being discharged by the infected animal, and it will be seen that this result is contrary to the older view regarding the tenacity of the virus. These workers found that the virus did not survive beyond 24 hours in corrals bare of vegetations but containing water, that animals became infected in such corrals within half an hour, 12 hours and 17½ hours after removal of the sick but not longer, that virus in urine diluted with water and sprinkled on grass survives for 36 hours in some instances but not always, that faeces mixed with water and sprinkled on grass infected 24 hours later, that faeces and urine mixed with water and kept in the shade remain infective for 36 hours only, and that the virus is not harboured for long periods in contaminated soil. The experiments of Shilston [1917], the results of which agree with those of Ward and his collaboratois, showed that in buildings and on areas infected by the natural discharges of sick animals, the rinderpest virus is unable to survive for more than two or three days and when air and sunlight are admitted its destruction is more rapid. INSECT VECTORS. Attempts have been made by several workers to demonstrate if vectors can be responsible for the spread of rinderpest. Following upon transmission experiments with leeches, carried out by Nicolle and Adil Bey [1899], Boynton [1913] has shown that blood taken from an infected animal by the ordinary water leech may remain virulent for at least 25 days, and that if it were crushed in water so that the blood content of its stomach escaped, the surrounding water was capable of infect-
UNUSUAL CASE OF CHRONIC RINDERPEST. 361 ing cattle five days after it had sucked blood from the diseased cattle, but the living leech itself was not infective to healthy cattle by its bite. Although observations such as these may be invoked sometimes to explain the recrudescence of outbreaks in certain areas starting about a month or so after an apparent disappearance, it will be realised that the establishment of a fresh outbreak at some distance from the previous ones can scarcely be explained on this basis. Curasson [1922], working in Poland found that crushed ticks (Ixodes ricinus) when injected immediately after removal from an animal at the height of fever produced rinderpest but when injected quarter to one hour after removal they were innocuous. Similar experi- ments with a fly (Tabanus) gave him only negative results. De Souza [1924] found that a specimen of Margaropus bovis which had engorged itself upon an animal infected with rinderpest maintained the virus at full virulence for 7 days. In his experiments at Muktesar, Sen [1925] was unable to demonstrate the possible rôle of mosquitos, house flies and lice as vectors of the disease under natural circums- tances, but he was able to record some positive results when crushed material (Musca domestica) was used subcutaneously. The experience of Hornby [1926] shows that Glossina morsitans can transmit the infection, for he obtained a positive result in one out of two cases. It will be seen from the above that the only report which points to the possibility of infection being transmitted through vectors under natural conditions is the report of Hornby. Since this species of flies is not existent in India, it is apparent from available evidence that there is no real danger in India from insect vectors. THE ROLE OF WILD ANIMALS. The improbability of rinderpest infection being transmitted through the medium of intermediary agents, such as insects, flies, ticks, etc., has been seen. There is a danger nevertheless of the disease being spread by direct contact with diseased wild animals. Evidence is available in the Report on Indian Cattle Plagues [ 1871 ] of the occurrence of rinderpest in deer, wild buffaloes, sheep, goats, yaks and zebus in Assam, Bengal and Central Provinces. Information collected by Mr. Cooper of this Institute from Provincial Veterinary Departments for submission to the Royal Commission on Agriculture in India shows that the Bison, Sambhar, Spotted dear and small deer are all affected. Pease [ 1894 ] states:362 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV from the circulation within six days of recovery and Jacotot [ 1927 ] has also trans- mitted rinderpest to a deer (Cervus aristotelis). It is a well-known fact that wild buffaloes often mix freely at night with the herds of village buffaloes in certain jungli tracts in India. It is to be remembered that in South Africa the game was almost entirely exterminated in the great rinderpest epizootic which raged among cattle during the years 1896-1898. Hutchins [ 1915 ] incriminated game as a spreader of the disease in Africa and pointed out that quarantine measures for the eradication of the disease in such neighbourhoods is not wholly effective and he gave an example [ 1920 ] of the appearance of cattle plague in certain parts of the Uganda Protectorate due to the movement of rinderpest-infected game. Zonchello [ 1917 ] also incriminated game as a factor in the spread of the disease and held that sero-vaccination should not be practised in such areas, as the game was likely to take the disease from the vaccinated animals and re-introduce the disease into populated land at a later period. McCall [ 1920 ] implicated such game as bush buck, wild pig and eland in the spread of rinderpest in Tanganyika. Edwards [ 1924 ] and Jacotot [ 1930, 1932 ] failed to demonstrate that the rabbit could become naturally infected, hence the rôle of these and other rodents can be safely ignored. Inowe, Harade and Shi- mazu [ 1930 ] proved that susliks (Citellus mangolicus ramosus, Thos.) are susceptible to rinderpest and that occasionally these can become " virus carriers ", and their experiments showed that blood from an inoculated suslik showing no symptoms may be infective to cattle. Although it sounds improbable Gilchrist [ 1848 ], from his personal experience in the Madras Presidency, was of the opinion that the circumstance " of a tiger having urined in the vicinity of the herd " of cattle can be productive of rinderpest. When rinderpest gets freshly introduced into a country to which it is alien, the danger of the spread of the disease to the wild game may be of paramount import- ance. For, while it may be easy to eradicate the disease from the domestic animals by an efficient veterinary police through registration of cattle, destruction of the affected and enforcement of standstill orders, the uncontrolled movement of infected game may render all these methods valueless. But in a country like India where rinderpest has established a strong foothold and where the existence of numerous extensive territories without any natural boundary renders the adoption of similar methods impossible from political and other grounds, the importance of game as a spreader of the infection may be said to be insignificant or unimportant. As will be shown later, the factor that counts here most is the unsuspected cattle themsel- ves and perhaps also some of the other domesticated animals which move among cattle.
UNUSUAL CASE OF CHRONIC RINDERPEST. 363 " CARRIERS" AMONG DOMESTICATED ANIMALS OTHER THAN CATTLE This brings us to the question of " carriers ", which is by no means a settled one. The case of the domesticated animals other than cattle may be considered first. Galambos [ 1861 ] was apparently the first to establish the susceptibility of sheep to rinderpest. Of the many early workers who have proved the susceptibility of goats to this affection, Nicolle and Adil Bey, Koch, Memo and Rogers may be mentioned. Rogers [ 1900 ] refers to an outbreak of cattle plague in the Hima- layas which was introduced into two villages by infected goats with most deplorable results. In a more recent paper Zonchello [ 1917 ] observed that goats living in the scene of an outbreak did not get the disease naturally and were unable to trans- mit it to transport cattle housed with them. Gartner [ 1920 ] considered goats of such importance that he headed a full chapter on them as " virus carriers " of rinderpest in spite of a little earlier statement by Angeloff [ 1917 ] to the effect that sheep and goats, although susceptible by artificial inoculation did not contract the disease naturally. Bliss [ 1922 ] working in China suggested that goats could be used as virus-producers in preference to cattle as the former are cheaper, withstand the disease better and recover from the mild attack after furnishing the required amount of virulent blood. Schein [ 1924 ] of Indo-China kept goat virus infective to cattle during 172 passages from goat to goat. Topacio [ 1927 ] working in the Philippines conceived the idea of utilising the lesser susceptibility of goats to a great practical end, similar to the employment of calves in the production of small- pox vaccine. He had the vision that it might be possible to obtain a virus by a single passage from cattle to goats that was sufficiently potent to infect Philippine cattle and carabaos and be sufficiently attenuated so that the quantity of serum necessary for simultaneous inoculation could be materially reduced. Edwards [1928] reported that after artificial intravenous inoculations of large quantities of virulent rinderpest blood, the virus was detectable in sheep up to one month (the longest time was not determined) but opined that this species of animal was not likely to act as " carriers " under natural circumstances. Robertson [ 1925 ] gave an ac- count of rinderpest in Western Australia and stated that the evidence appeared to indicate that sheep brought to Fremantle as live ship's stores and which were pur- chased by local butchers for slaughter were the source of an outbreak. Beaton [ 1931 ] working in Nigeria, proved that goats are susceptible to rinderpest by contact. That contact infection takes place from cattle to goat and vice versâ has been proved by Hall [ 1930 ]. It is, therefore, definite now that goats do get infected with rinderpest, but the disease is very mild and passes off unnoticed in most cases. With the knowledge we now possess of the degree of attenuation of the virus that takes place within the
364 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV body of the goat [Bliss, Topacio, Edwards, 1930 and Stirling, 1932 ] and from the recorded evidence quoted above, it is probably safe to conclude that such goats may infect cattle in their midst with the attenuated virus, the result of which would appear to depend upon whether the cattle concerned do or do not possess a degree of immunity and upon whether they are in robust health or are weak, debilitated and predisposed to infection. The two extreme experiences of Zonchello [ 1917 ] and Robertson [ 1925 ], referred to above, are suggestive of the view now expressed. Carré and Fraimbault [1898] proved the susceptibility of pigs to infection with virulent blood and Penning obtained the same results with wild hogs and was able later to reinfect calves from them. In the description of an outbreak of rinderpest which occurred in the Island of Romblon, where the disease had never occurred before and into which island no cattle had been imported for a long time, Boynton [ 1916 ] produced evidence to show that pigs played a rôle in the spread of rinderpest in this constituent of the Philippine Islands. It was found on en- quiry that pigs had been imported from another island where rinderpest was pre- valent and that first of all local pigs began to die in considerable numbers and later the cattle and carabaos fell victims to it. Nicolas and Rinjard [ 1921 ] proved that pigs are of importance in the spread of the disease and sanitary police mea- sures, therefore, should be adopted against these animals if rinderpest has to be controlled. Bliss [ 1922 ] also found that hogs were susceptible and thought that these might act as carriers but did not attempt to obtain any experimental proof to confirm this. Experimental proof has, however, been put forward by Molinie [ 1931 ], who showed that swine can play an important rôle in the epizootiology of the disease, since in his experiments, the pigs contracted the infection as readily as cattle and further they could infect cattle by contact or by the artificial inoculation of infected blood or urine. He believed that passage through the body of this animal increased the virulence of an attenuated virus but he did not entertain any definite idea as to whether the pig could act as a reservoir of the virus. Conti and Van Dac [ 1929 ] have maintained the virus in series in young pigs through 174 passages. With regard to India, only scanty reports are available. The Indian Cattle Plagues Commission [ 1871 ] collected evidence to show that pigs died of rinderpest in Bengal, and Jackson and Cabot [ 1930 ] refer to authentic reports of occasional natural outbreaks amongst pigs in the Nilgiris in Southern India. There seems to be little doubt that rinderpest occurs amongst camels in this country. Apart from the experience of Gilchrist [ 1848 ] who states:UNUSUAL CASE OF CHRONIC RINDERPEST. 365 Public Cattle establishment (in Madras) during the current year "; there are a few more reports of the occurrence of rinderpest in camels available in the evidence collected by the Indian Cattle Plagues Commission [1871]. Pease [1894] states :366 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV days) may start a fresh outbreak if they be brought in contact with a suitable fuel". Littlewood [1905] has observed that cattle imported into Egypt from Asia Minor may not show clinical symptoms and yet at autopsy reveal lesions of rinderpest. Rickman [1908] had the same experience in German South-West Africa, for he states that cattle and other animals may be infected to an imperceptible degree. In China, Eggebrecht [1910] found that some animals infected with rinderpest show no visible signs of the disease beyond a rise of temperature to 40° C. or higher for two days. In discussing " climatic influence " upon the incidence of disease in India, Baldrey [1912] refers to the fact that by long residence of any organisms of contagious animal disease in one place the disease becomes weakened in virulence to the animals of that place and further that animals infected with rinderpest may act as carriers without showing symptoms in enzootic areas. Again Pool and Doyle [1921] state :UNUSUAL CASE OF CHRONIC RINDERPEST. 367 [1928-1930] have pointed out that serum-simultaneous inoculations create new centres of infection and that in countries, where this method has been resorted to, it has never been possible to eradicate rinderpest. The latter worker further added that the long duration of immunity conferred was due to the frequent recurrences of symptomless infections derived from centres of disease set up during the double inoculation. " There can be little doubt", he remarked, " that in animals guarded from all risks of reinfection immunity begins to decline at between 2-3 years after serum-simultaneous inoculation". The waning of immunity has been suggested also in a few cases of natural attacks. Evidence has been recorded by the Indian Cattle Plagues Commission from villagers and others to show that a bovine may be attacked more than once after a lapse of several years. This view is not un- supported, for Bliss [1922] furnishes trustworthy experimental proof to show that two animals, a cow and a heifer 7 months old, which recovered from a natural attack of typical rinderpest could be artificially infected by virus inoculation after three years and one and half years respectively and mentions that he has encount- ered other cases of second attacks during his experience in China. Animals having a second attack six years after the first and succumbing to it were met with by Pease [1894]. It is known that movement of cattle can be responsible for outbreaks of rinderpest. Angeloff [1917] held that the outbreaks of 1853, 1877 and 1913 in Bulgaria were all due to the movement of transport cattle from Asia. Illicit movement of cattle has been known to be responsible for the spread of rinderpest [McCall, 1922]. Very recently from a survey of the outbreaks of rinderpest which occurred in the Central Provinces in India Stirling [1932] has shown that they are confined to the routes followed by the nomadic tribes of cattle dealers. In all these instances, however, it is not possible to state definitely whether the cattle responsible for the introduction of the disease are the inapparently infected animals, such as those enumerated by Jacotot [1929]. or carriers of rinderpest in a chronic form. As has already been pointed out, the danger from the visibly sick animals in these nomadic herds is relatively less and here the methods of control are likely to be more effective since such animals would not be physically fit to travel long distances and, further, their owners would not parade them about to the detriment of their own interests. It will be remembered that Great Brtain was free from rinderpest for such a long period as 120 years, when in 1865, the disease was brought to the London Stock market, and at the same time to different provincial cities by a cattle boat from Finland and towards the end of that year 85 counties were infected. During the 1½ years of its prevalence 500,000 cattle died. The disease spread to Holland from England and destroyed a large number of cattle there also. In those days the steam ships were not so fass as now and the cattle boat must D
368 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV have taken a period in excess of the maximum incubation period of the disease for reaching the English docks, and it is to be presumed that the cattle were in apparent health at the ports of embarkation and unloading. This historical outbreak seems to be the first recorded case of a large scale infection caused by what would appear to be " carriers ". Another interesting account is available of a severe outbreak being started by " carriers " in an Editorial article in the Rev. Gen. Med. Vet. [1920], in which the infection was introduced into Belgium through the agency of Indian zebus, presum- ably of the Hariana breed which is said to be highly resistant to rinderpest. These cattle were embarked at Bombay for Brazil and were jettisoned in the qurantine depots for a few days at Antwerp. Several of these died at Antwerp but rinderpest was not suspected. Three consignments of cattle arrived from America into the same port during the stay of the Indian zebus, and with the distribution of American cattle to different towns for slaughter many centres of cattle plague were established. This outbreak which was closely watched and studied by Bordet, Gratia, Lienaux, Nicholas and Rinjard has brought out the following facts. The creation of new centres was ascribable in nearly every instance to the accidental or fraudulent movement of in-contact animals, and in a few other cases to the transportation of fresh meat. On the other hand, none of them could be attributed to the very indirect methods of contagion described in all the old classical refer- ences. Living intermediaries such as man or insusceptible animals played quite an insignificant or no part. Some exact observations showed that flies do not trans- port the virus. An efficient veterinary police with strict enforcement of stand-still orders sufficed to eradicate the disease completely. A point of further interest is the connected case, reported by Roberts [1921] as the first official record of rinderpest in Brazil. He considered that the same Indian zebus, which brought the disease into Belgium, were also responsible for its introduction into South America. Now the cargo boat used for the transport of these cattle must have taken 4 or 5 weeks for the voyage from Bombay to Antwerp and a little longer for Rio de Janiero at that time. Had the shipped cattle been highly susceptible, they would have almost certainly all died before the boat reached Antwerp, and the diagnosis of rinderpest would have been readily made. Here the Indian cattle were appa- rently healthy when they left Bombay and the virus was carried without the manifestation of clinical symptoms for a period well over the maximum incubative stage known (10 days). In another recorded case [Delpi, 1930] calves were brought from a herd which had been attacked with rinderpest but the calves appeared to be perfectly healthy. These were transported by a canoe for 20 days to an island where the disease did
UNUSUAL CASE OF CHRONIC RINDERPEST. 369 not exist. On arrival, some diarrhoea and lachrymation was noticed. Within the next few days other animals began to show similar symptoms but these were not severe enough to be considered as due to rinderpest. On the 32nd day after the arrival of the calves, typical rinderpest broke out. It seems that the neglected question of carriers among cattle was brought to some prominence by the finding of Mrowka [1914] of lesions resembling those of rinderpest in apparently healthy animals after they were slaughtered. His view was that these lesions in the abomasum represented the residue of a pre-existent disease in which the rinderpest virus might be retained even for years, and in animals which, in the meantime, became devitalised, it might cause a reinfection in the course of which the virus might be eliminated in great quantities. But it seems that he was not able to infect other cattle by feeding the abomasum from such cases. Schern [1918] reported that out of 131 animals which recovered after inocula- tion, with virulent blood, 34 animals had shown no symptoms after inoculation, but when slaughtered at varying intervals showed lesions of rinderpest. In one case lesions were present on slaughter 155 days after inoculation. He attempted to find out if the abomasum from such sick animals was still infective. Animals fed on the abomasum from an animal slaughtered 26 days after infection contracted rinderpest, those at 70, 105 and 108 days did not, but those fed with the aboma- sum from the 70th day animal were found to be subsequently immune when exposed to infection by contact with diseased animals. Cattle fed on the aboma- sum removed from an animal slaughtered 101 days after infection exhibited mild doubtful symptoms. From this Schern concluded that cattle which had to all outward appearances completely recovered from rinderpest may, nevertheless, be possible carriers of infection, but that the danger of infectivity decreases as the time after recovery progresses. Bliss [1922] did not attempt to locate the seat of the virus in a "carrier" animal but his views on the origin of " carriers " in this disease are worthy of being quoted in extenso. He states : " since the virus is very short-lived outside the body of the host, it is highly probable that the epidemics are started by carriers that have received the infection in a former epidemic and have failed to throw it off. Of this, up to the present time there is no direct proof, but it has been observed that there are individuals which do not show symptoms within the usual period after infection, but later when exposure to severe chill lowers their vitality they develop the disease................A degree of immunity, too weak to destroy the micro-organism but sufficiently strong to hold it in check until condi- tions favourable to its development occur, would produce a carrier. The number of D 2
370 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV cases of rinderpest closely follows the variations in weather, the epidemics closely being connected with the inclement seasons of the year. Often a weakling in a herd starts an epidemic. It apparently takes a weak strain of the organism which the stronger cattle can resist and converts it into a virulent strain too strong for even the robust cattle." Curasson [1926] was able to associate the presence of healed ulcers in the abomasum, patches of congestion in the intestine and moist and enlarged mesen- teric lymphatic glands with animals which after recovery from rinderpest showed persistent poorness of condition, dull coat, frequent cough, intermittent fever, chrome enteritis and in females, chronic vaginitis and sterility. Further he was able to infect a susceptible calf with such abomasum in one out of two cases, the positive result being obtained with the material collected 34 days after apparent recovery and the negative result with that collected 7 weeks after recovery. Several cases of the infectivity of materials other than abomasum from animals suffering from chronic rinderpest are on record. For instance, Hutyra and Marek [1916] showed that the blood of an animal chronically affected with rinderpest may remain virulent up to 30 days. Curasson [1926] showed that in animal which showed a second rise of temperature one month after recovery, the blood was infective by both subcutaneous and intravenous route. Delpi [1928, 1930] showed that in animals suffering from atypical rinderpestUNUSUAL CASE OF CHRONIC RINDERPEST. 371 failed to reproduce the disease. Curasson who had reported cases in support of the existence of carriers came across two instances of negative results, one with blood and the other with duodenal ulcers. Jacotot [1932] obtained consistently negative results with the exception of a notable case in which the vaginal discharge was infective. With reference to the negative results, Schern and Jacotot, both think, though with varying degrees of emphasis, that these are due to the fact that carriers are rarely encountered ordinarily. In sifting the evidence that has been recorded on both sides of the question it is apparent that the two views are in reality not contradictory but they refer to facts appertaining to the different phases of the disease, for an animal may be a " carrier " of the virus in one tissue and not in another, as will be amplified later, or may have become entirely cleansed of the virus in one stage and not in another. OUR EXPERIENCE. Having seen the present position with regard to certain connected aspects, our own case may now be considered. The subject of this case was a bull No. 288 of the Kumaun hills which died of chronic rinderpest 74 days after inoculation with virus, and whose spleen was proved to be infective at the time of death. It is believed that this is the first time that an attempt has been made to demonstrate a " carrier " through the infectivity of the spleen. The above-case was encounter- ed during routine post mortem examination and one was struck with the strange presence of the typical lesions of rinderpest so long after the initial infection with the virus. Some of the tissues were therefore collected with proper precautions and stored in sterile glass ware (pipettes and petri-dishes) in the refrigerator with a view to test their infectivity. It may be stated in parenthesis that the breed to which this animal belongs has been ascertained to be 18 times more susceptible than the Indian plains cattle [Lingard, 1899] and of about one-sixth the susceptibily of European cattle. It is known from experience that usually the mortality among these hill cattle varies from 50 to 80 per cent. when infected with a virus of bovine origin but it is much less when goat virus is used. This bull was inoculated on 11th August 1931 as a routine virus producer with a goat strain which was being maintained at this Institute by passaging alternately through bulls and goats. The virus for inoculation into this animal was obtained on the 4th day after injection from a goat (No. 147) which had shown a rise of temper- ature of 106° on the third day after infection and died of rinderpest on the 15th day. To show that the virus used was potent it may be mentioned that another bull (No. 315), which was inoculated with blood from the same goat at the same
372 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV time, developed typical clinical symptoms of rinderpest (inappetence, diarrhUNUSUAL CASE OF CHRONIC RINDERPEST. 373 presence in blood smears of a few Theileria parasites on the 4th day after inocu- lation. The animal was discontinued from the experiment on the 16th day after inoculation and sent away to a tin shed a few furlongs away from the main rinder- pest station since this tin shed is set aside for housing all the animals that have passed through rinderpest pending eventual disposal. During its sojourn in the tin shed as a discontinued animal, whatever minor symptoms of malaise that it exhi- bited did not receive any serious attention. The bull died on the night of 24th October 1931, i.e., 74 days after the infective inoculation with the rinderpest virus. An autopsy was held on it on the morning of 25th October 1931. The lesions detected at post mortem examination were definitely suggestive of rinderpest and included marks of diarrh[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CLINICAL CHART No. 3.
[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CLINICAL CHART No. 4.
CLINICAL CHART No. 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
UNUSUAL CASE OF CHRONIC RINDERPEST. 376 characteristic of rinderpest, dying 25 days after the retest inoculation on account of pleuropneumonia and resuscitated piroplasmosis [chart No. 4]. Of the two animals which were inoculated with splenic pulp, Hill bull No. 791 showed a characteristic thermal reaction starting from the 4th day, inappetence, diarrh377 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV incriminated as natural carriers of the disease, like jackals in canine piroplasmosis or certain wild ruminants in Nagana. Hutyra and Marek [1926] have quoted the following authors for information bearing on the actual mode of contagion: (a) Ranpach has shown that, out of doors, the spread of the disease may be prevented by digging a trench around the infected herd which the animals are unable to pass and that in such cases cattle on the other side of the trench may remain healthy; (b) Piot Bey found that by isolating affected cattle for a distance of 10 metres the spread of the disease to other animals could be prevented; (c) Nencki has shown that in the stable healthy cattle may be protected from the neighbouring infected animals by simple board partition. Very recently Cooper [1932] at this Institute has shown that the introduction of a healthy bull into a stall just vacated by an animal dead of acute rinderpest and only separated from other infected animals by mere board partitions may not result in infection (period of observation was 15 days). Again the experience at Muktesar, where susceptible and infected animals have been maintained since the very inception of this Institute about 40 years ago, only a few hundred feet apart on either side of a ridge, is that there has never been any instance of the disease spreading over to the other side. No steps whatever are taken to prevent the movement of men and traffic except for the infected cattle themselves. In his experiments to obtain some exact information regarding the infectivity of rinderpest by intimate contact, Cooper has found that a contact of 2 days with animals during the early febrile stage of the disease is not sufficient for infection and that the most contagious period in the rinderpest syndrome is between the 5th and 10th days after artificial inoculation. The infected animals are so sick in the abovementioned most contagious period that it is not likely that they would move about. The known facts about the epizootiology of rinderpest can therefore be explain- ed only by the view that carriers of rinderpest exist among cattle and perhaps also among other domesticated ruminants which move among cattle and that outbreaks are started by prolonged contact of susceptible animals with a carrier in the infec- tive stage but under suitable conditions. However, when an attempt is made to obtain from published literature, experimental confirmation of this mode of spread of the disease both the sides of the question appear to be equally well represented. For, it has already been seen that Ward and collaborators [1914], Boynton [1918], Ruppert and Wolfel [1921] and Jacotot [1932] (except in a solitary instance) have all failed to prove the existence of carriers; and that on the other hand, Schern [1918], Curasson [1920, 1926] and Jacotot [1932] have brought definite findings which leave no room for any other conclusion than that carriers do exist. The
UNUSUAL CASE OF CHRONIC RINDERPEST. 378 former results are explained by the latter school of thought by saying that carriers are not at all frequent and that Ward, Rupert and others were not fortunate enough to encounter them. Our contention is that carriers are not, perhaps, as rare as supposed although it is not easy to detect them in the ordinary way. For it seems more than probable that the virus is kept well under control in some remote duct- less gland or organ, the virus being not detectable in the usual discharges and excretions until such time as unfavourable conditions of life supervene and upset the controlling mechanism. One is struck by the remarkable similarity in the circumstances under which the reported outbreaks in England [1865], Belgium [1920], Brazil [1921], Romblon [1916], Australia [1925] originated. An invariable association of a trying voyage on sea for varying periods (exceeding 10 days) with each one of these cases suggests that this association was certainly more than a mere coincidence. This suggestion is considerably strengthened since evidence is available to show that unfavourable conditions of life have an important bearing on the starting of outbreaks. Apart from the statement of Bliss already quoted in extenso, the Indian Cattle Plague Commission observed that rinderpest rages " on seasons of exceptional insalubrity379 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV 0 C. Although the abomasum was found to be richest in the virus [Jacotot, 1932] in an animal at the acute stage of the disease, it does not seem to have been used for the preparation of vaccine. In certain unpublished experiments, which one of us (V. R. R.) undertook under the direction of the late Director of this Institute (Dr. Edwards) it was found that chloroform in the concentration of 0.75 per cent. killed rinderpest virus in blood within 2 hours at body temperature. In similar experiments Daubney [1929] found that the virus in blood is readily killed by chloroform and that such killed virus has no antigenic powers. The superiority of the spleen as vaccine material has been referred to. The retention of immunising properties in the spleen can be shown to be due not to any preservative added to the tissues but to be inherent in them, for it is known that glycerine, phenol and other antiseptic substances even in minute quantities cause rapid deterioration of the virus (Koch, Semmer, Theiler, etc.). Further Edwards [1924] proved that the virus of rinderpest is not destroyed but only inactivated by treatment with 0.5 per cent. carbolic acid, since intensive passage through rabbits brought back its virulence for cattle. An idea of the degree of the tenacity of the virus in the spleen can be obtained from the fact that it has been found by more than one worker [Kelser, 1928, Cooper and Menon, 1931] that the spleen retains its vaccinating properties for about 1 year. This must have been due to the survival of the virus in the spleen pulp in spite of treatment with chloroform. In fact it has been suggested that the vaccinating properties are due to the survival of the virus in minimal quantities. Curasson and Delpi [1929] do not know whether the mainten- ance of antigenic powers over long periods is due to the spleen being specially rich in the virus or because it has some special action but they are certain that other virulent materials such as blood or peritoneal washings when treated with formalin are uncertain in their immunising powers. It is interesting to note that Jacotot [1929] has claimed that antiserum prepared against the organ pulp vaccines as antigen for hyperimmunisation was superior to that prepared against virulent blood. As a result of the studies on our case of chronic rinderpest, it is suggested that the spleen is one of the seats of the virus in a carrier animal, a view which is considerably supported by the available information on the persistence of the virus for long periods in the splenic tissue both under experimental conditions and in the preparation of vaccines and hyperimmune antiserum. It is believed that in Kelser's vaccine the spleen cells protect the architecture of the virus molecules from the destructive action of chloroform and that the superiority of Jacotot's hyperimmune antiserum is due to the spleen cells constantly releasing small quanti- ties of the virus and maintaining a sustained stimulation on the host's body
UNUSUAL CASE OF CHRONIC RINDERPEST. 380 mechanism for the preparation of efficient antibodies. Further, the employment of a tissue culture of the spleen with a view to cultivate the rinderpest virus in vitro would appear to be indicated. REFERENCES. Angeloff, St. (1917). Arch. 381 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV Hall, G. N. (930) 5th Ann. Rep. Vet. Lab. Nigeria. Vet. Bull. 1931,1, 213. Hornby, H. E. (1926). Vet. J. 82, 348-355. Hutchins, E. (1915). Ann. Rep. Dept. Agri. Vet. Div. Uganda Protectorate. Trop. Vet. Bull. 3,159. UNUSUAL CASE OF CHRONIC RINDERPEST. 382 Rickman, W. (1908). Tierzucht und Tierkrankheiten in Deutsch Sudwest Afrika, p. 156. Roberts, G. A. (1921). J.Am. Med. Assn., 60, 177RINDERPEST : TRANSMISSION OF INFECTION BY CONTACT BY HUGH COOPER, M.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., Veterinary Research Officer, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on 24th June 1932.) The object of this paper is to record the results of a series of experiments per- formed during the last few years at Muktesar, since the information already ob- tained is of interest to workers engaged in the control of this disease in India. With this object in view only, a description is given of the actual experiments and their main results, and no attempt is made here to discuss the subject in relation to pre- viously recorded work. The aim at the outset of the work was to gain certain information concerning the " serum alone " method of inoculation against rinderpest. Although the infor- mation originally sought was not obtained, yet, in the light of the experimental evidence concerning the transmission of the disease that has emerged from the experiments described below, it is hoped that the original plan of work can be fol- lowed in a future series of experiments. In the year 1926 a plan was laid down for the execution of an experiment de- signed to give information concerning the duration of immunity conferred against rinderpest by the " serum alone " method of protective inoculation. The results of earlier work at Muktesar had indicated that under experimental conditions when cattle were given a protective dose of anti-serum and then at varying intervals afterwards were injected with rinderpest virus, the immunity did not extend beyond about nine days. There was reason to think, however, from reports in the " field " that protection might last somewhat longer under natural conditions of infection. The plan of the experiment was designed therefore to copy natural conditions of infection, and to expose cattle to it that had previously received doses of anti- serum alone at varying intervals before contact was established. The cattle that received serum were to be turned loose in a shed and be allowed to mix freely together with other artificially infected animals. The infected cattle were to be given rinderpest virus at a suitable time before contact occurred in order that they would be suffering from the clinical disease when the experiment started. They were to remain in close contact with the cattle that had received serum for two (383)
RIDERPEST : TRANSMISSION BY CONTACT. 384 days, during which time no cleaning of the shed or removal of excreta was to take place. The object in allowing contact for only two days was to limit the time of infection so that results could subsequently be read with precision. After the two- day period was over the infecting animals were to be removed from contact; the others were to be placed separately in stalls for detailed observation, and the shed was then to be cleaned and disinfected. The experiment began on the 28th of September 1926 when a total number of thirty hill-bred bulls were turned loose in a shed together with four other hill bulls already reacting to an injection of rinderpest virus. The thirty-three bulls com- prised six different lots. Six bulls each had received serum 24, 18, 12 and 6 days earlier ; one lot of six bulls received serum on the day contact began and three bulls were left uninoculated as controls. The four infected bulls used consisted of two which had received virulent blood three days previously. Both of them exhibited fever during the two days of con- tact, and they both died of acute rinderpest five and six days later respectively. The other two bulls had received virus eight days before and were showing at the time of contact severe symptoms and specific lesions of the disease, including marked buccal ulceration and diarrh385 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV It seemed clear therefore that in this experiment rinderpest failed to spread as a highly contagious disease as it had been expected to do. The failure might be explainable as due either to too small a proportion of affected animals; too short a period of contact; or because the affected animals were not themselves in the most highly infective stage of the disease. The subject thus clearly required further study. During the interval which occurred before a further experiment was started, it is of interest to record that on two separate occasions single highly susceptible hill-bred cattle were placed in a position that would seem to ensure natural infec- tion, if rinderpest were the highly contagious disease it is considered to be. Rinderpest virus has been kept alive at Muktesar for purposes of serum pro- duction, " serum-simultaneous" inoculations, and for experimental uses, for a period of certainly not less than 30 years. It may be noted here that obviously a single " strain " of virus has not been maintained during this long period of time. Also that there is no evidence available to indicate that the virus used at Muktesar behaves differently in any way from " field " strains, except, perhaps, that by con- stant passage a virus attains a more uniform virulence. It is only possible to maintain living virus by constant passage in susceptible cattle, and the hill-bulls used at Muktesar are believed to be as susceptible as it is possible to obtain cattle in India. Passage inoculations have been made from animal to animal in one par- ticular shed set aside for the purpose at Muktesar during the whole of the time mentioned above, and the shed is constantly filled with cattle exhibiting all stages of rinderpest infection, since they remain in the shed from the time they receive an injection of virulent blood until they die, or completely recover. The shed is certainly divided into separate stalls, but the partitions consist only of a very light wooden framework. The two hill-bulls referred to were placed at different times in this shed in the ordinary routine course to receive an injection of virus, going directly into stalls where the previous occupants have died of acute rinderpest. In both cases, how- ever, virus injection was withheld for about ten days, and, as no evidence of natural infection was exhibited by them, they were then injected with rinderpest virulent blood, when both bulls reacted normally. These observations added further evidence indicating unexpected difficulty in setting up rinderpest by natural means, and the experiments recorded below were accordingly carried out at later dates. THE FIRST EXPERIMENT. This experiment was planned to find out definitely whether rinderpest infection could be transmitted by direct contact alone between affected and healthy cattle
RINDERPEST : TRANSMISSION BY CONTACT. 386 under experimental conditions; and if so, to obtain a preliminary idea of the number of days of contact necessary. It started on the 10th August 1929, and the proportion of affected to healthy animals was adjusted to be an equal number of each. Thus on this date six hill bulls were injected with rinderpest virus and turned loose in an enclosure within one of the sheds used ordinarily for such experimental work at Muktesar, and on the same day another six healthy, uninoculated hill bulls (called Lot A) were turned loose with them in the same enclosure, and daily observations were made upon them all. The enclosure consisted simply of a portion of the shed with the partitions removed to form a " loose box ", in which the cattle were confined only by posts and rails. They were left untied, and were fed and watered from common troughs. After three days of this close contact, two of Lot A (Lot A-1) bulls were removed, and observations were continued upon them thereafter in strict isolation elsewhere. On the same day, namely, the third day of the experiment, two new healthy hill bulls, Lot B, were turned into the enclosure to replace the two which had been removed. Three days later again a similar change was made, when two more of Lot A (Lot A-2) bulls were removed to isolation, and two new bulls, Lot C, replaced them. Contact between the artificially infected and the healthy bulls was maintained for a total period of sixteen days. As soon as one of the infected animals died, one of the healthy cattle was removed to isolation in order that an equal number of each should be maintained during the whole experiment. The artificially infected animals used in the experiment all reacted to the virus injection given on the 10th August 1929, although two of them somewhat mildly, ending in recovery. The other four bulls all showed severe and typical reactions and died of rinderpest, one after seven days and the other three after eleven days. Table I summarises the results obtained in the healthy animals that were in- contact during the experiment, and they proved that it was possible to transmit rinderpest by the method of close contact alone that had been used. Thus, hill bull No. 595 of Lot A-2 died of the disease resulting from infection gained while in contact; and both hill bulls No. 488 of Lot A-3, and No. 475 of Lot B reacted typically, and, although they recovered from the attack, they were both solidly immune to a subsequent immunity test when virulent blood was injected. The results also showed clearly, however, that even with an equal number of affected and healthy cattle kept in the closest possible contact, rinderpest definitely failed to develop in as many as half the number of animals used in the experiment. Failure in this respect was certainly to be expected in the case of the pair Lot A-1, since they were in contact only for three days of the incubation period in the ex-
387 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV perimentally infected animals. In the case of hill bulls No. 589 of Lot A-2, No. 528 of Lot B, and No. 343 of Lot C, however, which had been in contact for 6, 9 and 10 days respectively and failed to contract the disease although later proved to be susceptible to it, there is further clear evidence of difficulty in establishing rinder- pest infection by simple contact. The results in the case of the two remaining animals are not so clearly apparent and require some explanation. The mild fever exhibited by hill bull No. 601 of Lot A-3 was unaccompanied by other symptoms suggesting rinderpest. It was solidly immune to the subsequent virus injection and the probability is that it was originally immune before the experiment began. Hill bull No. 516 of Lot C, on the other hand, exhibited a mild attack of fever during the period of contact which was accompanied by diarrhRINDERPEST: TRANSMISSION BY CONTACT. 388 results were obtained failed to contract infection by contact in what would appear to be ideally favourable conditions. The three bulls which definitely contracted infection showed symptoms of the disease after 6, 9 and 10 days of contact, or, deducting an incubation period of three days, infection probably took place only on the 3rd, 6th, and 7th days of contact. THE SECOND EXPERIMENT. The next experiment as originally planned was to extend over a longer period of time, namely, until all the healthy animals had become infected by contact. No means of closer contact could be devised, or seemed necessary since they were already considered to be more continuously intimate than any normal village conditions. In this experiment healthy hill bulls were set free in similar enclosures to the one used in the previous experiment, and artificially infected cattle were brought to them in order to establish contact. Three such enclosures within separate sheds were prepared, and six healthy hill bulls were placed in each of the first two, while three bulls only were put in the third enclosure. A supply of susceptible animals artificially infected with rinderpest was main- tained by injecting virus every fifth day into a batch of three hill bulls. The first batch of these infected bulls was turned loose with the six healthy cattle in the first shed (Shed A) immediately after having received virus, and they remained there in contact until the morning of the fifth day. On the fifth day this first batch of infected cattle were transferred to contact with the second lot of healthy animals in Shed B, while a newly infected batch of bulls took their place in Shed A. On the tenth day batch No. 1 of infected bulls moved from Shed B into contact with the third lot of three healthy bulls, in Shed C, and a similar move was made from Shed A into Shed B, when the third batch of newly infected bulls came into the first Shed A. This succession of transfers was carried out in a similar manner on every subsequent fifth day during the whole course of the experiment. In the last Shed C only three healthy bulls were kept for the reason that it was expected that the full number of affected bulls would not survive long enough to reach them. At the end of each 10th to 15th day period spent in Shed C, the surviving affected bulls were removed elsewhere for final observations. The main information sought in this experiment was the most infective period of rinderpest infection from contact, and the plan adopted divided the experiment into three periods, as follows :389 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV The experiment began on the 30th June 1930, when the first batch of artificially infected bulls received their injection of rinderpest virus, and ended on the 3rd September 1930, when selected survivors were tested for immunity, or a total period of contact lasting for 68 days. The artificially infected animals used in the whole experiment consisted of eleven batches of three hill bulls each, or 33 in all. The five-day periods in the rinderpest syndrome were distinguished as follows :RINDERPEST : TRANSMISSION BY CONTACT. 390 as late as on the 43rd day of contact. This animal proved to be solidly immune when submitted to a test with rinderpest virus subsequently, and it'is at least highly probable that the bull was immune before the experiment began, and the mild fever was probably due to some cause other than Rinderpest. If hill bull No. 45, therefore, is excluded from consideration, it is seen that the last- bull in each Lot A and B became infected after approximately one month (31 and 33 days respectively) of contact. That infection can be so long delayed in highly susceptible cattle in close contact with others showing typical rinderpest is a striking fact, and greatly at variance with the usual conception of the disease. Another particularly striking result is in Lot C, where three highly susceptible cattle, as proved in the subsequent immunity test, were in close contact continuously with either one, two or three animals at a time when they were showing advanced symptoms and, lesions of rinderpest for as long a period as 68 days and not one of them contracted the disease. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS. In the experiments described rinderpest spread by direct contact from artificially infected to healthy susceptible cattle at a. surprisingly slow rate. It required contact for a minimum period of three days, but the average length of contact before infection occurred was far greater. In a total number of fourteen healthy-cattle used in two experiments which were exposed to various stages of the disease, the average contact period was just over fifteen days; and the longest time a susceptible animal remained in contact before becoming infected was 33 days. The most contagious period in the rinderpest syndrome was found to be between the 5th and 10th days after artificial infection. Spread of infection was longer delayed from contact before the 5th day, and from the 10th to 15th day the disease failed to spread to any one of three susceptible animals exposed to it, even after 68 days of contact. Until the results of a further series of controlled experiments are known, in which the protective effects of " serum alone " immunisation are actually tried out against rinderpest transmitted by contact, it is perhaps early to draw conclusions on that point. Since, however, in the experiments described here the disease spread only as a slowly progressive one, its control by " serum alone " must at best be a prolonged and therefore tedious and expensive procedure. F
391 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV TABLE I. The First Experiment. Lot No. In contact Hill bull No. Estimated infected day of contact (a) Reaction Result Immunity Test days period Reaction Result A. 1 3 0 to 3rd 586 ..... Nil Escaped infec- tion Fever, diarrhRINDERPEST : TRANSMISSION BY CONTACT. 392 TABLE II. The Second Experiment. Hill bull No. Estimated infected (a) Reaction Result (b) Day of contact During batch Immunity test Lot AVIABILITY OF ANTHRAX BACILLI AND SPORES AFTER FIXATION AND STAINING BY S. M. SARWAR, M.R.C.V.S., Veterinary Investigation Officer, Punjab. (Received for Publication on 17th March, 1932.) The great resistance of the bacilli and spores of B. anthracis has been recog- nised since the early days of Bacteriology. From time to time various workers have demonstrated the resistance of these bacilli and spores to heat and chemicals under many diverse conditions. With this fact in view, experiments were carried out in order to ascertain the degree of danger to which a laboratory worker is subjected in handling anthrax slides which have been fixed by heat and stained according to the usual laboratory methods. The results were somewhat unexpected as it was demonstrated that anthrax organisms could be cultivated by inoculating agar tubes with scrapings from fixed and stained slides. As a result of this, a series of experiments was carried out to determine the resistance to the heat of a bunsen flame of anthrax bacilli and spores in the form of a smear on a glass slide. The experiment is divided into 3 parts. The first part deals with the resistance of the bacilli to fixation and staining with aqueous solutions of methylene blue. The results of this experiment show that it is necessary to pass a blood smear at least 4-5 times over the bunsen flame, necessitating a temperature of 220°C to kill the bacilli. The temperature of 220°C can be attained only if the slide is passed over the flame in such a manner as to take one second for each passage. This procedure is effective only in the case of blood smears which have been prepared from the heart blood of an anthrax carcase, in which case the bacilli have not had an opportunity of forming spores. The smears should be fixed immediately after preparation by the above method. Mere drying of the smear does not seem to inhibit anthrax spore formation, as shown by the following experiment. A guinea pig was killed by inoculation with anthrax culture. Immediately after death about 20 blood-smears were prepared from the heart blood. Two of these 20 smears were fixed by passing over the bunsen flame 5 times, raising the temperature to about 220°C with a view to kill all anthrax bacilli in the smear (393)
VIABILITY OF ANTHRAX BACILLI AND SPORES. 394 but not the spores. Emulsion from these fixed smears was inoculated in agar tubes for cultural examination. No growth was found even after 48 hours incubation, showing that no spores were present in the blood at the time of fixation. The remaining 18 smears were kept unfixed in the laboratory. Each day two of these slides were fixed in similar manner and agar tubes inoculated with the emulsion from the fixed smear. On the third day there appeared two colonies of anthrax in one of the two tubes. All subsequent slides gave some growth in the culture tubes though the number of the colonies was variable. This experiment was carried out at the Muktesar Institute and has been repeated here, at the Punjab Veterinary College, many times but with variable results. It is quite possible that the uniformity of the results at Muktesar may be due to the constant presence of certain amount of moisture in the atmosphere. Experiment No. 2 (Table II) deals with the viability of anthrax spores of a 24 hour old agar culture. Experiment No. 3 (Table III) with similar spores from a 48 hour old culture. The results of Experiments Nos. 2 and 3 show that it is necessary to pass the slide over the bunsen flame at least 9 times, raising the temperature on the upper surface of the slide to 320°C before the spores can be considered innocuous. In smears thus fixed and afterwards stained with a saturated solution of methylene blue, it has been noticed on microscopic examination that the penetra- tion of the stain towards the centre of the spore is proportionate to the amount of heat employed. My thanks are due to Mr. F. Ware, Director, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, for providing all possible facilities for carrying out the experi- ment and to Messrs. Menon and Naik for their kind assistance. TECHNIQUE. The culture used in carrying out these experiments was of a virulent strain. To obtain uniform thickness of the smears an emulsion of the culture was prepared. A loop full of this emulsion was used for each smear. The slides employed were of uniform thickness. The chief difficulty encountered in carrying out these experiments was the recording of the temperature on the slides. The method employed to over-come this difficulty, although crude, proved adequate. A set of thermometers, recording temperatures to 360°c., was employed. G
395 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV METHOD OF RECORDING TEMPERATURE. In order to record the temperature on the upper surface of the slide, the thermometer was tied on the slide in such a manner, that only the bulb of the thermometer came in direct contact with the smear. Before tying the thermometer on the slides the bulb of the thermometer was heated slightly in order to accelerate the recording of the maximum temperature. After fixing the thermometer, the slide was passed over the flame as required and the maximum temperature was noted. The defect in this method of recording temperature was that the thermometer did not record the maximum temperature until a few seconds after the necessary exposure of the slide to the heat. During those few seconds the slide lost some of its heat and thus reduced the possibility of recording the exact maximum temperature. This difficulty was partially overcome by keeping a heated air oven handy. Immediately after the slide had been passed over the bunsen flame it was placed in the oven to reduce the rate of loss of heat while recording the maximum temperature. After cooling the slide, a drop of sterile normal saline sol. was employed to make an emulsion of the smear. Two agar tubes were inoculated from each smear, and incubated at body temperature. In doubtful cases in which the growth on agar was somewhat meagre the incubation period was extended to 48 hours. The experiments were repeated several times with uniform results. TABLE I. Experiment No. 1. Slide No. Description of smear Number of times passed over the flame Time taken in passing over the flame Staining Remarks 1 & 2 Smears prepared from heart blood of guinea pig immediately after death. 3 times . 4 seconds 5 minutes c. sat. Aq. Sol. of methylene blue. Two agar tubes inocu- lated by making emulsion of the smear c. N. S. S. Typical anthrax growth found in both tubes after 24 hours. 3 & 4 Ditto . 5 VIABILITY OF ANTHRAX BACILLI AND SPORTS. 396 TABLE II. Experiment No. 2, 24 hour old culture No. of slide Description of smear No. of times passed over the flame Time taken in passing over the flame Maximum Temperature recorded on the slide Remarks °C. 1 & 2 Smears prepared from culture making an emul- sion. 5 times. 7 second 200 Sat. Aq. Sol. of methy- lene blue 5 minute. In each case four agar tubes were inoculated with the emulsion. Abundant growth of anthrax found in all four tubes after 24 hour incubation. 3 & 4 Ditto . 6 TRIRADIATE TAPEWORMS FROM HOUNDS AND JACKAL BY M. ANANT NARAYAN RAO, Lecturer in Parasitology, Madras Veterinary College, AND L. S. PARAMESWARA AYYAR, Assistant Lecturer, Madras Veterinary College. [Received for publication on 28th April, 1932.] (With Plates XXXIII to XXXV.) In the early part of the year 1926, while holding a postmtorem examination on a jackal cub, the senior author encountered a few triradiate tapeworm. In the later part of the year 1926 and early in 1927, the junior author collected a few more similar tapeworms passed by hounds of the Huntclub, and these were added to the collection of worms in the Madras Veterinary College. Attention was drawn to these worms while going through the collection with a view to identify them. The kennels are situated in Saidapet, a town close to Madras, and the jackal cub was also from a locality near the kennels. It is interesting to record that several of these triradiate tapeworms with six suckers were collected from the same locality at one time. Leiper [1913] has described a cysticercus with six suckers and two sepa- rate rostella wherein he has proved how this monstrosity occurs, His view affords an important explanation for the constant association of such a head with six suckers and a triradiate strobila. A specimen of the triradiate tapeworm to be des- cribed below was sent to Professor Leiper and he is of opinion that it may prove to be an abnormality of a new species or of a known species of the genus Taenia. DESCRIPTION. The worm has a head, neck and a strobila. The head is more or less pear- shape when viewed from the side and circular when viewed end on. The visual section of the head measures 0.65 mm. There is a well developed, though short, rostellum about 0.26 mm. in diameter and it bears a double crown of 30 hooks. Each large hook is about 70 PLATE XXXIII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Scolex showing the crown of hooks. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Scolex, magnified. Shows six suckers. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Ovum.
PLATE XXXIV. CROSS SECTIONS. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. 1. Excretory channels. 2. Vitellaria. 3. Uterus. 4. Ovary. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. 5. Vaginal canal. 6. Vas deferens. 7. Cirrus sac. 8. Genital pore.
PLATE XXXV. TRIRADIATE TAPEWORM. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Hooks. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Mature segment. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Scolex.
TRIRADIATE TAPEWORMS FROM HOUNDS AND JACKAL. 398 looks like a rounded cone and is about 25 399 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV nearly so. Each egg presents the usual characters of one from any taenia and measures 0.003 mm.× 0.004 mm. Hosts.DIPLOPILIDIUM NOLLERI, SKRJABIN, 1924 BY M. ANANT NARAYAN RAO, Lecturer in Parasitology, Madras Veterinary College, Madras. (Received for publication on 4th September 1931.) The material of the species to be described was found in the collection of tapeworms in the parasitological section of the Madras Veterinary College. The specimens in question were collected from the intestines of a domestic cat by Mr. L. S. Parameswara Iyer, Assistant Lecturer, in the early part of the year 1923 but unfortunately were not identified at that time. Skrjabin described this species, for the first time, from a cat in Turkestan in 1924. As far as the author is aware, the parasite has not been reported from India. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Diplopilidium nolleri Skrjabin 1924. Scolex. The worm is slender and is about 5 cm. in length. The scolex is 2 mm. in diameter and bears a large rostellum, comparatively, having 3 or 4 crowns of hooks. The hooks are large in the anterior row and resemble those of taenia. They decrease (400)
401 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV in size in the posterior rows and the hooks of the last two rows resemble those of Dipylidium. There are about 20 hooks in each row; the length of the hooks in the anteriormost row is about 50PLATE XXXVI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Cercaria of P. cervi. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Cercaria of E. elongatus.
A PRELIMINARY REPORT ON TWO AMPHISTOME CERCARIÆ AND THEIR ADULTS BY M. ANANT NARAYAN RAO, Lecturer in Parasitology, Madras Veterinary College, AND L. S. PARAMESWARA AYYAR Assistant Lecturer, Madras Veterinary College. (Received for publication on 4th September 1931.) (With Plate XXXVI.) While working with cercariæ found in fresh water snails403 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV of this larva, like most other paramphistome larvæ, is difficult to see owing to this pigment and also to the large masses of cystogenous cells under the cuticle. To a degree, it can be seen in the young larvæ obtained after the snail is dissected and its liver teased. Even here, one cannot accurately get at all the internal anat- omy and further, the development of the young larva brings about changes in the organs when it comes to be a mature one. There are two conical eyes, with lenses, pointing upwards. These are placed anteriorly. The infundibuliform oral sucker is in the anterior end and is about 0.08 mm. in diameter. The mouth is followed by an oesophagus, which after running for some distance bifurcates into two intestinal cecæ which end bluntly in front of or on either side of the middle of the posterior sucker. The excretory system consists of a bladder situated in front of the posterior sucker in the median line. It is more or less rectangular and its long axis is in the same direction as the length of the larva. From the bladder, a fairly wide tube, one from each angle, takes its course forwards, its curve being, at first, parallel to that of the sides of the larva. Both the tubes bend inwards, about the middle of the larva, and come very near each other. Here, there is a cross-connection between the two tubes, and more often than not, a small process of the cross-connection points anteriorly in the middle. The main tubes again diverge and taking a course as before proceed forwards. Just behind the eye, each tube bifurcates, the longer branch, runs forward on the inner aspect of the eye up to the oral sucker and the smaller branch runs behind the eye outwards and stops short. These tubes have in them refractile excretory granules. Each main branch then, curves backwards, near the oral sucker, and proceeds posteriorly ending in fine tubes in the region of the posterior sucker. There appear to be three patches of cilia in this retrograde branch about the middle of the larva. In the tail there is a central canal which is bulbous at its end, with two excretory pores placed laterally and the basal end of the candal canal joins the excretory bladder in front of the posterior sucker dorsally. The posterior sucker is muscular and larger than the anterior sucker. The average diameter is 0.12 mm. The genital system is composed of a mass of cells just in front of the posterior sucker to the right side of the bladder and two small masses on the left side one behind the other. The former is perhaps what is going to be the ovary in the adult and the latter the testes. The cercariæ develop in slender and elongated rediæ. The length of these vary considerably. Many immature ones are much shorter than a young cercaria. The larger ones measure about 1.25 × 0.2 mm. They have no ambulatory processes and
TWO AMPHISTOME CERCARIAE AND THEIR ADULTS. 404 have pointed posterior extremities. The anterior extremity of each of them has a mouth which has a circular opening leading into a muscular pharynx and is continued into a simple saccular intestine or stomach. There are a few salivary or digestive glands, surrounding the pharynx, whose ducts open round the border of the mouth. There is a well developed birth pore a little behind the oral opening. The excre- tory system consists of three pairs of flame cells on the ventral side. Each mature redia contains 8 to 12 immature cercariæ, which perhaps become mature, not in redia itself, but outside in the liver of the snail. The small size of the redia also proves that it cannot have in it developed cercariæ as big or bigger than itself without detriment to the rest of the cercaria in embryo. The young cercariæ in the redia have no pigment in them, but the ones that are developing outside in the liver tissue of the snail, often show two brown patches in the region of the eyes, and the rest of the pigment in the body develops later. The tail is very rudimentary at first. They are active inside the parthanitæ and can be observed during their emer- gence through the birth pore. They seem to get inactive after they come out of the redia. In a tube of water, when the developed larvæ get out of the snail host, they swim about for a couple of hours and then attach themselves to the sides of the tube at its junction with the surface of water. They secrete a gelatenous material which begins to surround them as a cyst and the tail gets pushed out by this substance. The larva can be seen actively moving in it round and round and adding more and more of this substance till the wall of the cyst is fairly thick and then the larva becomes less active. They are now ready for infection. If a few blades of grass are put in the tube they encyst on them just at the point where the blades and the surface of water come in contact with each other. It is obvious that this situation is such as to be easily accessible to the vertebrate host. On 8th February 1931, a calf after being under observation for some time, was fed with over 200 of these encysted cercariæ collected during a period of over a week. The fæces of this calf was examined for ova on 22nd March 1931 and on 3rd April 1931 and none were found. On 9th April 1931 the calf was destroyed and over 40 fairly mature P. cervi were collected. The experiment shows that the kind of cercariæ in question are the larval forms of P. cervi [Shrank 1780]. It is also inferred that the parasites, to attain maturity, take more than 8 weeks. The cercaria described above resembles cercariæ Indicæ XXVI [Sewell 1922], excepting in the number of ciliated patches in the excretory tube running back- wards from the oral sucker. Looss [1900] re-described " Cercaria pigmentala " Sonsino [1892], and showed that these were the larval stages of P. cervi. Now that the cercariæ under question have been fed to a calf and P. cervi have been
405 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV obtained, it appears that the cercariæ described above and C. pigmentata are identical. Sewell, in his description of Cercariæ IndicA NOTE ON THE PROBABILITY OF INFECTION OF MAN AND DOMESTIC CARNIVORES BY ISOPARORCHIS HYPSELOBAGRI (BILLET, 1898)* BY G. D. BHALERAO, M.Sc., Helminthologist, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on 27th April 1932.) (With one text-figure.) Southwell [1913] obtained these flukes from the gas-bladder of the siluroid fish, Wallago attu, and described them as Isoparorchis trisimilitubis; but Ejsmont [1932] has recently proved it to be a synonym of I. hypselobagri (Billet, 1898). Previously to this, in 1910, Captain Parker had obtained immature forms of this fluke from the muscles of the siluroid fish, Barbus tor. In 1921, the writer with his professor, Dr. W. N. F. Woodland, had obtained at Allahabad these parasites from the gas-bladder of the fish, Wallago attu. Chandler [1926] recovered some large flukes in Calcutta from the stools of a human patient who was treated with an anthelmintic and these were identified by the writer as Isoparorchis trisimilitubis. Faust [1929] also record- ed the presence of this parasite in man in Hunan Province, China. In 1928 I obtained at Nagpur some immature forms of this parasite from the muscles lining the coelomic cavity of the siluroid fish, Ophiocephalus striatus. Another very interesting case of the occurrence of this parasite is that it was found in the stomach of a crocodile shot in Assam, which had devoured some siluroid fish. It is quite evident from the foregoing remarks that the parasite is a very common scourge of certain siluroid fishes, especially in the orient, and any animal eating the infected siluroid fish is exposed to infection with this fluke. It is there- fore suggested that a man should be careful to cook his fish properly before eating it, and further he should prevent his domestic carnivores, such as dogs and cats, from visiting rivers and other places in which infected fishes may be present. * A paper read before the Medical and Veterinary Section of the 18th Indian Science Congress, Nagpur, 1932. (406)
407 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [II, IV [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Isoparorchis hypselobagri. Southwell [1913] published the figure of the adult fluke only, and it is therefore thought necessary to give here by an illustration an idea of an immature parasite from the muscles of Ophiocephalus striatus. REFERENCES. Chandler, Asa. C (1926). The Prevalence and Epidemiology of Hookworm and other Helminthic infection in India. Ind. Journ. Med. Res. 14, 481PUBLICATIONS OF THE IMPERIAL DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE IN INDIA. TO BE HAD FROM THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA CENTRAL PUBLICATION BRANCH, IMPERIAL SECRETARIAT BUILDING, 3, GOVERNMENT PLACE, WEST, CALCUTTA AND ALL AGENTS FOR SALE OF GOVERNMENT PUBLICATIONS. A complete list of the publications of the Imperial Department of Agriculture in India can be obtained on application from the above-mentioned. The following are the publications of the last two years :Botanical SeriesEntomological SeriesBooks. Wheat in India, by ALBERT HOWARD, M.A., A.K.C.S., F.L.S., and GABRIELLE L. C. HOWARD, M.A. Price, Rs. 5 or 7s. 6d. A Description of the Imperial Bacteriological Laboratory, Muktesar; Its Work and Products, by MAJOR J. D. E. HOLMES, M.A., D.SC., M.R.C.V.S. Price, As. 8 or 9d. Hindi and Urdu Editions, Rs. 2-4 each. Agriculture in India, by JAMES MACKENNA, M.A., I.C.S. Price, As. 4 or 5d. Some Diseases of Cattle in India. A Handbook for Stock-owners. (Revised in 1927.) Price, Re. 1-4 or 2s. Report on the Diseases of Silkworms in India, by A. PRINGLE JAMESON, D.SC. Price, Rs. 3. The Importance of Bacterial Action in Indigo Manufacture, by C. M. HUTCHINSON, B.A. Price, As. 2. Notice. All new publications are included in the above list and are regularly posted to all on the mail- ing list as soon as issued. Unless complaints of non-receipt of any publication are received by the Manager, Government of India Central Publication Branch, Imperial Secretariat Building, 3, Govern- ment Place, West, Calcutta, within six months of the date of issue, duplicate copies can be supplied only on payment of cost and postage. MGIPCIndex to Authors A PAGE AJWANI, G. A., and VENKATARAMA AYYAR, R., " A Case of Rupture of Heart in a Horse " . . . . . . . . 66 ii THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY PAGE BHALERAO, G. D., " On Some Nematode Parasites of Goats and Sheep at Muktesar" . . . . . . . . 242 BISHOP, F. C., and WAGNER, R. D., " Nicotine in the Control of Ecto- parasites of Poultry" . . . . . . . . 170 BOZICEVICH, J., See Wright, W. H. . . . . . . 176 BUCKLEY, J. J. C., " An Observation on Human Resistance to Infection with Ascaris from the Pig " (Abstract) . . . . . . . . 222 BURKE, N., See McCulloch, W. E . . . . . . . . 75 C CLARKE, N., See McCulloch, W. E. . . . . . . . . 75 COOPER, HUGH "Rinderpest : Transmission of Infection by Contact" . 383 D DARLING, F. FRASER, "Natural Immunity and Disease Resistance : the Genetical point of view " . . . . . . . . 88 DAS GUPTA, N. C., " The Conjugation of Benzoic Acid by Indian Cattle " 289 INDEX TO AUTHORS iii I PAGE ISAAC, P. V., " Papers on Indian Tabanidae, IX. The Life-history of Haematopota roralis F. B." . . . . . . . . 278 J JOHNES, F. S., and LITTLE, R. B., " The Etiology of Infectious DiarrhIV THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY PAGE MOHLER, J. R., " Recommendations of the Bureau of Animal Industry on Problems of Livestock Production. " (Abstract) . . . . . . . . 100 INDEX TO AUTHORS V T PAGE TAYLOR, E. L., " The Use of Drugs in the Treatment of Disease caused by Nematode and Trematode Worm " (Abstract) . . . . . . . . 221 U UNDERWOOD, P. C., See Wright, W. H. . . . . . . . . 176 V VENKATARAMA AYYAR, R., See Ajwani, G. A. . . . . . . . . 66,69 VISWANATHA IYER, A., See Warth, F. J. . . . . . . . . 325 VISWANATHAN, G. R., See Ajwani, G. A. . . . . . . . . 68 W WAGNER, R. D., See Bishop, F. C. . . . . . . . . 170 WARE, F., and BANERJI, P. C., " The Control of Foot-and-Mouth Disease by Iodine " . . . . . . . . 103 WARTH, F. J., " Sulphur and Sulphate Balance Experiments with Cattle " 225 Index to Subjects. A Abrus precatorius (ratti seeds), Cases of poisoning in the horse with . . 59 Agglutinability of homologous and heterologous strains of brucella orga- nisms during the course of Bacillus abortus Bang infection . . . 262 viii THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY PAGE. Biting insects, control of . . . . . . . . 33 Blood-sucking insects in India, control of . . . . . . . . 29,37 Blow-flies, control of . . . . . . . . 35 Bone, pelvic, fracture of, in a dog . . . . . . . . 69 Brucella organisms during the course of Bacillus abortus Bang infection, agglutinability of homologous and heterologous strains of . . . . . . . . 262 Brucella organisms, agglutinability of . . . . . . . . 262 Buffalo (cow), tuberculosis in . . . . . . . . 53 Bullocks, digestion of fats by . . . . . . . . 333 Bureau of Animal Industry, U. S. A., activities of . . . . . . . . 318 INDEX TO SUBJECTS ix PAGE Cattle disease and pestsX THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY PAGE. Cercaria saundersi, n. sp. . . . . . . . . 255 Codliver oil and potassium iodide, effect of, on the growth, of white Bellary sheep . . . . . . . . . 222 Colour inheritance in Bellary sheep . . . . . . . . 222 Concentrates, benzoic and para-cresol production from . . . . . . . . 286 Cow-buffalo, tuberculosis in . . . . . . . . 53 Craterostomum spp. as a parasite of horse . . . . . . . . 181 D Dermanyssus gallinae, L., in poultry, nicotine sulphate against 171 DiarrhoINDEX TO SUBJECTS XI PAGE Feeding and feeding stuffsXII THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY PAGE Horse, keratoma in the pedal bone of . . . . . . . . 315 Horses, agglutination reaction due to mallein injections in . . . . . . . . 265 INDEX TO SUBJECTS xiii M PAGE Magnesia and lime, influence of urinary reaction on excretion of . . 301 Mallein injection in horses, agglutination reaction due to . . . 265 Mange, sarcoptic, in camels . . . . . . . . 83 Menopon gallinae as a parasite of poultry . . . . . . . . 173 Mineral assimilation from two typical fodders, ragi straw and mature hay 325 Mosquitos, control of . . . . . . . . 31 Mouse, foot-and-mouth disease in . . . . . . . . 321 Museum specimens, mounting of . . . . . . . . 310 N N-butylidene, a new drug for equine strongylidosis . . . . . . . . 176 Nasal granuloma (bovine), etiology of . . . . . . . . 131 Nasal granuloma (bovine), identity of schistosome found in cases of . . 338 Nematode parasites of goats and sheep at Muktesar . . . . . . . . 242 Nematode and trematode worm, use of drugs in the treatment of disease caused by . . . . . . . . 221 Nicotine in the control of ecto-parasites of poultry . . . . . . . . 170 Nicotine sulphate against lice . . . . . . . . 175 Nitrogen balance in cattle, effect of hippuric acid excretion on . . 294 Nolleri (Diplopilidium) Skrjabin, 1924 . . . . . . . . 400 O Oesophagodontus robustus, as a parasite of horse . . . . . . . . 182 Oesopihagostomum venulosum (Rud. 1807) as a parasite of goats and sheep . 249 Ophiocephalus striatus, Isoparorchis hypselobagri from the muscles of . 406 Ornithobilharzia, Odhner 1912 Definition of the genus of . . . 352 Ostertagia circumcincta (Stadelmann, 1894) as a parasite of goat . . 251 Ostertagia occidentalis Ransom, 1907 as a parasite of goat . . . 251 Ostertagia oricntalis, n. sp. as a parasite of goats . . . . . . . . 249 Oviduct in a hen, obstruction of . . . . . . . . 68 P Paramphistomum cervi . . . . . . . . 405 Parascaris equorum, mounting of small museum specime ns . . . 310
XIV THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY PAGE Parasites, helminthic, affecting domestic animals in India, a general account of . . . . . . . . 1 INDEX TO SUBJECTS XV PAGE Reproductive organs of cattle, stimulation of . . . . . . . . 306 Rhinosporidiosis in equines . . . . . . . . 49 Rinderpest, chronic, with special reference to the carrier problem in this disease . . . . . . . . 357 Rinderpest, infectivity of shade-dried hides from infected cattle . . 86 xvi THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY PAGE Tuberculosis in a cow-buffalo . . . . . . . . 53 Tuberculosis in goats in India . . . . . . . . 41 U Urinary reaction on excretion of lime and magnesia, influence of . . 301 V Varestrongylus pneumonicus as a parasite of goats and sheep . . . 242 Veterinary College, Patna, admission to post-graduate class in . . 223 Veterinary Journal, special sheep diseases number, April 1932 (Review) . 323 Veterinary Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, Wey- bridge and Pirbright Experimental Station, work done at, on foot-and- mouth disease . . . . . . . . 320 Veterinary medicinexvii ERRATA TO VOLUME II OF THE Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry. Page 225, line 34, for Convrtede eithre read Converted either. Page 291, Table A. With normal concentrate ration, last column, for Half bred Scindhi Ayreshirs read Half-bred Scindhi Ayreshire. Page 292, line 15, insert full stop between ' half ' and ' For '. Page 304, Table V, heading of second column, for Fodder per cent. read Fodder per cent. CaO. Page 396, Title-heading, for Viability of Anthrax Bacilli and sports read Viability of Anthrax Bacilli and Spores. MGIPC