[NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
ICRR. 15. V./650. Vol. V 1935 THE Indian Journal of Veterinary Science AND Animal Husbandry Issued under the authority of The Imperial Council of Agricultural Research [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Annual subscription Price per port Rs. 6 or 9s. 9d. Rs. 2 or 3s. 6d. PUBLISHED BY THE MANAGER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI PRINTED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, NEW DELHI. 1937. Price annas 5 or 6d.
List of Agents in India from whom Govearnment of India Publications are available. (a) PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENT BOOK DEPOTS. MADRAS :Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. V., Pt. 1. Plate I. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] V. Krishnamurti Ayyar, I. V. S.
ORIGINAL ARTICLES V. KRISHNAMURTI AYYAR, I. V. S. AN APPRECIATION. The late Mr. V. Krishnamurti Ayyar, I.V S., was born of well-to-do parents in November 1885 in the district of Tanjore, Madras Presidency. After the comple- tion of his high school education in Kumbakonam, he joined the Madras Veterinary College in the year 1906. His career as a student at the College was remarkable for painstaking and diligent application to work, and the desire to dive deep into a sub- ject in pursuit of knowledgeTHE ROLE OF TABANUS ORIENTIS WLK. AND STOMOXYS CALCITRANS LINN. IN THE MECHANICAL TRANSMISSION OF RINDERPEST. BY H. L. BHATIA, M.Sc., Offg. Entomologist, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on 19th November 1934.) (With four text-figs.) INTRODUCTION. In order to ascertain whether species of Tabanus and Stomoxys act as mechanical transmitters of rinderpest under natural conditions, as suggested by Crawford [1933] in Ceylon, a series of experiments were carried out by the writer with Tabanus orientis Wlk. and Stomoxys calcitrans Linn. The results with S. calcitrans were negative. In the case of T. orientis the infection was transmitted under natural circumstances from an infected to a susceptible bull. The only other species of fly which has been positively incriminated in the transmission of the disease under natural conditions is the African Glossina morsitans Westw. The success obtained with T. orientis has opened up a new field for intensive research connected with vectors of rinderpest. It is hoped that this problem will be thoroughly investigated by interested workers, and with the progress of their enquiries a precise knowledge of the blood sucking flies and other arthropods res- ponsible for the propagation of this disease will be acquired. I am deeply indebted to W. Taylor, Esquire, M.R.C.V.S., D.V.H., I.V.S., Offg. Director of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, for his many valuable suggestions and for granting all facilities in the prosecution of this investi- gation. My thanks are also due to Mr. Ahmed Bux of this Institute for the charts and the figures. A BRIEF REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE ON TRANSMISSION OF RINDERPEST BY ARTHROPODS. Up to the present time very few attempts appea to have been made on the transmission of rinderpest through the agency of insects and other arthropods. The (2)
ROLE OF T. ORIENTIS AND S. CALCITRANS IN RINDERPEST TRANSMISSION. 3 earliest records in this connection are some experiments by Curasson in Poland in 1922. He experimented with the tick, Ixodes ricinus Linn. and a species of Tabanus. An engorged tick was removed from an animal on the second day of fever and imme- diately ground up in salt solution, and this mixture when injected into a healthy animal produced a normal attack of the disease, but negative results were obtained when the tick was emulsified an hour after the removal. In his experiments with Tabanus (sp. ?) the material used for injection was a mash of the proboscides of the flies in salt solution. The results obtained were the same as in the experiments with ticks. De Souza [1924] found that a specimen of the tick, Boophilus annulatus Say. (Margoropus bovis Riley.), which had been feeding on an animal infected with rinderpest, maintained the virus in its body at full virulence for a period of seven days. Sen [1925], in his experiments with Musca domestica Linn., Aedes (Stegomyia) albo- picta Skuse and Linognathus vituli (Linnæus) carried out at Muktesar, could not transmit the disease by means of these insects under natural conditions, but he was able to record positive results when flies (M. domestica) fed on virulent blood, nasal discharge and fresh fæces from infected animals were crushed in salt solution and inserted into pockets prepared beneath the skin of susceptible animals, or when saline suspensions of crushed infected flies were inoculated intravenously into susceptible animals. He obtained a positive result also in one out of three experiments with crushed material of Linognathus vituli. The experiments of the same author with Boophilus annulatus australis Fuller, which were communicated in the report by Husain [1926], were all negative. In the course of his experiments with Glossina morsitans, Hornby [1926] was successful in proving the mechanical transmission of rinderpest under natural conditions in one out of the two experiments, conducted by him, with these flies. The susceptible animal to which the disease was transmitted by these flies died of acute rinderpest. Hornby has not given a clinical chart of this animal, and the complete details of his experiments were not furnished. In his report Kearney [1927] mentions that some of the cattle in Northern Nigeria which had come from a district where tsetse (Glossina) is unknown, were found infected with rinderpest. As Hippoboscids are very common there at certain times of the year, it is assumed that these were the probable vectors of the disease. In reviewing the present position regarding insect vectors of rinderpest Datta and Rajagopalan [1932] have drawn some conclusions from Hornby's experiments quoted above, and have stated that " Since this species of fly (Glossina morsitans) is not existent in India, it is apparent from available evidence that there is no real danger in India from Insect Vectors." This opinion has been challenged by Crawford [1933] who, while strongly suspecting Tabanus and Stomoxys as probable transmitters of the disease, says that " if Glossina can transmit infection, as Hornby thinks, I should imagine that the much larger and deeper biting Tabanus and Stomoxys could do so too." A 2
4 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I METHODS AND MATERIAL. Tabanus orientis and Stomoxys calcitrans were the two species of blood-sucking flies selected for the transmission experiments which were conducted during this summer at Muktesar. These flies (Text-fig. 1, Figs. a and b) were available in the field throughout the period of experimentation, and they could therefore be acquired without difficulty. In all these experiments wild flies were used. For the initial feeds, the flies were induced to bite bulls experimentally inoculated with the virus of rinderpest, such animals being named " Controls ". The flies were interrupted in the course of their feeding on a " Control", and transferred to a healthy animal for the completion of their meal. The interval elapsing between their two meals was not more than five hours in any case. The healthy animals on which infected flies were fed were kept in small sheds or " chuppars". These sheds were separately situated, and at a considerable distance from the shed in which the " controls " were kept. In view of the preliminary nature of the experiments the chuppars in which the experimental animals were housed, though affording some protection against insect visitors, were not totally fly-proof. It is rather difficult to arrive at a definite conclusion regarding the optimum time for the initial feeds during the period of development of the disease in expe- rimentally inoculated animals. Curasson (loc. cit.), while experimenting with crushed material, collected his infected tabanid flies on the third day of the fever. Sen (loc. cit.) fed his house flies on virulent blood, nasal discharge and fresh faeces of infected animals at the height of reaction, and his mosquitoes at a time just prior to, or immediately following the appearance of vesicles on the buccal mucous membrane, although in some cases this rule was not strictly adhered to. Hornby (loc. cit.) fed his tsetse flies at the height of reaction. In the present series of experiments the flies were fed at the height of the tem- perature reaction, but all those which could not be induced to feed on an infected animal on the one day, were allowed to suck its blood on subsequent days. In all, eight transmission experiments were carried out, four with T. orientis and four with S. calcitrans. The failure of flies to produce infection in the healthy bull in any one experiment was confirmed by carrying out an immunity test, following upon a close observation of the animal for not less than nine days subsequent to the last day of feeding of the infected flies. During this period, the morning and evening temperatures and the general condition and feeding of the animal were registered daily ; and also the examination of blood smears was carried out when considered necessary. The immunity test consisted of an injection of rinderpest virus into the experimental bull, and on rinderpest being produced by the virus, it was concluded that flies had failed to transmit the disease.
Text-fig. 1. Fig. a. The ROLE OF T. ORIENTIS AND S. CALCITEANS IN RINDERPEST TRANSMISSION. 5 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1.
6 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, METHODS EMPLOYED IN KEEPING AND FEEDING FLIES FOR LABORATORY PURPOSES. In transmission work with blood sucking flies, great difficulty has been ex- perienced in maintaining the flies alive under laboratory conditions for a desired length of time. This is due mainly to the fact that it is almost impossible to provide them, in the laboratory, with the same conditions as are available in the field. Con- sequently a high rate of mortality often results even if kept together in cages for a short time. Again, the work of inducing them when under confinement to feed on animals is equally difficult, involving considerable labour and patience. In order to overcome these difficulties various methods for keeping the flies alive under laboratory conditions and subsequently feeding them on experimental animals have been employed by Dutton and Collaborators [1907], Stuhlmann [1909] Baldrey [1911], Mitzmain [1913], Francis [1914], Cross and Patel [1921], Connal and Connal [1922], Nieschulz [1926ROLE OF T. ORIENTIS AND S.CALCITRANS IN RINDERPEST TRANSMISSION. 7 In view of these considerations it was decided to feed the flies singly. The total number of flies fed in each experiment was varied with the object of attempting to determine the minimum required to produce infection. The separate feeding of flies was very laborious, especially when the feeding of a large number had to be controlled. Only the interrupted method of feeding of flies has been followed in all the experiments. In the case of T. orientis each fly sucking the blood of an animal experimentally inoculated with the virus of rinderpest, has been interrupted after 1½ to 2 minutes and in S. calcitrans after 25 seconds to 40 seconds. After the half- feeding was over, they were transferred after one to two hours' interval to a healthy animal in order to complete their meal. The feeding of those flies which could not be induced to suck blood on the one day was carried out on the same infected bull on subsequent days. The flies, having fed on the infected and the healthy animal in one experiment, were destroyed. The interval of time elapsing between the two feeds would vary in the case of each fly, as they were not fed on the healthy animal in the same order as on the infected one, this procedure not being considered necessary. The longest possible time between the two feeds could not have exceeded five hours. The technique employed in feeding of flies was as follows : A small portion of skin on the back of a bull was shaved with a sterilized razor. For feeding Sto- moxys the animal was immobilized and for this the plan adopted was to throw and secure it by tying the legs. This being done, the mouth of the tube containing the fly was then brought into contact with the shaven skin after having removed the blotting paper. In many cases there appeared to be a disinclination to feed but by tapping the tube on the outside the fly was kept in constant touch with the skin and was induced to suck a desired amount of blood without much loss of time. In this way the feeding of all flies used in the experiment was carried out. In the case of T. orientis a half of each wing was clipped before feeding (Text fig. 1, fig. a. 2), and by so doing they were unable to escape and could be fed without being enclosed in tubes, also the necessity for throwing the animal was eliminated. Usually three or four flies were liberated simultaneously on the shaved area of the back of the animal, and removed when they had sucked for a desired time. In this way feeding of all the flies used in any experiment could be closely watched. Those flies which could not be induced to feed on one day, were kept separately in tubes and fed on subse- quent days.
8 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I The transmission experiments with T. orientis. The results of all the four transmission experiments carried out with T. orientis are summarised in the following tables. TABLE I 1st Experiment Serial No. No. of flies collected and date No. of flies half-fed and Control No. No. of flies induced to complete their meal, and experimental bull No. Date of feeding Maximum interval between two feeds Result Remarks 1 8 flies on 18th May 1934. 8 flies on Con- trol No. 544. 6 flies on experi- mental bull No. 985. 19 th May 1934. 1 hour and 20 minutes. Negative. The flies used in the experiment were starved for 18 hours before their infec- tive feeds. The hill bull No. 985 used in the foregoing experiment was kept under observation for 20 days after infected flies had been fed on it and on being subjected to an immunity test after this period proved susceptible and developed rinderpest.
ROLE OF T. ORIENTIS AND S. CALCITRANS IN RINDERPEST TRANSMISSION. 9 TABLE II. 2nd Experiment. Serial No. No. of flies collected and date No. of flies half-fed and Control No. No. of flies induced to complete their meal, and experimental bull No. Date of feeding Maximum interval between two feeds Result Remarks 1 2 flies on 22nd May 1934. 2 flies on Con- trol No. 824. 1 fly on experi- mental bull No. 967. 23rd May 1934. 30 minutes. . . 2 14 flies on 25th May 1934. 10 flies on Control No. 1098. 7 flies on experi- mental bull No. 967. 26th May 1934. 2 hours . Negative . The two lots of 2 and 14 flies were starved for 18 and 21 hours respectively before their initial feeds. The hill bull used in the above experiment was kept under observation for a total number of 55 days after the date of feeding and on being submitted to an immunity test after this period proved susceptible, and developed rinderpest.
10 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I TABLE III. 3rd Experiment. Serial No. No. of flies collected and date No. of flies half-fed and Control No. No. of flies induced to complete their meal, and experimental bull No. Date of feeding Maximum interval between two feeds Result Remarks 1 40 flies on 2nd June { 1934. 15 flies on Control No. 854. 13 flies on ex- perimental bull No. 531. 3rd June 1934. 4 hours . . . The flies employed in the experiment were starved for 24 hours before their initial feeds on 3rd June 1934, and those which could not be induced to suck blood on this date were fed on sugar solution, and used on 5th June 1934. 5 flies out of 25 remaining unfed on Control No. 854. 5 flies on experi- mental bull No. 531. 5th June 1934. 2½ hours . Negative .
ROLE OF T. ORIENTIS AND S. CALCITRANS IN RINDERPEST TRANSMISSION. 11 As will be seen from table III, this experiment commenced on the 3rd of June. Hill bull No. 531 was kept in a chuppar in which, from 15th June Hill bull No. 954 em- ployed in the fourth experiment, to be described hereafter, was also accommodated. The infection was transmitted mechanically by infected flies to Hill bull No. 954 and the animal showed a thermal reaction on the 19th of June. Bull No. 531 also developed rinderpest and showed a rise of temperature on June 28th. Evidently it developed the disease through contact with bull No. 954, and taking into account the incubation period of three days, it would appear that bull No. 531 probably caught infection on the 25th June, that is to say, after a period of ten days' close contact with bull No. 954. This observation is in accord with the findings of Cooper [1932]. During the period following rise in temperature, bull No. 531 showed all the typical symptoms such as inappetence, diarrh12 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
ROLE OF T. ORIENTIS AND S. CALCITRANS IN RINDERPEST TRANSMISSION. 13 TABLE IV. 4th Experiment. Serial No. No. of flies collected and date No. of flies half-fed and Control No. No. of flies induced to complete their meal, and experimental bull No. Date of feeding Maximum interval between two feeds. Result Remarks 1 93 flies on 14th June 1934. 43 flies on Control No. 657. 36 flies on ex- perimental bull No. 954. 15th June 1934. 5 hours Posi t i v e. The expe- rimental bull deve- loped acute symptoms of Rinder- pest. The flies used in the experiment were starved for 21 hours before their infec- tive feeds.
14 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I It will be gathered from table IV, that in this instance, the feeding of a larger number of infected flies has taken place than in any of the three previous ones. Altogether 36 infected flies completed their meal on healthy bull No. 954 on the 15th of June. The flies successfully transmitted rinderpest, and the first sign of infection was seen when the animal showed a marked rise of temperature of 104.8° F. on the evening of the fourth day after infected flies had fed upon it (Chart No. 2). The temperature increased to 106. 2° F. on the evening of the fifth day, when, with a view to ascertain that the rise in temperature was actually due to rinderpest, 20 c.c. of blood from this bull was inoculated subcutaneously into healthy bull No. 987. Bull No. 987 developed symptoms of rinderpest consisting of soft faeces and inappetence on the fifth day after inoculation (Chart No. 3). The infection was mild, the animal recovering on the 12th day after inoculation. On being put to an immunity test after this period, immunity to rinderpest was shown to be established. After a maximum rise in temperature of 106.2° F. on the fifth day, the tempera- ture of bull No. 954 gradually arrived at normal on the tenth day after the feeding of infected flies. Characteristic ulcers were detected on the 8th and 9th day on the gums and the lips. A slight rise of temperature was observed in the evenings for four succeeding days. The animal suffered from inappetence and diarrhROLE OF T. ORIENTIS AND S. CALCITRANS IN RINDERPEST TRANSMISSION. 15 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
16 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
ROLE OF T. ORIENTIS AND S. CALCITRANS IN RINDERPEST TRANSMISSION. 17 THE TRANSMISSION EXPERIMENTS WITH Stomoxys calcitrans. The results of the four transmission experiments carried out with. Stomoxys calcitrans are summarised in the following tables :18 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I TABLE VI. 2nd Experiment. Serial No. No. of'flies collected and date No. of flies half-fed and Control No. No. of flies induced to complete their meal, and experimental bull No. Date of feeding Maximum interval between two feeds Result Remarks. 1 15 flies on 22nd June 1934. 11 flies on Control No. 934. 10 flies on ex- perimental bull No. 856. 23rd June 1934. 3 hours Negative The flies were starved for 21 hours before their initial feeds. Hill bull No. 856 employed in the foregoing experiment was under observation for a period of 35 days after infected flies had fed on it, after which period it developed rinderpest on inoculation with virus.
ROLE OF T. ORIENTIS AND S. CALCITRANS IN RINDERPEST TRANSMISSION; 19 Table VII. 3rd Experiment. Serial No. No. of flies collected and date No. of flies half-fed and Control No. No. of flies induced to complete their meal, and experimental bull No. Date of feeding Maximum interval between two feeds Result Remarks. 1 30 flies on 29th June 1934. 14 flies on Control No. 859. 13 flies on ex- perimental bull No. 777. 30th June 1934. 4 hours . Negative . The flies used in this experiment were starved for 24 hours before their initial feeds. Hill bull No. 777 used in the foregoing experiment was under observation for a period of 26 days following the date of feeding on it of the infected flies, but on being submitted to an immunity test after this period, it proved immune and did not develop rinderpest. The circumstances under which this bull had acquired a previous immunity are not known. B 2
20 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I TABLE VIII. 4th Experiment. Serial No. No. of flies collected and date No. of flies half-fed and Control No. No. of flies induced to complete their meal, and experimental bull No. Date of feeding Maximum interval between two feeds Result Remarks. 1 20 flies on 13th July 1934. 14 flies on Control No. 972. 14 flies on ex- perimental bull No. 638. 14th July 1934. 3½ hours . Negative . The flies used in the experiment were starved for 21 hours before their initial feeds. Hill bull No. 638 used in the above experiment was under observation for 31 days after the feeding of infected flies, and after an inoculation of virus developed rinderpest.
ROLE OF T. ORIENTIS AND S. CALCITRANS IN RINDERPEST TRANSMISSION. 21 CONCLUDING REMARKS. The mechanical transmission of rinderpest having been experimentally demons- trated by means of Tabanus orientis, it is urged that transmission experiments on a much larger scale than has been possible for the writer, should be carried out with a larger variety of blood-sucking flies and other arthropods, in order that more complete information may be gained regarding the species which are capable of transmitting rinderpest. In addition to experiments with more species of Tabanus and Stomoxys, transmission of the infection should be attempted with other biting and non-biting flies which are found in association with cattle such as species of Simulium, Haema- topota, Chrysops, Lyperosia, Haematobia, the blood sucking spp. of Musca and Hippobosca, and non-biting muscids found in the region of the eyes of cattle. Only when the vector problem has been thoroughly investigated will it be possible to introduce control measures for checking the frequent outbreaks of rinderpest. It will be seen from the experiments reported upon in this article that the feeding of a varying number of infected flies has been carried out on the healthy bull employed in each experiment, with the object of finding the minimum number of flies that is required for the production of the infection. In T. orientis by which positive results have been obtained, successful transmission of rinderpest resulted only when 36 infected flies were fed, the results being negative when a smaller number of flies were used. It is too early to state whether this number represents the minimum necessary for the transmission of the infection, nevertheless, it is hoped that following upon this article, further experiments will throw light on this point. It will also be interesting to determine the length of time for which the vector maintains a fully virulent virus, and the circumstances in which it transmits the infection under field conditions. REFERENCES. Baldrey,F. S. H. (1911). J. Trop. Vet. Sc., 6, 271. Connal, A. and Connal, S. L. M. (1922). Trans. Roy. Soc. Med. and Hyg., 16, 64-89. Cooper, H. (1932). Ind. J. Vet. Sc. Ani. Husb., 2, 390. Crawford, W. (1933). Ibid., 3, 401. Cross, H. F., and Patel, P. G. (1921). Dept. Aqri. Punj. Vet. Bull., 5, 2. Curasson, G. (1922). Rev. Gen. Med. Vet., 31, 57-60. [Abstract in Trop. Vet. Bull., 10, 49-50 (1922).] Datta, S. C. A. and Rajagopalan, V. R. (1932). Ind. J. Vet. Sc. Ani. Husb. 2, 360-361. De Souza, M. A. (1924). Trop. Vet. Bull., 12, 63. Dutton, J. E., Todd, J. L., and Hanington, J. W. B. (1907). Ann. Trop. Med. and Parasit., 1, 203, 215. Francis, E. (1914). J. Infect. Dis., 15, 1-5. Hornby, H. E. (1926). Vet. J., 8 2, 348-355. Husain, M.A. (1926). Sci. Repts. Agri. Res. Inst., Pusa, 76-77. Kearney, W. (1927). Rev. App. Ent. 15, 168. Kinghorn, A. and Yorke, W. (1912). Ann. Trop. Med. and Parasit., 6, 3-4.
22 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, 1 Kranefeld, F. C. (1931). Ned. Ind. Diergeneesk., 43, 132-192. [Abstract in Vet., Bull., 1, 209 (1931).] Mitzmain, M. B. (1913). Philipp. J. Sc. Sec.,B., 8, 226. Ind, Jour, Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb, Vol. V, Pt. 1. Plate II. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Outline of shell and spine is seen well ; the miracidium inside seen to some extent × 60 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Some amount of "Actino-body" is seen as dark masses on the shell. × 40.
OVA OF SCHISTOSOMES IN THE FAECES OF A DOG. (A PRELIMINARY REPORT) BY M. ANANT NARAYAN RAO, G.M.V.C., Lecturer in Parasitology, Madras Veterinary College, AND R. SWAMINATHA AYYAR, B.A., G.M.V.C., Veterinary Assistant Surgeon, Ootacamund. [Received for publication on the 9th October 1934.] (With Plate II and one text-fig.) In the month of May last, one of us (R. S. A.) found schistosome ova in the faeces of a dog that was brought for treatment at the Veterinary Hospital, Ootaca- mund (The Nilgiris). The material was re-examined at Madras and the finding was confirmed by the senior author. The dog, it is reported, developed periodical dysentery at Jubbalpore (North India) nearly six months prior to its arrival at Kota- giri (The Nilgiris) and in spite of the change to the South, it continued to suffer from the complaint. The owner had lost previously three other dogs which, along with this one showed similar symptoms. There is no published account of such cases in India and the authors wish to record that schistosomiasis is one of the possible causes of dysentery in the dog in this country. The dog is still under treatment and a separate paper on this aspect of the subject will be published later. DESCRIPTION OF THE OVA. The ova have thin shells which are brownish-yellow in colour. Each ovum is suboval in shape with one side flattened. It has a small spine at one end which is subterminal and inclines slightly towards the flattened side. (P1. II, fig. 1 and text (23)
24 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I fig. 1.) Some of the ova show a thin layer of actino-body attached round the shell. (P1. II, fig. 2.) The dimensions of the ova are as follows:OVA OF SCHISTOSOMES IN THE FAECES OF A DOG. 25 into coarsely granular and finely granular ones is more a physiological than a mor- phological difference and that the final test of the identity of this form of cercaria, with that of 8. japonicum, lay in the similarity or otherwise of the adults. Bhalerao obviously assumes that those cercariae are of S. japonicum. on the strength of Sewell's observation and because they existed in the same locality where adult schistosomes have now been found in the pig, the adult worms are 8. japonicum. As regards the first point, Bhalerao seems to be unaware of a paper on the Schistosome of the pig by Rao and Ayyar [1933]. It will be instructive to compare, in a tabular form, the morphological features of worms described by Bhalerao with those of the male S . suis and S . japonicum, since he describes only male worms. Table of comparison of male worms Schistosome described by Bhalerao (1934) S. suis Rao & Ayyar (1933) S. japonicum Katsurada, 1904 According to Baylis (1929) According to Faust (1930) Cuticle . . Tuberculate (Tuberculations of moderate size). Tuberculate (Tubercula- tions of mo- derate size). Smooth . . Smooth. Length . . 5.65 26 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V. I if only a few males are taken into account, in the absence of the morphological charac- ters of the females and their ova. Bhalerao [1932] by comparing in a tabular form the range of variation of testicular glands in the different species, has suggested that the number of testes is not important in the specific identity of schistosomes. Secondly, he has pointed out that the caecum, a part of the alimentary canal of the female, is variable in its nature and cannot be relied upon in aiding the specific identification of these, hence it is evident that the alimentary canal of a male schis- tosome may vary as much, if not more, because it is much more muscular than the female. Bhalerao [1932, 1934] says that the nature of the cuticle and the average size of the worm are not of any significance. By eliminating these four important morphological characters as variable and therefore unreliable, there is nothing left to compare the male schistosome in question with a male S. japonicum to say they are identical. Regarding the second point it is interesting to quote Faust and Meleney [1924] who say that they have analysed all the numerous researches on schistosome cer- cariae, and affirm that " although the cephalic glands have been at times inaccura- tely and inadequately observed and described, they constitute, nevertheless, specific characters by which definite differentiation of species may be made ". One of us (M. A. N. R.), who has had many opportunities to study cercariae, agrees with them regarding the importance of the characters presented by the cephalic glands. Therefore, with this additional knowledge at the present moment about the cephalic glands in schistosome cercariae, one cannot brush aside the morphological details of these important glands, and still hold that those cercariae described by Sewell [1919] are of S. japonicum. Further Sewell [1922] redescribed the same cercariae under the heading Cercariae Indicae XXX, and Rao [1933] has definitely proved, by experimental evidence, that those cercariae produce nasal schistosomiasis in cattle. The identity of the adult schistosomes obtained from those cercariae has also been settled by Rao [1934]. These schistosomes experimentally obtained have been found to be similar to the ones described by Rao [1932] from the nasal veins of naturally infected cases of nasal schistosomiasis. It would appear there- fore that Bhalerao is not aware of these facts. The cercariae in question are not of S. japonicum, but they are the larval forms of the nasal schistosome. It will not be out of place here to quote Faust [1930] who says that " the species of operculate amphibious snails, which S. japonicum utilises for the intra-molluscan phase of its life cycle, are peculiar to certain areas in the far east and therefore Schistosomiasis japonica is restricted in its distribution in accordance with the dis- tribution of its molluscan host". The present writers were unable to find any record, so far, reporting the existence of snails of the genus Onchomelania in India. It is therefore suggested that the Schistosome of the pig in Calcutta described by Bhalerao [1934] is not S. japonicum, but there are reasons to believe that it is S. suis.
OVA OF SCHISTOSOMES IN THE FAECES OF A DOG. 27 Before concluding this paper, we wish to quote a portion of the letter from the owner of the dog in question. " You ask whether there were pigs in Jubbulpore. Yes, plenty, especially round the jheels where we used to go snipe shooting ". This information suggests that the dogs may have been infected in the jheels and presum. ably with the same schistosome as found in the pigs of that locality. REFERENCES. Baylis, H. A. (1929). Helminthology, Med. and Vet. London, B. T. and Cox. Bhalerao, G. D. (1932). On the identity of the Schistosomes found in cases of Bovine Nasal Granuloma and some observations on a few other members of Schistosomidae Ind. Jour. of Vet. Sc. and Anim. Husb., 2, 338-356. (1934). On the occurrence of Schistosoma japonicum Katsurada in India Ind. Jour. of Vety. Sc. and Anim. Husb., 4, 148A NOTE ON TAENIA SOLIUM LINNEUS, 1758 IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY BY M. ANANT NARAYAN RAO, G.M.V.C., Lecturer in Parasitology, Madras Veterinary College. [Received for publication on 3rd October 1934.] In the Annual Report of the Civil Veterinary Department, Madras, for the year 1932-33, attention was drawn to the fact that the pigs obtained from near Tiruvan- namalai, North Arcot District, for slaughter in Madras; showed varying degree of infestation with Cysticercus cellulosae. It was then suggested that T. solium may exist in man in that locality. On 3rd May 1934, the Veterinary Assistant Surgeon at Tiruvannamalai sent to this College some segments of tapeworms passed by a man and these were found to be T. solium which is interesting. Those segments were obtained by him through the kind courtesy of the Assistant Surgeon attached to the Civil Hospital at that place. This parasite is of great veterinary importance, because its cystic stageA NOTE ON TAENIA SODIUM LINNEUS. 29 cases discussed, the course of case III recorded by him is of particular interest because that was the only one that showed a very heavy multiple infestation of the brain in addition to the heart, diaphragm, etc. In that dog the outer surface of the cerebrum, cerebellum and the pons varoli was beset with a number of cysts, while on the anterior portion of the medulla there were some. On section of the brain cysts were found in the interior involving the ventricles also. This dog was admitted as an in-patient in the College Hospital on 26th July 1926 with the history that it was losing condition and that it was gradually losing power over its limbs. The blood smears of this dog showed Babesia canis for which trypanblue was injected subcutaneously inside the thigh and treated with stimulants and tonics. The dog was getting worse though the blood was free from parasites. On the morning of 3rd August 1926 it was found that two toes of the left hind limb were torn off the foot, probably by the dog itself and the reasons for the cause of such a condition are obvious. Such a sequel to multiple infestation of the brain does not appear to have been recorded hitherto and this opportunity is taken to do so. In the pigs, animals of economic value, owing to their highly coprophagou habits, the chances of a large percentage of them getting infested with C. cellulosae are greater even if a very small percentage of men in that locality harbour the adult tapeworms in their intestines. Therefore the larger the percentage of the pigs with cysts in their flesh, the greater are the chances of more men getting infested with T. solium, thus enlarging the vicious circle day by day. With the reduction of the adult worm in man and of the larvae in pigs, it should be possible to reduce the incidence of human infestation which apparently is more widely present in this Presidency than what has been recorded hitherto. REFERENCES. Elliot, R. H. and Ingram (1911). Ind. Med. Gaz. Krishnamurti Ayyar, V. (1929). Scientific papers of the C. V. D., Madras, 1, p. 16. Tirumurti, S. (1911). Ind. Med. Gaz. Ware, F. (1925). Jour. of Com. Path. and Therapeutics, 38, pp. 89-91.
LUNG FLUKES IN TWO DOGS IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY BY M. ANANT NARAYAN RAO, G.M.V.C., Lecturer in Parasitology, Madras Veterinary College. [Received for publication on 3rd October 1934.] (With Plate III.) Lung flukes or Paragonimus westermani [Kerbert, 1878] Braun [1899], were first discovered in the lungs of two Bengal tigers that died in the Zoological Gardens in Amsterdam and Hamburg. Since then they have been recorded in the pig, dog, cat, panther and in man. Some importance is attached to this parasite, because it produces a serious disease "Paragonimiasis" in man in the far east. As regards the geographical distribution of these parasites it would be interesting to quote here a few authors. Lane and Low [1923] include the whole of India, but Faust [1930] includes only Bengal and Assam in the endemic foci. Chandler [1930] who, like Lane, had worked in Bengal and Assam, says that the flukes of the Genus Para- gonimus occur in " parts of India ". Baylis [1929] omits India in the geographical range of these parasites. None of these authors, however, have reported the finding of these parasites in man in India, or in domesticated animals such as the dog and cat in this country. From the literature available, it would appear that there is no record of Paragonimiasis either in man or domesticated animals in India, at any rate in the Madras Presidency. Surveyor [1919] appears to be the only one in this country, who recorded a case of Paragonimiasis in a Chinaman in Bombay and that case appeared to be an imported one. Leiper [1920] in abstracting that paper remarked that the case referred to did not appear to him to be an endemic one. This opportunity is taken to record the finding of Paragonimus westermani in two dogs in the Madras Presidency, one in Malabar on the West Coast and the other in Coimbatore, a district adjoining the former. It will not be out of place to mention here that the writer recently received a few specimens of P. westermani from the lungs of a panther shot in CoorgInd. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. V, Pt. 1. Plate III. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 1. Section of lung showing lesions × 30. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 2. Section of lung showing fibrous changes round an ovum × 60. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 3. Section of lung showing nests of ova and catarrhal changes in the alveoli × 60.
LUNG FLUKES IN TWO DOGS. 31 run, form an area where lung flukes exist. Through the courtesy of V. S. Hejmad, Esq., I.C.S., the writer has had opportunities of obtaining parasites from some tigers and panthers shot in Kurnool and Kistna districts. It is interesting to note that no lung flukes were found in them. The fact of finding these parasites in the panther and two dogs in the region mentioned appears to be significant. The dog that was brought to the veterinary institution at Calicut, Malabar appears to have undergone treatment for debility on two occasions within a period of two years. It was again brought there for treatment on 4th January 1934, for the third time, with the same complaint. The dog was treated with anthelmintics twice, with an interval of a week between the two courses of treatment. It passed some tapeworms, but on 14th January 1934 it died. The postmortem examina- tion revealed that the right lung, which was in a state of congestion, had nodules in it. One of the nodules when opened contained two parasites. A piece of the lung and the two flukes were received here for examination and report. The flukes were examined and found to be P. westermani. No nodules could be seen in the portion of the lung received, but the sections of lung tissue showed a large number of ova of the flukes with the usual histopathological changes of the lungs caused by them. There was some amount of diffused fibrosis, dilated alveoli and bronchi filled with catarrhal discharges containing ova and some pseudotubercles (Figs. 1, 2 and 3). The other dog which was admitted on 25th April 1934 in the veterinary hospital at Coimbatore, belonged to a planter in Variday Malai in the Anamalai Hills, about 30 miles from Coimbatore. It was admitted for retention of urine and died the next day. The postmortem examination showed that the right lung contained a cyst in which the flukes were found. The flukes were received here and were found to be P. westermani. The writer is of opinion that this finding of parasites of the genus Paragonimus is of some importance to the human clinician and worth recording, because Para, gonimiasis in man simulates pulmonary tuberculosis. There may be perhaps a tendency among practitioners, in cases of chronic lung affections in man, to examine chiefly for tubercle bacilli and omit to examine the sputum in the fresh state for ova of helminths. It is possible, therefore, that such helminthic diseases in man simulating pulmonary tuberculosis may be overlooked. If only a systematic exa- mination of the sputum and faeces of human beings and domesticated animals such as the cat and the dog, is carried out in the areas pointed out in this paper, it is possi- ble that many cases of Paragonimiasis may be discovered. It is therefore suggested that the finding of Paragonimus westermani in dogs in two adjoining districts of the West Coast of this Presidency may lead on to the discovery in man of yet another important helminthic disease in India which is common to man and animals.
32 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I REFERENCES. Baylis, H. A. (1929). Manual of Helminthology, Med., and Vet. B. T. and Cox, London. Chandler, Asa, A. (1930). Introduction to Human Parasitology, John Wiley and Sons, New York. Faust, E. C. (1930). Human Helminthology, Henry Kimpton, London. Lane, Clayton and Low, G. C. (1923). The Practice of Medicine in the TropicsON THE OCCURRENCE OF STILESIA VITTATA (CESTODA) IN OVINES IN INDIA BY G. D. BHALERAO, M.Sc., Helminthologist, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on the 29th November 1934.) The occurrence of Stilesia vittata from camels has been recorded by several authors in the past. Among these Railliet [1896], Gough [1908 and 1911], Douthitt [1915], Meggitt [1921] and Baylis [1929] may be mentioned. In his Fauna Volume Southwell [1930], who had an opportunity of examining these worms from a sheep in the Punjab, makes the following remarks concerning the species :34 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I REFERENCES. Baylis, H. A. (1929). A Manual of Helminthology, London, xi+ 303. Douthitt, A. (1915). Studies on the Cestode family Anoplocephalidæ. III. Biol. Mon., 1. Fuhrmann, O. (1932). Les tenias des oiseaux. Mem. Univ. Neuchatel, 8. Gough, L. H. (1908). Notes on South African parasites. Ann. Rep. South Afr. Assoc. Adv. Sc. (1911). A Monograph of the tapeworms of the family Aviteliniæ being a revision of the genus Stilesia and an account of the histology of Avitellina centripunctata (Riv.). Quart. J. Microsc. Sc., 56 317Ind, Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. V, Pt. I. Plate IV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG.1 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG.2 Photographs showing the diverticulated nature of the intestinal cacca.
HELMINTH PARASITES OF THE INDIAN ELEPHANT FROM THE ANDAMANS AND BURMA BY G. D. BHALERAO, M.Sc., Helminthologist, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on 31st December 1934.) (With Plate IV and nine figures.) For the opportunity to record the parasites dealt with in the present communi- cation the writer is indebted to Dr. Gupta of Toungoo, Burma, and to Mr. Sen Gupta, Veterinary Officer for the Andamans. TREMATODA. FAMILY FASCIOLIDÆ . Fasciola jacksoni (Cobbold, 1869). Remarks on the anatomical details and taxonomy of this parasite have already been published in one of the writer's previous communications : Bhalerao [1933]. Location.36 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I Pfenderius heterocHELMINTH PARASITES OF THE INDIAN ELEPHANT. 37 cirrus sac, measuring 0.6238 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I Description. The worms are oval, with the anterior end attenuated an the posterior hemispherical. The ventral aspect is almost that with a little concavaty while the dorsal surface is convex. The worms measure 2.3 in length and 12 in breadth. The mouth is subterminal and is surrounded by papillæ. The posterior sucker is situated at almost the posterior end and is also subterminal. It is round with a diameter of 0.92HELMINTH PARASITES OF THE INDIAN ELEPHANT. 39 and Goldberger, 1910 and Tagum40 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I Cirrus sac spindle-shaped muscular. Inside the cirrus sac male genital duct differentiated into vesicula-seminalis, pars prostatica and cirrus. Genital sucker absent. Vitellaria lateral. Excretory system coiled. Lymphatic system consisting of three pairs of canals. Parasitic in the Indian elephant. Type-genus.HELMINTH PARASITES OF THE INDIAN ELEPHANT, 41 [1932], but this author had only one pair of worms at his disposal and therefore the description is not complete. The present opportunity is therefore taken to revise in more detail the description of the worm from the study of a number of specimens available to me. Description. The spirit preserved specimens are red in colour. A few of the worms were in copula but a large majority of them were separate. The males have their body gradually increasing in thickness posteriorly with a constriction imme- diately in front of the bursa. The body of the female grows thicker to a distance more than half its body length, then it gradually diminishes in thickness posteriorly. The cuticular striations are very indistinct. The cervical papillæ are short and thick being at the same level as the nerve ring or slightly posterior to it. The excretory pore is either slightly anterior to the nerve ring or level with it. A definite mouth collar is absent. The mouth opening is terminal and is surrounded by two lateral and four sub median papillæ. The buccal capsule is more or less subglobular in appearance and is supported internally by six ridges which arise from its anterior border and correspond with the papillæ, so that the number of ridges is also two lateral and four submedian. The two shorter ribs described for Syngamus laryngeus by Ware [1925] and for S. hyppopotami by Gedoelst [1924] are not present in this species. At the base of the buccal capsule there are eight salient teeth and all these, excepting the dorsal and the ventral ones, stand against the ridges. Male.42 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I laterals as is indicated in Mönnig's figures. The extreno-dorsal rays arise quite independently, but are not the thinnest of all the rays as described by Mönnig. In all the specimens examined they appeared to be stouter than the dorsal rays. The distal end in some cases was observed to end in a narrow point, while in others it ter- minated bluntly. The dorsal rays arise quite independently and are far apart. Their distal end terminates in very irregular, small digitations. They appear, as remarked by Mönnig, " broken off". Mönnig, having only one pair of worms at his disposal, did not observe the spicules. A large number of specimens being available for study enabled me to see these minute structures by dissecting a few males. These spicules are like small nails and measure 0.06HELMINTH PARASITES OF THE INDIAN ELEPHANT. 43 It will be seen from the above description that the specimens at my disposal differ in some respects from those of Mönnig ; particularly in respect of the size, the rays of the bursa and the female genitalia, but since the host and the location of the parasite is the same these differences are not in the opinion of the writer enough to justify the creation of a new species. It is probable that these variations occur normally in this species and Monnig could not record these as he had only a single pair at his disposal. Location.44 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I Explanation to abbreviations. a. 1. Antero-lateral ray. or. s. Oral sucker. c. Cirrus. ov. Ovary. c. s. Cirrus sac. p. l. Postero-lateral ray. d. Dorsal ray. p. s. Posterior sucker. e. d. Externo-dorsal ray. pp. Pars prostatica. g. a. Genital atrium. sh. gl. Shell gland. g. p. Genital pore. sp. Spicule. h. b. Hermaphroditic bulb. s. v. Seminial vesicle. i. c. Intestinal cæca. t. Testis. l. v. Latero-ventral ray. ut. Uterus. m. l. Medio-lateral ray. v. v. Ventro-ventral ray. o. b. Oesophageal bulb. vag. Vagina. o. d. Oral diverticulum. vit. Vitellaria. oes. Oesophagus. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. I. (Please see p, 43 and above for explanations to figures and abbreviations,)
HELMINTH PARASITES OF THE INDIAN ELEPHANT. 45 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 2. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 3. (Please see pp. 43-44 for explanations to figures and abbreviations,)
46 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 4. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 5. (Please see pp 43-44 for explanations to figures and abbreviations.)
HELMINTH PARASITES OF THE INDIAN ELEPHANT. 47 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 6. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 7. (Please see pp. 43-44 for explanations to figures and abbreviations.)
48 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 8. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 9 (Please see pp. 43-44 for explanations to figures and abbreviations.)
ON TWO NEW MONOSTOMES (TREMATODA) FROM AVIAN HOSTS IN BRITISH INDIA. BY G. D. BHALERAO, M.Sc., Helminthologist, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on the 13th November 1934.) (With four figures.) Up to the present time there has not been any record of the occurrence of any monostome from India. The present opportunity is therefore taken to record the presence of these worms from two avian hosts in this country. For the material described in this paper I wish here to record my indebtedness to Mr. K. Subramanian, M.A., formerly of the Biological Department, University College, Rangoon, and to Mr. V. R. Rajagopalan, G.M.V.C., my colleague at this Institute. Notocotylus babai n. sp. Only one specimen of this species was obtained by Mr. K. Subramanian from the cæcum of the common kite, Milvus migrans govinda. The specimen was in an excellent state of preservation and well stained. On comparison it was found to differ from all the existing species of Notocotylus. It is intended to give here a short description of the species, and to discuss its affinities in the subsequent part of the paper. In order to facilitate future investigation on this genus a comparative table of the known species recorded from birds and a key to these have been given. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Notocotylus babai n.sp.; entire worm. (49) D
50 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I The body is small, elongate, elliptical, measuring 3.83* in length and 0.93 in maximum breadth which is attained some distance behind the anterior end. The lateral margins, a short distance from the anterior end, and the posterior margin of the body are slightly incurved ventrally. The cuticle of both the dorsal and the ventral surfaces is covered with minute spines. The parenchymatous cells are arranged in diagonally transverse rows and have large nuclei. There are three rows of ventral glands ; the lateral ones consist of seventeen glands each and the central row consists of fifteen glands only. The glands are more or less of uniform size and are eversible. The lateral rows advance more anteriorly than the central one. The oral sucker is subterminal and measures 0.2 × 0.16. The TWO NEW MONOSTOMES (TREMATODA) FROM AVIAN HOSTS IN BRITISH INDIA. 51 The main portion of the excretory system consists of a short bladder that divides into two main lateral branches behind the ovary. The excretary pore is median and is situated on the dorsal side of the body near its posterior end. DISCUSSION From the foregoing description it is quite evident that the worm is a digenetic trematode belonging to the superfamily Notocotylidæ, family Notocotylidæ and the genus Notocotylus. Up to the present time sixteen species of this genus have been recorded ; these being N. attenuatus, N. ægyptiacus, N. chionis, N. gibbus, N. intes- tinalis,N. naviformis, N. noyeri, N. quinqueserialis, N. seineti, N. trachyeretis, N. urbanensis, N. discrialis, N. thienemanni, N. parviovatus, N. magniovatus and N. vespertilionis. Of these species the last named, coming as it does, from a mamma- lian host, will not be considered in the present discussion. All the remaining species have been recorded from avian hosts. Of these the species N. diserialis has been regarded by Sprehn [1932] and Kossack [ 1911 ] to be very poorly described' and its inclusion in the genus Notocotylus is highly sceptical. In regard to the species N. ægyptiacus both Odhner [1905] and Kossack [1911] remark that it is not possible to understand how it differs from the species N. attenuatus and N. gibbus. Of the two recently described species : N. parviovatus and N. magniovatus, the latter in the opinion of the writer is identical with N. attenuatus and should be regarded as its synonym. Even according to the original author Yamagati [ 1934 ], the only point of difference between N. attenuatus and N. magniovatus is the size of the eggs. This difference is not sufficient to separate one species from the other. Moreover, if we compare the measurements of the eggs of N. attenuatus and N . magniovatus they are 0.0252 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I of the genital pore, the smaller size of the eggs and in the extent of the uterus in front of the vitellaria. In this latter respect it is very characteristic and differs from all the existing species of the genus. In this species the majority of the uterine coils are anterior to the vitellaria while in all others the majority of the uterine coils lie in the vitelline zone of the body. On account of this difference coupled with the other two already mentioned it is considered that the species from the Burmese kite is a new one and it is proposed to designate it Notocotylus babai. SPECIFIC DIAGNOSIS. Notocotylus: Length 3.8, maximum breadth 0.93. Cuticle spiny. Ventral glands in three rows: the central row consisting of 15 glands and the lateral ones of 17 each. Oral sucker subterminal, 0.2 × 0.16. TWO NEW MONOSTOMES (TREMATODA) FROM AVIAN HOSTS IN BRITISH INDIA. 53 9. Major portion of uterus anterior to vitellaria, genital pore at intestinal fork . . . . . . Major portion of uterus in vitelline zone, genital pore immediately behind intestinal fork . . . . . N. babai. 10 10. Middle row of ventral glands consisting of 1454 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I The flukes are of medium size, flat but fleshy, measuring 10.5TWO NEW MONOSTOMES (TREMATODA) FROM AVIAN HOSTS IN BRITISH INDIA. 55 The genital glands (Fig. 2.) are situated in the posterior fourth of the body. The hinder testis is completely inclosed by the posterior intestinal arch and is almost in contact with the latter. It is flattened anteriorly and rounded posteriorly and mea- sures 2.15 × 1.32. The vas deferens of the posterior testis arises from the right hand corner of its anterior margin. The anterior testis is somewhat irregularly elongate and oval in shape and measures 2.07 × 1.7. Laterally it is in contact with the left intestinal cæcum and is separated from the posterior testis by a few, usually three, uterine coils and the ovary. The vas deferens of the anterior testis emerges from its left anterior margin. The cirrus sac is small and wide and measures 0.5 × 0.43. The large, inversely pear-shaped seminal vesicle almost completely fills the cirrus sac. The seminal vesicle is followed by a somewhat thicker duct, the pars prostatica, which describes only a single coil. Into the pars prostatica open numerous, non-cellular prostatic glands. The terminal portion of the male genitalia is the cirrus, which is disposed in the form of a horizontal S inside the cirrus sac. The male genital duct opens into the genital atrium by a distinct aperture. The genital atrium is very large and is situated posterior to the pharynx, the genital pore being situated slightly behind the pharynx. Posteriorly the cirrus sac extends only as far as two-thirds of the thickness of the intestinal fork. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 4.56 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I testis. The dimensions of the receptaculum seminis are 0.36 × 0.275. The oviduct, after its short course into the shell gland, enlarges into a spindle-shaped sac, the ootype, which continues postero-laterally as the uterus. Near the posterior end. of the ootype opens the common vitelline duct. The vitellaria lie, for the most part, between the lateral margins of the body and the intestinal cæca. Their anterior extension varies considerably : they may end some distance behind the intestinal fork or they may extend as far anteriorly as the hinder border of the pharynx. Stages intermediate between these two extremes are seen. In the same individual the vitellaria do not necessarily termi- nate anteriorly at the same level. Posteriorly the glands terminate on either side of the excretory bladder. The transverse vitelline ducts pass between the ovary and the posterior testis and unite together to form a common vitelline duct. This latter enters the shell gland and opens into the posterior portion of the ootype. Laurer's canal is absent. The uterine coils are very crowded in the posterior two third of the inter-cæcal area while in the anterior third of this space they are some- what loose. In the posterior two-thirds of their course the coils overlap the in- testinal cæca, but in no case do they cross beyond the outer border of the cæca. The metraterm is strongly muscular and is surrounded with gland cells. The eggs are long and elliptical and measure 0.123TWO NEW MONOSTOMES (TREMATODA) FROM AVIAN HOSTS IN BRITISH INDIA. 57 from the Western yellow-billed Magpie, have been recorded in literature; these being C. makii Yamaguti [ 1933 ], C. microcotylum Noble [1933 ], C. phasidi Stun- kard [1929 and] C. vageli Szidat [ 1932 ]. Before discussing the relationship of the species from the magpie with those mentioned above, it will be instructive to compare them all in tabular form (Table II). As a result of the study of Table II, it will be observed that the species under discussion differs from the other species in the points noted in Table III. Table III shows clearly that the species from the magpie can be differentiated from all the species of C yclocælum allied to it. It is therefore necessary to create a new species for its reception for which the name C yclocælum sharadi is proposed. SPECIFIC DIAGNOSIS. Cyclocælum.58 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I Duthoit, M. G. (1931). A new species of trematode genus Notocotylus. Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist. 7, 290-293. Fuhrmann, O. (1919). Notes Helminthologiques Suisses. Rev. Suis. Zool. 27, 353- 376. (1928). Trematoda in Kükenthal's "Handbuch der Zoologie ", Berlin, 1-140. Harrah, E. C. (1921). Two new monostomes from Asia. J. Paras. 7, 162-165. (1922). North American Monostomes. III. Biol. Mon. 7, 1-106. Joyeux, Ch. (1922). Researches sur les Notocotyles. Bull Soc. Path. Exot. 15, 331- 343. & Baer, J. C. (1927). Note sur les CyclocN. attenuatus Rudolphi, 1809. N. TABLE I. The species of Notocotylus. N. attenuatus Rudolphi, 1809. N. 60 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I TABLE Comparison of the Species. C. elongatum. Harrah, 1921. C. makii. Yamaguti, 1933. C. mutabile. Zeder, 1800. C. microcotylum Noble, 1933. C. obscurum Leidy, 1887. Dimensions . 12TWO NEW MONOSTOMES (TREMATODA) FROM AVIAN HOSTS IN BRITISH INDIA. 61 II. species Cycloc62 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I TABLE Species. C. elongatum Harrah, 1921. C. makii Yamaguti, 1933. C. mutabils Zeder, 1800. C. microcotylum Noble, 1933. C. obscurum Leidy, 1887. Points of differ- ence from Cy- clocælum shar- adi. 1. Pharynx smaller 1. Oral sucker not definite. 1. Pharynx larger 1. Size larger 1. Oral sucker weak- ly developed. 2. Genital pore Ventral to pos- terior end of pharynx. 2. Pharynx smal- ler. 2. Genital pore ventral to pha- rynx. 2. Pharynx larger. 2. Pharynx smaller. 3. Cirrus sac ex- tends up to pos- terior wall of in- testinal fork. 3. Uterus less dense. 3. Cirrus sac ends to anterior margin of in- testinal fork. 3. Testes both to right of middle line. 3. TWO NEW MONOSTOMES (TREMATODA) FROM AVIAN HOSTS IN BRITISH INDIA. 63 III. C. orientale Skrjabin, 1913. C. phasidi Stunkard, 1929. C. toratsugumi Morishita, 1924. C. vagum Morishita, 1934. C. vogeli Szidat, 1932. 1. Oral sucker absent. 1. Oral sucker feeble. 1. Oral sucker weak. 1. Oral sucker weak. 1. Oral sucker feebly developed. 2. Genital pore ven- tral to pharynx. 2. Genital pore ven- tral to pharynx. 2. Pharynx smaller. 2. Ventral sucker present. 2. Pharynx smaller. 3. Pharynx smaller. 3. Vitellaria varying 3. Testes smaller. . 3. Cirrus sac extends much posteriorly. 3. Ovary level with posterior testis. 4. Uterine coils not so much overlap- ping intestinal cæca. 4. Uterine coils less overlapping intes- tinal Cæca. 4. Genital pore ven- tral to pharynx. 4. Vitellaria extend from posterior end of cirrus sac to excretory bladder. 4. Eggs smaller. 5. Uterine coils less dense. 5. Uterine coils con- fined to intercæcal area. 6. Genital pore level with intestinal fork. 7. Pharynx smaller. 8. Ovary in straight line passing through the two testes.
THE PERMEABILITY OF THE GOAT'S PLACENTA TO RINDERPEST VIRUS* BY P. C. BANERJI, G.B.V.C., Veterinary Deputy Superintendent, AND R. N. MOHAN, L.V.P., Veterinary Inspector, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on 11th December 1934.) INTRODUCTION. That certain substances, when introduced into, or otherwise gaining access to, the blood stream of pregnant mammals, may sometimes reach the foetus through the placenta, has been known for a long time. The subject has received special consideration from those interested in the immunological aspects of embryology, resulting in the accumulation of a great mass of literature, and the behaviour of the placenta towards a large variety of substances has been determined. Very incon- clusive observations have been made by most of the earlier workers who have laid stress only on the nature and size of the substance passing through the placenta. Kuttner and Ratner [1923] and Ratner, Jackson and Gruehl [1927], in a series of articles, were the first to point out that the histological structure of the placenta. determines largely whether any given substance would pass through it or not. Thus, the haemochorial placentas (man and rodents), consisting of villi composed of a single layer of cells directly bathed in the maternal blood, are permeable to many sub- stances of a sufficiently small molecular size, but the syndesmochorial (ruminants) and the epitheliochorial (horse and pig) placentas, in which three or more layers in- tervene between the two circulations, are impermeable to most such substances. The earlier workers have entirely overlooked this important phase of the subject and one only too often encounters such vague and generalised statements as that " the placenta is permeable, or impermeable, to " whatever substance was used. LITERATURE. The few observations that have been made on the behaviour of the goat's pla- centa, in common with the placenta of ruminants in general, tend to show that it * Read at the Indian Science Congress, January 1935. (64)
PERMEABILITY OF THE GOAT'S PLACENTA TO RINDERPEST VIRUS. 65 is impermeable to most antigens and antibodies. Kraus [1901], for instance, re- ported a negative placental transmission of haemagglutinins to the red blood cells of the sheep from a mother goat to her kid. Kreidl and Mandl [1904] obtained similar results with ox blood haemolysins in goats. Famulener [1912], as a result of his experiments with haemolysins, concluded that goats actively immunised against sheep blood corpuscles during gestation transmit the specific haemolysin to the young, not through the placenta but through the colostrum. Reymann [1920], in a study of natural agglutinins with B. typhosus, B. coli and horse and rabbit sera, in a series of 14 goats and new-born kids, found the blood of all but one kid negative. Similar results have been obtained with tetanus and diphtheria antitoxins. The only substances to which the goat's placenta has been shown to be permeable are thyroxin [Tanberg, 1922], insulin [Pack and Barber, 1928] and iodides of potassium and sodium [Copper, 1906]. It is generally held that the placenta, speaking non-specifically, is, as a rule, impermeable to foreign proteins and bacterial antigens. Filtrable viruses, however, appear to be refractory to this law and occupy a position different from that of the bacterial antigens in this respect. Burckhardt [1879] had long ago observed an acquired immunity to variola in infants born of mothers during late pregnancy. Transplacental infection with the now well-recognised tuberculous ultravirus has been shown from time to time in rodents and there are on record a few cases of true (with uninjured and apparently healthy placenta) congenital tuberculosis in the human beings, although such cases reported in cattle, when examined casuistically, appear to have occurred only through diseased placentas. Remlinger [1919], in a study of the hereditary transmission of rabies, observed the presence of rabies virus in the offspring of female guinea-pigs born either before or after the mothers had developed symptoms of rabies. Beller and Tahssin Bey [1926] not only succeeded in infecting the foetuses of pregnant sheep with pleuro-pneumonia virus, but found the foetal tissues to be a suitable medium for the growth of that virus. EXPERIENCE GAINED AT MUKTESAR. It had already become evident from the researches conducted at Muktesar by Dr. Edwards [1927] in connection with the " fixation " of rinderpest virus in preg- nant goats that, when inoculated on the foetal side of the placenta, the virus could be obtained from the maternal circulation. That the reverse is also true has now been shown when an opportunity was afforded, on June 6th, 1933, through a nearly full-grown foetus thrown by a goat a week after inoculation with a strain of the " goat-adapted " rinderpest virus. The spleen of the aborted foetus was removed with aseptic precautions, mixed with a quantity of the foetal blood, triturated with sterile normal saline solution and inoculated subcutaneously into two fresh goats. Both of these having reacted, the spleen of one of them was removed five days after inoculation, triturated with saline and inoculated into two Himalayan bulls. The bulls exhibited a typical thermal response, one of them having diarrh66 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I pathognomonic vesicles and ulcers on the mucosa of the lip and gums a week after the inoculation. Both had undergone a moderate reaction and survived the attack. It is apparent from this experiment that the tissues of the foetus contained the rinder- pest virus. CONCLUSION. One is, therefore, justified in concluding that the placenta of the goat (and probably ruminant placenta in general), though possessing a relatively high degree of resistance to the passage through it of most substances, will allow a very minute antigen like the ultravisible virus of rinderpest to traverse it from the mother to the foetus and vice versa. REFERENCES. Beller, K. and Tahssin Bey, S. (1926). Arb. a. d. Reichsgesundheitsamte, 57, 484. (Abs. Trop. Vet. Bull, 1927, 15, 121.) Burekhardt (1879). Deutsche. Arch. f. Klin. Med., 24, 506. Copper, D. J. (1906). Jahresb. u. d. Fortschbritte d. Tier-Chemie, 36, 682. Edwards, J. T. (1927). Trans. Seventh Cong. Far East. Assn. Trop. Med., 3, 699. Famulener, L. W. (1912). J. Infect.. Dis., 10, 232. Kraus, R. (1901). Wien. Klin. Wchnschr., 14, 737. Kreidl, A. and Mandl, L. (1904). Ibid, 17, 611. Kuttner, A. and Ratner, B. (1923). Amer. J. Dis. Child., 25, 413. Pack, G. T. and Barber, D. (1928). Amer. J. Obstet. and Gynaecol., 16, 115. (Abs, J. A. M. A., 1928, 91, 753.) Ratner, B., Jackson, H. C. and Cruehl, H. L. (1927). J. Immunol., 14, 249. Remlinger, P. (1919). Ann. Inst. Pasteur, 33, 375. Reymann, G. C. (1920). J. Immunol, 5, 227, 391, 455. Tanberg, A. (1922). Acta. Med. Scand., 56, 33.
THE USE OF GOAT TISSUE VACCINE FOR THE CONTROL OF OUTBREAKS OF RINDERPEST IN BENGAL BY P. J. KERR, I.V.S., Director, Civil Veterinary Department, Bengal. (Received for publication on 30th January 1935.) (With 18 text-figures.) A preliminary note on the use of goat virus and goat tissue vaccine alone for the control of outbreaks of rinderpest has already appeared. [Kerr and Menon 1934]. In this article some of the same ground is covered again and the work dealt with from the beginning of December 1933, when a vaccine depot was established at Barrackpore. VACCINE DEPOT. The Depot is a slaughterhouse rented from the Military Authorities. The building is a modern one and consists of a large fly-proof meat room; and a slaugh- tershed, both of which have " pucca " floors and drains. Water is laid on. In the small compound a brick incinerator, and mat sheds for goats have been erected. The compound is surrounded by a 7 ft. brick wall. Special apparatus consists of an ice-chest, a dry heat steriliser and an air-acety- lene gas plant for ampouling work. PREPARATION. The Muktesar procedure is followed for the preparation of vaccine. Goats are injected with 1 to 5 c. c. of a 1 per cent. emulsion of spleen tissue, and usually react on the 4th day. They are then slaughtered, the abdomen clipped, and the spleen removed. The spleen is then cut up into pieces of approximately 1 gram in weight, placed in glass ampoules and sealed in the flame. These ampoules are then sent to the Bengal Veterinary College for cold storage at 45° F. At first the vaccine was prepared every 3 weeks, but it was found better to make it every fortnight. It would be still better to make it each week but this is not possible under the limitations of the present temporary arrangement. A higher concentration of emulsion has been tried but did not yield such good results : probably due to the more ready diffusion of the thinner emulsion. (67) E 2
68 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I Samples of vaccine have been sent periodically to the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, to check potency and ensure that the fixed strain has been maintained. Also from time to time fresh vaccine has been obtained from Muktesar as a double precaution. REACTION IN GOATS. Great variation has been found in the size of the spleens. This bears little relation to the size of the goat. The cross-bred Jamnapari with the small Bengal goat gives the best yield with a spleen of about 40 grams. In the hot weather goats run very high normal temperatures, 103° F. to 105° F. being common. As the thermal reaction is the chief guide, this makes interpreta- tion difficult. It is better to obtain the goats some time beforehand and keep them in a shed protected from the sun for some days before use and keep a record of their daily temperatures. In the charts attached will be found the record of four goats which were injected in the usual way. Three failed to react but the fourth gave a proper reaction. The former had no natural immunity and the first injection conferred no immunity. Of these three, two were again injected four days afterwards with blood from No. IV and gave a proper reaction. The vaccine made from these two goats was tried in cattle and buffaloes and gave normal results and conferred immunity. Vaccine prepared from the second sub-inoculation from these goats was sent to Muktesar for test and found fully potent. Fresh vaccine was obtained from the Institute to make sure that the right strain had been maintained, pending the result of the test. The charts of a number of other vaccine goats are attached. DOSAGE. In the matter of dosage there is more investigation to be done. As noted in the preliminary article published, some buffaloes reacted very strongly, and though this was probably enhanced by the animals being worked, it is a fact that buffaloes react more strongly than cattle. The attempt made to control this by giving half doses to buffaloes seems to have had an appreciable effect. IMMUNITY. The immunity conferred by giving buffaloes ½ c. c. doses of emulsion has been tested and found solid. The immunity to cattle conferred by giving 1 c. c. doses has also been tested and found to be satisfactory. It remains to be shown whether ½ c. c. doses to the more resistant plains cattle will be sufficient. It is possible that it may be below the minimum essential. This matter is being investigated. From an administrative point of view it is important as it will further reduce the cost of anti-rinderpest inoculation by 50 per cent. In Bengal the cost is borne by Govern- ment.
GOAT TISSUE VACCINE FOR THE CONTROL OF RINDERPEST IN BENGAL 69 The following immunity tests have just been completed at the time of submis. sion of the paper for publication:70 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I The results are c assified under four heads :GOAT TISSUE VACCINE FOR THE CONTROL OF RINDERPEST IN BENGAL. 71 FAILURES. In only two instances have definite failures occurred. Both were due to the inertia of the vaccine and no protection was given to the animals. The outbreaks continued unchecked. In the first the vaccine was used more than 7 days after issue. This was in the early days of the work. The second occurred in April 1934 during the height of an exceptionally hot weather when the temperature was in the neighbourhood of 108°F. Cognisance of the extreme heat should have been taken and the vaccine sent in a thermos container by passenger train. RESULTS. The results have far surpassed expectation. 100,000 animals have now been inoculated by this method in face of the disease, and after eliminating those animals which were obviously inoculated during the incubation period of the disease, the loss works out to ½ per cent. which is negligible. ADVANTAGES OF THE GOAT TISSUE VACCINE METHOD. A. The protection conferred is lasting. B. Distribution is inexpensive. C. It is easy of application in the field. D. The extremely low cost of production72 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I 2. Charts to illustrate the effect of initial high temperature in vaccine makers. a. Reactor. b. Non-reactor. 3. Peculiar reactors, subinoculation and viability test by Muktesar Institute, positive. Experimental goats : 1. Vaccine 30 days old in cold storage. 2. GOAT TISSUE VACCINE FOR THE CONTROL OF RINDERPEST IN BENGAL. 73 VACCINATION AGAINST RINDERPEST WITH GOAT TISSUE VACCINE. Summary of 45,000 cases. Out of 100,000 animals vaccinated with Goat Tissue Vaccine, the details of reactions and deaths of 45,148 have been accurately recorded. Throughout the whole period 1 c. c. doses of emulsion have been given to cattle. Buffaloes were at first given 1 c. c. and later ½ c. c. doses. Buffalo reactions are therefore shown as A. 1 c. c, B.½ c. c. In buffaloes the reduction in dose appears to have controlled the reaction without impairing the protection given:74 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, 1 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1.GOAT TISSUE VACCINE FOR THE CONTROL OF RINDERPEST IN BENGAL. 75 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 3.76 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 5.GOAT TISSUE VACCINE FOR THE CONTROL OF RINDERPEST IN BENGAL. 77 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 6.78 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig .7.GOAT TISSUE VACCINE FOR THE CONTROL OF RINDERPEST IN BENGAL. 79 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 8.80 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 9.GOAT TISSUE VACCINE FOR THE CONTROL OF RINDERPEST IN BENGAL. 81 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 10.82 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 11.GOAT TISSUE VACCINE FOR THE CONTROL OF RINDERPEST IN BENGAL. 83 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 12.84 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 13.GOAT TISSUE VACCINE FOR THE CONTROL OF RINDERPEST IN BENGAL. 85 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 14.86 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 15.GOAT TISSUE VACCINE FOR THE CONTROL OF RINDERPEST IN BENGAL. 87 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 16.88 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 17.GOAT TISSUE VACCINE FOR THE CONTROL OF RINDERPEST IN BENGAL. 89 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 18.SELECTED ARTICLES STERILITY IN DAIRY COWS*. BY W. L. HINDMARSH, B.V. Sc., M.R.C.V.S., D.V.H. Senior Research Officer, Veterinary Research Station, Glenfield. (Reprinted from the Australian Veterinary Journal, 10, 5, pp. 162STERILITY IN DAIRY COWS. 91 Domestic cattle are kept and bred for man's convenience and profit, and hence, by selective breeding, the modern dairy cow is of no value unless it produces milk in large amounts, amounts enormously in excess of what would be required to rear a calf. Further, whereas the wild animal is mon92 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I of breeding for high production would throw considerable light on many of our breeding problems. In this connection Orr and Darling,1 in a brochure published by the Imperial Bureau of Animal Genetics, make this statement: "It would appear that an optimum state of domestication exists in relation to the fertility of animals and in the case of the cow and the mare the demands made upon them by the factors associated with domestication have outweighed the benefits." Another point of considerable importance is that the comparatively heavy cattle population of our farms assists the rapid spread of infectious disease. Dealing with sterility itself, we may class it as : (a) functional or (b) patholo- gical. FUNCTIONAL STERILITY. By functional sterility are meant those cases of sterility in which there are apparently no pathologic changes in the genital organs and the failure to breed is due to dysfunction of the organs. This dysfunction is stated to be due mainly to failure of the hormonic control of the generative mechanism. The anterior pituitary is now regarded as providing the initial stimulus to the ovary. It is, as it were, the " self-starter ". Without the action of the pituitary hormone the STERILITY IN DAIRY COWS. 93 Another aberration in the function of the ovary is retention of the corpus luteum. As you are aware, the corpus is known to produce a hormone which has profound effects on the activity of the ovary and which prepares the uterus for the develop- ment of the f94 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I STERILITY DUE TO PATHOLOGICAL CONDITIONS. In dealing with sterility due to pathological conditions we face a vast field, since disease of any part of the genital tract may prevent breeding. Further, since the various parts of the genital organs are connected, in that there is a direct passage from the vulva to the ovarian bursa, there is great opportunity for exten- sion of the disease process. Sterility has been more or less popularly classed as temporary and permanent, although it must be borne in mind that by " temporary sterility " is frequently meant a condition in which the cow fails to breed after two or more services, but holds to a later service without any remedial measures having been applied by the owner. Actually any sterility which responds to treatment is of a temporary nature. Vaginitis and Sterility. Using the term in its popular sense, temporary sterility is that condition in which STERILITY IN DAIRY COWS. 95 Herd 2. Sixty-five per centum of the cattle showed inflammatory conditions of the vagina and 66 per cent. of the cattle had conceived to the first service. Herd 3. Sixty-five per centum of cattle showed vaginal lesions, 55 per cent. of cattle conceived to the first service. Herd 4. Eighty per centum of cattle showed vaginal lesions, and 32 .5 per cent. of cattle conceived to the first service. Herd 5. Sixty-one per centum of cattle showed vaginal lesions, and approximately 50 per cent. of cattle conceived to the first service. Herds 6 and 7 will be referred to later. From the above it will be seen that in five herds with a total cattle population of some 220 animals, from 60 per cent. to 80 per cent. showed the presence of various forms and grades of vaginal inflammation and that approximately 50 per cent. of the animals failed to conceive to the first service by the bull. In all the herds there was a small incidence of metritis and cervicitis, but these cases are not being taken into consideration at the moment. Vaginitis occurs in different forms, probably due to different infections. We have not carried out bacteriological investigations into the causes of the conditions, but have classed them on their clinical manifestations : Granular venereal disease, approximately 30 per cent. of animals inspected. Congestion of vagina, approximately 25 per cent. of animals inspected. Purulent vaginitis, approximately 15 per cent. of animals inspected. Since the only detectable lesions in the majority of the cattle were located in the vagina, we decided to adopt treatment by douching the vagina with various antiseptic and astringent solutions in order to note the results. The medicaments tested covered a wide range; potassium permanganate, iodine and bromine compounds, various silver preparations and zinc sulphate were used. Generally speaking, improvement resulted in all cases, but in view of their apparent greater efficacy we finally decided to use zinc sulphate in solution of 1/200 and dibromin (a proprietary preparation) in strength of 1/4,000 in treatment on a more extensive scale. Of the five herds quoted two were placed under regular treatment with dibromin and three with zinc sulphate solution.
96 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I Treatment was carried out by the farmer. The routine was as follows:In the first instance, all the cattle were inspected and the findings recorded.All the cattle were then treated by douching with the selected solution on alternate days for three weeks. This treatment was carried out irrespective of pregnancy or state of gestation. In addition, as each cow calved it was subjected to the treatment again. No cow went to the bull until it had been examined and declared free from clinical evidence of vaginitis. The results of this treatment are shown in Table I. TABLE I. Herd No. Veginal lesions. Percentage con- ceived to one service. Before treatment. After treatment. Before treatment. After treatment. Per cent. Per cent. Per cent. Per cent. 1 78 9.7 56 88 2 65 29 66 83 3 65 47 55 82 4 80 60 32 60 5 61 35 50 63 In view of these results it was decided to continue the treatment for a further year, during which every cow would be treated immediately following calving. After this second year of treatment the animals showed further improvement in the breeding record, and a still lower incidence of vaginal lesions. Another method of estimating the breeding efficiency of a herd is to compare the breeding index. This represents the average number of services required for
STERILITY IN DAIRY COWS. 97 the production of each calf. Taking these herds again the breeding indices in suc- cessive years are shown in Table II. TABLE II. Herd No. Breeding index before treatment. Breeding index after one year's treatment. Breeding index after two years' treatment. 1 1.6 1.15 1.14 2 1.5 1.3 1.31 3 1.7 1.2 1.26 (1.56) 4 2.0 1.6 ? 5 4.4 2.65 1.5 From these figures it is evident that not only is the breeding of the cattle generally improved, but there is a definite saving of male effort. It will be noted that there is a lack of parallelism in these figures, as is illustrated by comparing Herds 1 and 5. In Herd 1,78 per cent. of the cattle showed vaginal lesions before treatment, and the Breeding Index was 1.6, whilst in Herd 5,61 per cent. exhibited vaginal lesions with a Breeding Index of 4.4. This is explained by the fact that, whereas in Herd 1 the vaginal lesions were mainly granular venereal disease, in Herd 5 these consisted largely of a purulent vaginal infection which was somewhat resistant to treatment. It might here be noted that no reference has been made so far to cervicitis and metritis in these herds. Cases did occur and were treated before the cattle were permitted to go for service, but these figures are intended to illustrate the fact that with cattle having no clinical evidence of cervical or uterine disease, and in which temporary sterility was occurring, and in which the only detectable lesions were in the vagina, considerable benefit resulted from the practice of regular douching. In order that the douching should be carried out satisfactorily, the following instructions were issued : As each cow calves the vagina to be douched with one gallon of the solution prepared as directed. The solution to be introduced into the vagina with rubber G
98 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I tubing and funnel. Immediately after douching of each cow the tubing to be sterilized by immersion in boiling water. The douching to be carried out each alternate day for three weeks. The following records to be kept: (a) Dates of service. (b) Date of parturition. (c) Any abnormality of parturition. No cow was permitted to go for service until inspected by the veterinarian. In New Zealand, Webster4 has reported that temporary sterility in that Domi- nion may be due to cervicitis of streptococcal origin. This disease was proved by him to be transmitted by the bull. This finding is of interest since, as will be seen later, we have found streptococci to be associated with cervicitis and metritis in dairy cattle. Cervicitis and Metritis. A considerable amount of sterility in cattle is due to infections of the cervix and uterus. Whilst in many herds cases of inflammation of the cervix and uterus are comparatively few, in some herds the extent of uterine disease is alarming, especially since the resulting sterility is much more obstinate to treatment than that due to disease of the posterior genital passage. Thus in one herd (Herd 6) of 93 cattle, 54 cattle showed lesions of cervicitis and metritis, and 12 additional cattle calved later showing similar lesions. In other words, 70 per cent. of the milking herd were affected with cervical and uterine infections. Of the 66 affected animals, 43 responded to treatment and bred satisfactorily, but 23 were refractory to treatment, and were finally disposed of by the owner at butchers' prices. Of the 23 animals so disposed of the original prognosis was very grave in the case of 16, but hope of successful treatment had been held out in the case of 7. It might be mentioned that of the animals of which the prognosis was grave the majority had been sterile for periods of from one to two years before treatment was adopted. Extensive incidence of metritis and cervicitis had been noted in other herds. In another herd where 60 cattle were regularly in lactation, 10 cases of chronic metritis were brought in for inspection, and 12 other cows were fattening in another part of the farm, being regarded as incurably sterile. The toll taken from the dairying industry by the incidence of incurable sterility due to ute ine infection would probably surprise us if we were able to accurately estimate it. Williams pays much attention in his work to a condition which he describes as cervical endometritis. He defines the disease as an ascending infection, advancing from the cervical to the ovarian end of the uterus. In many, probably in most cases, he states that cervical endometritis is the result of an extension of infection from the cervical mucosa forward.
STERILITY IN DAIRY COWS. 99 Clinical experience in this State has shown that this conception of the progress of invasion of the uterus is in many cases justified. This is illustrated by the history not uncommonly given by stockowners, as the following examples show: 1. The cow bore a normal calf with apparently normal parturition. The animal required a number of services before next conception took place. After a normal gestation period another calf was born, but the placenta was retained, coming away spontaneously two days later. There was considerable discharge from the uterus, but recovery appeared to take place. After several visits to the bull the cow bred again, but the calf was not carried full time, abortion taking place at about seven and a half months. The after-birth was retained. Examination showed that the placenta was firmly adherent, and manipulation to remove it caused the maternal cotyledons to come away, with hæmorrhage as a sequela. What appeared to be the last of the placenta was not removed until seven days after the abortion, The cow did not breed again. 2. The first partuition was reported to have been normal. Following the birth of the second calf, service by the bull on four occasions did not result in con- ception. Examination showed that the cervix was congested. Treatment was adopted and the cow bred. The third calf was carried full time, but the placenta was retained, being expelled about twenty-fours after the birth of the calf. Treat- ment for metritis was adopted. The cow was bred again and the gestation period was normal. The placenta was retained and was removed manually three days after the calf was born. Treatment of the uterus was again carried out, and the symptoms of metritis subsided. The cow was put to the bull and bred. A prema- ture calf was born at about 260 days. It was weak and sickly, and died when about seven days old. The cow bred again after treatment for metritis, and once more the calf was delivered before full term. The after-birth was retained. Treat- ment failed to have any curative effect upon the metritis, and the animal was even- tually sold to the butcher. Taking Williams' hypothesis that the condition originated in the cervix and that the infection was slowly creeping forward, the cause of the infection would be : (a) infection of cervix, (b) infection of internal os, invading the uterine body, (c) invasion of uterus spreading forward. If this represents the sequence of the spread of infection in certain cases, and in my opinion this is the sequence, we have brought before us the fact that in some herds where a number of abortions occur from time to time, the cause is not neces- sarily Brucella abortus of Bang. In one herd where eight abortions occurred in a period of twelve months, none of the animals gave a positive reaction to the aggluti- nation test. This result surprised us, since we knew that abortus infection was present to some extent in the herd. The previous history, however, suggested that the uterine infection had been slowly advancing, and that the abortions were due to cervical endometritis.
100 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I Of course many cases of metritis owe their origin to the results of brucella in- fection. When abortion due to this organism takes place, retention of the placenta is a frequent sequela, and rapid invasion of the uterus by putrefactive, pyogenic and coliform bacteria occurs. In general, our experience has indicated that metritis is most commonly en- countered in herds where brucella infection is present. Bacteriological examination of material from cases of metritis has almost always shown the presence of streptococci, staphylococci and/or coliform bacilli. Strepto- cocci appear to be the most common invaders. This finding is in keeping with those of other investigators, and streptococci are known to be present in most cases of chronic metritis. In some cases, always chronic cases which defy treatment, we have found B. pyogenes present. Some authors, including Williams, pay great attention to metritis involving the tip of the horns and the fallopian tubes. This is considered to be a blood-borne infection, and possibly a fSTERILITY IN DAIRY COWS. 101 gentle manipulation from the cotyledons. No force is used, since it is desired to prevent bleeding and the exposure of a raw surface. On the following day the procedure is repeated. Rarely is it necessary to continue treatment after the fourth day. By this time the uterus has contracted to a considerable extent, and the passage of the hand through the cervix is not possible. Frequently on the third day the cervical canal has so lessened in diameter that the hand cannot enter. Should there be still marked evidence of infection as shown by delayed resolu- tion of the uterus and muco-purulent or purulent discharge, or if shreds of placenta are still being voided, the inter-uterine injection of such a preparation as a saturated solution of magnesium sulphate in glycerine will frequently be followed by good results. The injection of this solution is followed by a marked out-pouring of fluid from the uterine walls, and as this is evacuated much of the debris is removed. The more chronic cases of metritis and cervicitis are best treated with iodine solutions. Lugol's solution has long been the standby of the veterinarian for such treatment. We, however, have had our best results with the injection of a solution of 1 per cent. iodine in liquid paraffin. This is injected as required at intervals of about four to seven days. The progress of recovery can be noted by the character and amount of discharge. It is of great importance that treatment be continued until no clinical evidence of disease is discernible. Although treatment as outlined above usually results in the recovery of the cow in so far as to permit breeding again, it does not always result in the eradication of the infections, since some cattle will come in at next calving with retained placenta and in odd cases the pregnancy has been terminated by abortion. Renewed treatment of these latter cases on the lines already indicated has resulted in successful breeding on many occasions, but some, of course, become incurably sterile. ENDOMETRITIS AND HORMONAL DYSFUNCTION. Referring again to the opinion expressed by Williams and others that endo. metritis may result not as a consequence of introduced infection but as a result of hormonal unbalance, there is an interesting statement by Cuillé and Chelle (5) of France. These authors state : " Many cases of sterility attributed to endometritis, and in particular to slight endometritis, are not in reality due to inflammation of the uterus. One confounds too often endometritis and leucorrh102 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I this secretion is often added the product of serous transudation of vaginal origin. The hypersecretion of the uterine and cervical glands appears to be the consequence of a faulty vago-sympathetic balance of ovarian origin. It is due most often to abnormal persistence of the C. L., and it is only necessary, as we will see later, to practise its enucleation to cause the uterine symptoms to disappear and to render breeding possible. " It is relatively easy by simple examination of the uterine discharge to differen- tiate leucorrhea and metritis. Whilst in uterine infections the discharge is always purulent or mucopurulent, opaque, thick and yellow, in simple leucorrhea the exudate is seromucoid, grayish, translucent like white of egg." This statement, of course, supports a commonly-held European opinion that many cases of sterility in cows can be cured by the mere expression of a so-called retained corpus luteum. In my opinion a corpus luteum which is readily expressed by manual manipu- lation per rectum is rarely pathologic, but there is some evidence to indicate that disturbance of the hormonal balance may interfere considerably with the STERILITY IN DAIRY COWS. 103 6. Infection of the cervix tends to progress to invade the uterus, and eventually may lead to permanent sterility. 7. There is considerable clinical evidence to indicate that such infection may be transmitted by the bull in service. 8. Ovarian disease has not been commonly encountered, and when it does occur is usually associated with metritis. 9. The treatment of sterility depends upon the diagnosis of the condition present after skilled examination. As this can be carried out only by a veterinarian there should be a wide field for veterinary practice in dairy districts when the stock breeder has learned to appreciate the value of such service. REFERENCES. 1 Orr, W., and Darling, F. F.: " The Physiological and Genetical Aspects of Sterility in Domesticated Animals," Imperial Bureau of Animal Genetics, 1932. 2 Williams, W. W. : " The Diseases of the Genital Organs of Domestic Animals." 3 Quinlan, J.: " Researches on Sterility in Cows in South Africa, " Annual Report Director of Veterinary Services, Union of South Africa, 1929. 4 Webster, W.: Aust, Vet. Journ., 3, 1927, p. 14. 5 Cuillé and Chelle : Rêv. Gên. de Mêd. Vêt., 41, 1932, p. 525.
IMPROVED PASTURES AND PARASITIC INFESTATION OF SHEEP. BY 1. CLUNIES ROSS, D.V.Sc. * Reprinted from the Journal of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, Commonwealth of Australia, 7, 3, pp. 131IMPROVED PASTURES AND PARASITIC INFESTATION OF SHEEP. 105 whether parasitism becomes of greater or of less importance on such pastures is largely a question of balance between the adequacy and degree of improvement of the pastures on the one hand, and on the intensity and duration of stocking practised, together with the predisposition to heavy parasitism owing to seasonal conditions or special topographical features, on the other. INFLUENCE OF OVER-STOCKING ON IMPROVED PASTURES. On improved pastures, overstocking is no less liable to occur than on natural pastures. At times, pastures, merely because they have been improved, are subjected to such stocking that they are completely eaten out, yet owners some times appear resentful if it is suggested that sheep carried on such pastures are definitely under-nourished. Given unfavourable seasonal conditions, grave over stocking may develop even more rapidly than on lightly stocked natural areas At such times, owing to the attempt to carry excessive numbers, the plane of nutrition of the sheep is markedly reduced below that which the pastures could maintain if more judiciously managed, and the risk of parasitism is augmented owing to the increased contamination of the pastures with eggs and larvae expelled by the excessive number of sheep. There is no reason, under such conditions, why sheep on improved pasture should be expected to be any more resistant to the effects of parasitism than those on natural pasture provided the nutritive qualities are adequate, but naturally the risk of infestation will be very much greater. RISK OF PARASITIC INFESTATION MAY BE INCREASED. Another aspect of this problem which requires attention is the danger in the resort to improved pastures or lucerne in the hope of overcoming the effects of parasitism in grossly infested sheep. Thus, it is not infrequently reported that an owner, finding his young sheep heavily infested with the small intestinal worms which are very resistant to medicinal treatment, had placed them on a small area of improved pasture or on lucerne. On the latter, the rate of stocking may for a short period be as high as 20 or 30 sheep per acre. In view of the heavy parasitic infestation already carried by these lambs, tremendous contamination of the area with egg and subsesquently with larvae rapidly occurs under such suitable climatic conditions as are provided by occasional showers, heavy dews, and warm days in the spring and autumn. In such circumstances, so far from the lambs benefiting from the change of pasture, they may be rapidly exposed to such a high degree of repeated infestation that any benefit from the improved diet available is more than counterbalanced and heavy mortality results. On the other hand, if the transfer to such a pasture were made in dry weather or at a time when temperatures were unfavourable to eggs and to the development of larvae of the worms, it would be beneficial. There is a tendency also for sheep-owners to overlook other factors which may seriously interfere with the carrying capacity of an improved area. For example,
106 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I where heavy stocking to the extent of five or more sheep to the acre is continued for any length of time, the soiling of the pastures with faeces, etc., renders a consider- able part of them distasteful and unsuitable to the sheep. Consequently, for the optimum benefits to be derived from improved pastures' both in respect to nutrition and to the control of parasitism, a system of rotation which makes it possible to practise intensive stocking for a short period and then spelling to allow regeneration of the pasture is ideal. In the early stages of improvement of a pasture, it may become almost wholly a sward of subterranean clover, and lack variety and suitability from a dietetic standpoint. Any falling off in condition of sheep as a result is very frequently attributed to parasites, though in part it may be due to nutritional factors. In short, it is very necessary for sheep-owners to realize that the greater the restriction of a grazing area and the less selective feeding compulsory for the sheep, together with an increased rate of stocking, the greater is the care and intelligence required in management both of pastures and sheep. ADVANTAGES OF PASTURE IMPROVEMENT FOR OUTWEIGHT DISADVANTAGES. Notwithstanding the foregoing discussion of some of the factors which tend to offset the benefits of improved pastures, there is no doubt that the over- whelming body of evidence available indicates that artificial improvement of pastures by top-dressing and the introduction of clovers and other legumes and improved grasses constitutes a very vital factor in controlling the effects of parasitism and in increasing production. On the Northern Tablelands of New South Wales, there are considerable areas where sheep breeding is no longer considered practicable owing to losses primarily attributed to worm infestation which is at least an important secondary, if not a primary, factor. The losses experienced, however, are almost invariably augmented during those periods at which there is a definite lack of adequate feed available to the young sheep, or at which, though there may be a great volume of feed, it is of an innutritious and unsuitable nature. In these areas, we come back again, therefore, to the importance of the nutritional factor in determining the importance of worm infection, and it appears that there must be an increasing area permanently classed as unsuitable for sheep breedingIMPROVED PASTURES AND PARASITIC INFESTATION OF SHEEP. 107 increased laying down of areas of lucerne for grazing appears destined to play an important part in ensuring maximum productivity in the sheep and wool indus- tries. It is hoped the foregoing discussion makes clear, however, how necessary it is for pastoralists who see in these new methods the solution of many of their present difficulties to realize that such measures call for a far greater study of every aspect of pasture and stock management than was required by the old methods of sparse grazing on natural country.
CARBON TETRACHLORIDE, ITS EFFECT ON THE APPETITE OF SHEEP BY D. MURNANE, B.V.Sc.* [Reprinted from the Journal of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, Common- wealth of Australia, 7, 3, pp. 145CARBON TETRACHLORIDE, ITS EFFECT ON THE APPETITE OF SHEEP. 109 Therefore it will be seen that, if anything, the treated group consumed slightly more than the control group on each of the four days following treatment. It was then decided to try the effect on animals receiving a hard diet (i.e., oaten chaff). The same animals were given a spell of two weeks, and were then placed on a sole diet of oaten chaff. When they had settled down on this diet, the daily consump- tion was found to be 1½ lb. per head. All were then starved for a period of 24 hours. The test group received 2 c.c. of carbon tetrachloride in 8 c.c. of paraffin oil. The controls were not drenched. The food consumption was then found to be as follows:110 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. The weights of the animals under test were as follows :SARCOPHAGIA IN HERBIVOROUS ANIMALS BY D . MURNANE, B.V.Sc.* [Reprinted from the Journal of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, Commonwealth of Australia 7, 3, pp. 143-144.] It is not uncommon in Victoria and other States of the Commonwealth to see the habit of bone chewing exhibited by cattle grazing on phosphorus- and/or protein- deficient pasture. On country where such deficiency is more pronounced, sheep also have resorted to bone and " dead " wool chewing, while, in extreme cases, both cattle and sheep have been observed to eat raw flesh evidently in the endeavour to obtain the elements lacking. Bennetts (this Journal 6: 137, 1933) has recorded this condition in Western Australia, and associates it with the occurrence of botulism in sheep in that State. In parts of South Australia, the writer has seen unskinned rabbits in traps being consumed by cows, and sheep eating dead sheep and " goannas." With the object of making observations on this condition, the following experi- ments were carried out at the Veterinary Research Institute, Parkville, on the instructions of the Chief of the Division of Animal Health :112 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I After six weeks on the above diets, the aggregate group weights were :ABSTRACTS The influence of starvation on anthelmintic efficacy. Ross, I. C., and GORDON, H. Mch. (1934). Austr. Vet. J. 10,135-142. The roll of starvation in enhancing the anthelmintic efficacy of a drug being doubtful, the authors have devised experiments to determine this point in relation to the efficacy of copper sulphate and carbon tetrachloride against Hæonchus contortus. Each of a group of young merino lambs, free from any previous infection, was subjected to the infection with 7,000 larvæ of Hæmonchus contortus . When all the lambs had acquired infection they were divided into five comparable groups, which were treated as follows:114 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I Hæmonchus contortus infection. There was, however, some indication that anthel- mintic efficacy was slightly higher in starved than in unstarved animals. It is considered that anthelmintic efficacy of copper sulphate may be due largely to its ability to pass in solution direct to the abomasum and that the use of this solution as a vehicle may make possible the direct passage of other drugs to the abomasum, with a consequent increase in efficiency against such small or large bowel worms as Tricho- strongylus spp., ABSTRACTS. 115 Differential diagnosis of the larvae of Ostertagia spp. and Trichostrongylus spp. of sheep. GORDON, H. (1933). Austr, Vet. J, 9, 223THE MAYNARD-GANGA RAM PRIZE. In 1925 the late Sir Ganga Ram, Kt., C.I.E., M.V.O., R.B., Lahore, with that generosity for which he was so well known, handed over to the Punjab Government a sum of Rs. 25,000 for the endowment of a prize of the value of Rs. 3,000 to be called the Maynard-Ganga Ram Prize and to be awarded every three years, for a discovery, or an invention, or a new practical method which will tend to increase agricultural production in the Punjab on a paying basis. The competition is open to all throughout the world. Government servants are also eligible to compete for it. Entries for the next award were invited by the 31st December, 1933. None of the entries was considered to be of sufficient merit and it has been decided by the Managing Committee of the prize that the award should be postponed for another year and that further entries should reach the Director of Agriculture, Punjab, Lahore, on or before the 31st December, 1935. * * * * Applications are invited for "The Maynard-Ganga Ram Prize " of the value of Rs. 3,000, which will be awarded for a discovery, or an invention, or a new prac- tical method tending to increase agricultural production in the Punjab on a paying basis. The prize is open to all, irrespective of caste, creed or nationality and Government servants are also eligible for it. Essays and theses are not eigible for competition and applicants should prove that some part of their discovery, inven- tion, etc., is the result of work done after the prize was founded in 1925. The Managing Committee reserves to itself the right of withholding or postponing the prize, if no satisfactory achievement is reported to it. All entries in competition for the next award should reach the Director of Agriculture, Punjab, Lahore, on or before the 31st December, 1935. (116)
CORRESPONDENCE AN UNUSUAL CASE OF CHRONIC RINDERPEST WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO THE CARRIER PROBLEM IN THIS DISEASE. To THE EDITORIAL COMMITTEE, Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry. DEAR SIRS, It seems that our article* in question has had the desired effect of stimulating interest and focussing attention upon the comparatively neglected subject of chro- nic carriers of rinderpest, and we are thankful to Mr. Purvis for giving us this opportunity of elaborating our previous remarks in the light of the criticisms con- tained in his letter. 1. At the outset it is noticed that most of the points raised by him relate to details of work by other investigators, and that for some of those specific details the workers concerned would be the best fitted to furnish such further informa- tion as is required to remove the origin of doubt. We will therefore confine ourselves to a few remarks based on recorded information. The specific points are dealt with below in the order in which they have been raised by the correspondent. 2. It is true that (on pp. 365118 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I the usual period after infection, which later developed the disease on the lowering of their vitality. Edwards [1928] detected the virus in a sheep up to one month, but the longest time was not determined. In Delpi's [1928-30] atypical cases amongst cattle, the blood was infective through the entire period of 1½ months. 3. In regard to the introduction of rinderpest into Belgium through the Indian zebus en route to Brazil, the idea of the disease being kept up by cases occurring in series during the voyage is the same as Stockman's " smouldering in a densely stocked location", but this view does not seem to be of much practical value to the point at issue here, since it would be very strange that out of the whole consign- ment not a single animal was reported to have exhibited any distinct symptoms, when seven of them were to die later, soon after landing. Further if this theory were correct, it seems probable that cases of death, if they should occur, would have been in series rather than almost simultaneously, as actually happened at Antwerp. Moreover when death did take place, rinderpest was not even suspected. This could not have been so, if they were cases of the acute type, since the lesions of acute rinderpest at autopsy, being quite well-known to veterinarians, could not have escaped the notice of the quarantine authorities. 4. (A) In regard to Delpi's cases, the food and water supply cannot be incrimi- nated, in view of the extreme fragility of the virus under natural conditions and on dilution, and because the forage must have been obtained from a stack rather than from sources where there might be a possibility of accidental contamination with infected excreta. (B) The outbreak of rinderpest in the island in question cannot be explained on the hypothesis that the calves arrived there in the recovery stage, since animals recovering from the acute disease are known to be non-infective. (C) Delpi's own assurance that the disease did not exist there previously settles this conjecture. 5. It seems that the words ' reaction' and ' reacted ' have been used wrongly in this paragraph in the sense of ' infection ' and ' infected '. Contrary to the view of Mr. Purvis, it seems to us that Schern's statement, concerning the failure of only 34 out of a total of 131 animals inoculated with the virus to exhibit symp- toms, can have only one meaning, viz., that the balance of 97 did react. It is certainly extraordinary to hypothesise that the inoculation of virulent blood may not cause infection in susceptible cattle. One knows that (depending upon the degree of susceptibility) susceptible animals, when inoculated, run one of the three courses, viz., (i) develop the symptoms of the disease in the acute form, ending in death in most cases, (ii) develop a thermal reaction only without the exhibition of any other visible symptoms, (iii) develop neither clinical symptom, nor a thermal reaction, though the presence of the virus in the blood can be never- theless revealed by animal inoculation. The survivors are in any case immune to a subsequent infection. In fact the final proof of the viability of the virus at the initial inoculation is obtained by testing animals for immunity with a second ' test
CORRESPONDENCE. 119 dose ' of known virulence. The attempted analogy between Schern's cases and those of Mr. Purvis is not clear, since the cases of the former gentleman received rinderpest blood only and his virus appears to have been potent judging by the 97 reactors and the finding of post mortem lesions, in the non-reacting 34, simulat- ing findings in natural cases in the experience, among others, of Littlewood [1905] in Egypt (p. 366 our article). In regard to Mr. Purvis's Kenya experience, which it may be noted was not controlled, the allegation that virulent blood failed to cause infection in susceptible animals is untenable, because, as he rightly infers later, it was a matter of anti-serum counteracting a doubtful or weak infection " as the quarantine station was too far from the centre of production of virulent blood which was therefore too old for use ". A similar experience in South India may be recalled. In an outbreak amongst a valuable imported Holstein herd including cross-breds full doses of a highly potent serum for protection in the face of the outbreak were given. On arrival four or five days later, the officer, who was specially deputed to carry out the serum-simultaneous inoculation on these animals, made ' assurance doubly sure ' by giving the full scheduled doses of serum without making allowance for the previously administered anti-serum. There was nothing the matter with the virus employed, as the same was prepared locally, used hot and fresh after with- drawal, and successfully caused symptoms and death in the controls. Yet many of these animals succumbed to another outbreak about a year later, whereas the same officer's technique had succeeded in establishing a solid immunity in another herd immunised simultaneously, which was healthy and free from rinderpest and where no overdosing with serum took place. Parenthetically, it is for this reason that the dosage of serum in the serum-simultaneous work has to be controlled carefully. Further the position taken by Mr. Purvis is self-contradictory since if Schern actually had rinderpest in the neighbourhood of his experiment, his virus could not be " still older " (than what ?). In extenuation of Schern's having rinderpest in the neigh- bourhood, it must be remembered that as this fragile virus is incapable of being arti- ficially cultured, only those having a rinderpest station in close quarters could contemplate any intensive, exact and controlled work. Further we have his word in the reply to Ruppert that as one experienced in rinderpest work, he knew what he was doing and that proper measures had been taken to preclude accidental infection. 6. The quotation from Bliss is not a mere theory but a reasonable enumera- tion of certain epizootiological observations of his. 7 and 8. Of the two possibilities, the weight of evidence is on the side of the conclusion that carriers do exist, though rarely. The standing of Curasson and Jacotot in the domain of rinderpestology, and the fact that the observations in question relate to the present decade, when considerable knowledge of the nature of the virus is available, certainly justify a less critical outlook than had hitherto been possible, and these considerations exclude the likelihood of infection from other sources. The criticisms of these workers are, however, primarily for them to reply to.
120 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I 9. The main contention of Mr. Purvis is that the subject of our article H. B. 288 did not take rinderpest at the initial inoculation, but had perhaps an attack of Theileriasis. He admits that the pair to this hill bull, inoculated with the same virus, undoubtedly developed rinderpest but reconciles, what appears to him a disparity in the reactions on the view that goat virus need not infect 100 per cent. of susceptible cases. We have already examined the invalidity of this assumption. If a bull could resist infection with even 5 c.c. of a viable rinderpest virus, it could not be an acci- dental occurrence but must have depended upon a natural or previously acquired resistance, and such resistance could not have collapsed within a period of 74 days. Mr. Purvis attributes the temperature reaction to Theileriasis. The organism of which we make mention is T. mutans, which normally exists in nearly cent per cent. of Indian cattle. In our experience such a temperature curve (the tempera- ture rising on the 3rd day after inoculation of the virus and coming down by the 7th day), is typical of rinderpest. It could not be due to inoculated Theileria para- sites, since those of the bovine are not transmissible through the goat, and because the incubation period of the inoculated Theileriasis is about 13CORRESPONDENCE. 121 with rinderpest but the recent lesions of rinderpest are so familiar to workers in this Institute that it would be difficult to imagine such lesions being overlooked or wrongly read. Admittedly, there is much to learn regarding the lesions of old stand- ing cases and one would not be justified from a knowledge of acute lesions only in jumping to conclusions as to whether or not lesions such as we encountered could occur in chronic and very old standing cases. Again deep and necrotic ulcers occu- pying an area larger than a rupee in the caecum and rectum are not met with every day and in the ordinary experience of rinderpest workers. Delpi has reported mouth lesions in cases 1½ months old, and recently Gibbs [1933] has described the presence of diphtheretic lesions in cases of some months' standing. The lesions in the anterior portion of the alimentary tract in our bull cannot, therefore, be taken as proof positive of a recent infection. It rather shows that careful observa- tions may reveal similar lesions in animals lingering after apparent recovery from rinderpest. Mr. Purvis thinks that the conditions existing in tin shed were very favourable for a later infection. Hill bull 288 was housed with others, discontinued at least 16 days after the administration of the virus, as is our routine practice. Evidently he had not noticed, from Cooper's article in the same number of the Journal, how almost impossible it is to set up infection by contact from animals recovering from rinderpest. In suggesting such a possibility as this, he virtually concedes our thesis that recovered animals may harbour the infection. Among those who have, since our attempt, examined the possibilities of carriers in virus diseases, Gibbs [1933] found that 4 out of 7 cattle recovered from rinderpest harboured the virus for periods varying from 32 to 177 days after natural infection. It is unfortunate that complete details of his observations have not been published, and the employment of calves 6 weeks old for experimental tests is a decided draw- back. Further from the analogy of a carrier state in the salivary virus of guinea pigs and the mosaic disease of plants, Doyle [1933] thinks that " with the elabora- tion of more refined technique, it may yet be shown that animals recovered from certain diseases retain minute quantities of virus over long periods in the system ". For purposes of analogy with other virus conditions we may refer firstly, to human poliomyelitis, in which occasional convalescent carriers lasting for seven months have been proved ; secondly, to equine infectious anæmia in which " the relaps- ing carriers continue to harbour the virus and through its elimination in the urine are a menace to the health of other animals " ; and thirdly, to equine influenza where stallions recovered from the disease may harbour the virus and infect healthy mares through coitus several months or even one or two years after recovery. In the last named condition, Poels (cited by Hutyra and Marek) was able to infect healthy horses through intravenous injections of filtered semen from a stallion which for a number of months had infected mares bred to it, and Basset (Comp. rend. des. seances de l'Academie des Sciences, 1911, CLIII, 485) demonstrated that the blood of a horse which had recovered from an artificial inoculation was infectious for three and one and half months subsequently.
122 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [ V, I In conclusion, whatever construction may be put upon the investigations of others, whose protocols were not published, it is necessary to point out that our experimental work, the protocols of which were published, was so nearly completely controlled, that it cannot seriously be called in question. It is regretted that our letter has assumed much larger proportions than was anticipated, but in view of the great practical importance of the subject, it is hoped that space may kindly be allotted for it in your esteemed Journal. Yours truly, S. C. A. DATTA, Temporary Veterinary Research Officer, in charge Pathology. V. R. RAJAGOPALAN, Offg. Assistant Veterinary Research Officer. REFERENCES*. Doyle, T. M. (1933), J. Comp. Path. 46, 94. Gartner (1920), Berliner Tier. Woch. 36, 501. Gibbs, C. S. (1933). J. Infec. Dis. 53, 169. *The details of the other references quoted in this letter are contained in our original article.
APPENDIX INSTRUCTIONS TO AUTHORS OF PUBLICATIONS OF THE IMPERIAL COUNCIL OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH.* 1. All manuscripts should be clean, clear and carefully revised. Only one side of the paper should be used, and as far as practicable the original type-written copy and not a carbon copy should be sent. Capitals should be sparingly used, and all the necessary punctuation should be done in the MS. and not left for intro- duction in proofs. 2. The title of a paper should not be lengthy. 3. It is desirable that the MS. should have suitable heads and sub-heads. In numbering the principal divisions of a paper, roman numerals should be used. The use of arabic figures and (a) , (b), (c), etc., is generally reserved for numbering the sub- divisions coming under each head. 4. Articles submitted for publication either in the Indian Journal of Agricul- tural Science or in the Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry should be accompanied by abstracts for publication in Agriculture and Live-stock in India. Abstracts should be concise, but should be long enough to explain the matter dealt with ; ordinarily no abstract should exceed 200 words. 5. When a word or line is intended to be printed in italics, it should be underlined with a single line, in SM. CAP. with two lines, in CAPITALS with three lines, and when in Antique (heavy type) with a wavy line (124 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I Rules of Zoological Nomenclature should be followed. The names of chemical sub- stances should not be written with a capital letter ; they are printed in roman type (e.g., calcium carbonate, prussic acid). 9. The following and similar abbreviations may be used freely :APPENDIX. 125 volume and page. In the text the reference should be indicated by the author's name followed by the year of publication enclosed in brackets ; when the author's name occurs in the text, the year of publication only need be given in brackets. If reference is made to several articles published by one author in a single year, these should be numbered in sequence and the number quoted after the year both in the text and in the collected references. This system of referencing is the same as is used in the Biochemical Journal with slight modification and will be clear from the following illustration:126 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, I area. A photograph should not be rolled up, nor pinned, and should always be packed flat. A complete list of plates and figures should always accompany the paper. 16. Line drawings should be made with clear black lines on smooth white paper, preferably Bristol board. Rough paper should be avoided. Care should be taken that all the lines are drawn firmly ; scratchy or grey lines, produced by the ink being thinned down, are not permissible. Drawings should be larger than the required size. All lettering should be neatly and clearly put in, care being taken to make all lettering sufficiently large to stand reduction. 17. For half-tone work, copy should be made on glossy silver paper and of the same size or larger than the size required. 18. For three-colour work, copy may be oil-painting, water-colour, coloured photograph or coloured transparency, and larger than the size required. In pre- paring copy, one should use only the primary colours, in any combination, as only inks of primary colours are used in printing. Originals can be enlarged, if neces- sary, but this should be avoided if possible. 19. For detailed instructions regarding preparation of illustrations, it would be of advantage to refer to Mr. C. M. Hutchinson's article on " Photographic Illustra- tions " in the Agricultural Journal of India, Vol. XI, Pt. 3, July 1916, and Mr. A. W. Slater's paper on " The Preparation and Reproduction of Scientific Illustrations " in the Proceedings of the Third Entomological Meeting, 1919, which has been reprinted as Bulletin No. 114 of the Agricultural Research Institute, Pusa.
BIHAR AND ORISSA VETERINARY COLLEGE, PATNA. Notice. The next session of the Bihar and Orissa Veterinary College will commence from the 1st July 1935. 1. Candidates desiring admission should each submit his application on the prescribed form together with the following certificates in original, so as to reach the Principal on or before the 1st June 1935. (a) Age and moral character certificate from the Head master of the school at which he last read. (b) University certificate or a certificate from the School or University autho- rities to show that he has passed the Matriculation Examination. (c) Medical Certificate of fitness from an Assistant Surgeon. (d) Letter from his guardian stating that all expenses incurred by his ward during the latter's period of study at the college will be paid. (e) Letter of identification from some well known person stating that the candidate is known to him and the statements made in the application form are correct. 2. Government or District Board stipendiaries should in addition to the above each produce a letter from the Director of Veterinary Services, Bihar and Orissa or from the Chairman, District Board concerned, to whom they should apply in the first instance, stating that their selection as stipendiaries has been approved. 3. Preference will be given to candidates who have passed the I. A. or I. So. Examination of a recognised University. A good knowledge of English is essential. 4. Non-stipendiary candidates will have to appear before the Governing Body of the College when called for interview. 5. Fees must be paid in advance according to the scale under rule 8 of the college rules. 6. Candidates will reside in the college hostel from the date of their admission unless specially exempted. 7. Admission forms may be had free on application to the Principal. Pros- pectus will be supplied on receipt of 0-4-0 by Money Order for each copy required. (127) GIPDTHE INFLUENCE OF PROGRESSIVE RIPENING OF FODDERS ON THE MINERAL NUTRITION OF CATTLE :130 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II From each fodder 2 or 3 cuttings were taken at different stages of maturity, each cutting providing sufficient fodder for feeding two bullocks for thirty days. Separate tests were made with each cutting. The tests were conducted on mature Indian bullock fed on a bare maintenance ration. Every feeding test consisted, of a preliminary feeding period followed by a digestion experiment period during which the food consumed and the excreta voided were accurately sampled daily and quantitatively determined. The composition, digestibility and mineral balance were thus determined for each cutting of each fodder. The digestion data (though not directly connected with the mineral problem) are of practical value and deserve brief notice here. The ordinary analytical composition of the fodders is given in Table II. From a perusal of the table, it will be seen that, generally, both the soluble ash and crude protein decreases with advance of maturity. DIGESTIBILITY OF FODDERS IN RELATION TO STAGE OF MATURITY. The digestibility data are recorded in a summary fashion in Table III. The figures agree generally with previous results published by the Nutrition Section [Warth, 1930] and show how the protein supply and digestibility of organic constituents is affected by maturing of fodders in India. These data shed light on an important question. It may be asked whether the phosphoric acid content, in other respects an index of quality in a fodder, is in any way an index of the digestibility of the fodder protein. Our experimental figures do not show any such connection Table IV will illustrate the point. Attention is particularly drawn to the Jouar samples. Ripe Jouar contains 30 grams phosphoric acid in the quantity fed which exceeds the amount present in the early cut, yet the digestibility of the protein in the early cut is very much higher (50 per cent. compared with 25 per cent.) Again comparing ripe Rhodes grass hay and ripe Jouar hay, for the former with only 11 grams phosphoric acid the digestibility of protein is 41 per cent. whereas for ripe Jouar hay having 30 grams of phosphoric acid the digestibility is only 25 per cent. Many similar figures from other experiments carried out by the Nutrition Section could be quoted to show that the digestibility of protein is not related to the phosphoric acid content of the fodder but is related to the protein content as has been repeatedly pointed out by the Nutrition Section. In this connection too, the protein digestion graph proposed by the Nutrition Section is significant [Warth, 1930]. Before passing on it may be noted that some of the mature cuts do not provide sufficient protein for maintenance. To avoid complications in the mineral balance experiments, appropriate protein supplements were fed with such fodders.
PROGRESSIVE RIPENING OF FODDERS ON MINERAL NUTRITION OF CATTLE. 131 MINERAL COMPOSITION OF THE FODDERS. Table I gives the mineral composition of the fodders tested. A perusal of the table shows that the mineral content varies from fodder to fodder and also changes with maturity. Jouar is the best example of peculiarity in mineral composition of fodders. In Jouar the phosphoric acid is higher and the lime lower than in any other fodder reported in the table. Jouar is also unusual in containing more phosphoric acid than lime, a peculiarity which the author has so far found only in one other fodder which will be reported in a later publication. There is an indication too that Spear grass hay contains less mineral matter than is found in Jouar and Rhodes grass hay. Some of the differences in this respect may be attributed to the soil, but it is significant that Rhodes grass hay and Spear grass hay grown on more or less similar soil contained very different quantities of mineral matter. Considering the effect of maturing, the table shows that phosphoric acid, magnesia and potash tend to become less with advance of maturity. It is note- worthy that lime generally does not decrease to the same extent. MINERAL BALANCE EXPERIMENTS. The average intake and outgo of minerals in duplicate feeding tests are shown in Table IX. TABLE IX. Mineral balance table. P2O5 CaO MgO Rhodes grass hay I Intake . . . 20.25 28.12 14.52 Balance . . 4.32 9.30 4.42 II Intake . . . 11.30 21.85 8.86 Balance . . .06 .45 .66
132 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II Mineral balance table. P2O5 CaO MgO Aurangabad hay I In take . . . 12.24 28.25 19.05 Balance . . .33 1.25 3.59 II Intake . . . 9.16 24.57 14.24 Balance . . PROGRESSIVE RIPENING OF FODDERS ON MINERAL NUTRITION OF CATTLE. 133 The actual minimum intake values found in these experiments are 10 grams phosphoric acid and 15 gr ms calcium oxide for an animal of 750 lbs. liveweight. It appears that with less calcium and phosphorus than these amounts, no positive balance is possible under any circumstances. Here it should be mentioned that Wellman [1931] has also made estimates of the minimum requirements from his experiments and gives the following values 25-50 grams for phosphoric acid and 50-100 grams for calcium oxide for an animal of 1000 Kg. which amounts to 8.8 grams phosphoric acid and 17 grams calcium oxide for an animal of 750 lbs., values which agree fairly closely, with the results from Bangalore quoted above. Another interesting point is, that, while a positive lime balance can be obtained when the lime is above the minimum but the phosphoric acid below, the converse, namely, a positive phosphoric acid balance, when lime is below the minimum, seems un- attainable. It must be emphasised that these minimal quantities only yield positive balances when conditions are otherwise favourable. SUMMARY. The mineral composition of four fodders at different stages of maturity has been determined. The mineral content was found to vary from fodder to fodder and with the state of maturity. Feeding tests were carried out with these fodders to study the assimilation of minerals. It was found that the stage of maturity greatly affected the mineral as milation. Some data are given to show the mineral amounts of calcium and phosphorus needed to produce positive balances of these elements. The author's grateful thanks are due to Dr. Warth for his very helpful suggestions in the preparation of this paper. REFERENCES. Warth, F. J. (1930). Mem. Dept. Agri. India, Chem. Ser. 11, 4. Warth, F. J., Viswanatha Iyer A., and Krishna Ayyar N. (1932). Ind. Jour. Vet. Sci. and Anim. Husb. 2, 4, 325-331. Wellmann (1931). Mitteil-d-deutsch Landwirtsch Cessellsch 46, 316-319. Viswanatha Iyer, A., and Krishna Ayyar N. (1934). Ind. Jour. Vet. Sci. and Anim. Husb. 4, 2, 108-113.
134 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II TABLE I. Mineral composition of fodders. Per cent. Rhodes grass hay. Aurangabad hay. Spear grass hay. Jouar hay. 1st cut. 2nd cut. 1st cut. 2nd cut. 3rd cut. 1st cut. 2nd cut. 1st cut. 2nd cut. 3rd cut. P2O5 . . . 0.446 0.233 0.185 0.128 0.049 0.313 0.141 0.543 0.460 0.574 CaO . . . 0.589 0.422 0.566 0.513 0.550 0.520 0.544 0.382 0.297 0.196 MgO . . . 0.307 0.171 0.344 0.279 0.255 0.306 0.234 0.446 0.316 0.278 Na3O . . . 1.084 0.972 0.230 0.289 0.393 0.301 0.254 0.257 0.319 0.222 K3O. . . . 3.028 1.302 0.668 0.590 0.229 1.263 0.352 3.393 2.142 1.837 TABLE II. Chemical composition of some Indian roughages. Roughages. Stages of maturity. Composition of Dry Matter. Organic matter. Crude protein. True protein. Ether extract. Fibre. Nitrogen free extract. Total carbohy- drates. Ash. Silica. Soluble ash. Rhodes grass hay. 1st cut 39.007 11.375 8.388 1.184 37.490 38.958 76.448 10.903 3.765 7.228 2nd cut 90.691 6.256 5.019 1.002 38.050 45.383 83.433 9.309 4.950 4.359 Aurangabad hay. 1st cut 85.520 4.163 3.494 1.150 40.650 39.557 80.207 14.480 12.250 2.230 2nd cut 84.598 2.581 2.281 1.428 37.780 42.809 80.589 15.402 2.934 2.468 3rd cut 84.420 1.663 1.506 1.308 38.730 42.719 81.449 15.580 13.617 1.963 Spear grass hay 1st cut 91.241 5.606 4.825 1.420 38.210 46.005 84.215 8.759 5.299 3.460 2nd cut 90.264 3.175 3.038 1.467 37.390 48.232 85.622 9.736 7.664 2.072 Jouar hay. 1st cut 89.945 7.031 5.675 0.981 42.770 39.163 81.933 10.055 2.695 7.860 2nd cut 92.113 4.500 3.950 1.298 42.890 43.425 86.315 7.887 2.808 5.079 3rd cut 92.926 4.844 3.419 0.926 42.770 44.386 87.156 7.074 2.649 4.425
PROGRESSIVE RIPENING OF FODDERS ON MINERAL NUTRITION OF CATTLE. 135 TABLE III. Per cent. digestibility of the fodders. Roughages Stage of maturity Digestion Coefficients. Org. matter. Crude protein. Ether extract. Fibre. Nitrogen free extract. Total car- bohydrates. Rhodes grass hay . 1st cut. . 63.73 59.38 24.79 74.43 55.34 64.68 2nd cut . 56.89 41.21 28.86 63.86 53.04 57.97 Augangabad hay . 1 st cut . 51.18 34.45 45.18 59.50 44.51 52.11 2nd cut . 49.76 11.53 42.46 57.00 45.92 51.12 3rd cut . 46.64 negative 57.13 53.35 42.95 47.90 Spear grass hay. . 1st cut . 55.05 41.93 39.81 63.00 50.03 55.92 2nd cut . 51.57 16.01 45.17 58.66 48.62 53.00 Jouar hay . 1st cut . 56.29 50.77 39.76 64.76 48.23 56.85 2nd cut . 50.85 31.24 41.37 58.66 45.05 51.81 3rd cut . 49.24 25.36 30.07 58.74 43.09 50.77 TABLE IV. Relation between P2 O5 in feed and protein digestion. Fodder P2O5 fed. (gms per day). Crude protein fed in (gms per day). Per cent digestion of crude protein in Roughage G.N. Cake Total Total Roughage Rhodes grass . . 1st cut . . 20.25 517.0 ... 517.0 59.4 59.4 2nd cut . . 11.30 303.7 ... 303.7 41.3 41.3 Aurangabad hay . 1st cut . . 12.24 196.5 136.9 333.3 57.3 34.5 2nd cut . . 9.16 118.9 137.7 256.6 53.5 11.6 3rd cut . . 6.87 79.4 188.0 267.4 56.4 Negative. Spear grass hay . . 1st cut . . 18.15 260.3 152.3 402.6 58.9 42.0 2nd cut . . 11.00 148.5 168.2 316.7 54.1 13.8 Jouar hay . . . 1st cut . . 24.64 319.2 ... 319.2 50.7 50.7 2nd cut . . 23.68 197.8 146.2 344.0 55.7 31.3 3rd cut . . 29.75 221.4 146.1 367.5 51.1 25.4 C
136 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II TABLE V. Rhodes grass hay, all stages. PROGRESSIVE RIPENING OF FODDERS ON MINERAL NUTRITION OF CATTLE. 137 TABLE VI. Aurangabad hay, all stages. 138 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, TABLE VII. Spear grass hay, all stages. PROGRESSIVE RIPENING OF FODDERS ON MINERAL NUTRITION OF CATTLE. 139 TABLE VIII. Jouar hay, all stages. THE INFLUENCE OF PROGRESSIVE RIPENING OF FODDERS ON THE MINERAL NUTRITION OF CATTLE :PROGRESSIVE RIPENING OF FODDERS ON MINERAL NUTRITION OF CATTLE. 141 TABLE I. Total urinary excretion of acids and bases in c. c. N per 1,000 grams fodder. Rhodes grass hay (Bangalore). Aurangabad hay. Spear grass hay (Bangalore). Jouar hay (Sorghum). 1st Cut. 2nd Cut. 1st Cut. 2nd Cut. 3rd Cut. 1st Cut. 2nd Cut. 1st Cut. 2nd Cut. 3rd Cut Total fixed bases . . . . . 818.7 518.3 264.5 202.1 138.5 296.7 137.5 655.4 411.4 330.1 Chlorides . . . . . . 385.9 388.8 76.6 60.3 38.9 125.3 52.9 251.5 162.2 136.7 Sulphates . . . . . . ... 10.4 2.1 1.5 1.2 8.6 9.2 7.7 10.2 12.0 Hippuric acid . . . . . 59.9 86.1 99.1 102.5 85.5 117.5 89.6 109.1 124.7 119.8 Other organic acids . . . . . 61.4 21.2 71.3 25.7 32.4 45.2 37.5 46.2 31.2 21.5 Total organic acids . . . . . 121.3 107.3 170.4 128.2 117.9 162.7 127.1 155.3 155.9 141.3 Total acids . . . . . . . 507.2 506.5 249.1 190.0 158.0 296.6 189.2 414.5 328.3 290.0 Excess of base . . . . . 311.5 11.8 15.4 12.1 142 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II The results have to be examined from two points of view:PROGRESSIVE RIPENING OF FODDERS ON MINERAL NUTRITION OF CATTLE. 143 TABLE II. Urinary excretion of fixed bases in c. c. N per 1,000 grams of the fodder. Rhodes grass hay. Aurangabad hay. Spear grass hay. Jouar hay. 1st Cut. 2nd Cut. 1st Cut. 2nd Cut. 3rd Cut. 1st Cut. 2nd Cut. 1st Cut. 2nd Cut. 3rd Cut. CaO . . . . . . 0.92 24.20 22.39 22.81 43.06 36.09 47.41 10.63 19.34 24.92 MgO. . . . . . . 24.38 30.98 42.92 43.40 50.79 57.71 46.43 35.37 30.67 41.29 Na2O. . . . . . . 288.20 191.10 9.36 9.21 8.00 Nil 10.65 Nil Nil Nil K2O. . . . . . . 545.10 293.50 196.60 145.00 48.49 230.80 45.64 633.90 375.60 290.80 Total bases (Gravimetric) Average of six days. 858.60 539.78 271.27 220.42 150.34 324.60 150.13 679.90 425.61 357.01 Total bases by Potentio-metric titration, Average of three days. 818.70 518.30 264.50 202.10 138.50 296.70 137.50 655.40 411.40 330.10
144 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [ V. II The figures by the two methods, as they do not cover the same period, are not strictly comparable, but they should be much alike. It is remarkable, therefore, that the potentiometric value is lower in every case. At present no explanation is offered for this difference. It may be noted, however, that there is a very fair parallelism between the two sets of data and hence the rapid and easy potentio- metric method is justified for the purpose of comparing the acid-base balance values of fodders. The potash and soda ingested with the food are excreted mainly in the urine, hence for the alkalis, the urinary excretion is an index of the intake. In every fodder it will be noticed that the alkalis decrease with maturity. Rhodes grass hay and Jouar hay are much richer in alkalis than the other two fodders. Rhodes grass hay is unique in the amount of soda it provides. This is seen not only in the fodder analysis table but in the present data on urinary excretion. It may be noted in this connection that the pH of urine is most closely related to the out-put of alkalis. Excretion of lime and magnesia. The data regarding excretion of lime are of special importance and are collected together in a separate table for emphasis. TABLE III. Intake and excretion of CaO and MgO in grams per day. - Rhodes grass hay. Aurangabad hay. Spear grass hay. Jouar hay. 1st cut. 2nd cut. 1st cut. 2nd cut. 3rd cut. 1st cut. 2nd cut. 1st cut. 2nd cut. 3rd cut. CaO intake . 28.12 21.85 28.25 24.57 27.88 25.78 26.99 18.61 14.44 10.82 CaO in urine . 0.12 3.29 2.96 2.94 5.76 4.70 6.21 1.01 1.82 2.47 MgO intake . 14.52 8.86 18.05 14.24 14.56 16.18 13.14 20.78 15.54 14.69 MgO in urine . 2.24 3.04 4.09 4.03 4.89 5.41 4.38 3.39 3.00 3.96 pH (Urine) . 7.98 7.40 6.62 6.25 5.72 7.22 5.85 7.90 7.60 7.40 It is evident from these figures that the excretion of lime is definitely not proportional to the intake, but depends almost entirely upon the pH of the urine, high pH leading to low lime excretion and low pH to increased lime excretion. The increased deflection of lime and magnesia into the acid urine has already been noted by the author in an earlier paper [1932]. It may be observed further that this natural development of acidity (nutritional acidosis) has exactly the same effect upon the deflection of calcium into the urine as may be produced experi- mentally by the ingestion of hydrochloric acid [Givens & Mendel 1917] and of ammonium chloride [Stewart & Haldane 1924]. The increase of lime in such
PROGRESSIVE RIPENING OF FODDERS ON MINERAL NUTRITION OF CATTLE. 145 urines suggests that the animal experiences difficulty in retaining minerals when the urine becomes acid. The mineral balance data discussed below support this view. The excretion of magnesia in the urine is less regular but it tends to follow lime. RELATION BETWEEN LIME AND PHOSPHORIC ACID IN URINE. The amount of phosphoric acid in the urine of cattle is generally exceedingly small. The figures in the accompanying table show, however, that there is some relationship between lime and phosphoric acid, as the lime increases so the phos- phoric acid decreases. TABLE IV. Relation between CaO and P205 in urine. 146 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, It would appear that fluctuations in the phosphoric acid content of cattle urine (although the amounts are so small) are in some way significant of the urine character and the balance of minerals. ASSIMILATION OF CALCIUM IN RELATION TO URINE REACTION. Balance experiments briefly summarised in the following table show that calcium assimilation is closely related to the stage of maturity. TABLE V. Mineral balance. PROGRESSIVE RIPENING OF FODDERS ON MINERAL NUTRITION OF CATTLE. 147 2. It has been noted that the early cut fodders are marked by the elimination of large volumes of urine, definitely attributable to the high amount of alkalis in the food and that with advancing maturity the total fixed bases decrease and the pH of the urine tends to become lower. 3. The bases in the urine of two fodders were very low even with the first cut. Later cuts show serious deficiency of bases. One late cut fodder produced definite nutritional acidosis marked by a large increase of urinary ammonia. 4. The species of grass and the stage of maturity both profoundly influence the mineral supply to and the acid base balance in the animal. 5. Lime and magnesia show increased deflection into the acidic urine. The excretion is not proportional to the intake but depends almost entirely on the pH of the urine. This suggests that the animal experiences difficulty in retaining minerals when the urine becomes acid. The mineral balance data discussed also support this view. 6. It appears that there is an inverse relationship between urinary lime and urinary phosphoric acid. 7. Urinary loss of calcium being closely related to the pH of the urine, it is probable that calcium assimilation is influenced by urine reaction. The author wishes to express his indebtedness to Dr. F. J. Warth, for his interest and helpful advice in the preparation of this paper. REFERENCES. Givens, M. H., & Mendel L. B., (1917). J. Biol. Chem. 31, 421. Krishna Ayyar, N, (1932). Ind. Jour. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 2, 300-305. Stewart C., & Haldane J. B. S. (1924). Biochem. J. 18, 855. Warth F. J., & Krishna Ayyar, N. (1930). Biochem. J. 24, No. 6, 1595.
THE INFLUENCE OF PROGRESSIVE RIPENING OF FODDERS ON THE MINERAL NUTRITION OF CATTLE. PART III. THE BLOOD CHARACTERISTICS AS INFLUENCED BY PROGRESSIVE RIPENING OF FODDERS BY N. C. DAS GUPTA, Assistant to the Physiological Chemist, Animal Nutrition Section, Bangalore. (Received for publication on 7th February 1935). The present paper deals with the blood characters obtained by feeding the food-stuffs already described in the first paper. In order that the blood used for analysis might be truly representative of the effect of the food-stuff, blood sam- ples were not taken until the animals had been on the ration for at least twenty days. Two animals were used and generally two blood samples were taken from each animal during every experiment, at least a day's interval being allowed between the two samples. The bleeding was always done before the animals received their morning ration at 8 A.M., after they had fasted for about 15 hours. Mature bullocks were used to avoid the complications caused by growth, lactation and other factors. METHODS OF ANALYSIS. In the earlier stages of this work determinations were made on the plasma, but as plasma determinations required the collection and working up of two separate blood samples for calcium and phosphorus respectively, the earlier pro- cess was abandoned in favour of serum analysis in which a single blood sample is used for the estimations of both calcium and phosphorus. The blood was drawn from the jugular vein into a 15 c. c. centrifuge tube and kept at room temperature (26° C.) for four hours before the serum was separated by a centrifuge. Many workers have estimated calcium in plasma and serum without removing the proteins, but the author found difficulties in the estimation of calcium in whole plasma. Some fibrous substance often separates when calcium oxalate is precipitated from whole plasma and it is difficult to make this fibrous substance adhere to the centrifuge tube. It is liable to be carried out and takes with it some of the oxalate precipitate when the liquid is decanted for washing. The fibrous organic precipitate in the tube is also undesirable because it consumes some permanganate. Hence the author now carries out all blood calcium deter- minations in the protein free filtrate of the serum. (148)
PROGRESSIVE RIPENING OF FODDERS ON MINERAL NUTRITION OF CATTLE 149 The actual determination is made thus :150 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS. 1. Rate at which serum phosphorus attains constancy. In certain cases Eckles, Gullickson and Pulmer [1932] found that after a change of ration the plasma may take months to attain a constant again. It is important to note that under the experimental conditions of the tests made at Bangalore the blood attained a constant very much more rapidly. TABLE II. Rate of change of serum inorganic phosphorus with the change of phosphorus content of ration. Date. Daily P supplement. Serum inorganic P. Animal B. Animal I. 3rd October 1934 . . . 60 gms. Ca3(Po4)2 Begun 2nd November 1934 . . . PROGRESSIVE RIPENING OF FODDERS ON MINERAL NUTRITION OF CATTLE. 151 TABLE III. Effect of phosphorus content of food on the inorganic phosphorus of the blood serum of mature bullocks. ___ ___ P. intake per day gm. P. excretion. per day gm. P. Balance gm. Inorganic P. in 100 c.c. serum mgm. Aurangabad hay . . 1st cut . 5.35 5.20 0.15 5.08 2nd cut . 4.00 4.99 152 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II TABLE IV. Effect of calcium content of food on the Ca of the blood serum of mature bullocks. Ca. intake per day gm. Ca. excretion per day gm. Ca. Balance gm. Ca. per 100 c.c. serum mgm. Aurangabad hay . . 1st cut . 20.19 19.29 0.90 10.84 2nd cut . 17.56 17.74 PROGRESSIVE RIPENING OF FODDERS ON MINERAL NUTRITION OF CATTLE. 153 TABLE V. Effect of Rhodes grass on the serum Ca. Fodder154 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II TABLE VI. Effect of calcium / phosphorus ratio of fodder on serum calcium and inorganic phos- phorus. Ca. intake per day gm. P. intake per day gm. Ca./P. ratio. Ca. in serum Mgm. per cent. Inorganic P. in serum Mgm. per cent. Aurangabad hay . 1st cut . 20.19 5.35 3.78 10.84 5.08 2nd cut . 17.56 4.00 4.38 11.76 5.11 3rd cut . 19.92 3.00 6.63 13.18 4.94 Spear grass hay . 1st cut . 18.42 7.93 2.32 11.38 5.99 2nd cut . 19.29 4.81 4.01 13.17 5.48 Jouar hay . . 1st cut . 13.05 10.53 1.24 11.15 6.08 2nd cut . 10.20 10.14 1.01 10.85 5.39 3rd cut . 7.65 12.78 0.60 12.60 6.08 Rhodes grass hay 1st cut . 20.09 8.85 2.27 17.58 6.12 2nd cut . 15.61 4.94 3.16 13.50 4.84 The data in Table VI show that with Aurangabad hay and spear grass hay serum calcium increased as the ratio became wider. With Rhodes grass it has decreased as the ratio widened, with Jouar hay it has increased as the ratio narrowed. Further a ratio of 0.6 in Jouar hay has given much the same serum calcium level as a ratio of 6.6 in Aurangabad hay. There is therefore no direct relationship to be seen between the calcium/phosphorus ratio and the serum calcium level in these experiments. du Toit, Malan and Greenwald [1931] working with sheep found only slight differences in the blood calcium in spite of a twenty-fold variation in the calcium/phosphorus ratio. Greenwald [1931] also came to the conclusion that the PPROGRESSIVE RIPENING OF FODDERS ON MINERAL NUTRITION OF CATTLE. 155 TABLE VII. Blood serum phosphorus in relation to the composition of the urine. P. intake per day gm. P. Balance gm. Inorg. P. in serum Mgm. per cent. P. excretion in urine per day gm. Acid base balance of urine.* Aurangabad hay 1st cut . 5.35 0.15 5.08 0.04 67.2 2nd cut . 4.00 156 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II TABLE VIII. Blood serum calcium in relation to the composition of urine. Ca. intake per day gm. Ca. Balance gm. Ca. in serum Mgm. per cent. Ca. excretion in urine per day gm. Acid base balance in urine.* Aurangabad hay . 1st cut . 20.19 0.90 10.84 2.11 67.2 2nd cut . 17.56 PROGRESSIVE RIPENING OF FODDERS ON MINERAL NUTRITION OF CATTLE. 157 SUMMARY. A marked change in the inorganic phosphorus of blood of bullocks is noticeable within three days after a change of ration and the full effect of the change is attained in less than three weeks. The level of the inorganic phosphorus of serum is dependent up on both the dietary phosphorus level and the nature of the food. Blood calcium varies with different fodders. It does not vary directly with the calcium content of the food, and there is no direct relationship between the calcium/phosphorus ratio and the serum calcium, but the blood calcium level is influenced by the nature of the food and the stage of maturity of the fodder. Serum calcium is frequently parallel to the acid base balance and the urinary excretion of calcium ; but there are important exceptions to these rules. During the course of this work certain modifications in the methods of blood analysis were found to be advantageous and are described in the text. Acknowledgements. The author has much pleasure in acknowledging his gratitude to Dr. F. J. Warth for his helpful criticism and advice. The writer is also indebted to Mr. A. Viswanatha Iyer and Mr. N. Krishna Ayyar for some of the analytical figures. REFERENCES. Bethke, R. M., Kick, C. H., and Wilder, W. (1932). J. Biol. Chem. 96, 389. Bourne, M. C., and Cambell, D. A., (1932). Biochem Jl, 26, 183. du Toit, P. J., Malan, A. I. and Greenwald, I. (1931). 17 th Rep. Direct. Vet. Services and Anim. Ind., Union of South Africa, 453. Eckles, C. H., Gullisckson, T. W., and Palmer, L. S. (1932). Univ. of Minnesota Agric. Exp. Sta. Tech. Bull. 91. Fraser, A. H. H., Godden, W., and Auchinachie, D. W. (1934). Biochem. J. 28, 157. Greenwald, I., (1931). J. Biol. Chem. 93, 551. Kuttner, T., and Lichtenstein, L. (1932). J.Biol. Chem. 95, 661. Kathleen Culhane (1930). J. Biol. Chem. 86, 113. Leiboff, S. L. (1929-30). J. Biol. Chem. 85, 759. Malan, A. I., Green, H. H., and du Toit, P. J. (1928). J.Agri. Sci. 18, 376. Palmer, L. S., Cunningham, W. S., and Eckles, C. H. (1930). J. Dairy Sci. 13, 174. Rymer, M. R., and Lewis, R. C. (1932). J. Biol. Chem. 95, 441. Sahyun, M. (1933). J. Biol. Chem. 101, 295. Theiler, A., Green, H. H., and du Toit, P. J. (1927). J. Agri. Sci. 17,291.
BOVINE SURRA IN INDIA, WITH A DESCRIPTION OF A RECENT OUTBREAK. BY P. R. KRISHNA IYER, G.M.V.C., Assistant Veterinary Research Officer, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar AND S. M. SARWAR, M.R.C.V.S., Veterinary Investigation Officer, Punjab. (Received for publication on 18th February 1935). Surra in cattle has not received the same attention as it has in equines, though there is no doubt that the disease is widely prevalent amongst cattle and buffaloes in this country. A perusal of the available literature gives one the idea, how- ever, that cattle and buffaloes are more or less resistant to this disease. The first reference to the likelihood of bovines acquiring surra is to be found in a report of Evans [1880], from where the following quotation is taken in ex- tenso :BOVINE SURRA IN INDIA, WITH A DESCRIPTION OF RECENT OUTBREAK 159 died and six were destroyed. The greatest mortality occurred during the rains which were unusually early that year, 11.62 inches falling in June. The symp- toms noted by him in the bullocks when first taken ill were loss of power in the hind quarters. The animals staggered and fell and were unable to rise from the ground and there was incontinence of urine. Some animals when driven from the shed to the hospital, fell down and died en route. This outbreak at Karnal was one of surra complicated with fllariasis. Until Lingard [1899] inoculated two buffaloes in 1897 with surra trypanosomes, there was no evidence to show whether buffaloes were susceptible to surra or not, although it was surmised that if cattle were capable of contracting the disease, buffaloes would not be exempt. These two animals showed the parasites in the circulation following an incubation period of five days. The first buffalo died 120 days later and it had 12 paroxysms lasting 39 days and 11 intermissions last- ing 81 days. The second buffalo died 46 days after the first appearance of the parasites in the blood and this period was made up of 7 paroxysms lasting 15 days and 7 intermissions lasting 31 days. Both these animals became emaciated during the course of the disease, notwithstanding a voracious appetite which was maintained till a few days before death. Fraser [1910] who has written on surra as it occurs in Malaya, which is an endemic centre of the disease, says that the course of the affection in cattle is apparently dependent on the condition of the animal at the time of infection. Animals in good condition may show only some loss of condition and an occasional rise of temperature. However, intercurrent infections which devitalize the animals, may set up a relapse in such animals and cause them to die of surra. When cattle in poor condition are attacked, the disease usually runs a more acute course. This worker adds that general anaemia is diagnostic of this condition in Malay cattle. Sowerby [1911] in his experiments carried out with a view to discover a reservoir of surra trypanosomes found that healthy buffaloes were carriers of this parasite. Baldrey [1911] studied the course of surra in a plains bull which was arti- ficially infected with surra blood from a pony, and observed that the bull did not show any clinical symptoms and was to all appearances quite healthy, even at the time it was showing in its blood the trypanosomes which could confer a deadly disease when inoculated into guineapigs. Hutyra and Marek [1912] state that surra in cattle becomes apparent only with the gradual development of anaemia and emaciation which sometimes reach a very high degree and that recovery takes place in most cases. They admit, however, that outbreaks do sometimes occur, in which the disease appears in numerous cattle with severe manifestations such as high fever, etc., and that they may run an unfavourable course. They add that buffaloes rarely become F
160 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II affected and then usually only in a very chronic form. Wallis Hoare [1913] writes that the symptoms of surra in cattle are by no means constant or well marked as they vary from a healthy carrier condition to acute clinical forms and that the mortality amongst cattle in India, if any, is extremely small. The parasite, however, can live for a considerable time in the blood of Indian cattle, which appear to have acquired great tolerance to it. Specially selected cattle from India, in the best of condition, have been found to be the carriers of trypanosomes in their blood after they have travelled to America. During an epizootic in Mauritius, the mortality amongst cattle was comparatively high, reaching 25 to 30 per cent. ; and if they had to do hard work, it reached 75 to 80 per cent. Sampath Ayyangar [1919] records an outbreak of surra in a herd of 1,070 head of cattle in Ramnad District in the Madras Presidency of which about one hundred died between March 20th and 23rd June, 1918. All the affected animals showed practically the same symptoms. Initially there was fever, watery dis- charge from the eyes and nostrils, staring coat and congestion of the conjunctiva. These symptoms are generally overlooked by the ryots since the animals continue to feed. After a week or so, the animals become emaciated at which stage the ryots realise that there is something wrong with the animals. At the third week there is great emaciation, oedematous swellings at the submaxilliary space and the dewlap and complete inability to get up followed by death. Death is pre- ceded by tympany and sometimes diarrhoea. No affected animal was ever known to be off feed. In the same article, this author makes mention of other outbreaks of surra in cattle which occurred in the Godavari District in the year 1916. In these outbreaks, the animals were suspected to have died of anthrax or haemorrhagic septicaemia, but microscopical examination revealed surra to be the cause of these outbreaks. Janaki Rama Ayyar [1919] recalls his experience of outbreaks of bovine surra which occurred in Arkonum Taluk in Chingleput District, Madras, in November 1915 and says that more than a hundred cattle died in one village in the course of one month. Bullocks taken to the plough early in the morning, worked in the fields till about 9-30 A.M. when they appeared to be dull and slack and showed a disinclination to work. The ryot took the bullock home and put it into a shed. Soon after arrival, the symptoms became more grave. The tem- perature went up to 105° F. and signs of restlessness were observed which gradually turned to delirium. The animal dashed against the wall or the ground with head foremost and died within two or three hours after its return home. The high temperature, rapid termination and heavy mortality led to the diagnosis of anthrax or haemorrhagic septicaemia. However, blood smears, on examination, showed surra parasites in large numbers.
BOVINE SURRA IN INDIA, WITH A DESCRIPTION OF RECENT OUTBREAK. 161 Venkatachala Ayyar [1920] says that bovine surra is quite likely to be mis- taken for splenic apoplexy or the latent form of haemorrhagic septicaemia and that outbreaks of pure trypanosomiasis can occur among cattle and cause fatal results. The outbreak occurred in Gannavaram Taluk, Kistna District, Madras; in September 1919 and out of a total of about 2,500 head of buffaloes, there were eight deaths. Perfectly healthy animals were suddenly attacked and they showed high temperature, symptoms of abdominal pain, sterterous breathing and groaning and death took place in from 6 to 12 hours after the commence- ment of the attack and the blood smears showed trypanosomes. He adds that the village where the outbreak occurred was very backward from a sanitary point of view and conducive to the breeding of flies, that it was damp and marshy and situated on the side of an irrigation canal. Venkataratnam Chetty [1922] records an outbreak of cattle surra in the Corporation bullocks in Madras. Out of a total of 111 animals attacked, 101 died, i.e., nearly 90 per cent. mortality. The symptoms shown in this outbreak seem to have varied considerably and the recorder places his cases in seven different groups. In the first group, which represented the hyper-acute form of the disease, animals in the best of health dropped down dead while at work, thus giving no previous warning about their condition, the only indication of the cause of death being the blood which was found to swarm with trypanosomes. In the last group, the affected animals had a chronic course of the disease characterised by pro- gressive anaemia, loss of condition, irregular feeding and fever, tenderness over the loins and back, oedema of the legs, diarrhoea and death from exhaustion. In the intermediary groups, the symptoms varied from those of nervous excitement to those of colic, sleepiness and paralysis of the hind quarters. Mukerji [1924] records an outbreak of cattle surra in Patna District which occurred during the month of September 1923. The important feature of this outbreak was that the affected cattle died suddenly and the symptoms simulated those of anthrax or snake-bite. Cattle of all ages were affected. Animals feed- ing in the stall or grazing in the pasture or working in the fields suddenly became ill, staggered, fell down, and died in convulsions in 2 to 4 hours. In this outbreak the disease was noticed to attack cattle, buffaloes as well as equines. Pillai [1926] reports that an old Indian bullock died suddenly of surra in Penang in 1925. One night, after its usual feed, the animal suddenly developed symptoms of wild excitement, struggled for some time and died. The author observes that surra is not common in Penang, and that this particular animal, having been imported from India, must have been harbouring the parasites for a long time without showing symptoms of ill-health. The Annual Report of the Civil Veterinary Department, Punjab, for the year 1926-27 contains the following information : " During the year under report, 1,380 deaths were reported from surra in bovine animals from the Gurgaon
162 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II and Rohtak Districts against none last year. A strengthening of the staff in the districts of Hariana tract is badly needed in order to provide an organisation for dealing with this disease in the villages by intravenous inoculation of the affected animals with tartar emetic solution." Wenyon [1926] writes that T. evansi appears to be much less virulent to cattle than to horses. The cattle show few symptoms as a rule, and nearly always recover naturally. However, this author admits that serious outbreaks affecting cattle do occur. Sheather [1926] states that Indian cattle possess a far higher degree of resis- tance to surra than equines and that they frequently harbour the parasites in their blood in small numbers without evincing any evidence of disease and that the disease is not fatal in cattle. This worker observes that in Northern India, where the disease is more common, the susceptibility of the buffaloes is low, symptoms seldom presenting themselves. He adds, however, that in South India and in the East Indies, fatal cases of surra in buffaloes do occur. Ram [1927] writes that the rapidity with which cattle sometimes die of surra is surprising and that the condition is difficult to diagnose. There is high fever, staring eyes, frequent micturition, bellowing, stamping of the feet and the affected animal runs out of the herd, falls down and dies in convulsions with a frothy discharge from the mouth and making one suspect the condition for anthrax. Edwards [1928] writes that virulent outbreaks of surra occur among cattle and notably among buffaloes with consequent high mortality. He observes that the tissues of bovine animals seem capable of responding readily to the extent of keeping down the rate of multiplication of the trypanosomes to the status of relatively innocuous invaders, so that after an initial intervention with a simple chemo-therapeutic agent to stay the progress of a virulent attack, the animal's tissues are able of their own accord to suppress further dangerous multiplication of the parasites. This worker also remarks that Indian cattle and buffaloes are commonly found to carry the trypanosomes in a latent state of activity without displaying any manifest symptoms of ill-health. Balwant Singh [1930] records a case of surra in a Holstein bull at Muktesar. The animal exhibited brain symptoms, coma alternated with periods of wild excitement, when the head was dashed against the ground, muscular spasms, grinding of the teeth, wild look, etc., and it was suspected for heat apoplexy or acute stomach disorder. However, the smears revealed trypanosomiasis. Mahajan [1934] records an outbreak of bovine surra in Hyderabad (Deccan) in which the disease was mistaken for anthrax. He says that 90 per cent. of the affected animals were bullocks and that the mortality in them was cent. per cent.
BOVINE SURRA IN INDIA, WITH A DESCRIPTION OF RECENT OUTBREAK. 163 The writers of this article were deputed to investigate an outbreak of disease at the Imperial Cattle Farm, Karnal, where they arrived for this purpose on 27th October 1933. The Karnal Farm is situated in a low-lying area, which is often subject to floods during heavy rains. The monsoon during the year 1933 was early and severe and the entire farm area was under water for a considerable period. Consequently, the farm cattle were put to great hardship which caused appreciable loss of condition in them. The farm is essentially a cattle-breeding one, a few buffaloes also being main- tained for experimental purposes. The herd is maintained in two groups. Group I consists of milch cows, stud bulls, young male stock, calves under one year and suckling calves, while Group II consists of young female stock and dry cows and buffaloes. Group I is the main section of the herd and is housed in the dairy lines, while Group II is kept at a distance of about two furlongs from the main section. Hous- ing, grazing and watering arrangements for the latter group are altogether separate from those of the main herd. The disease was confined to the animals of the main herd, and throughout the duration of the outbreak not a single case occurred in the animals of Group II. The main herd consisted of the following animals on the day of the writers' arrival at Karnal :164 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II brain symptoms and its temperature was 103.8° F. Its blood smears showed large numbers of trypanosomes on microscopical examination. The animal was immediately injected with 30 c.c. of a 10 per cent. solution of " Bayer 205 " in- travenously. Two hours after these injections, symptoms of colic and tympanites were observed in this animal, but these symptoms were relieved by the adminis- tration of an enema. The next morning, i.e., 15 hours after the injection, the animal appeared quite cheerful and was found chewing its cud peacefully and its blood was sterile. During this outbreak the following symptoms were noted by one of the Supervisors on the dairy staff and these were afterwards confirmed by us in the buffalo bull " Gama ", and subsequent cases :BOVINE SURRA IN INDIA, WITH A DESCRIPTION OF RECENT OUTBREAK. 165 TREATMENT AND PROPHYLAXIS. If the records of outbreaks of surra in cattle are rare, records of the chemo- therapy of this condition are rarer still. Venkataratnam Chetty [1922] attempted treatment of a few ailing cattle with a few chemicals and other drugs. Of two animals treated with atoxyl and arsenic one was cured while the other died. Then out of seven animals treated with tartar emetic in doses of 100 c.c. of a 1 per cent solution every 4th day, five died while two recovered. Four animals were treated with rectal injections of tartar emetic solution (30 to 120 grains) of which two died and two recovered. However, this worker claims to have got successful results in all the four animals treated by him by the oral administration of ten ounces of infusion of chiratta mixture given every morning and evening together with the use of a chutney of the size of a tennis ball of Nochalai (Vitex Negundo) with an ounce of pepper in it. Anant Narayan Rao [1923] tried an extract of Neem leaves (Melia Azadirachta) in cattle surra with apparent success. Fifty grammes of mature neem leaves were placed in a litre of distilled water which was heated till it reached boiling point and then was allowed to cool. The extract was then filtered and autoclaved. This extract, when added to blood containing trypanosomes in vitro, made the parasites sluggish in their movements in 5 minutes, agglomerated them in 10 minutes, and killed them all at the end of a half an hour. Three bullocks suffer- ing from surra were treated by this worker with this extract given intravenously in repeated doses of 250 to 500 c.c. This author suggests that it would be worth while trying intravenous injections of an extract of the leaves of Vitex negundo in this condition. Baermann [1923] suggests that in view of the lower susceptibility of cattle to surra, a small dose of " Bayer 205 " might be used. Balwant Singh [1926] treated his case of surra in a Holstein bull successfully with tartar emetic followed by an injection of " Bayer 205 ". Edwards [1926] writes that outbreaks of surra in cattle, including buffaloes, which occasionally occur in India with high mortality, particularly among buffaloes, are easily checked by the administration of intravenous injections of relatively simple trypanocidal agents such as tartar emetic and that single injections usually suffice. He suggests that a suitable therapeutic dose of tartar emetic is 5 c.c. of an M/10 (3.2 per cent.) solution per 100 lb. body weight. He adds that this treatment does not bring about a complete sterilization of the system of trypa- nosomes, which, he says, persist thereafter in the system in a latent state of activity, apparently indefinitely. Out of a lot of 18 surra buffaloes treated by this worker with this drug, 8 animals died, which high mortality he attributes to the extra- ordinarily high virulence of the strain of trypanosome with which these animals were inoculated. However, this drug, when used in buffaloes in a natural outbreak of
166 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II surra subsequently, was found by this worker to be a good therapeutic agent. This author remarks that the results obtained after treatment with tryparsamide do not appear to be appreciably superior. Mahajan [1934] found a 10 per cent. solution of naganol effective in cattle surra if the intravenous administration of this drug was carried out sufficiently early in the course of the disease. When in a normal state of health, the defensive mechanism of the body of bovine animals may overcome an infection even without treatment, although the trypanosomes will be found in the blood for a considerable time without producing any ill-effects. However, when the body-vitality is in a low state, these organisms gain the upper hand and bring about the death of the host. In such cases, a prompt injection of an effective trypanocidal agent is essential to protect the animal. Tartar emetic is one of the drugs which answers this purpose in the majority of cases. However, this drug should be avoided in acute cases when the blood is swarming with trypanosomes. In such cases a less drastic drug such as " Bayer 205 " is recommended. It is a well-known fact that tartar emetic, in spite of its powerful trypanocidal properties, diffuses quickly and is excreted completely from the body in a couple of days. Hence, this drug is practically useless as a prophylactic agent. Naganol on the other hand, by virtue of its larger molecular structure, is said to remain in the blood in sufficient trypanocidal concentration for longer periods without being excreted. Kleine [1924] in the course of an address delivered before a meet- ing of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, stated that even with large doses' of " Bayer 205 " it was not possible to prevent infection by trypa- nosomes in cattle. Berg [1925] also found " Bayer 205 " almost valueless for the prophylactic treatment of cattle. However, these two workers were dealing with Trypanosoma theileri, brucei, congolense and trypanosomes of the Vivax group and not T. evansi of Indian cattle. In this outbreak at Karnal, " Bayer 205 " was found to be as good a prophylactic agent as it was when used as a curative. The seven animals which had recovered from the acute stage of the disease, but were still infected with trypanosomes were treated with 50 c.c. each of a 2 per cent. solution of tartar emetic. Animals in the acute stage of the disease were given intravenous injections of " Bayer 205 ". The valuable stud animals of the herd were given prophylactic injections of " Bayer 205 " and none of the animals so protected developed the disease in this outbreak. As it was not possible to inject all the animals of the herd with prophylactic doses of naganol or even tartar emetic the following measures were taken to control the outbreak. At first arrangements were made to record the morning and evening temperatures of the in-contact animals. Within two days it was found that rise of temperature was not a constant symptom of infection. Animals
BOVINE SURRA IN INDIA, WITH A DESCRIPTION OF RECENT OUTBREAK. 167 showing very heavy infection with trypanosomes were found to show a normal temperature. As a result of the above observation the temperature recording was discontinued, and daily fresh blood film examination of the in-contact animals was started. By this method of observation, sixty-five animals were found to be infected and they were promptly treated. Twenty-five of these animals were treated with tartar emetic and the remaining forty with naganol. Directly an infected animal was spotted with the aid of the microscope, it was forthwith isolated with a view to prevent further spread of the disease through the agency of biting flies. The valuable animals of the herd, twenty-eight in number, i.e., the stud bulls, etc., were given 10 c.c. to 15 c.c. each of a 10 per cent. solution of naganol, intravenously to protect them from the infection. One Tharparkar cow which was showing large numbers of trypanosomes in its blood dropped down dead within 15 minutes after she was injected with 50 c.c. of a 2 per cent. solution of tartar emetic. Two bull calves so treated also died 4 days and 10 days respectively after treatment and showed advanced fatty changes in the liver. A few other animals treated with tartar emetic showed relapses. However, none of the forty animals treated with " Bayer 205 " showed any relapse and these animals received 10 to 30 c.c. of a 10 per cent. solution of this drug intravenously, depending upon their size and the intensity of the infection. None of the twenty-eight animals which were given prophylactic injections of this drug got the infection subsequently. The majority of animals treated with tartar emetic showed signs of distress and salivation immediately after the introduction of this drug into the circulation. Treatment with this drug would have continued had not one valuable cow succumbed within 10 to 15 minutes after the injection. By the time the needle was removed from the vein, this cow started showing symptoms of distress and profuse salivation. The symptoms became worse in 5 minutes. Blood-tinged froth appeared from the mouth and nostrils. Laboured breathing set in. The cow got up and in about one minute dropped down and died. This accident, coupled with the death of two bull calves subsequent to treatment, put an end to the use of tartar emetic in the chemotherapy of this condition. The severity of the toxic symptoms following tartar emetic injections depended upon the degree of infection. When the trypanosomes in the circulation were few, the symptoms were mild. In cases of heavy infection, the symptoms proved alarming although only one cow died. Moreover, all the animals treated with tartar emetic developed a cough that lasted for about 2 days after treatment. Four of the 25 animals developed swellings at the seat of injection as a result of a small quantity of this drug getting out of the vein into the subcutis. By fomentation these swellings in 3 of these animals disappeared subsequently, while in one animal the swelling persisted followed by sloughing of the part. G
168 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II Although tartar emetic is a much cheaper drug than " Bayer 205 ", the disadvantages following its use are very many. TRANSMISSION OF SURRA. The only known method of transmission of surra in nature is a mechanical one in which various biting insects are suspected to transmit the infection to healthy animals within a short time of their having fed on infected ones. The findings of Cross and Patel [ 1921 ] regarding the transmission of this disease through the agency of ticks belonging to the genus Ornithodorus have not been confirmed. It is generally presumed that flies belonging to the genus Tabanus are mainly responsible for the dissemination of this disease. A complete survey of the farm for these flies in November 1933 showed not a single fly belonging to this genus though they are said to be found in great abundance in the months of July and August. The entire absence of Tabanus flies indicated the possibilities of other vectors being responsible for the transmission of the disease. A search for them revealed the presence of the following types of flies on the farm :BOVINE SURRA IN INDIA, WITH A DESCRIPTION OF RECENT OUTBREAK. 169 Fraser [ 1910 ] in his article on " Surra in the Federated Malay States " states that the trypanosomes met with in cattle, horses and dogs in Malaya are indistinguishable morphologically and in their pathological effects. Sowerby [ 1911 ] remarks that the buffalo-strain of trypanosomes is practi- cally identical with T. evansi in form, measurement, folds of the undulating membrane and sparcity of chromatin granules. Kumaraswami Pantulu [ 1920 ] points out the difference in the symptoms manifested in different outbreaks of cattle surra and suggests the possibility that each outbreak might be caused by a different species of trypanosome. Stirling [ 1921 ] found trypanosomes in large numbers in the blood of a bullock which died in the Central Provinces of India. The trypanosome was quite unlike T. evansi and measured 14.5170 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II Berg, H. (1925). Die Eignung von " Bayer 205 " sur Bekampfung der Africanichen Haustier-trypanosomen. Deut. Tier. Woch. 33, 34, 561. Cross, H. E. and Patel (1921). A note on the Transmission of Surra by Ticks. Punjab Dept. Agri. Vet. Bull. No. 6. Edwards, J. T. (1928). The Chemotherapy of Surra of Horses and Cattle in India. Mem. Dept. Agri. India, Vet. Ser., 4, 1. Evans (1880). Cited by Lingard. Report on Surra. 2, Part 2, 80. Fraser, H. (1910). Surra in Federated Malay States. J. Trop. Vety. Sc. 4, 345. Hutyra and Marek (1912). Special Pathology and Therapeutics of the Diseases of Domestic Animals, 1, 814. Janaki Rama Ayyar, V. (1919). My experience of outbreaks of Trypanosomiasis in cattle in 1915. Madras Vet. J. 1, 2, 21-23. Kleine (1924). Cited by Edwards in his Surra Memoir, 27. Kumaraswamy Pantulu, L. (1920). Trypanosomiasis in cattle. Madras Vet. J. 1, 6, 4. Lingard, A. (1895). Report on an outbreak of Surra and Filariasis at Karnal Depot, 3. A HITHERTO UNDESCRIBED PIROPLASM OF GOATS (PIROPLASMA TAYLORI). BY S. M. SARWAR, M.R.C.V.S., Veterinary Investigation Officer, Punjab. (Received for publication on 4th December 1934.) (With Plates V to VII.) Babes, in 1892, demonstrated a parasite, similar to the one causing " Red- water " in cattle, in the blood of sheep suffering from a disease known as ' Car- ceag ' in Roumania. It was named B. ovis by Starcovici in 1893. Since that time several parasites have been seen in goats and sheep by various workers, and it has been established that there are three species of Babesia and one Theileria, as follows, B. motasi, B. ovis and B. sergenti and T. hirci. B. motasi was first seen by Motas [ 1903 ] in the blood of sheep. Lestoquard [ 1925 ] observed this parasite in the blood of goats in Algeria and showed that the parasites were readily inoculable from one goat to another. The disease caused by this parasite resembles Red-water fever of cattle, and is said to occur in acute or chronic forms. Morphologically also the parasites re- semble B. bigeminum of cattle, in that they occur either singly or in pairs, and the pairs always meet at an acute angle at their narrower ends. Their length is 2.5172 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II Of 200 sheep examined, the last named worker found 130 infected. The parasites are said to resemble B. mutans morphologically. Small, round and bacillary forms are usually found but cross forms are also stated to occur. T. hirci.A HITHERTO UNDESCRIBED PIROPLASM OF GOATS. 173 the surface blood vessels were congested. The kidneys did not show any marked abnormality except distinct congestion, particularly in the cortical area. The urinary bladder contained about 30 c.c. of clear straw-colour urine. A few petechial marks were observed on the epicardium and endocardium. The trachea also showed a few millet seed size petechiae in the cervical portion. The lungs were normally collapsed and no lesions could be found in them. Blood and organ smears were taken for examination. No ecto-parasites were found on the carcase. MORPHOLOGICAL FEATURES. On microscopical examination, the smears were found to contain a large number of piroplasms in the red blood cells, about 11.5 per cent of cells being in- fected. On examination it was seen that this parasite did not coincide in several respects with the already recorded species. The chief distinctive features of the parasite are its morphological and div- sional characters. The parasite is found to divide into two elements, or into multi- ples of two, at one and the same time, the number into which it is to divide appears to be predetermined. Although single parasites are frequently seen, it is also not uncommon to find two, four, eight and sixteen elements in one red cell. The infected red blood corpuscles are found to be distinctly enlarged in size. The average normal red blood cell in the specimens examined measures 4.2 microns in diameter, while corpuscles infected with single parasites measure 5.6 microns. Those infected with 2 parasites measures 6 . 0 microns, while those infected with four, eight and sixteen measure 6.8, 7.6 and 8.2 microns, respectively. The parasites also vary considerably in their measurements. When single parasites are found in a cell, they measure 2 × 1.5 microns, whilst the individuals consti- tuting 16 parasites in one cell are about 1 micron or less in diameter. Forms showing the initial stages in the process of division into two, four, eight or sixteen elements, are seen in abundance. The binucleated forms (those at the stage of binary fission) measure 2.75 × 2.0 microns, while those about to divide into four elements are 3.8 × 3.0 microns and those at the stage of division into eight, measure 4.2 × 3.6 microns in the intra-cellular position. Another feature is the occurrence of a fairly large number of parasites in extra-cellular situations, the extra-cellular parasites being found larger in size than the intra-cellular forms. The enlarging parasite, in commencing division, brings about a premature rupture of the corpuscle before the division is complete, showing the picture of free extra-cellular dividing forms. These extra-cellular division forms are usually 50 per cent. greater in size than the corresponding forms inside the red cells. It is clear that the intra-cellular position has an inhibitory effect on the full development of the parasite. The parasite are either ovoid, pear-shaped or round on staining with Leishman's stain.
174 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II The cytoplasm takes up a fairly deep blue colour and the nucleus (chromatin) is found to be embodied usually at one of the poles (Plate VI, fig. 1). In no case is the chomatin body found in a central position. There is a characteristic absence of the string of fine granules extending from the chromatin body, found usually in B. bigeminum and B. canis. In binary fission the nucleus becomes elongated, followed by subsequent divi- sion into two parts. The two daughter nuclei occupy the opposite poles, followed by the appearance of a constriction in the centre of the cytoplasm (Plate VI, fig. II). When division into four or more elements takes place, the resulting nuclei occupy position around the periphery of the cytoplasm, which itself divides into portions equal in number to the number of nuclei. Preceding division the parent piroplasm becomes considerably enlarged. (Plate VI, fig. 1 & 2). After the rupture of the host cells, the individuals escape into the plasma to invade fresh red blood corpuscles and repeat the process in the usual manner. Typical " Maltese cross " forms are found in abundance in the smears when quadruple division is in progress. Smears from the lymphatic glands and internal organs, also, show similar morphological features to those described above. DISCUSSION. It has previously been briefly mentioned that the piroplasm under descrip- tion, differs from the recorded species occurring in goats and sheep. The absence of Koch's blue bodies in the smears excludes the possibility of this parasite belonging to the genus Theileria. The presence of more than two parasites in a single cell and the multiple divi- sion into as many as sixteen parasites observed in this case are not the recorded features of B. motasi, which is a much larger paratsite than the one at present described. The absence of haemoglobinuria in this acute condition is also a point in favour of the casual organism not being identical with B. motasi. B. ovis produces a very chronic debilitating disease in goats and sheep and it infects not more than 0.6 per cent of the R. B. C. It is a much smaller parasite and is said to resemble B. ovis of cattle. The morphological features of the para- site in hand are quite different from those of B. ovis in that the occurrence of more than two parasites in a single cell has never been recorded in the case of the latter. A perusal of the literature shows that there has been considerable confusion in the description of B. sergenti, which has been described as Gonderia ovis and many times mistaken for parasites of B. bovis type. Moreover B. sergenti is said to produce no recognisable symptoms in sheep and goats while the parasite in Land was found to have been the probable cause of death in the goat from
A HITHERTO UNDESCRIBED PIROPLASM OF GOATS. 175 which it was recovered. It is recorded that Lestoquard [ 1924 ] in Algeria found 130 sheep infected with B. sergenti out of 202 healthy sheep that he examined. The goats and sheep infected with B. sergenti did not exhibit any signs of ill health. Infection with B. sergenti is never intense, only 0.1176 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II The author is indebted to the Director of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, for his help in affording access to the Institute Library. REFERENCES. Achar, S. D. and Srikantiah, G. N. (1934). Ind. Vet. J. 10.4. Dechunkowsky, E., and Urodschevich, V. (1924). Parasitol, 16, 107. Du Toit, P. J. (1918). Arch. Protistenk, 39, 84. Imp. Inst. Vet. Res. Muktesar. Annual Report, 1932. Laveran, A., and Nicolle, M. (1899). C . R. Soc. Biol. 51, 800. Lestoquard, F. (1924). Bull. Soc. Path. Exot. 17, 122. Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. V, Pt. 2 . Plate V. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Microphotograph (× 275) showing division of the parasite into two, four and eight in single cells ; Also showing single parasite in intra and extra cellular positions. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Microphotograph (× 275) showing division of the parasite into two, four, eight and sixteen.
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. V, Pt, 2 . Plate VI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Coloured drawing indicating the variations in shape and size of the parasite. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Coloured drawing showing the mode of binary fission.
Ind. Jour, Vety. Set. & Anim. Husb. Vol. V, Pt. 3. Plate VI(a) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Showing the extra and intra cellular multiple division of the parasite into four.
Ind. Jour, Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. V, Pt. 2. Plate VII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Coloured drawing showing the extra and intra cellular multiple division of the parasite into eight. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG . 2. Coloured drawing showing the extra and intra cellular multiple diwsion of the parasite into sixteen.
GLOBIDIOSIS IN INDIAN CATTLE, WITH A DESCRIPTION OF A NEW SPECIES. BY S. R. HASSAN, M.R.C.V.S., L.M., Deputy Director, Imperial Veterinary Serum Institute, Izatnagar. (Received for publication on 18th February 1935.) (With Plates VIII to X.) The definition, and terminology of the group of protozoon organisms, the first of which was discoverd by Flesch [ 1883 ] in the small intestine of the horse and afterwards named Globidium leuckarti, is still unsettled, and as far as India is concerned no previous reference to the parasites is available, and little is known about the morbid conditions produced by them in the alimentary canal of cattle. Data concerning the life-history and other points of protozoological interest in connection with the parasite about to be described are incomplete, so no attempt can, at present, be made to offer a detailed account. The particular purpose of this article, therefore, is to record observations concerning clinical and laboratory findings of the organism and to invite the attention of other workers, especially those connected with meat inspection and post-mortem examination of cattle, to its presence and importance in this country. The writer's observations are based on the study of five cases, four of which he encountered as early as 1919-20, while he was working as Assistant on post-mortem duty under Major S. Black, R.A.V.C., at the Army Veterinary Hospital, Peshawar, but owing to war conditions then prevailing no facilities for detailed study were available, and the material was ultimately destroyed. The only data available concerning those cases are clinical notes and post-mortem reports, which have not been previously published for want of relevant literature. As the organism resembles a Sarcosporidium in certain respects, opportunities were taken to study in detail the latter organisms and observations on this point were made before the All-India Veterinary Conference held at Lahore in 1923, when histological speci- mens were also exhibited. All the above four cases occurred in transport bullocks, which were suffering from dysentery. The examination of faeces during life by the direct method reveal- ed the presence of Coccidium-oocysts in two of the cases and the faeces of the remain- ing two cases contained a large number of spore-like bodies, peculiarly elongated and tapering at both extremities, which were hardly differentiable from sporulat- ing intestinal bacteria on a cursery examination of saline faecal preparations under (177)
178 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II l/6th objective and No. 4 ocular. A special feature of these spindle-shaped, non- motile bodies, then noted, was that they were found in groups or clumps. There was a considerable amount of blood in the faeces which was negative for Amoebae or their cysts, but some rounded bodies, which represent a stage in the develop- ment of the parasite under report, were found and were at that time considered as vegetable spores, which they resemble. The faecal films were not stained, so the morphology and histology of the elements of the parasite present in the faeces could not be thoroughly studied. With regard to the particulars and place of origin of the affected oxen, it is interesting to note that all of these animals, which were about eight years old, belonged to various bullock corps raised in the 8th Lucknow Division, Supply and Transport Corps and, as far as the writer could ascertain, they were purchased from Etawah District of the United Provinces. These oxen were either of local or mixed United Provinces and Hariana breeds. All the four cases had suffered several times from dysentery and were consequently in poor condition. They were considered to be affected with rinderpest and were destroyed. POST-MORTEM FINDINGS. Case No. 1.Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. V, Pt. 2 . Plate VIII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Globidium fusiformis n. sp. 1. Multinucleated cytoplasmic bodies, which later become spores. 2. Individual spores of the globidium. 3. Faeces particles. 4. Red blood corpuscles.
GLOBIDIOSIS IN INDIAN CATTLE, WITH A DESCRIPTION OF NEW SPECIES. 179 had a patch of eczema about 4 in diameter on the right side of the hump, which had become almost bald. This skin disease was reported as not yielding to any treatment. Mange mites were not seen in skin scrapings, which were examined under a microscope after treatment with 10 per cent. caustic potash. Case No. 5.180 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II MICROSCOPICAL EXAMINATION. For the purpose of diagnosis during life it appears necessary that several examinations of the faeces should be made. As the spores and certain other stages in the development of the parasite, which constitute the only diagnostic elements present in the faeces, are not easily seen even microscopically in unstained prepara- tions, staining is necessary and the selection of the material is another important point. In the case of apparently normal faeces scrapings from all sides of the drop- pings may be tried, but the blood stained part is probably the most suitable. As the faecal specimens received were almost dried up, these were emulsified in normal saline solution, from which were made fresh smears, which revealed the spores. The latter were also found by Sheather's sugar floatation method for worm ova. With regard to the method of staining, Giemsa's stain was found to be the most suitable. All other Romonowsky stains, Mann's double stain, Haematoxylin and Eosin, or Carbol fuchsin and Methylene blue will also serve the purpose. The contents of a colony were found to be composed of spherical protoplasmic bodies varying in size. The smallest of these, which were rare, had only one nucleus, whereas the larger ones, measuring from 60 to 90 Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. V, Pt. 2. Plate IX. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Globidium fusiformis n. sp. 1. Individual spores. 2. A stage in the development of the spores. 3. A lymphocyte. 4. Red blood corpuscles.
GLOBIDIOSIS IN INDIAN CATTLE, WITH A DESCRIPTION OF NEW SPECIES. 181 which are the precursors of the spores, become arranged around the periphery of the cyst. The nuclei vary in size and around them there is a fluid which fills the space and gives rise to a fluctuation in the contents of the cyst, when pressure is exerted. Finally, there appear projections at the periphery of the spherical body which radiate outwards from the centre. These represent the extremities of mar- ginally situated spores. In a freshly ruptured cyst as many as 20 or more spores have been seen lying parallel to one another, in which position they remain for some time due to attachment by the cytoplasmic debris between them. The spores are elongated, spindle-shaped and slightly curved bodies, measur- ing about 13 182 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II is one end truncated. The average length is about 13 Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. V, Pt. 2. Plate X. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Globidium fusiformis n. sp. 1. A freshly ruptured globidium cyst. 2. Particles of fæces. 3. Red blood corpuscles. 4. Laked blood.
GLOBIDIOSIS IN INDIAN CATTLE, WITH A DESCRIPTION OF NEW SPECIES. 183 2. That although there is not as yet sufficient evidence to calculate the economic loss, yet as one of the causes of debility in all cattle either bred for milk or meat, the organism must be playing an important part. 3. That in this country where rinderpest and other weakening diseases are so common, the resuscitation of this organism after an attack of one of the conta- gious diseases should be kept in mind. It seems possible that this organism may have a much wider distribution in India than has yet appeared, and that its position may be the same as that pre- viously held in this country by coccidiosis, regarding which the following remarks were made in the Annual Report of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, for 1923-24 :MINERALS IN PASTURE GRASSES IN INDIA BY A. VISWANATHA IYER, B.A., Assistant Physiological Chemist, Animal Nutrition Section, Bangalore. (Received for publication on 13th March 1935.) Largely through the stimulating lead given by Dr. Orr, Director of the Rowett Institute, work on the mineral content of crops has been taken up and is being prosecuted vigorously all over the world. In India practically every agricultural institute is collecting some data on the subject. The question was taken up by the Nutrition Section in a tentative form some years ago. The aim was, and is, to grow and to determine the mineral content of certain pure species of grass at a number of selected stations representing some typical Indian soil and climate conditions. The chief difficulties have been in connection with the establishment of permanent cultures. In some places one species, in other places another species is found to be difficult to grow. It has also occurred that after having been estab- lished a plot may retrogress and eventually fail. The scope of this work has been extended steadily so that there are now ten Stations well distributed over the country at which plots have been laid down. The present paper deals with the crops of two successive years from three Stations only, namely, Pusa, Sabour and Bangalore. The procedure has been to take three cuttings from each plot to represent respectively, the young (just before flowering), the prime (full flower) and the ripe (seed ripe and falling) stages of maturity. The sample including leaf, stalk and heads is chaffed as a whole and milled. The analytical data obtained from these samples will be considered from various points of view. I. INFLUENCE OF DEEP CULTIVATION ON THE MINERAL CONTENT OF GRASSES. Table I shows the significant figures obtained with the Bangalore sample It will be noticed that Pennisetum cenchroides and C ynodon Dactylon gave roughly similar values for the two seasons. Therefore the climatic differences that there may have been were not sufficient to produce marked mineral differ- ences in these two species. In contrast to the results with Pennisetum cenchroides and C ynodon Dactylon, Andropogon contortus gave entirely different results in the 2 seasons, the 1932 crop was rich in nitrogen and mineralsMINERALS IN PASTURE GRASSES IN INDIA. 185 It is a fact that the Andropogon contortus crop of 1932 was a new plantation, the first year's growth after deep cultivation. The richness of this crop must, therefore, be attributed to the effect of cultivation. Further tests are necessary to corroborate and extend this important observation, which warns us that the mineral content of a crop may be entirely misleading if the cultivation factor is overlooked. In the present enquiry the practice has generally been to establish a plot as permanent grass and to sample this undisturbed permanent growth. II. INFLUENCE OF SOIL AND OF GRASS SPECIES ON THE MINERAL CONTENT OF GRASSES. In Table II average values of the three cuts of each sample are given, the discussion being confined to lime and phosphoric acid. Certain characteristics of soils seem to be revealed by these figures. In every case the Pusa crop contains more lime and less phosphoric acid than the average value for the crop. Bangalore yields average phosphoric acid content and low lime content. These results agree very closely with the known characteristics and chemical constitutions of these two soils, the Pusa soil being a highly cal- careous loam with low available phosphoric acid and the Bangalore soil a red laterite deficient in lime and tending to be acidic. With regard to phosphoric acid, it seems to be worthy of note that although all the grasses grown at Pusa have a phosphoric acid content which is below the ave age, yet the figures are not as low as we might have been led to expect from the soil analysis data under the head available phosphoric acid. Certain very interesting characteristics of grass species are also indicated by the data of Table II. Andropogon contortus appears to develop with relatively low amounts of lime and phosphoric acid in its constitution. C ynodon Dactylon invariably shows a considerable excess of lime over phosphoric acid, while Pennisetum cench- roides is remarkable in containing an excess of phosphoric acid over lime, except at Pusa, where, apparently, this tendency is masked by the highly calcareous nature of the soil. Plants containing an excess of phosphorus over calcium are apparently rare. The author has only noted two such cases up to date, namely, Pennisetum cenchroides recorded here and Sorghum vulgare recently reported on in another paper [Viswanatha Iyer, 1935]. These observations are considered to be tentative only at present. NITROGEN AND POTASH IN GRASSES. The figures for nitrogen and potash in Table III show that there is a parallelism in the variations of these two elements. Both are liable to fluctuate considerably and both fluctuate in the same direction. For example, if, owing to seasonal effect, the nitrogen content is above normal, the potash will also be above normal. In contrast, the fluctuations of lime and magnesia are
186 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II relatively negligible. These elements remain almost constant while great variations in the nitrogen and potash occur. INFLUENCE OF MATURING ON MINERAL CONTENT. Table IV gives the mineral composition of cuts made at different stages of maturity. Of the three grasses, Cynodon Dactylon gives the highest average nitrogen content. It maintains its nitrogen most satisfactorily during maturing, Pennise- tum cenchroides comes next in this respect while Andropogon contortus is definitely inferior when judged by this important quality. The nitrogen content of this grass falls to a very low level indeed in the course of maturing. It may be noted that the phosphoric acid generally varies in the same way as the nitrogen and the potash, but to a smaller extent. Taking the figures as a whole it appears that maturing exerts a considerable influence on per cent. of nitrogen and potash in the grass, a smaller influence on the per cent. of phosphoric acid and only a minor effect on the per cent. of lime and magnesia. * * * * SUMMARY. The mineral composition of three species of grass grown under different soil conditions has been studied. The effect of the following factors was noted :MINERALS IN PASTURE GRASSES IN INDIA. 187 TABLE I. Percentage mineral composition of the grasses grown at Bangalore during the two seasons (on dry basis). Year. Mineral ingredients. Andropogon contortus. Cynodon dactylon. Pennisetum cenchroides. Young. Prime. Ripe. Young. Prime. Ripe. Young. Prime. Ripe. 1932 Ash . . . . 12.570 10.930 8.590 11.600 12.010 8.890 13.490 11.720 9.220 Ash soluble in Hcl. . . 8.180 7.250 3.670 7.020 5.080 4.580 9.200 7.770 5.190 P2O5 . . . . 0.628 0.428 0.188 0.508 0.474 0.302 0.671 0.501 0.306 CaO . . . . . 0.603 0.558 0.403 0.876 0.762 0.436 0.432 0.436 0.480 MgO . . . . 0.407 0.417 0.295 0.377 0.269 0.426 0.368 0.432 0.451 Na2O . . . . 0.168 0.273 0.225 0.548 0.529 1.486 1.350 1.583 1.173 K2O . . . . 3.861 3.206 1.511 3.058 1.826 1.553 3.887 3.050 1.620 Nitrogen . . . . 2.416 1.748 0.778 2.349 1.903 1.324 2.299 1.906 1.129 1933 Ash . . . . 11.710 7.460 9.990 15.480 11.800 9.720 14.150 11.410 11.290 Ash soluble in Hcl. . . 4.390 2.430 2.220 8.660 7.080 5.110 9.270 5.440 4.670 P2O5 . . . . 0.317 0.158 0.159 0.641 0.549 0.245 0.634 0.444 0.469 CaO . . . . 0.528 0.301 0.384 0.735 0.637 0.384 0.382 0.526 0.372 MgO . . . . 0.300 0.224 0.206 0.390 0.355 0.254 0.333 0.340 0.337 Na2O . . . . 0.222 0.211 0.208 0.375 0.333 0.173 1.311 0.811 0.603 K2O . . . . 1.867 1.109 0.568 3.284 2.830 2.453 4.378 1.916 1.717 Nitrogen . . . . 0.808 0.461 0.556 2.372 1.638 1.376 1.672 1.283 1.197
188 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II TABLE II. Average percentage composition of lime and phosphoric acid in the grasses and soils (on dry basis). Year. Andropogon contortus. Cynodon dactylon. Pennistum cenchroides. Soil. P2O5 CaO P2O5 CaO P2O5 CaO available. P2O5 Total. CaO Pusa . . 1932 0.234 0.691 . . . . 0.448 0.888 0.001 17.645 1933 . . . . 0.412 0.898 0.510 0.839 Sabour . . 1932 0.367 0.527 . . . . 0.718 0.531 0.053 0.648 1933 0.208 0.461 . . . . 0.699 0.630 Bangalore . 1932 0.408 0.521 0.428 0.691 0.493 0.449 0.0045 0.138 1933 0.211 0.404 0.478 0.585 0.516 0.427 Average for the species 0.286 0.521 0.439 0.725 0.564 0.627
MINERALS IN PASTURE GRASSES IN INDIA. 189 TABLE III. Average percentage composition of nitrogen, potash and magnesia in the grasses (on dry basis). Year. Andropogon contortus. Cynodon dactylon. Pennisetum cenchroides. N K2O CaO MgO N K2O CaO MgO N K2O CaO MgO Pusa . . . 1932 0.671 1.304 0.691 0.282 No sample. 1.398 5.159 0.888 0.436 1933 No sample. 0.858 1.411 0.898 0.300 0.789 2.307 0.839 0.427 Sabour . . . 1932 0.769 1.413 0.527 0.251 No sample. 1.132 2.614 0.531 0.254 1933 0.208 0.421 0.461 0.165 No sample. 1.153 2.633 0.630 0.362 Bangalore . . 1932 1.647 2.859 0.521 0.373 1.859 2.146 0.691 0.357 1.778 2.852 0.449 0.417 1933 0.508 1.181 0.404 0.243 1.795 2.856 0.585 0.333 1.382 2.670 0.427 0.337 Average for the species . 0.761 1.436 0.521 0.263 1.504 2.138 0.725 0.330 1.272 3.039 0.627 0.372
190 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II TABLE IV. Percentage mineral composition of the grasses at different stages of maturity (on dry basis). Andropogon contortus. Cynodon dactylon. Pennisetum cenchroides. N P2O5 K2O CaO MgO N P2O5 K2O CaO MgO N P2O5 K2O CaO MgO Pusa. 1932 Young Prime Ripe . 0.782 0.725 0.506 0.256 0.218 0.228 1.863 1.307 0.742 0.649 0.589 0.835 0.280 0.315 0.250 No sample. 1.722 1.468 1.005 0.537 0.419 0.389 8.935 3.985 2.558 1.266 0.628 0.770 0.541 0.375 0.393 1933 Young Prime Ripe . No sample. 0.714 1.059 0.853 0.282 0.455 0.500 1.376 1.520 1.337 0.874 1.156 0.663 0.336 0.336 0.229 0.823 0.756 No sample. 0.565 0.455 3.596 1.018 0.636 0.941 0.479 0.374 Sabour. 1932 Young Prime Ripe . 0.579 0.958 No sample. 0.331 0.402 1.240 1.586 0.530 0.525 0.220 0.282 No sample. 0.932 1.477 0.988 0.765 0.575 0.815 1.925 3.305 2.612 0.486 0.552 0.555 0.167 0.320 0.276 1933 Young Prime Ripe . 0.173 0.260 0.194 0.239 0.181 0.201 0.477 0.372 0.423 0.477 0.421 0.484 0.170 0.161 0.163 No sample. 1.261 1.532 0.666 0.676 0.552 0.871 2.815 4.200 0.884 0.592 0.744 0.555 0.342 0.429 0.314 Banglore. 1932 Young Prime Ripe . 2.416 1.748 0.778 0.628 0.428 0.188 3.861 3.206 1.511 0.603 0.558 0.403 0.407 0.417 0.295 2.349 1.903 1.324 0.508 0.474 0.302 3.058 1.826 1.553 0.876 0.762 0.436 0.377 0.269 0.426 2.299 1.906 1.129 0.671 0.501 0.306 3.887 3.050 1.620 0.432 0.436 0.480 0.368 0.432 0.451 1933 Young Prime Ripe . 0.808 0.461 0.556 0.317 0.158 0.159 1.867 1.109 0.568 0.528 0.301 0.384 0.300 0.224 0.206 2.372 1.638 1.376 0.641 0.549 0.245 3.284 2.830 2.453 0.735 0.637 0.384 0.390 0.355 0.254 1.672 1.283 1.197 0.634 0.444 0.469 4.378 1.916 1.717 0.382 0.526 0.372 0.333 0.340 0.337
SELECTED ARTICLES A SUCCESSFUL METHOD OF TREATING PROLAPSE OF THE VAGINA AND UTERUS IN BOVINES BY CHAUDHRI MUSHTAQ AHMAD, G.P.V.C., P.V.S., Hospital Surgeon and Radiologist, Punjab Veterinary College, Lahore. (Reprinted from the Veterinary Record, No. 2409, Volume 46.) (With Plates XI to XIV). Prolapse of the Vagina or Uterus is the term applied when either of these organs is everted. The former condition may take place during advanced pregnancy, but the latter occurs immediately or shortly after mature or premature birth. All animals are liable to suffer from this accident, but it is most frequently met with in cows and buffaloes. Various methods have been introduced to return the prolapsed organs and to prevent recurrence. No great difficulty is encountered in returning the inverted parts, but in preventing recurrence veterinarians have not always been so success- ful. Different methods have been adopted by various surgeons, such as the use of pessaries, west's clamp, bottle, the application of trusses and suturing of the vulva. The vigorous straining of the animal is chiefly due to the severe inflammation and irritation of the part, the prevention of free drainage, interference with urination, and acute constipation. It is hoped that the method adopted and the success achieved by the writer in no less than 80 cases at this college, will appeal to all professional brethren. This article is purely confined to the treatment and does not discuss the various causes and symptoms. The method of treatment is as now described. The prolapsed part is irrigated with cold water from half to one hour in order to lessen the congestion and to cleanse it. When thoroughly cleansed the part is covered in a sheet of clean cloth and the animal is cast on its right side on a tarpaulin. Cushions made of gunny bags filled with straw are placed under the quarters. A dose of chloral hydrate is administered per os or intra- venously or the animal is chloroformed. The everted organ is washed with pota- ssium permanganate solution, one in 1500, or with some other suitable antiseptic such as ½ per cent. solution of electrolytic chlorine, or carbolic acid or lysol. In fresh cases, if any part is torn or ruptured, it is carefully sutured with catgut liga- ture. In neglected cases any portion of the prolapse showing signs of sloughing owing to the onset of gangrene or necrosis, is removed. If maggots are present (191) K
192 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II they are removed. The prolapsed organ is then thoroughly washed with 2 per cent. zinc sulphas or alum lotion. In cases in which the organ is enormously swollen and oedematous its size is reduced by dusting over it finely powdered sugar and 20 minutes later folding around the organ a sterilized wet, sheet of markine cloth and twisting the ends of this sheet. Kneading and applying pressure by one's hand is not always safe. The organ is reduced in simple cases by pressing the fist against the most dependent part. When the whole of the uterus is out it then becomes a more difficult and laborious task but reduction can be effected as follows. The operator should place his right fist against the os uteri, lifting the organ with his left hand, while the right side of the prolapsed part is supported by an assistant. The operator should now place his right elbow against the inside of his right knee, and another assistant should press both his hands against the knee from the outer side. The knee of the operator acts as a fulcrum and the power is provided by the assistant. In this way the prolapsed uterus is pushed into the abdominal cavity. This is easily accomplished during the intervals between periods of straining. Moreover by employing this method, time and labour are reduced to a minimum. When the organ is replaced, it should be flooded with a weak antiseptic solution to ensure that it is in its normal position. To prevent recurrence an apparatus made of metal such as brass or aluminium (preferably the latter) of suitable dimensions according to the size of the animal is then inserted. If made of aluminium, it affords maximum strength with minimum weight. It can be highly polished in order to provide a uniform smooth surface; it is comfor- table to the animal; easy to clean and not liable to tranish. The apparatus used (Plate XI) is open at the anterior part, which rests against the os uteri, while the posterior end is provided with a suitable hinged lid capable of being securely closed by a catch. This lid prevents the entrance of flies, dust, dirt, etc. The ventral aspect, which rests on the lower surface of the vagina, is suitably concave to avoid pressure on the region of the bladder, and an aperture is provided which comes in to apposition with, the sphincter of the bladder, to allow the urine and discharge to pass out. The dorsal aspect is convex, and is provided with grooves to accommodate the rugae of the upper surface of the vagina. It is perforated with numerous holes to allow free escape of discharge. The posterior end with the hinged lid resembles and conforms to the shape of the lips of the vulva. It is provided with a number of holes along its outer rim by which it is sutured to the lips of the vulva. A series of perforations in the lower half allows the escape of discharge and urine. A ring is provided on the top of the posterior end of the apparatus just in front of the hinge of the lid, for fastening it to the body of the animal by means of a tape or truss.
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. V, Pt. 2. Plate XI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Prolapsus uteri Apparatus Mushtaq's Patent.
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. V, Pt. 2 . Plate XII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 1. Complete Prolapsus uteriSUCCESSFUL METHOD OF TREATING PROLAPSE OF VAGINA AND UTERUS IN BOVINES. 193 The vagina and the uterus are irrigated with potassium permanganate solution or boric lotion and the apparatus is left in position from 2 to 4 days according to the severity of the case. Laxatives such as mag. sulphas or linseed oil should be administered to overcome or prevent constipation. If the cow strains continuously, anodynes such as chloral hydrate, pot. bromide, camphor, or ext. of belladonna may be adminis- tered every four hours. In cases where there is severe continuous straining, tracheotomy should be performed. On the other hand, should the animal be very weak and exhausted, alcoholic stimulants should be given. On the following morning, in cases where the temperature rises magnesium sulphate in small doses with quinine sulphas and dilute sulphuric acid should be given twice a day. The uterus is douched with one of the following warm potassium prmanganate solution, 1 in 1500, or one per cent. lysol, one to two per cent. common salt solution, 2 to 3 per cent. boric lotion, once or twice a day according to the condition of the case. The douching should be continued for several days after removing the apparatus till the discharge ceases. CASES. Two typical cases, out of all those successfully treated at the Punjab Veterinary College Hospital, Lahore, are recorded in detail with photographs. (Plates XII194 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II Treatment.Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. V, Pt. 2. Plate XIII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Complete Prolapsus uteri. (Grey Hissar cowInd. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. V, Pt. 2 . Plate XIV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 1. Twelve days after recovery from Prolapsus uteri (Brown Montgomery cow, 6 years). [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Seven days after recovery from Prolapsus uteri (Grey Hissar cow, 6 years).
A NOTE ON THE TREATMENT OF TAPEWORM (MONIEZIA SPP.) INFESTATION OF SHEEP. BY H. MCL. GORDON, B.V.Sc.* (Reprinted from the Journal of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, Commonwealth of Australia, Vol. 8, No. 1, pages 21196 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II of efficiency against this parasite in South Africa. In view of the findings of Clunies Ross (1934), that solutions of copper sulphate administered to sheep pass directly to the abomasum in the great majority of instances, it was decided to give arsenic trisulphide suspended in such solutions to some sheep, while to others the drug was given in powder form as done by Mönning. One group received a full dose of magnesium sulphate following the dose of arsenic trisulphide shaken up in copper sulphate solution. Lambs were divided into four groups of five each :NOTE ON THE TREATMENT OF TAPEWORM (Moniezia spp.)INFESTATION OF SHEEP. 197 DISCUSSION. S460 was dead on the morning of 8th July, 1934. At post-mortem, masses of Moniezia spp. were found in the ileum and caecum. Egg counts were made on falces of these lambs for almost two months following treatment, and in only one case did ova of Moniezia spp. appear. This was in the case of S459. Daily egg counts made on the faeces of this lamb from 8th July, 1934, onwards did not show Moniezia spp. ova until 16th August, 1934. S459 was treated on 21st August, 1934, with 0.5 gram. As2 S5 as powder, and on the following day passed Moniezia spp. segments. Subsequently, all the lambs in this experiment were killed, and at post-mortem were free from Moniezia spp. It thus appers that the arsenious sylphide alone, or in the combinations used, was almost equally effective in removing Moniezia spp., S459 being the only exception. In this lamb, which received the smaller dose of arsenic sulphide, it appears that the scolex remained, and after approximately a month a new strobila had grown, and eggs were being produced. A second treatment of this lamb was quite effective. It is to be noted that S477 was negative for Moniezia spp. throughout. EXPERIMENT 2. This experiment was designed to compare the efficiency of arsenic trisulphide and copper sulphate against Moniezia spp. Six lambs were used and divided into two groups:198 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II The six lambs were killed on 20th July, 1934, and all were completely negative for Moniezia spp., except S463, which had two mature specimens some yards in length. Careful search failed to reveal any retained scolioes in the other lambs. DISCUSSION. It appeared that arsenious sulphide in 0.5 gm. doses was 100 per cent. efficient in removing Moniezia spp., even when given alone in powder form, its action being quite rapid (within 26 hours). Copper sulphate solution in the strength used was quite efficient in one case, and quite inefficient in the other. CONCLUSIONS. Arsenic trisulphide is very efficient in removing Moniezia spp. from sheep, administered either in powder form or suspended in copper sulphate solution. Copper sulphate solution alone was efficient in one out of two cases. REFERENCES. Clunies Ross, 1. (1934). The Passage of Fluids through the Ruminant Stomach, II. Aust. Vet. J., 10 : 11. Monning, H. O. (1903). The Chemotherapy of Oesophagostomiasis in Sheep. Onder- stepoort J. Vet. Sc. and Animal Ind., 1 : 67. Freeborn, S. B., and Berry, L. J. (1934). Observations on the Sheep Tapeworm, Monieza expansa in California. J. Am. Vet. Med. Ass., 85 : 611.
THE NUTRITIONAL VALUE OF MILKS- RAW VS. PASTEURIZED AND SUMMER VS. WINTER.* BY C. A. ELVEHJEM AND E. B. HART, Department of Agricultural Chemistry, University of Wisconsin, Madison. AND H. C. JACKSON AND K. G. WECKEL, Department of Dairy Industry, University of Wisconsin, Madison. (Reprinted from the Journal of Dairy Science, Volume XVII, No. 12, December 1934.) The consumption of milk by both children and adults has increased in recent years. Along with this increase in the use of milk has come a greater reliance upon pasteurization as a safeguard against milk-borne diseases. It has been estimated (1) that in the United States over 87.5 per cent. of the milk used in cities of 10,000 population and over is pasteurized. Studies on the changes produced in milk by pasteurization are as old as the process itself. The question of whether pasteurized milk is equal nutritionally to raw milk is far from settled at the present time, and each new investigation seems to increase the discordance in results. Some of the reported work is value- less because it was sponsored by parties either opposed to or in favour of pasteu- rized milk. It is impossible to attempt a review of the existing literature on the subject in this short paper. A comprehensive review has been published recently by Stirling and Blackwood (2) of the Hannah Dairy Research Institute. Theoretically it should be very simple to measure the biological value of all the nutrients in pasteruized milk and compare these values with those obtained with raw milk. In practice we find this method very difficult because we are probably not aware of all the nutrient factors in milk and because assay of some of the known factors is far from easy. The study of raw and pasteurized milks would be greatly simplified if the milk could be used as the sole source of the majority of the nutrients. This is now possible due to the fact that milk can be mineralized with iron, copper, and manganese and thereby rendered complete for normal animal growth. Kemmerer, Elvehjem, Hart, and Fargo (3) showed *Published with the permission of the Director of the Wisconsin Agricultural Experiment Station. [Ed. Jour. Dairy sci]. (199) L
200 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II that rats reared from weaning on whole cow's milk mineralized with iron, copper, and manganese grew from 60-200 gm. in 36 days, a growth which is comparable in every way with the growth of rats on a natural ration. Krauss, Erb and Washburn (4) found no difference in the rate of growth of rats fed raw and pasteurized milk supplemented with iron and copper. However, their animals showed a very slow rate of growth due to the absence of manganese and this slow growth may have reduced the requirements sufficiently to prevent the demonstration of any limitations in the treated milk. In this paper we wish to present results obtained by feeding mineralized raw and pasteurized milk produced during the fall, winter, and spring months. We want to emphasize that the method which we have used does not give the quantitative destruction or inactivation of any individual component due to the heat, but it does demonstrate whether pasteurization alters the milk suffi- ciently to prevent it from supplying the nutrients which we rely upon milk to furnish. EXPERIMENTAL. The milk used throughout these experiments was received directly from the University of Wisconsin Dairy each day. The source of milk was from approxi- mately twenty farmers who sell their milk to the dairy. It was typical market type and contained about 3.7 per cent fat. One-half of the milk was pasteurized in the University dairy before bringing it to the laboratory. In the pasteuriza- tion process the milk was heated to 145°F. in a vat and held at that temperature for 30 minutes.* It was then cooled over a surface cooler to 40° F. The two milks were therefore identical except for the pasteurization process. The first feeding trial, which will be described in detail, was started October 26, 1932. Three litters of six rats each were taken from the stock colony at weaning. The litters were divided as equally as possible according to weight and sex into two groups, one for the raw milk and one for the pasteurized. Each animal was put in an individual wire bottom cage and fed nothing but the milk supplemented with iron, copper, and manganese. The iron was supplied as ferric chloride, the copper and manganese as the sulphates. The minerals were administered as follows:Ind. Jour. Vety.Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. V, Pt. 2 . PLATE XV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Photograph of two rats fed mineralized milk for nine weeks. Rat 791 (left) received raw milk reinforced with iron, copper and manganese. Rat 796 (right) received pasteurized milk plus iron, copper and manganese. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Growth curves for rats grown on mineralized raw and pasteurized milk. The solid line indicates raw milk and the broken line pasteurized milk.
NUTRITIONAL VALUE OF MILKS . 201 The rate of mineralization outlined for the third week was continued through- out the duration of the experiment. The animals were fed ad libitum but during the first two weeks the minerals were placed in a small amount of milk fed in the morning and additional milk supplied in the evening. Beginning the 3rd week 35 cc. of mineralized milk were supplied in the morning and additional untreated milk in the evening depending upon the amount consumed the previous day. By this method consumption records were kept without leaving a great deal of unconsumed milk in the dishes over night. The animals were weighed weekly. All animals except one (Rat 805) grew exceedingly well on these diets and remained on the experiment for a period of 30 weeks. Rat 805 became sick during the fourth week and upon autopsy showed an enlarged and highly pig- mented liver. Growth curves for two male and two female rats on mineralized raw milk and a like number on mineralized pasteurized milk are given in PI. XV, fig. 2. The males grew from 60 to 200 gm. in about 28 days, which is somewhat better growth than previously reported (3). It is readily seen from these curves that there is no difference in the growth of the rats on the pasteurized and raw milks. The fact that the rats on the pasteurized milk grew very well and were maintained for a period of 30 weeks demonstrates that there is no serious deficiency due to the heat treatment. An idea of the physical condition of the animals may be gained from PI. XV, fig. 1. showing the picture of Rat 791 on raw milk and Rat 796 on pasteurized milk. They had been on the milk diet nine weeks at the time the picture was taken and weighed within one gram of each other. They were in good flesh, their coats were smooth and sleek and their eyes bright. When the animals had been on the experiment 10 weeks (14 weeks old) ovulation studies were made on the females by vaginal smears. All animals ovulated normally. Some of the animals were allowed to mate with production of young as may be seen from the growth record of Rat 794. Reproduction studies will not be included in this paper. The only abnormal condition which we observed was the presence of some respiratory trouble during March and April. However, there was no indication that the animals on pasteurized milk were more susceptible, in fact Rats 792 and 801 both on raw milk had the most severe attacks. Although the temperature of our laboratory was kept very constant, the respiratory troubles might have been due to drafts. However, we were more inclined to believe that the difficulty was associated with some change in the winter supply of the milk. A second series of rats was started therefore on April 21, 1933. The experimental procedure was identical with that described for the first series. At this time of the year none of the animals grew quite as rapidly as those started in the fall and the animals receiving the raw milk made considerably better gain than those on pasteurized milk. This difference is represented in Table 1 which shows the average daily gain for the males and females during the first six weeks of each experiment,
202 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, 11 TABLE I. Average daily gains in grams during the first six weeks of rats started in October and in April, 1932-33. Time of starting experiment. Raw. Pasteurized. Males. Females. Males. Females. October 26, 1932 . 4.55 3.04 4.36 3.04 April 21, 1933 4.00 2.66 3.49 1.91 Due to a very uneven distribution of sex in the litters used in the second experiment the number of animals in the male group receiving raw milk was reduced to one. In spite of this there seems to be no question but what the difference in growth between the fall and winter experiment is significant in all groups. This difference must be due to a seasonal variation in the milk. In order to test this suggestion more carefully three series of experiments were conducted during the past year. The milk was obtained again from the University dairy. The average fat content varied from 3.67 per cent. during the fall to 3.7 per cent. in the spring. The rats were started on the following dates: October 14, 1933 ; December 27, 1933 ; and February 6, 1934. The average daily gains during the first six weeks for the different groups are given in Table II. TABLE II. Average daily gains in grams during the first six weeks of rats started in October, December and February, 1933.34. Time of starting experiment. Raw. Pasteurized. Males. Females. Males. Females. October 14, 1933 4.19 2.88 3.90 2.59 December 27, 1933 3.32 2.11 1.96 2.52 February 6, 1934 2.45 3.14 1.14 2.12
NUTRITIONAL VALUE OF MILKS. 203 The rats started in October (1933) gave results quite similar to those obtained in October, 1932. Both the males and females grew a little slower and the differ- ences between the raw and pasteurized milk were slightly greater than in the earlier series, but the differences cannot be considered significant. However, in the experiments started in December and February very significant differences are evident. In the case of the male rats there is a progressive decrease in the daily rate of growth from 4.19 to 2.45 gms. for the raw milk and from 3.90 to 1 .14 gms. for the pasteurized milk. The females show some indication that the winter milk is of poorer quality than the summer milk. However, the results are not as uniform as for the males, and the females do not show the extremely poor growth in the February experiment that the males do. This we believe is due to the fact that the females do not grow as fast and therefore do not need as much of the factor or factors which winter milk is deficient in. Whatever the limiting factor is in winter milk, the deficiency is undoubtedly a relative one. Thus it is decreased sufficiently during winter feeding to have a very drastic effect upon the males which have a tendency to grow faster, but not enough to produce an equal growth impairment in females. The fact is further emphasized in the case of pasteurized milk. The milk produced in October and November, when the cows still have a store of nutrients from the summer feeding period, contains a fairly adequate supply of all needed nutrients. At this period, although pasteurization may destroy a small amount of certain constituents, the amount remaining is still sufficient to allow the animal an adequate supply. However, in December the supply of essential factors is reduced in the original raw milk and pasteurization will now increase the deficiency. Thus we have a decrease in the rate of growth of the males from 3.32 to 1.96 gm. per day due to the heat treat- ment. In February the raw milk allows a growth of only 2.45 gm. daily and pasteurization reduces the growth rate to 1.14 gm. It should be noted that the females on the pasteurized milk in both the second and third experiments grew faster than the males. This is further indication that the deficiency is more readily demonstrated in males than in females. The female rats on raw milk during the February experiment also grew faster than the males but two of the rats in this group grew exceedingly well and raised the average. In this connection we might mention a test made on milk produced by two cows in the University herd and brought directly to the laboratory. This experiment was also started on February 6 and the average growth for the males was 2.62 gm. which is almost identical with 2.45 found for the commercial milk at this time of the year. The average growth for the females was 2.65, which is lower than the 3.14 value but more in line with the other results for the females. Season or the kind of feed ingested by the cow, therefore, has a much greater effect upon the nutritive value of milk than does pasteurization. Pasteurization will aggravate the deficiency of a poor milk, but a good milk, one produced when
204 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II the cow is receiving an abundance of green feed containing certain essential factors., is little affected by pasteurization. Our problem therefore becomes one of pro- ducing a milk so complete that slight changes due to pasteurization have no effect on the nutritive quality. DISCUSSION. The lack of any noticeable destructive action due to pasteurization of a good quality milk obtained in our studies with rats is in accord with the general con- clusions reached in extensive studies with children in this country (1) and in Scotland (5). The Lanarkshire studies have been criticized, but a recent re- examination of the data by Elderton (6) substantiates the original conclusion that ' There is no evidence that raw milk has an advantage over pasteurized or pasteurized over raw in increasing growth when the two are directly compared on this selected material'. The deficiency of winter produced milk and the increase in this deficiency due to pasteurization observed with rats indicates that there is a definite change in the composition of the milk during the winter period. Although it is well known that the amount of certain vitamins in milk varies with the season, it is difficult from our present results to determine what specific factors may be respon- sible for the gross changes observed. Vitamin C may be disregarded because rats do not require this factor preformed in the diet. Since a few of our animals suffered from respiratory troubles, it might be suggested that we were dealing with a vitamin A deficiency. However, there is no indication that our rats were receiving a limited supply of this factor. In a recent paper Baumann, Steen- bock, Beeson, and Rupel (7) calculated the vitamin A activity of Holstein milk produced in the University dairy herd to be approximately 21 International units per gram of butter fat when the cows were on winter feed. The rats showing growth impairment in our studies would therefore be ingesting at least 50NUTRITIONAL VALUE OF MILKS. 205 in a recent paper that the vitamin B and G potency of raw milk is remarkably constant throughout the year. It is possible that the difference in wniter and summer milk may be associated with change in the vitamin B4 content but further work is necessary before any definite relationship can be established. The studies which we have conducted so far suggest that the rate of growth of male rats on mineralized milk is an excellent measure of changes in the nutri tive value of that milk. This method may be of considerable importance in measuring the value of milks produced by cows fed artificially dried hays and legumes preserved by the A. I. V. process during the winter months. SUMMARY. 1. Rats started on experiment in October and grown on mineralized raw milk and mineralized pasteurized milk showed no differences in growth or develop- ment over a period of 30 weeks. 2. The average daily gains during the first six weeks for rats on mineralized raw milk were less for the animals started in April than those started in October. In April the rate of growth for rats on pasteurized milk was inferior to that obtained on raw milk. 3. A decrease was observed in the daily rate of growth in male rats on miner- alized milk from 4.19 gm. for milk produced in October to 3.32 gm. for milk produced in December to 2.45 gm. for milk produced in February. The decrease for male rats on pasteurized milk for the same periods was 3.90 to 1.96 and to 1.14 gm. The female rats showed some decrease in growth on winter milk but the impairment in growth during this period was not nearly as great as that observed in the case of the male rats. 4. The kind of feed ingested by the cow has a greater effect upon the nutritive value of milk than does pasteurization. 5. Pasteurization has practically no detrimental effect, as measured with rats, upon the nutritive value of a milk of high nutritive quality but may further decrease the value of a milk of low nutritive quality. BIBLIOGRAPHY. 1. Frank, L. C, Clark, F. A., Haskell, W. H., Miller M. M., Moss, F. J., and Thomas, R. C. Do children who drink raw milk think better than children who drink heated milk ? U. S. Pub. Health Rep. 47, 1951. 1932. 2. Stirling, J. D., and Blackwood, J. H. The nutritive properties of milk in relation to pasteurization. Bull. No. 5, The Hannah Dairy Research Institute. 1933.
206 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, II 3. Kemmerer, A. R., Elvehjem, C. A., Hart, E. B., and Fargo, J. M. The nutritive value and efficiency of mineralized milk. Amer. J. Physiol, 102; 319. 1932. 4. Krauss, W. E., Erb, J. H., and Washburn, R. G. The effect of pasteuriza- tion on some of the nutritive properties of milk. Ohio Agric. Exp. Sta. Bulletin. 518. 1933. 5. Leighton, G., and McKinlay, P. L. Milk consumption and the growth of school children. His Majesty's Stationery Office. 1930. 6. Elderton, E. M. The Lanarkshire milk experiment. Ann. Eugenics 5; 326. 1933. 7. Baumann, C. A., Steenbock, H., Beeson, W. M., and Rupel, I. W. Fat- soluble Vitamins XXXIX. The influence of breed and diet of cows on the carotene and vitamin A content of butter. J. Biol. Chem. 105; 167. 1934. 8. Gunderson, F. L., and Steenbock, H. Is the vitamin B content of milk under physiological control ? J. Nutrition 5 ; 199. 1932. 9. Dutcher, R. A., Guerrant, N. B., and McKelvey, J. G. Vitamin studies XX. The effect of various methods of pasteurization on the vitamin B and the vitamin G content of cow's milk. Journal of Dairy Science 17 ; 455, 1934. We are indebted to Frank E. Stirn and Walter H. Uphoff for help in conduct- ing the feeding trials and to W.M. Beeson for the determination of vitamin A and carotene in the mineralized milk.
ABSTRACT Haemorrhagic filariasis in cattle caused by new species of Parafilaria, JESUS, Z. Phil J, Sc. 55, 125NOTICE ROUND TABLE DISCUSSION ON NUTRITION AT THE NEXT CONGRESS OF FAR EASTERN ASSOCIATION OF TROPICAL MEDICINE. We have received the following letter for publication from the Local Secretary, The Far Eastern Association of Tropical Medicine :Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. V, Pt. 3. PLATE XVI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Dr. F. J. Warth, D. Sc.
ORIGINAL ARTICLES DR. FREDRIC JOHN WARTH, B.Sc. (LOND.), D.Sc. (BIRMINGHAM) : AN APPRECIATION. By the retirement of Dr. F. J. Warth, Physiological Chemist, Imperial Ins- titute of Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Bangalore, from Government service on 23rd March 1935, the Indian Agricultural Service has lost one of its most ex- perienced and capable workers. Dr. Warth was born on 23rd March 1879 and received his education first at Merchiston Castle School, Edinburgh, and then in the Birmingham University. He graduated in science in 1901, with honours in chemistry and became a chemical research scholar in the University where he displayed considerable zeal in the prosecution of an investigationTHE DETERMINATION OF SULPHUR FOR SULPHUR BALANCE EXPERIMENTS WITH CATTLE AND SHEEP. BY F. J. WARTH, D.Sc., I.A.S.,AND T. S. KRISHNAN, B.A. Animal Nutrition Section, Bangalore. (Received for publication on the 27th April 1935.) The methods in general use at present for the determination of total sulphur in vegetable and animal products depend upon either oxidation with copper nitrate [Benedict 1909, Denis 1910, Aitken 1930, Frear 1930], or fusion with sodium peroxide (A. O. A. C., 1931, Evans 1931, 1933) a bomb being used by- some workers [Hodsman 1921]. The main draw-back to either of these methods for our purpose is that no more than 1 grm. of material can be oxidised. The following table shows the amounts of barium sulphate obtainable from 1 grm. of some of the substances with which we have to deal:SULPHUR BALANCE EXPERIMENTS WITH CATTLE AND SHEEP. 211 Further, in our work, we have to differentiate between organic sulphur and inorganic sulphate. Very frequently, for example in the specimen of hay, the inorganic sulphate exceeds the organic sulphur. Hence any error in the total sulphur falls entirely on the organic sulphur which is found by difference. In the present case, an error of 0.2 mgrm. in the total sulphur deter- mination of the hay would cause an error of 10 per cent. in the organic sulphur. Finally we have found like Marston [1928] that the copper nitrate method is unsafe with many cattle urine samples, which, owing to the high content of hippuric acid, tend to deflagrate. To overcome these obstacles, in balance experiments with cattle reported in an earlier paper [Warth 1932], one of us devised and employed a new process for the determination of sulphur. Briefly, the procedure consisted in a nitric acid oxidation followed by alkali fusion, the latter step being essential for the complete oxidation of sulphur, as will be shown below. The original process was used in two forms, for urine and for foodstuffs respectively. These will each be described briefly together with the improvements we have introduced as the result of our joint further experience. DETERMINATION OF TOTAL SULPHUR IN URINE. As the organic sulphur may not be more than a tenth of the total sulphur, in this determination, the difficulties attending oxidation cannot be minimised by reducing the amount of material. A sufficient amount to give a determinable increase of precipitate must be used. The method originally adopted for dealing with cattle urine was as follows : Some suitable aliquot of urine (about 100 c.c.) is treated with 10 to 15 c.c. concentrated nitric acid and slowly heated on a sand bath until a reaction with gentle effervescence commences. The beaker is re- moved and the action is allowed to proceed to an end without heating. After reheating, and cooling overnight, nitrophenols and hippuric acid are filtered off and the liquid concentrated to a small volume, rediluted and concentrated, this treatment being repeated until dilution does not cause turbidity. After filtra- tion, the yellow solution is made to 100 c.c. and an aliquot taken for fusion. For the fusion 5 c.c. of 50 per cent. sodium hydroxide are added, mixed and the whole transferred to a silver basin. The water is evaporated off, the dry residue is heated on the sand bath and finally fused. The fusion is completed in a few minutes resulting in a pure white melt which is dissolved in water, treated with hydrochloric acid to remove nitric acid, filtered to remove small amounts of silver chloride and silica and is then ready for precipitation of barium sulphate in the usual way. Beyond increasing the sand bath heating preparatory to fusion, we have not found it necessary to alter this procedure. 2
212 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III The accompanying table of urinary sulphur determinations made in the course of our work shows that a considerable quantity of urine must be oxidised to obtain a determinable amount of organic sulphur. Excretion of urinary sulphur and sulphate (expressed in grms. barium sulphate per day). Sheep number. 1 3 5 7 Volume of urine c.c. . 773 776 269 268 Total sulphur . . . 2.267 1.830 4.822 5.267 Sulphate sulphur . . 2.088 1.675 4.382 4.812 Organic sulphur (By differ- ence). 0.179 0.155 0.440 0.455 Sheep 1 and 3 received basal ration ; sheep 5 and 7 basal ration plus sulphate supplement. DETERMINATION OF TOTAL SULPHUR IN FOOD-STUFFS. The technique originally employed was as follows : 4 to 5 grms. of dry sub- stance are exidised with nitric acid in a kjeldahl flask, the reaction being allowed to proceed in the cold for a time. Heat is then gradually applied, finally boiling or simmering being continued for several days. By this means sulphur in all forms is oxidised but a little fat and much cellulose remain intact while the liquid contains nitrated organic compounds in solution. The digest is diluted, allowed to stand and is filtered. The filtrate is evaporated nearly to dryness, 10 to 20 c.c. 50 per cent. sodium hydroxide are added and the fusion carried out as in the case of urine. It was stated above that after filtering off the intact cellulose the liquid contains some nitrated organic substance. The subsequent treatment, as outlined above, is not able to deal very efficiently with this organic matter, hence the endeavour to carry the oxidation as far as possible by prolonged nitric acid treat- ment. The original process, thus outlined, is undoubtedly very tedious; it is also liable to fail at times when the amount of organic matter remaining in solution happens to be more than usual. In such cases deflagration ocours during fusion. We have made the interesting observation that the amount of unoxidised organic matter in solution is very constant for any one substance and differs considerably with different substances. As the amount becomes larger, the determination by
SULPHUR BALANCE EXPERIMENTS WITH CATTLE AND SHEEP. 213 this process becomes increasingly difficult. It was found that hay, grass and fæces could be dealt with easily. Great difficulty was experienced with ground- nut cake, while with linseed cake the process failed invariably. Further experiments on this point lead us to believe that the nature of the nitrogen free extract determines the amount of soluble organic matter. Tests carried out by us showed that filter paper (cellulose), groundnut oil (fat) and wool (protein) yield very little soluble organic matter and are easily oxidised by this process. Hence it can be only the nitrogen free extract that is liable to yield excessive amounts of resistant nitrated products. It is a very curious fact, deserving further study, that the nitrogen free extract of coarse fodders cause less trouble than the nitrogen free extract of some oil cakes. The original process, as outlined above, has been considerably modified and improved. The determination is now carried out as follows : 5 to 10 grms. of substance are oxidised with boiling nitric acid for 6 hours. The contents of the flask are washed into a beaker, diluted and allowed to stand over-night. The liquid is filtered off and concentrated in a beaker to reduce the volume to 25 c.c. when the beaker is covered with a watch glass. The gentle boiling and con- centration cause further oxidation with production of brown fumes. More acid is added, if necessary, until no further oxidation can occur by this means. The liquid is cooled, diluted and, if necessary; filtered. It is evaporated on the water bath, 10 c.c. of 50 per cent. sodium hydroxide and 1-2 grms. of potassium nitrate are added, the whole is transferred to a silver dish, dried and fused. As an example of what can be effected by this technique, we may quote a series of sulphur determinations of sheep fæces recently carried out by us. The question was to determine the effect of a supplement of sodium sulphate on the amount and nature of the fæcal sulphur. The results are shown in the accompanying table:214 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III No doubt with careful work 1 grm. samples would show a difference in the sulphur content of the two sets of fæces, but by oxidising 10 grms. we have been able to measure the difference with a considerable degree of accuracy. A FURTHER MODIFICATION FOR DEALING WITH 100 GRMS. OF MATERIAL. In certain experiments owing to sampling difficulties, it became desirable to deal with quantities of material up to 100 grms. in amount. We have found that the sulphur can be completely extracted from such material by boiling with dilute nitric acid. An actual test was carried out thus : 112.65 grms. of Dhub grass were weighed into a litre beaker, 500 c.c. dilute nitric acid (1:3) were added and heated to commence a gentle reaction. Removing the source of heat, the reaction was allowed to proceed, with stirring, to completion. The beaker was again heated, covered and the contents boiled vigorously for 12 hours, the volume being maintained by addition of water. The mixture was allowed to stand over- night filtered on a Büchner funnel and thoroughly washed with distilled water. The filtrate and washings were made up to 2000 c.c. and an aliquot of 100 c.c. was used for the determination of sulphur by fusion. The residual organic matter on the Büchner funnel was exhaustively oxidised by prolonged boiling with concentrated nitric acid. The residue from this treat- ment was found to consist of silica only. The nitric acid solution was treated as usual for the total sulphur determina- tion and yielded 2.5 mgrms. barium sulphate of which 0.5 mgrms. must be deduct- ed as the reagent blank. The test suggests that the first treatment with dilute nitric acid failed to dissolve a small residual amount of sulphur equal to 2 mgrms. barium sulphate. This is not quite correct. We have learnt since, that washing the residue with distilled water only is not quite effective. Nitric acid water should be used. However, in spite of this slight imperfection in washing, the result obtained was as follows : Per cent. of total sulphur in dhub grass. As found in the first dilute nitric acid extract 0.6317 As found after allowing for further yield by concentrated nitric acid .......... 0.6324 All but an insignificant fraction of the total sulphur was recovered in the first treatment. NOTE ON THE INCOMPLETENESS OF THE EFFECTED BY NITRIC ACID. We have carried out a number of duplicate determinations of total sulphur, in the one case relying upon nitric acid oxidation only, in the other case carrying out the double process of nitric acid oxidation followed by fusion.
SULPHUR BALANCE EXPERIMENTS WITH CATTLE AND SHEEP. 215 The results of these tests, given in the accompanying table, show that nitric acid alone fails to give the full value, a subsidiary fusion or other oxidation being absolutely necessary. Effect of fusion on the yield of sulphur in different substances. Substances Yield of barium sulphate in mgrms. Without fusion. After fusion. Hay....... 61.5 65.0 Guinea grass ...... 75.5 87.5 Groundnut cake ..... 101.5 104.0 Urine........ 115.5 119.0 Fæces ....... 86.5 92.0 Wool....... 93.0 95.5 SUMMARY. A new method is described for the determination of sulphur in vegetable and animal products. Briefly, the process consists of nitric acid oxidation followed by alkali fusion. The process is lengthy, but is recommended as more appropriate than other standard methods where large amounts of material have to be oxidised. REFERENCES. Aiten, H. A. A. (1930). Biochem. Jour. 24 250. Benedict, S. R. (1909). Jour. Biol. Chem. 6, 363. Denis, W. (1910). Jour. Biol. Chem. 8, 401. Evans, R. E. (1931). Jour. Agri. Sci. 21, 806. A FEEDING EXPERIMENT WITH SHEEP. BY F. J. WARTH, D.Sc., I.A.S., AND T. S. KRISHNAN, B.A. Animal Nutrition Section, Bangalore. (Received for publication on 31st May 1935.) The rearing and breeding of sheep on modern lines has only recently been taken up in India, but interest in the subject, especially from the point of view of wool production, is extending rapidly. There is no doubt that the Nutrition Section will have to take an important share in this work in studying the nutri- tional aspects. The present paper describes the result and experience obtained by us in a preliminary feeding trial extending over 17 months. The object of the experiment was to study the food consumption, the digestive capacity and the wool produc- tion of the local type of sheep. The test was commenced with 6 animals, the number being increased to 8 later. Mature castrated rams were used. The feeding was alike for all, the ration consisting of a fixed quantity of groundnut cake, a fixed amount of green grass and hay ad lib. They were also given a daily supplement of 2 grms. of calcium phosphate. The daily hay and Guinea grass consumption of each animal was determined by collecting and weighing the residue from a known amount supplied. This feeding test was continued for about 17 months and was divided into 3 approximately equal periods, two digestion trials being carried out during each period and a clean shearing of wool being made at the end of each period. The live weight of each animal was recorded daily. The experimental results are discussed under the following heads :A FEEDING EXPERIMENT WITH SHEEP. 217 EXPERIMENTAL. 1. Digestibility trials. Six sets of digestion trials were carried out at somewhat irregular intervals during the long period feeding test. In the first and second tests six animals were used, in the later tests 8 animals. However the two new animals were found to be less efficient, hence they have been excluded from the main discussion which is based on the results obtained with the six original animals. Table I shows the average digestion attained in six separate trials, each figure being the average value obtained with six sheep. TABLE I. Group average digestion results. (Each figure is the average of results from six sheep). Experiment No. Ration. Per cent.digestion. Total dry matter con- sumed. Percent. protein in ration. Organic matter. Crude protein. 1....... 731.5 5.70 53.9 54.2 2....... 660.0 7.18 51.5 59.6 5 .... ... 686.4 7.31 52.6 56.2 8....... 658.4 6.88 52.6 58.2 10....... 771.1 6.03 53.7 57.4 12 .... . 761.5 5.96 52.0 57.4 Average...... 711.5 6.51 52.7 57.2 There are some remarkable fluctuations in food consumption. In the se- cond, third and fourth tests the animals consumed less than the normal amount, while in the last two tests the food consumption was much above the average. All the animals behaved alike in this respect. The differences are due partly to variations in the quality of the hay and partly to the fact that the animals were in better condition and health at the end of the experiment. The digestibility of total organic matter, which may be taken as the best single criterion of a ration, is liable to be depressed sometimes when food B
218 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III consumption is considerably increased. It is significant that no such depression is revealed in these figures. On the contrary the highest consumption coincides with highest digestion and the lowest consumption with lowest digestion. This would indicate that the quality of fodder varied perceptibly and influenced food consumption to an appreciable extent. The variation in the percentage of protein in the ration is due partly to fluc- tuations in the protein content of the hay and partly to the proportion of hay in the ration, the greater the amount of hay the smaller the percentage of protein in the ration. The digestibility of protein is found to be roughly parallel to the percentage of protein in the ration, except in the third experiment. There is no obvious reason for this anomalous result. We can only state the fact that 5 out of the 6 animals failed to come up to the anticipated standard in this test. If there was a peculiarity in the fodder, it was not noticed by us. Individual variations are shown in Table II, in which the results of each animal are compared with the corresponding group averages. TABAL II. Individual digestion results compared with group average. Sheep No. Food consumption. Excess over group average. Actual. Per 100 lbs. live weight. Ration grms. ercent. crude Protein. Percentage digestion. Organic matter. Crude protein. 1 769.1 1083 + 57.7 + 0.22 + 1.8 + 1.07 2 604.0 1098 A FEEDING EXPERIMENT WITH SHEEP. 219 disturbing factor of varying food quality has been eliminated (because each figure represents tests with all the rations), thus enabling the normal effect of ration bulk to become visible. Allowing for this effect, the digestion attained by all the animals except No. 3 is very uniform. No. 3 was anomalous in many ways. It was much smaller than the others, it differed from the normal in appearance and evidently possessed a larger capa- city for food. The two new sheep were tested in four experiments. In every case they gave decidedly lower digestion results than the corresponding group averages of the six animals. The results are briefly summarised here. TABLE III. Digestion experiments with two new sheep (Nos. 4 and 8). Experiment No. Ration. Percent. digestion Total dry matter. Percent. crude protein. Organic matter. Crude pro- tein. 5 . . . Group average . 686.4 7.31 52.6 56.2 Sheep No. 4 . . 763.3 7.07 50.8 50.5 Sheep No. 8 . . 834.5 6.43 50.4 49.8 8 . . . Group average . 658.4 6.88 52.6 58.2 Sheep No. 4 . 717.2 6.79 49.7 52.1 Sheep No. 8 . 849.8 6.28 49.4 51.1 10 Group average . 771.1 6.03 53.7 57.4 Sheep No. 4 . . 934.0 5.66 50.6 52.2 Sheep No. 8 900.9 5.76 51.5 48.4 12 . . Group average . 761.5 5.96 52 .0 57.4 Sheep No. 4 . . 874.5 5.83 51.0 50.6 Sheep No. 8 . 885.1 5.69 48.9 52.3 Average for sheep 4 and 8 851.1 6.19 50.3 51.8 B2
220 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III There is evidence to show that these digestion results are related, to some ex- tent to the age of the animals. No. 1 is the youngest (2 years, 10 months). No. 2 comes next (just over 3 years). No. 5 is 3 years 6 months. Nos. 6 and 7 are 4 years old or somewhat over. No. 4 is about the same as 6 and 7. No. 8 is 5 years old. 2. Food consumption. The daily average food consumption of individuals is shown in Tables IV and V which give respectively consumption per head and per 100 lbs. live weight. TABLE IV. Average food consumption in grms. dry matter per day per head. Sheep No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 First period . . . 834 666 654 .. 869 734 669 .. Second period . 744 612 537 728 757 724 706 809 Third period . . 761 644 601 838 784 772 749 852 TABLE V. Average food consumption in grms. dry matter per 100 lbs. live weight. Sheep No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 First month .. 1411 .. 1745 .. 1498 .. .. .. First period .. 1174 1211 1476 .. 1275 1184 1239 .. Second period .. 1048 1113 1220 921 1113 1168 1307 1305 Third period .. 1072 1171 1366 1061 1153 1245 1387 1374 It will be observed that generally the highest food consumption occurred in the first period. There was a decided fall in the second period and a recovery in the third. However, the consumption during the first period cannot be considered quite normal. Some of the animals gorged themselves at the commencement and the unusual consumption during the first two months made the average for this period somewhat above normal. The
A FEEDING EXPERIMENT WITH SHEEP. 221 tables show that these remarks apply specially to sheep Nos. 1, 3 and 5. That a consumption of 1400 grms. is unusual may be seen from the normal for 2 good sheep Nos. 6 and 7. No. 7 in particular has made a very good performance and its consumption did not average 1400 grms. The initial high consumption cannot be attributed to the quality of the food either, because Nos. 6 and 7 did not react to it. Comparing the capacities of the animals with one another, as shown by the consumption per 100 lbs. live weight, the figures indicate that Nos. 3, 7 and 8 were the best eaters for their size. Nos. 2, 5 and 6 were intermediate and Nos.1 and 4 were poor. It will be shown below that the performance has not been in this order at all. The actual composition of the ration consumed is shown in summary form in Table VI. TABLE VI. Average food consumption for entire feeding test. Sheep No. Grams dry matter per day. Food consumption per 100 lbs. live weight. Hay. Guinea grass. Ground- nut cake. Total. lbs. Starch equiva- lent. Dry matter grms. Starch equi- valent lbs. 1 604 121 55 780 0.555 1100 0.78 2 525 70 45 640 0.452 1165 0.82 3 447 102 46 595 0.330 1350 0.97 4 640 92 55 787 0.556 999 0.70 5 647 101 55 803 0.567 1181 0.83 6 587 110 46 743 0.520 1198 0.84 7 555 107 46 708 0 499 1311 0.92 8 678 100 55 833 0.585 1343 0.94 3. Live weight fluctuations. The accompanying summary, Table VII, shows the live weight changes which occurred during each period.
222 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III TABLE VII. Live weight fluctuations. First period. Sheep No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 First Period. Initial weight, lbs. . 67 52 47 .. 63 55 47 .. Final weight, lbs. . 73 58 45 .. 70 63 54 .. Gain, lbs . . . 6 6 A FEEDING EXPERIMENT WITH SHEEP. 223 TABLE VIII. Live weight fluctutions. (Live weight excess at end of each period over initial live weight in lbs.). ____ Sheep No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Live Wt. Ex. Live Wt. Ex. Live Wt. Ex. Live wt. Ex. Live wt. Ex. Live Wt. Ex. Live Wt. Ex. Live Wt- Ex. Initial . 67 ... 52 ... 47 ... ... ... 63 ... 55 ... 47 ... ... ... End of first period . . . 73 6 58 6 45 224 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III Excluding the effect of shearing there has been a steady increase with most of the animals during each period. No.7 has done best throughout. Nos. 3, 4 and 8 have not done well. All the data of No. 3 are vitiated by the fact that this animal was ill for some time. The first period gave the best and the middle period the worst increase. The effect of shearing must be noticed. The loss of weight after the second shearing was only trifling and accounts roughly for the wool and dirt removed. By con- trast, the sharp fall after the first and third shearing is serious. We believe this is due partly to actual loss of flesh, because these shearings were done during cold weather and the shorn animals undoubtedly suffered from the cold. On the other hand, the second shearing was done during mild weather, when the animals would not suffer from exposure. The sequence of weekly average live weights, given in the appendix, makes these points still more clear. The total effect of the ration has been gauged from the initial and final week- ly average live weights. A subsidiary statement, Table VIII, makes clear the nutritional state of the animals at the end of each period. Subsidiary information relating to condition of animals. The nitrogen balance was determined eleven times in all, at approximately regular intervals. There were considerable variations and the record is only partial; still the average may be considered to have significance. Another figure, the urine volume, determined at the same time as the nitrogen balance, seems to reflect the animal's state of health. These data are shown in Table IX. TABLE IX. Average nitrogen balance and average urination. (Nitrogen balance in grms. per day. Urine volume in litres per head per day.) Sheep No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 *Live weight increase (lbs.) 1.41 1.00 0.00 -0.62 1.40 2.00 2.40 0.00 Nitrogen balance . . . 0.55 0.57 0.56 0.01 0.70 0.66 0.66 0.10 Urine volume . . . 4.68 1.38 4.06 7.74 1.31 2.27 1.51 5.74 Urine volume per 100 lbs. L.W. 6. 60 2.50 8.80 9.90 2.60 3.60 2.70 9.40 * For comparison, the live weight increase in 100 days is also given.
A FEEDING EXPERIMENT WITH SHEEP. 225 No. 3 was sick for part of the time, when probably the nitrogen balance would be negative, though it was not determined then. The nitrogen balance of the two other bad doers, 4 and 8, is not satisfactory. It will be noticed that the three bad doers have urinated most profusely. Live weight in relation to food consumption. The fluctuations of food and live weight of individuals is given in Table X. No. 3 having been ill, the figures for this animal are of little significance. With Nos. 1 and 2 an appreciable fall in live weight during the second period coincides with a serious fall in food consumption. In the third period a small recovery in consumption has produced good recovery of weight. No. 5 on the other hand maintained its weight during the second period in spite of a fall in consumption. Nos. 6 and 7 maintained their consump- tion and made the best live weight increase. Thus there is a relationship between consumption and live weight but it is not very close. In Table XI (consumption per 100 lbs. live weight) in which individuals can be compared with one another, it appears that, although live weight is not an accurate measure, the animals varied very much in efficiency of food utilisation. With No. 3 which was sick for part of the time, it is evident that there has been waste of food. The animal has given very little return for the food consumed. With Nos. 3, 4 and 8 excessive urination suggests some metabolic error leading to waste. With 1, 2, 5, 6 and 7 there is a rough parallelism between food consumed and live weight increase. 4. Wool yield. Table XII gives the data relating to wool yield. The first period actually extended over 180 days. The yields for this period have been calculated to 160 days to make them comparable with the figures for the two succeeding periods of 160 days each. The table gives the yields of wool of each animal for three periods and also the live weight excess over the initial live weight which the animals attained at the end of each period. This figure is an index of the live weight statics or condition arrived at during the period. On the average, there has been a fall in wool yield during the second, period and a marked increase during the third period. C
226 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III TABLE X. Live weight in relation to food consumption. Periodic consumption per head and live weight changes. Sheep No. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Food consump- tion. grms. Gain in L. W. lbs. Food consump- tion. grms. Gain in L. W. lbs. Food consump- tion. grms. Gain in L. W. lbs. Food consump- tion. grms. Gain in L. W. lbs. Food consump- tion. grms. Gain in L. W. lbs. Food consump- tion. grms. Gain in L. W lbs. Food consump- tion, grms. Gain in L. W. lbs. Food consump- tion. grms. | Gain L. W. lbs. 834 6 666 6 654 A FEEDING EXPERIMENT WITH SHEEP. 227 TABLE XII. Wool production in relation to live weight excess over initial live weight. 228 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III There is a definite relationship between condition and wool production. The fall in yield during the second period coincides with the fall in live weight already noted. Further, the individual wool yields go up and down with the individual live weights. For example, animals 1 and 2 lost most live weight in the second period and also decreased most in wool yield. No. 5 lost only 1 lb. in live weight and its wool yield is only slightly depressed. Nos. 2 and 6 did not lose live weight and their wool yield remained nearly constant. No. 7 increased in live weight and also in wool yield. The marked increase of wool yield in the third period is reflected all along the line by an improvement in the live weight. The ration provided, though not excessive, was intended to set up the ani- mals. The evident improvement finally obtained and due to the rationing, might have shown itself earlier perhaps, had not the accident of shearing during cold weather caused a set back. Although the wool yields of these sheep are insignificant, the experiment shows clearly that yield is profoundly influenced by the nutritional state of the animal. SUMMARY. A long period feeding test has been carried out with sheep, the food consump- tion, live weight and wool production being studied. Digestion trials were also carried out. It was found that the live weights fluctuated somewhat roughly in accor- dance with food consumption and that the individual animals differed consider- ably in their efficiency for utilisation of food. Digestion experiments indicated that the food varied somewhat in quality and that consumption increased when the quality improved. The extent of such increased consumption was considerable. With regard to wool yields, the important observation was made that the yields fluctuated according to the nutritional state of the animals. REFERENCE. Warth, F. J. and Krishnan, T. S. 1935. Ind. Jour. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 5.
A FEEDING EXPERIMENT WITH SHEEP. 229 APPENDIX. Record of weekly average live weights of sheep (in lbs.). Date (Week ending) Sheep No. Date of shearing. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 22.VII.1933 67 52 47 .. 63 55 47 .. All sheep were shorn and experiment started. 29-VIT.1933 67 52 46 .. 63 56 49 .. 5-VIII-1933 69 52 47 .. 65 56 50 .. 12-VIII-1933 70 54 48 .. 66 58 52 .. 19-VIII-1933 71 55 48 .. 68 57 52 .. 26-VIII-1933 70 54 48 .. 68 58 51 .. 2-IX-1933 71 53 47 .. 67 58 50 .. 9-IX-1933 70 54 47 .. 68 59 49 .. 16-IX-1933 70 53 49 .. 68 58 49 .. 23-IX-1933 69 54 8 .. 67 57 49 .. 30-IX-1933 70 .. 47 .. 67 58 51 .. 7-X-1933 70 53 48 .. 68 60 52 .. 14-X-1933 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 21-X-1933 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 28-X-1933 70 55 45 .. 67 60 52 .. 4-XI-1933 70 55 .. .. 69 59 51 .. 11-XI-1933 69 55 .. .. 68 59 51 .. 18-XI-1933 70 55 .. .. 69 61 53 .. 25-XI-1933 70 56 41 .. 68 60 54 .. 2-XII-1933 71. 56 42 .. 69 62 55 .. 9-XII-1933 71 56 42 .. 70 61 54 .. 16-XII-1933 71 57 44 .. 70 61 55 .. 23-XII-1933 73 55 44 .. 68 62 54 ..
230 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III Date (Week ending) Sheep No Date of shearing 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 30-XII-1933 72 55 45 .. 70 62 53 .. 6-I-1934 . 72 57 .. .. 71 62 53 .. 13-I-1934 . 73 58 45 .. 70 63 54 .. All sheep shorn on 15th January 1934. 20-I-1934 . 68 54 42 .. 66 60 51 .. 27-I-1934 . 68 53 41 .. 67 61 52 .. 3-II-1934 68 53 41 81 67 61 52 62 10-II-1934 . 69 53 41 81 68 59 53 63 17-II-1934 . 70 53 42 78 .. 60 54 63 24-II-1934 . 70 55 43 78 67 61 55 64 3-III-1934 70 54 42 80 68 62 55 64 10-III-1934 70 54 42 80 67 62 55 64 17-III-1934 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 24-III-1934 72 54 42 79 67 62 53 63 31-III-1934 71 54 42 79 67 62 55 64 7-IV-1934 72 54 43 80 69 63 56 65 14-IV-1934 72 55 43 80 70 65 55 65 21-IV-1934 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 28-IV-1934 72 56 44 80 69 65 58 64 5-V-1934 . 70 54 44 80 68 64 57 62 12-V-1934 . 70 54 43 79 67 63 56 61 19-V-1934 . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 26-V-1934 72 53 44 78 68 64 57 62 2-VI-1934 72 55 44 78 66 64 58 62 9-VI-1934 71 55 44 78 67 64 58 61 16-VI-1934 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
A FEEDING EXPERIMENT WITH SHEEP 231 Date (Week ending) Sheep No. Date of shearing. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 23-VI-1934 . 70 55 45 78 69 63 58 61 All sheep shorn on 23rd June 1934. 30-VI-1934 . 70 54 44 76 67 61 56 60 7-VII-1934 . 70 54 43 77 68 65 57 61 14-VII-1934 . 71 56 44 78 67 66 58 62 21-VII-1934 . 71 56 44 79 69 65 59 63 28-VII-1934 . 72 57 44 80 69 65 58 63 4-VIII-1934 . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 11-VIII-1934 . 71 57 44 79 69 65 58 62 18-VIII-1934 . .. .. ... .. .. .. .. .. 25-VIII-1934 . 71 56 45 79 68 66 58 62 l-IX-1934 . 71 57 44 79 68 65 59 63 8-IX-1934 . 71 57 44 80 66 65 58 62 15-IX-1934 . 72 57 45 80 69 66 58 62 22-IX-1934 . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 29-IX-1934 . 73 56 44 79 70 66 58 62 6-X-1934 . 72 56 46 79 70 67 59 61 13-X-1934 . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 20-X-1934 . 74 57 46 79 70 65 58 61 27-X-1934 . .. ... .. .. .. .. .. .. 3-XI-1934 . 73 56 45 77 70 63 58 59 10-XI-1934 . 72 56 45 78 70 63 57 60 17-XI-1934 . 73 57 47 79 70 65 59 62 24-XI-1934 . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. All sheep shorn on 30th November 1934. l-XII-1934 . 75 57 47 79 70 65 59 62 8-XII-1934 . 71 55 44 77 66 64 56 61
PYOSEPTICAEMIA OF CALVES BY J. F. SHIRLAW, M.R.C.V.S., Professor of Pathology and Bacteriology, Punjab Veterinary College, Lahore. With Plates XVII-XXII and six text-figs. (Received for publication on the 5th July 1935.) INTRODUCTION. Calf septicaemia is a generic term that embraces a variety of pathological conditions of an etiology so confused, that the disease defies any precise description either on clinical or pathological grounds. A considerable amount of research has been devoted to the problem, much of it of value, but still more of it a repetition of conjecture and surmise which, gaining a degree of credence through repetition, has been tacitly accepted. The subject is a difficult one, chiefly on account of the variation in etiology and the obscure metabolic factors which complicate it. No exact infection produces an exact disease syndrome in calves of a few days old, and when we consider that the type and degree of infection in such calves is largely indeterminate, it is little wonder that the clinician defines the disease in terms which bear little scientific interpretation. Calf septicaemia includes a variety of disease conditions which are easily disposed of in text-book descriptions ; e.g., " white scour of calves ", "joint ill ", " Infectious Broncho-pneumonia ", " Paratyphoid " and " omphalophlebitis ". The precise definition of septicaemia is the presence of pathogenic micro- organisms in the circulating blood usually accompanied by toxins elaborated by those organisms. In many cases of septicaemia in, calves, it is rarely, if ever, possible to determine the actuality of blood infection. Such cases are frequently peracute, cases which one would naturally be led to look upon, on clinical grounds, as instances of extreme invasion of the blood stream by organisms of a high degree of virulence. They frequently represent, however, an entirely localised infection with a moderate degree of toxaemia in which there is a complete and sudden breakdown of metabolic function. The first few days in the life of the calf are treacherous and critical days. The slightest interference with, or upset of normality of function is sufficient, in (232)
PYOSEPTICAEMIA OF CALVES. 233 many weakly animals, to precipitate a crisis leading to a rapid dissolution. In- fection may produce the end result, but to incriminate micro-organisms isolated from the tissues as of etiological significance in such cases is an evasive method of solving the etiology. The factors inducing such a breakdown are little understood. They may be described as non-hygienic234 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III translated to the calf in utero. It is also conceivable that, under the strain of parturition, minor infections of the udder, either latent, or recently incurred through subacute bacillaemia of the dam, may constitute the means of transmission. The udder may appear perfectly normal. The ease with which the mammary tissue excretes pathogenic micro-organisms without, in itself, becoming infected, is a point to be considered. In the early stages of lactation it may be impossible, and frequently is, to differentiate between a physiological hyperaemia and one that is actively pathological and transient to a degree. Infection in utero is not improbable. It is estimated, from abattoir exami- nations, that nearly one half of the uteri of pregnant cows contain organisms that are potentially dangerous. Many organisms are capable of passing the placental filter. These, gaining entrance to the amniotic fluid, are swallowed by the foetus, and when such an invasion is accompanied by the absorption of the toxic products of inflammation affecting the placenta the results may be serious. The foetus may develop septicaemia and die in utero or the calf, if it survives infection in utero, may be born in a dying condition. It is a fashion to believe that calf septicaemia has, as its common origin, an infection of the omphalic veins. There seems little evidence in support of this view. Omphalophlibitis is neither a constant nor a common lesion in outbreaks of calf septicaemia. Naturally, after birth, there is always some oedematous swelling of the umbilical area but the evidence that an exact infection exists extending into the internal organs with a consequent pyosepticaemia seems in- conclusive. If omphalitis were present, one would expect to find septic infarction of the liver as an almost constant lesion. This is a lesion, however, which is rarely encountered. Most authorities agree that calf septicaemia is the ultimate expres- sion of an intestinal infection. In support of this belief, little effective control of the disease has resulted from disinfection and ligation of the cord at birth. The main argument levelled against the opinion that the intestinal route of infection is improbable is that it is usually difficult and frequently impossible to experimental- ly induce the disease in supposedly susceptible calves by the oral administration of large quantities of freshly isolated cultures of these organisms which are considered to be of etiological significance. A point that has been lost sight of, and one that is of fundamental importance, is that, apart from the introduction of infection into the gastro-intestinal tract, there are certain factors which determine disease incidence. To isolate an organism from the diseased tissues and to reproduce the exact disease syndrome or even to reproduce the exact pathological change in the same tissues of the same species cannot ordinarily be done, and in the disease under review, one little expects to be able to reproduce the disease without the ability to produce those metabolic
PYOSEPTICAEMIA OF CALVES. 235 factors, to an extent parallel to that occurring in natural cases. On the other hand, other workers claim that young calves may be infected with practical certainty by the feeding of recently isolated cultures. Those contrary expressions of experimental pathogenesis excite a partisanship and wealth of conflicting evidence which leaves a decision upon experimental results very much sub-judice. The types of infections vary widely. Out of 251 cases examined by Jensen, 118 showed B. coli, with septicaemia, 53 B. coli without septicaemia, 16 B. paracoli, 3 cases B. coli and B. paracoli mixed, 18 cases of micrococci, 11 cases B. proteus, 1 case B. abortus, while in 31 cases no cause could be determined. The observations of Christiansen record that, in 222 cases examined, 16 occurred between 1 and 8 days, 57 between 6 and 14 days, 84 between 2 and 4 weeks, 61 between 1 and 6 months and 4 at about 6 months. According to these observations, the disease is most common in calves from 3 to 4 weeks old. The most common types of infection were found to be S. Gaertner and S. Schotrmulleri. A septicaemic disease of calves, due to organisms of the Salmonella group was first described in 1897 by Thomassen and has since been described at length by numerous writers in Germany and the United States, where Mohler described these infec- tions as chiefly affecting adult animals and Mayer as a cause of specific infectious diarrh236 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III give an indication of the losses sustained over a period of years in one of the largest cattle breeding farms in the Punjab (Jehangirabad) :PYOSEPTICAEMIA OF CALVES. 237 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Chart 1. Cow calf No. J. 331 Raseeli (¾ Fr. ¼Sah), 10 days old, Govt. Military Dairy Farm, Lahore Cantt. Disease calf pneumonia. Admitted 7th October 1934 ; Died 13th Octo- ber 1934.
238 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Chart 2. Cow calf No. J. 333 Dildar (¾ Fr. ¼ Sah) 6 days old, Govt. Mili- tary Dairy Farm, Lahore Cantt. Disease calf pneumonia. Admitted 9th October 1934 ; Destroyed in extremis 24th October 1934.
PYOSEPTICAEMIA OF CALVES. 239 at Jehangirabad Cattle Farm, marked swelling of the glands of the head and neck was noted. Pneumonia, chiefly of an apical type, is present in the majority of cases. The affected animals resist all treatment and there is a tendency to natural recovery, although a proportion of cases show a tendency to relapse. (Young animals are more severely affected and the disease more protracted in them). The youngest animal affected was 2 days old and the oldest 2 months and 17 days. The calves had been reared under the most scrupulous conditions of hygiene and no light could be brought to bear upon the source of infection. None of the cows giving birth to the diseased calves showed any evidence of disease. A particular examination was made of the udders and the milk of these cows. Bromthymol blue tests performed at the farm upon freshly drawn samples of milk failed to detect any evidence of either active or latent infection of the udder. There was no history of abortion, retention of the placenta, or metritis of any degree in the cows of the herd, which had also, over a period of years, remained singularly free from mammary disease. It seemed impossible to elucidate any factor which might have been considered of value in the determination of the pathogenesis. PATHOLOGY. Twelve calves were subjected to post-mortem examination. In younger animals, the lesions were those of septicaemia. The spleen was slightly enlarged and showed marked swelling of the malphigian bodies, and on mesial section of the kidney, minute greyish white foci were present, chiefly in the cortical area. Similar lesions were present in the liver. Theabomasum and duodenum were affected, in some cases, with a severe haemorrhagic inflammation and in others with a simple catarrhal inflammation with petechae in the mucous coat; swelling of Payer's patches was observed and mesentric lymph glands were enlarged, suc- culent and haemorrhagic. Areas of hepatization occurred in the middle and anterior lobes of the lungs. A straw-coloured serofibrinous fluid distended the pleural, pericardial, and in some cases the peritoneal sac. The pathological picture presented in these acute cases was very similar to that of acute pasteurellosis of calves. Older calves manifested little evidence of involvement of the gastro- intestinal tract beyond a slight catarrhal inflammation and swelling of Payer's patches. This type of case seemed to gradually merge into one in which the chief lesion existed as a pleuropneumonia of rather a special type in which effusion and early adhesions were prominent. The lung lesions consisted of primary apical pneumonia, spreading posteriorly, usually bilateral in occurrence. An increase in the volume of the interstitial stroma and the distension of the lymphatic spaces with exudate had the effect of sharply delineating the outline of the lobules and conferring on the tissue an appearance similar to that seen in chronic pulmonary pasteurellosis. The lobules were severely hepatised, many of them necrotic and in some this process had extended to actual abscess formation. Similar necrotic foci with abscess production were encountered in the formative tissue at the angle
240 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III of junction of the interlobular septa. These abscesses showed a tendency to early insipissation and fibrous encapsulation. Lesions in the joints were those of sero- fibrinous arthritis with necrosis and ulceration of the articular cartilage. HISTO-PATHOLOGY. Gastro-intestinal tract. The changes are relatively slight. In acute cases; they are those of acute enteritis somewhat haemorrhagic in type. In more subacute cases Payer's patches show a tendency to hyperplasia without any evi- dence of bacterial embolism leading to necrosis and ulceration. The capillary vessels of the mucous coat are congested and cellular infiltration of the mucosa is present, along with slight necrosis of the glands of the coat. LIVER. The changes are those to be expected in disease of a septicaemic type. In addition to these changes, small areas of cellular infiltration develop in and around the lymph channels of the portal tract. These probably represent centre of embolism although no bacteria are found. The cells present have proliferated from endothelial cells. KIDNEY. The changes are those of acute catarrhal nephritis with capillary haemor- rhages and the development of nodules in the interstitium, similar in type to those described in the liver. SPLEEN. Marked distension of the spleen sinusoids and cellular infiltration composed of monocytes, endothelial cells and macrophages. Malpighian bodies are increased by a lymphoid hyperplasia in which no bacteria can be seen. LUNGS. The lesion commences as an acute interstitial pneumonia accompanied by a relatively slight congestion of perialveoler capillaries. In the early stages, there is only slight exudation into the alveoli, but the lymphatic spaces of the interstitum become grossly distended by a fibrinous exudate rich in cells, in which monocytes predominate. There is a coincident increase of the polyblastic cells of this tissue,
PYOSEPTICAEMIA OF CALVES. 241 and at the angles of junction of the interstitial septa, the formation of cellular nodules. Similar nodules develop around the adventitious sheaths of the bronchio- les, the walls of which become slowly infiltrated. The terminal phase of the in- fection is the production of bronchiolitis rapidly forming a focus of a localized catarrhal pneumonia, which undergoes a slow central necrosis followed by abscess formation. At this stage of the process, there is a tendency for fibrous encapsulation of abscesses. The severity of the process abates, and results in a fibroid type of pneumonia in which chronic catarrhal changes remain. In the more acute type of pneumonia as affecting younger animals, a pure type of fibrinous pneumonia, chiefly apical, is seen. BACTERIOLOGY. In acute cases representing a septicaemia, one has little difficulty in obtaining from the blood pure cultures of the organism about to be described. In the more chronic cases characterised by septic broncho-pneumonia, a very mixed infection is found, but with careful and selective bacteriological methods one can, with little difficulty, isolate the same organism that is found with readiness in acute cases, while in all instances this organism can be isolated from the gastro-intestinal tract. When it appeared probable that the infection was an organism of the colon typhoid group, it became the routine to attempt haemo-cultures in broth PH. 7.4 containing .1 per cent. malchite green as an inhibitory factor. Even in the subacute cases, growth was usually obtained in pure culture, from the intestinal contents and the pus from the lung abscesses after dilution. Cultures were puri- fied, when necessary, in Mc.Conkey medium. The predominant type of organism, and in most acute cases the only type of organism isolated, was a short bacterium, motile, aerobic, measuring 2 × .6 microns with a tendency to coccobacillary forms. On agar, the colonies were dew drop- like, translucent, and on richly seeded slants a thin delicate glistening surface growth developed after 24 hours ' incubation. BIOCHEMISTRY. The organism produces acid and gas in glucose, dulcite, mannite, maltose and xylose. No reaction is produced in lactose, saccharose, salicin, rhamnose and inosite. Litmus milk remained alkaline. The Vosges-Proskauer and Indol tests were negative and nitrates were reduced. Antigen prepared from 24 hours old agar culture standardised to opacity tube No. 4 was tested against high titre serum obtained from Kasauli. The organism was agglutinated at maximum titre 1 in 5000 by B. enteritidis serum and at a dilution of 1 in 2400 by B. aertrycke high titre serum of maximum titre 1 in 5000 E
242 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III No reaction was obtained with Para. B. serum. Positive and negative controls were established in the usual way, but no agglutination absorption tests could be per- formed through lack of supply of high titre serum to conclusively identify the organism which was tentatively judged, through virtue of its biochemical and agglutination reactions, to be a strain of Salmonella enteritidis Gaertner. Pure cultures of the organism were finally sent to the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, and to the School of Tropical Medicine, Calcutta, for exact serological typing. The sera obtained from 3 diseased calves and 3 of the cows which gave birth to diseased calves (unfortunately only 3 cows were available on the premises at the time of this test)PYOSEPTICAEMIA OF CALVES. 243 No. of animal. S. gaertner. S. aertrycke. Para. B. Calf organism. Calf J 335. . .. .. .. 1 in 80 Calf J 328 . . .. .. .. .. Calf J 292 . . .. .. .. .. Calf J 318 . . .. .. .. .. Calf J 16 . . .. .. .. .. Calf J 324 . . .. .. .. 1 in 80 Calf J 327 . . .. .. .. 1 in 80 Calf J 322 . . .. .. .. .. Calf J 332 . . .. .. .. .. Cow Sonvenier . .. .. .. .. Cow Merdock . .. .. .. 1 in 60 Cow Akson . . .. .. .. .. Cow Jell . .. .. .. .. Cow Jeolikote . . .. .. .. .. Cow Jownisheen . .. .. .. .. TRANSMISSION EXPERIMENTS. These were divided into two groups :244 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III IN CONTACT EXPERIMENT. 1. Two country bred calves were placed in the same stable as two diseased calves showing slight diarrhPYOSEPTICAEMIA OF CALVES. 245 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Chart 3. White cow calf indigenous breed about 8 months, No. 16, Disease calf pneumonia, Admitted 19th October Discontinued 14th December 1934.
246 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Chart 3.PYOSEPTICAEMIA OF CALVES. 247 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Chart 4. Red indigenous calf, 8 months, No. 15, Disease calf pneumonia, Admitted 19th October 1934, Discontinued 14th December 1934.
248 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Chart 4.PYOSEPTICAEMIA OF CALVES. 249 then relapsed on the 23rd day with typical pneumonia, recovery from which was protracted. The inoculation produced an intense and extensive suppurating swelling extending into the dewlap. Examination of the pus revealed a gram positive micrococcus and cultural examination yielded a pure culture of the organism inoculated. The primary culture showed a tendency to the same Gram. + reaction but sub-cultures were strictly Gram - One month after inoculation, an agglutination test of this animal's serum showed a titre of 1 in 125, SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS. Calf septicaemia is discussed as regards its etiology and the factors which determine its incidence in herds. The disease is one which does not bear easy definitions as it frequently represents a variety of pathological conditions to which the young are peculiarly susceptible. Various factors which determine the incidence of infection are discussed. The point of view is stressed that hygienic considerations play a most important role in the genesis of the disease and that a bacteriological etiology, important as it is, cannot be considered as of primary importance. The methods of infection are discussed, as well as types and degree of infection with particular reference to infection of calves by organisms of the colon typhoid group. A detailed account is given of the disease as it affects calves in the Punjab. From available figures on work carried out over a period of 5 years, it is shown that calf septicaemia is a common and serious disease on certain farms at certain times of the year affecting animals chiefly of the age of 10 days to 4 months with average mortality of about 35 per cent. An account is given of the symptomology, essential pathology and histopatho- logy of the disease which is septicaemic in young animals and pulmonary in older animals, the type of pneumonia being a special one. Bacteriological examination of a large number of cases shows that the disease in the Punjab is due to an organism of the S. enteritidis group which was isolated from the lesions of the disease in the majority of cases. The blood sera of diseased calves showed evidence of specific agglutinins against this organism as well as the cows giving birth to diseased calves and persistence of the reaction was observed three months after complete cessation of the disease on the farm premises. Transmission experiments showed that it is impossible to transmit the disease by direct incontact nor could the disease be produced by feeding pure cultures, but the subcutaneous and intravenous inoculations of small amounts of cultures into indigenous calves showed the pathogenic nature of the organism isolated from naturally occurring cases. F
250 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III The lesions in these experimental animals bore every resemblance to the natural disease. REFERENCES. Christiansen. (1917). Centralbl. F. Bakt. 1. Orig. 79. Hutyra & Marek. Pyosepticæmia of sucklings 1, p. 187. Jensen. Kalbarukr. Kolle. Wassermann. Handbueh. d. Path. Mikroorg. Jan. 1912. Lessaze & Delmer. (1902). " Diarrheia des yeunes veaux." Annales. de. L. Institut Pasteur. Meyer. Traum & Roadhouse. (1916). Jour. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc. 49. Smith, T. & M. L. Orcutt. (1925). Jour. Exp. Med. 41, 89. Titze & Weichel. (1903). Berlin Tierarztl. Wochens. Williams, M. L., & W. W. Diseases of the Genital Organs of Domestic Animals. Ithaca, N. Y. 1921. Winzer. Zeitschr. f. Fleisch Und Milchhy. 23.
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. V, Pt. 3. PLATE XVII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] A typical case of calf pneumonia.
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. V. Pt. 3. PLATE XVIII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Experimental calf showing effects of subcutaneous inoculation of pure culture of S. enteriditis organism isolated from a case of calf pneumonia.
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. V, Pt. 3. PLATE XIX. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Calf PneumoniaInd. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. V, Pt. 3. PLATE XX. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Microphotograph of liver showing cellular modules in the septicaemic form of the disease.
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. V, Pt. 3. PLATE XXI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Microphotograph of pneumonic lung showing infiltra- tion and hyper plasia of interstitium.
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim Husb. Vol. V, Pt. 3. PLATE XXII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Microphotograph of lung showing acute interstitial pneumonia.
A STATISTICAL STUDY OF THE BODY WEIGHT FIGURES OF SPECIAL AND ORDINARY FED CALVES AT PUSA. BY P. V. KRISHNA AYYAR, M.A., Statistician, Imperial Institute of Agricultural Research, Pusa. (Received for publication on 3rd October 1934.) (With two text-figs.) A comparative study of the weekly weights of pail-fed calves during ordinary and special feeding has recently been made by Sayer [1934]. The present paper may be considered as a supplement to this study, and attempts have been made herein to demonstrate the superiority of the special fed calves from a statistical point of view. The following are the methods employed for the statistical analysis of the problem : (i)The average weekly weights, the co-efficient of variation and the average per cent. rates of growth of calves under the two treatments for the different weeks have been estimated and compared by using the ' t ' test. (ii)The values of z 252 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III TABLE I. Average weekly weight in pounds of special and ordinary fed calves. 1 2 3 4 Age in weeks. Ordinary fed. Special fed. Observed ' t ' of difference between (2) and (3). At birth . . . . 53.82 ± 1.14 49.60 ± 1.21 2.5383 1 . . . . . 57.85 ± 1.08 52.47 ± 1.29 3.1974 2 . . . . . 61.64 ± 1.11 58.73 ± 1.17 1.8043 3 . . . . . 66.45 ± 1.12 64.97 ± 1.37 0.8364 4 . . . . . 70.33 ± 1.11 70.20 ± 1.38 0.0734 5 . . . . . 74.94 ± 1.38 76.37 ± 1.55 0.2072 6 . . . . . 79.91 ± 1.41 81.10 ± 1.79 0.5206 7 . . . . . 86.49 ± 1.62 87.20 ± 1.97 0.2784 8 . . . . . 93.18 ± 1.75 95.47 ± 2.07 0.8449 9 . . . . . 100.25 ± 1.83 102.23 ± 2.35 0.6648 10 . . . . . 107.73 ± 2.23 1.08.40 ± 2.60 0.1956 11 . . . . . 114.58 ± 2.22 117.37 ± 2.71 0.7965 12 . . . . . 123.24 ± 2.19 125.53 ± 3.36 0.5709 13 . . . . . 132.42 ± 2.26 134.43 ± 3.15 0.5185 14 . . . . . 140.36 ± 2.29 143.13 ± 3.16 0.7533 15 . . . . . 149.27 ± 2.44 153.03 ± 3.39 0.9001 16 . . . . . 156.82 ± 2.40 162.47 ± 3.58 1.3108 17 . . . . . 164.60 ± 2.59 173.60 ± 3.74 1.9782 18 . . . . . 172.27 ± 2.68 181.57 ± 3.96 1.9451 19 . . . . . 179.97 ± 2.90 192.87 ± 3.98 2.6196 20 . . . . . 187.49 ± 3.20 203.53 ± 4.31 2.9878 21 . . . . . 195.09 ± 3.47 212.83 ± .41 3.1613 22 . . . . . 202.36 ± 2.38 224.00 ± 4.64 4.1500 23 . . . . . 209.29 ± 4.22 233.90 ± .89 3.8101 24 . . . . . 217.09 ± 4.66 244.03 ± 5.27 3.8295 25 . . . . . 224.61 ± 4.71 254.43 ± 5.32 4.1967 26 . . . . . 231.48 ± 5.09 264.13 ± 5.78 4.2392 Theoretical value of ' t ' (for n = 60) at the 5 per cent. level = 2.000. A close examination of the values of ' t ' tabulated in the last column at birth and first week on the basis of the theoretical value reveals that the average weight of the thirty-three calves selected for ordinary treatment was significantly more than that of the calves picked out for special treatment. But it is seen from the subsequent values of ' t ' that there is no significant difference between the weights of the two groups until the eighteenth week. From the 19th week onwards the value of ' t ' goes on increasing and it reaches a maximum for the twenty-sixth week, showing thereby that there is considerable increase in weight of the special fed calves. It may be noted that, though at the time of birth the calves selected
STATISTICAL STUDY OF SPECIAL AND ORDINARY FED CALVES. 253 for special treatment were lighter in weight than those selected for ordinary treatment, the special feeding has enabled them to attain weights which are signi- ficantly more than those reached by ordinary fed calves at the end of the nine- teenth week. Table II gives the co-efficient of variation with its standard error, of the weekly weights of the two groups. It will be seen that there is no significant difference in the co-efficient of variation between the calves under the two treatments for differ- ent weeks. This shows that there is no differenee in the variability in weight of the calves under the two systems of feeding. TABLE II. Co-efficient of variation of weight for special and ordinary fed calves. Age in weeks. Ordinary. Special. At birth . . . . . . . 12.13 ± 1.51 13.33 ± 1.75 1 . . . . . . . 10.70 ± 1.33 13.46 ± 1.77 2 . . . . . . . 10.34 ± 1.29 10.93 ± 1.43 3 . . . . . . . 9.67 ± 1.20 11.69 ± 1.62 4 . . . . . . . 9.07 ± 1.13 10.74 ± 1.40 5 . . . . . . . 10.55 ± 1.31 11.26 ± 1.47 6 . . . . . . . 10.15 ± 1.26 12.10 ± 1.58 7 . . . . . . . 10.76 ± 1.34 12.35 ± 1.62 8 . . . . . . . 10.80 ± 1.34 11.90 ± 1.66 9 . . . . . . . 10.49 ± 1.31 12.58 ± 1.65 10 . . . . . . . 11.89 ± 1.18 13.15 ± 1.73 11 . . . . . . . 11.13 ± 1.39 12.63 ± 1.66 12 . . . . . . . 10.21 ± 1.27 14.67 ± 1.93 13 . . . . . . . 9.81 ± 1.22 12.82 ± 1.68 14 . . . . . . . 9.38 ± 1.16 12.07 ± 1.58 15 . . . . . . . 9.40 ± 1.17 12.13 ± 1.59 16 . . . . . . . 8.78 ± 1.09 12.06 ± 1.58 17 . . . . . . . 9.03 ± 1.12 11.81 ± 1.55 18 . . . . . . . 8.95 ± 1.11 11.96 ± 1.57 19 . . . . . . . 9.27 ± 1.15 11.30 ± 1.48 20 . . . . . . . 9.80 ± 1.22 11.59 ± 1.52 21 . . . . . . . 10.21 ± 1.27 11.36 ± 1.49 22 . . . . . . . 6.76 ± 0.84 11.35 ± 1.48 23 . . . . . . . 11.57 ± 1.44 11.46 ± 1.50 24 . . . . . . . 12.33 ± 1.54 11.83 ± 1.55 25 . . . . . . . 12.06 ± 1.51 11.45 ± 1.50 26 . . . . . . . 12.64 ± 1.58 11.99 ± 1.57 The average percentage increase in weight of the calves, i.e., the ratio of the increase in weight in any week to the weight at the end of the proceding week multi- plied by 100, and its standard error as determined from the original data are given in Table III.
254 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III TABLE III. Average percentage increase in weight of calves. Age in weeks. Special fed calves. Ordinary fed calves. 1 . . . . . . . 5.93 ± 1.2959 7.81 ± 0.9360 2 . . . . . . . 12.61 ± 1.5122 6.80 ± 1.1623 3 . . . . . . . 10.70 ± 1.0764 8.12 ± 1.2183 4 . . . . . . . 8.30 ± 0.9152 6.05 ± 0.9523 5 . . . . . . . 7.50 ± 1.1605 6.54 ± 0.9576 6 . . . . . . . 7.61 ± 0.8416 6.81 ± 0.9274 7 . . . . . . . 7.63 ± 1.0218 7.99 ± 0.9502 8 . . . . . . . 9.71 ± 1.0640 7.83 ± 0.6888 9 . . . . . . . 7.07 ± 0.7857 7.69 ± 0.7528 10 . . . . . . . 5.99 ± 0.7137 7.38 ± 0.6853 11 . . . . . . . 8.40 ± 0.6656 6.53 ± 0.7137 12 . . . . . . . 6.91 ± 1.2526 7.71 ± 0.5294 13 . . . . . . . 7.40 ± 1.0847 7.54 ± 0.5216 14 . . . . . . . 6.75 ± 0.6598 6.09 ± 0.6365 15 . . . . . . . 6.88 ± 0.6986 6.41 ± 0.5872 16 . . . . . . . 6.29 ± 0.7239 5.55 ± 0.5119 17 . . . . . . . 6.91 ± 0.4944 4.98 ± 0.5681 18 . . . . . . . 4.68 ± 0.8097 4.69 ± 0.4226 19 . . . . . . . 6.35 ± 0.7543 4.47 ± 0.5365 20 . . . . . . . 5.54 ± 0.5865 4.37 ± 0.4988 21 . . . . . . . 4.64 ± 0.5774 4.98 ± 0.4314 22 . . . . . . . 5.27 ± 0.4287 3.68 ± 0.4521 23 . . . . . . . 4.44 ± 0.4685 3.37 ± 0.3852 24 . . . . . . . 4.30 ± 0.4903 3.66 ± 0.3652 25 . . . . . . . 4.34 ± 0.5058 3.51 ± 0.4301 26 . . . . . . . 3.76 ± 0.3171 3.03 ± 0.4996
STATISTICAL STUDY OF SPECIAL AND ORDINARY FED CALVES. 255 A careful study of the above table reveals the following facts :256 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III Since the correlation co-efficient between age and weight is nearly one for calves both under special and ordinary treatments, it is evident that the age and weight of calves under the two systems of treatments can be fairly represented by means of straight lines. Now let us proceed to determine the regression line of bulk weight on age. The best line which approximately represents the weight of a calf (y) at any week (x) is given by the general equationSTATISTICAL STUDY OF SPECIAL AND ORDINARY FED CALVES. 257 Similarly the standard error of the co-efficient of x for special fed calves [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Since the standard errors of the rates of growth have been calculated, we are in a position to see whether there is any statistical significance between the rates of growth for ordinary and special fed calves. Difference between the rates of growth=1.2845 lb. per week. Standard error of difference = ±0.2245 Therefore, 't' =1.2845/0.2245=5.7216, which is greater than the theoretical value 2.008. (n=50) Hence, the weight of the special fed calves increases at a significantly more rapid rate than that of the calves under ordinary treatment. An examination of Table I shows that the rate of growth of calves is not constant, but it varies for different weeks. To get at a more approximate value of the rate of growth, a parabolic curve is fitted to the data by using the method of moments. Let the equation to the best parabola that fits the observed data (that is, the weekly average weight in pounds corrected to the nearest whole number) be y=ax2+bx+c. Equating the first three moments of the right hand side to that of the left, we get three equations which enable us to determine the values of a, b and c. Equating the moments we find that258 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III The values of STATISTICAL STUDY OF SPECIAL AND ORDINARY FED CALVES. 259 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Graph 1. Curves observed and fitted for ordinary fed calves up to 26 weeks. G 2
260 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Graph 2. Curves observed and fitted for special fed calves up to 26 weeks.
STATISTICAL STUDY OF SPECIAL AND ORDINARY FED CALVES. 261 The equations dy/ dx=0.1319&+7.1966 and dy/dx=0.2646x;+8.4811, which are the first differential coefficients of the two parabolas given above, represent the rates of growth of the calves under ordinary and special treatments at any ins- tant. The difference in the rates of growth of the two groups at any age is given by the expression 0.1327x+1.2845. Equating this expression to zero, it is seen that the rates of growth of the calves under the two treatments are the same during the fourth week. From the fifth week onwards the special fed calves grow at a more rapid rate. Further, it is evident that difference in the rates of growth steadily increases with age. The justification for proceeding from the regression line to the regression curve will be evident from the following considerations, where it has been shown conclusively that there is considerable reduction in error by using a parabola for representing the growth of calves under the two systems of treatment. For ordinary fed calves the mean square of deviations S1 2 and S22 from linear and curvi-linear regressions are 575.455/25=23.018 and 230.926/24= 9.622. Now, S12/S22=23.018/9.622=2.392. Similarly, for special fed calves the mean square of deviations S/1'2 and S/2'2 from the linear and curvi-linear regressions are 1508.371/25=60.335 and 81.762/ 24=3.407 S/1'2/S/2'2=60.335/3.407=17.709. Theoretical values of S12/S22 for n1=24 and n2=24 at 5 per cent. and 1 per cent. levels of significance are 1.98 and 2.66, which proves that the parabola is better for representing the weights of both sets of calves in this particular case. It may be pointed out that the general growth of live weights is represented by curves of the form A262 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III NOTE BY WYNNE SAYER. I wish to make clear that in this paper nothing is claimed for special fed calves except that as a result of special feeding they put on weight and grow more rapidly. As regards the main experiment on early maturity of which this work is a part, data is still being collected on milk yields, constitution and the many other factors which are to be considered in an investigation of this magnitude, and no conclusions can yet be drawn on this aspect of the problem at such an early stage. REFERENCES. Fisher, R. A. (1932) Statistical Methods for Research Workers (fourth edition), Oliver and Boyd, Edinburgh. Sayer, W. (1934) Agriculture and Live-stock in India, 4, 633STATISTICAL STUDY OF SPECIAL AND ORDINARY FED CALVES. 263 APPENDIX. TABLE I. Scale of calf feeding264 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III TABLE ISTATISTICAL STUDY OF SPECIAL AND ORDINARY FED CALVES. 265 TABLE IIFURTHER OBSERVATIONS ON BOVINE NASAL SCHISTOSOMIASIS. BY M. ANANT NARAYAN RAO, G.M.V.C., Lecturer in Parasitology, Madras Veterinary College With Plates XXIII and XXIV and one text-fig. (Received for publication on 4th June 1935.) In his previous papers, the author has shown that the nasal schistosome is different from S. spindalis Montgomery, 1906. A further study of the length- frequency curves of their ova is of some interest. Bovine nasal schistosomiasis exists in some animals without gross lesions sufficient to attract the notice of a casual observer. In such animals the disease can be recognised only after a close examination of the nasal mucous membrane for small lesions, or for ova in the nasal washings under a microscope. The author has often met with bovines and buffaloes suffering from nasal schistosomiasis with no gross lesions. In the buffalo it is the exception rather than the rule for such lesions to occur. Mr. A. Ramachandra Ayyar, District Veterinary Officer, Mada- napalle, stated in a communication that he has examined many buffaloes with nasal schistosomiasis and none of them showed any gross lesions. In this paper an attempt has been made to explain the cause of this " symptom-free " disease in such animals. LENGTH FREQUENCY CURVES OF OVA. Fisher [1934] found a species of schistosome in the intestines of human beings in Belgian Congo, which closely resembled S. haematobium and S. bovis morpholo- gically, and he depended on biometry of the ova as a reliable species criterion to differentiate the new parasite from the other two. To this end he measured a large number of ova and plotted curves of their length frequencies. The curves showed that the ova of the new schistosome occupied an intermediary position between those of the other two and concluded that the parasite was a new species. On this hypothesis, the present writer has portrayed the length frequency curves of the ova of S. spindalis and S. nasalis with interesting results. (Text figure 1.) (266)
FURTHER OBSERVATIONS ON BOVINE NASAL SCHISTOSOMIASIS 267 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Length frequency curves of S. spindalis and S. nasalis. The curves show that there is a marked difference in their maximum and minimum lengths, which shows graphically that they are different species. There is a striking resemblance between the curves as regards a deep notch in the middle. It is possible that this is an indication of the probability that these two schistosomes evolved from a common type but are now definitely specialised with regard to their respective habits, etc, in their definitive hosts. ABNORMALITY IN SHAPE OF THE OVA OF NASAL SCHISTOMES In order to find out the abnormalities, if any, in the shape of the ova, the writer and his assistant Mr. S. Vaidyanatha Mudaliar examined samples of nasal washings obtained from the districts from over 895 bovines and 82 buffaloes, during H 2
268 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III a period of one year ending with 31st January 1935. They were not able to find any marked deviation from the typical shape of ova, excepting in their size. It is therefore interesting to record that among the several thousands of mature ova examined not even a single abnormal ovum conforming to the description of any of the forms described by Datta [1932] and figured by Bhalerao [1933] could be detected. EXPRIMENTAL INFECTION. At the end of the year 1933 it was decided to repeat the experimental in- festation of nasal schistosomiasis to confirm the previous work of the writer [Rao, 1933, 1934]. To this end, Calf No. 516, which was under observation from Septem- ber 1933, was first infested with S. spindalis cercariae and later with those of the nasal schistosome. In the third week of November 1933, the calf was infected with about 15,000 cercariae of S. spindalis through the nasal mucous membrane; in about eight weeks it developed diarrhoea and dysentery for a few days and these symptoms abated soon after without any treatment. The calf did not show lesions in the nose or ova in the nasal washings, but its faeces contained plenty of ova of S. spindalis during that period. The number of these ova in faeces gradually lessened as the weeks passed by but they did not disappear altogether during the period the calf was under observation. In the middle of February 1934, the calf was infected with about 30,000 cercariae of the nasal schistosome by the nasal route and on the 50th day after the event a very small number of ova was en- countered in the nasal washings. For a time there appeared to be an appreciable rise in the number of ova in the nasal discharge, and it lessened considerably during the succeeding weeks. In any case they were not numerous at any time during the whole period of one year the calf was under observation. The calf was destroyed on 26th February 1935 and about 100 single males and 60 pairs of nasal schistosomes were collected from the veins of the nasal mucous membrane, and about 50 single males and 250 pairs of S. spindalis from the portal and mesen- teric veins. The liver showed a well-marked periportal cirrhosis. This experiment confirms the previous work of the writer [Rao, 1934]. In parenthesis it may be mentioned that Mr. V. R. Phadke, Principal, Bombay Veterinary College, very kindly informed the writer that he infected some calves with cercariae, presumably of S. spindalis, with a view to producing nasal schistosomiasis. These calves developed typical S. spindalis infection and the infestation was so heavy as to produce acute diarrhoea and dysentery with the result that some of them died and the others were treated with antimony tartrate to save them. None of these, he said, developed nasal schistosomiasis, a fact which further supports the findings of the author. In the annual report of the Bombay Veterinary College for the year 1933-34, mention is made about these experiments.
FURTHER OBSERVATIONS ON BOVINE NASAL SCHISTOSOMIASIS 269 The lesions in the nose of this experimental calf were small hard yellowish nodules, each about the size of a millet seed, scattered over the mucous membrane of the nose. These nodular abscesses burst and subsequently healed making way for a fresh crop. These small lesions continued to appear and disappear in gradually diminishing numbers month after month, but there were no signs of cessation of the lesions in the course of over a year. The progressive diminution in the number of ova in the nasal discharge may be due either to a retardation of ova production or to the increasing difficulty of the ova in making their way out of the nasal mucous membrane which gets thickened as a result of tissue repair. The symptoms shown by this experimental calf were only occasional sneezing, throwing out some mucous which sometimes contained streaks of blood. But for the presence of the small nodular abscesses and the occasional manifestation of discomfort in the nose, a casual observer would not have suspected the animal as one harbouring nasal schistosomes. This experiment confirms the previous work of the writer that cercariae Indicae XXX Sewell 1922 are the larv 1 forms of S. nasalis and that S. spindalis does not produce nasal schistosomiasis. IMMUNOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS. It has already been said that buffaloes in general and some bovines in parti- cular do not develop gross lesions in the nose, and the infestation is more or less " symptom-free " though nasal schistosomes are present. The evidence deduced from experimental calf No. 516 seems to suggest that such differences in the mani- festation of grades of lesions may depend on some degree of immunity against the later infestation with S. nasalis derived from a pre-existing infestation with S. spindalis. On the subject of immunity against schistosomes many workers have demon- strated the presence of a definite bilharzial anti-body in the blood of animals and men suffering from schistosomiasis. Fairley and Jesudasan [1930] found in goats a primary rise of the anti-body response following cercarial invasion, and then a second rise which was related to the defunct schistosomes in portal thrombi. These workers found that the anti-body response remained at a certain level even during the second year of the disease. It is clear therefore that an anti- body is produced in the system either stimulated by the schistosomul270 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III Fisher [1934] after analysing the previous work of others on the subject, concludes that two types of mechanisms are involved in the production of anti- bilharzial immunity response in animals. One of them manifests itself after primary infestation with cercariae against a subsequent invasion which he names a response. The othe one which he calls FURTHER OBSERVATIONS ON BOVINE NASAL SCHISTOSOMIASIS 271 skin in addition to what may be ingested, after the primary infestation has estab- lished itself. The immunity responses in these animals are perhaps similar to what obtains in man [Dixon 1934]. In this class of animals the 272 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III pseudotubercles what appeared to be shrivelled up ova of the nasal schistosome were found (Plates XXIII and XXIV). At the present moment we do not know if the nasal schistosome could be an etiological factor in causing horn cancer in bovines. Endeavours are now being made to work on this interesting problem and it is hoped to obtain additional information on this. SHEEP AND NASAL SCHISTOSOMASIS. It has been possible to examine nasal washings of some sheep in the endemic areas of nasal schistosomiasis, but no ova of S. nasalis could be detected. Sec- tions of the nasal mucous membrane of a sheep, showing symptoms simulating the condition in cattle, proved negative for that disease. Hence the question of the susceptibility of sheep to that disease appears to be doubtful. Rao [1932] recorded ova of S. nasalis in the nasal discharge of a sheep. It is more than likely that the nasal washings from that sheep was contaminated with the nasal discharge from bovines which were also being examined at the time in that village. SUMMARY. 1. The length frequency curves of the ova of S. nasalis and S. spindalis provide additional proof that these two worms are different. 2. No abnormal shapes of ova of S. nasalis could be detected in mature ova examined. 3. The previous experiments of artificial infestation with cercariae indicae XXX Sewell 1922 to produce nasal schistosomiasis are confirmed. 4. The buffalo and some bovines appear to have a partial immunity conferred by S. spindalis against a later infestation with S. nasalis. 5. The presence of what looked like ova of S. nasalis in a growth from the base of horn of a bullock is recorded. 6. Susceptibility of sheep to nasal schistosomiasis appears to be doubtful. Acknowledgments.Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. V, Pt. 3. PLTAE XXIII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2 Photo-micrographs of sections of a growth from the base of horn. (Note the pseudo-tubercles in Fig. 1 (×20), and shape of the crumpled shell of the ovum in Fig. 2 (×80).
Ind. Jour, Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. V, Pt. 3. PLATE XXIV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3 Photo-micrographs of a growth from the base of horn. Note the crumpled ova and actino body in Figs. 1FURTHER OBSERVATIONS ON BOVINE NASAL SCHISTOSOMIASIS 273 Fairley, H. N., & Jesudasan, F. (1930). Studies on Schistosoma spindale. Ind. Med. Res. Memoirs, No. 17, Part IV. Fisher, A. C. (1934). A study of Schistosomiasis of the Stanley Ville District of the Belgian Congo. Trans. Roy. Soc. Trop. Med. & Hyg. 28, 277-306. Ozawa, M. (1934). Experimental Study of acquired immunity to Schistosomiasis japonica. Japanese Jour.Exper. Med. 8, 79. Quoted by Fisher, A. C. (1934). Rao, M. A. N. (1934). A preliminary Report on the successful infection with Nasal Schistosomiasis in experimental calves. Ind. Jour. Vet. Sc. & Anim. Hus. 3, 160-162. Rao, M. A. N. (1934) A comparative study of Schistosoma spindalis Montgomery, 1906, and Schistosoma nasalis, n. sp. Ibid. 4. 17. I
SELECTED ARTICLES THE BEARING OF THE PHYSIOLOGY OF PARASITIC NEMATODES ON THEIR TREATMENT AND CONTROL. BY GEOFFREY LAPAGE, M.D., M.Sc., Institute of Animal Pathology, University of Cambridge. The following abstract from the article is published with the kind permission of the Imperial Bureau of Agricultural Parasitology, St. Albans.) There is no need nowadays to emphasise the economic importance of the study of parasitic nematodes. They are the cause of some of the most serious and least controllable of human diseases, especially in the tropics ; the unanimous opinion of agricultural authorities is that they are one of the most serious menaces to the continued success of our domestication of animals useful to man ; in some of our colonies they threaten the very existence of the sheep-rearing industry; and they are also the cause of incalculable suffering and disease in animals which man is not concerned to conserve. The control of them is, therefore, one of the most important problems which the medical man and the economic biologist have to face. It is also one of the most interesting problems which the academic biologist can study. The result of all the work that has been done, however, has been only a limited degree of control; and even this is confined to one or two species of nematodes only, of which Haemonchus contortus, infecting the abomasum of sheep is an example. The other species found in the intestines of sheep, which probably do a great deal more harm, are little affected by any known treatment, so that the best measures we can take are quite inadequate. Those nematodes which inhabit less accessible situations, such as the lung worms which cause the disease called husk or hoose in sheep, cattle and swine, or the Filariae which live in the blood, or Trichinella which migrates into the muscles, are even less amenable to treatment, although such preventive methods as meat inspection have practically eradicated the latter from human beings in this country. There is thus no doubt that diseases caused by nematodes belong to that diminishing group which still baffles scientific workers. When we try to explain this striking failure, we may find one of the most important reasons for it in the fact that a great deal of the work done in the past on nematodes has been morphological, so that we have very little sound and (274)
BEARING OF PHYSIOLOGY OF PARASITIC NEMATODES ON THEIR CONTROL.275 tested knowledge of their physiology. We know even less about their physio- logical relationships with their hosts, upon which our measures of control and treatment must depend. Without this physiological knowledge we cannot understand the pathology of the diseases caused by these or any other parasites ; without it we cannot even understand the equilibrium which exists in nature between any host and its parasites. Almost every animal slaughtered for human consumption, or used for agricultural purposes, harbours many parasites, including many nematodes, and yet remains healthy and marketable at an economic profit. Man himself lives harmoniously with many parasites, for we must include among parasites all the bacteria. If we could understand the physiological basis for this equilibrium which occurs so often in nature, we could at least try to maintain farm animals in it, and this might even be sufficient for economic purposes. A complete understanding of the physiological relationship between the host, on the one hand, and the complex formed by all its parasites, on the other, is of course an ideal at present far beyond our reach. We can only work towards it, realising the great complexity of the problems involved, and hoping that, as our knowledge extends, we may be able to use the struggle for existence among the various parasites present to the advantage of the host which harbours them, in much the same way as the medical man has used the malarial parasite for the treatment of general paralysis, or the economic entomologist has encouraged the parasites of insect pests, or other animals which prey upon them, for their control. In the meantime the physiology of each kind of parasite can be studied with the special object of determining its physiological relationship to its host, on the one hand, and to the other parasites present in its environment inside that host, on the other. It is this kind of knowledge of the nematode that is needed. It can best be obtained by study of the nematode as a particular organism in relation to its particular environment, the special problems of the economic worker being kept in mind while this biological study is going on. This kind of study, the natural one for the biologist, has already taught us that the nematode is peculiar enough among living things, morphologically at any rate, to require a separate phylum in zoological classification. The parasito- logist is not primarily interested in such interesting biological features as the nematode's lack of segmentation, nor its peculiar body cavity, which may or may not be a coelom. He need not seek the reason for the remarkable uniformity of structure among the nematodes, although it will be worth his while to note that the reason for it cannot be that which is commonly given to explain the similar lack of structural variation among the birds, namely, the narrow limits of possible variation imposed by life in the air. The nematodes are, unlike the birds, remarkably successful in a variety of environments. They live as well in the soil, as on a sewage farm or in a vinegar barrel, and succeed as parasites not only in the gut, but also in a great variety of tissues, and even in such I 2
276 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III apparently unsuitable tissues as tendon and ligamentum nuchae. They seem, indeed, like many other parasites, to favour such tissues as liver and muscle, in which glycogen is abundant, a point which will be discussed below. They live as parasites in both warm and cold blooded animals, in vertebrates as well as in invertebrates, and are parasites also in plants. Yet there is little essential difference of structure between the various species living in these every different environments. Many nematodes have performed the feat, without any morpho- logical penalty, of living part of their lives as parasites inside a host, and part of it in the outer world, requiring no metamorphosis as a condition of this kind of parasitism; the parasitic larvae of such species are not essentially different in structure from the free-living ones preceding them in the life history. Even these few general facts are enough to show that the nematodes are extremely adaptable. Their organs, although they show so little structural variation, can successfully perform their functions in widely differing environments. Few animals excel the nematode in its capacity of resisting adverse conditions. We may expect to find, therefore, that their physiological needs either are not exacting or can be supplied by perhaps more primitive methods than those to which more highly organised animals are confined. If, for example, they require little oxygen, a fact which has been demonstrated by McCoy (1930) and others, we may find that they also show peculiar methods of respiration, a knowledge of which might suggest to us means of control. We may find among them a capacity to feed on a great variety of substances ; and a system of excretion of a primitive kind. Their muscles, we know, are morphologically peculiar and the study of them may give us useful information. Most important of all, perhaps, from the point of view of the economic worker, is their peculiar cuticle, a structure unique in the animal kingdom. We do not know even the chemical composition of this; certainly we do not know its function, nor anything about its permeability. It seems especially important, for example, to learn some- thing about the permeability of this cuticle to the drugs with which we try to kill its possessor. Our lack of knowledge about all these points constitutes one of the most remarkable gaps in comparative physiology. A brief review of such knowledge as we have may help to indicate some lines of investigation which, although they should be pursued from the purely biological point of view, may yet be especially interesting to the parasitologist, or may be especially the kind of work he can do. Because many parasitic nematodes have non-parasitic larvae by which their hosts are infected, the problems raised by these free-living larvae must also be considered by the parasitologist. It will be convenient, therefore, to consider the eggs and the free-living larvae first and the parasitic larvae and the mature worms in a separate section. It should not be forgotten, however, that the same kind of organism is being considered in both sections. The non-parasitic larvae often live under conditions
BEARING OF PHYSIOLOGY OF PARASITIC NEMATODES ON THEIR CONTROL.277 very like those to which non-parasitic species of nematodes are exposed. Their environment is very like that of the nematodes living in the soil, for example. Any knowledge of non-parasitic nematodes that we may have, and any that we may gain, may therefore be applicable to the control of the free-living non- parasitic larvae of parasitic nematodes, provided that we bear in mind the greater resistant powers of the latter. The study of non-parasitic nematodes may also have its own agricultural value, because these organisms may affect the agri- cultural properties of the soil, or because they affect other necessities of civilisa- tion, such as sewage disposal. I. THE EGGS AND FREE-LIVING LARVAE. A. The Eggs. A good deal of work has been done on the effect of the environment upon the eggs. It will not be here discussed, because it is doubtful whether any attempts to kill the eggs of nematodes will be practicable or economically worth while. They are almost as resistant as coccidian oocysts and all the objections stated below to attempts to kill the infective larvae, apply also to measures directed against the eggs. The use of hypochlorite solutions against them has been suggested, and especially the use of acidified hypochlorite solutions. The writer (1933) came to the conclusion that Milton hypochlorite was more lethal to the eggs than other antiseptics which were tried for the sterilisa- tion of eggs for the cultivation of larvae from them. Dressings of bleaching powder upon pastures or other situations might kill many nematode eggs. Such methods are further discussed below, where it is suggested that they could only be subsidiary to other methods of control. B. The Infective Larvae. The study of the physiology of the non-parasitic larvae, and especially of their reactions to physical and chemical factors in their environment, may suggest to us subsidiary methods of control designed to attack these larvae. We already have a good deal of knowledge of this kind which will guide future work. We can supplement it with what we know of analogous phases of other parasites, such as the protozoa and other helminths. The first and the infective larvae which live on the pastures must both perform an ecdysis which may be the most vulnerable point at which to attack them. If we could control these two ecdyses, we could prevent, at its beginning outside the host, the development of those parasitic nematodes which have a free- living phase. The successful accomplishment of the second ecdysis is particularly important to the parasite. It divests the third larva of the remarkably efficient sheath without which it cannot survive for long outside the host, and renders it dependent upon parasitic life. If, therefore, we could control this ecdysis, we could control the infection of the host.
278 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III Any method, for example, which would prevent this ecdysis occurring would prevent the onset of the third parasitic phase inside the infective larva and so would limit infection of the host. Such larvae entering the host would not exsheath and would be passed out again with the faeces ; presumably they would eventually die. If, however, we succeed only in delaying this second ecydsis we might do more harm than good, by enabling infective larvae to pass through various hosts unchanged, until they eventually exsheathed in one or other of them. The hosts would thus be passing out not only eggs, the larvae developing from which could not infect new hosts for at least three days, but infective larvae as well, and so would be distributing these latter over a wide area. We should be making each individual host a more efficient carrier of the disease we were trying to control. Methods, however, which would cause the second ecdysis to occur on the pastures outside the host, or to occur more readily here, would kill many larvae, because they would expose the parasitic third larvae to climatic conditions which they could not survive without their protective sheaths. The possibility that we may be able to do this certainly merits further study. The writer's work on the second ecdysis (shortly to be published) shows that a relation between the second ecdysis and the acid-base equilibrium in the alimentary canal may be demonstrable; and that methods directed to the alteration of the permeability of the sheaths of infective larvae would be effective as a means either of killing them or of causing them to exsheath outside the host, so that they would die from exposure. That the larvae might possibly be attacked also through their second ecdysis inside the host, as well as outside it, is suggested by the effect observed by the writer of sulphides on the infective larvae and of solutions containing organic sulphides in the presence of common intestinal bacteria such as B. coli, which produces H2S from these compounds. It is also worth remembering that the protective sheaths of the infective larvae are the skins of the second larvae, so that any knowledge we acquire about the chemical composition or permeability of these sheaths, or of means of rendering them more vulnerable to our attack may give us valuable indications for similar methods to be applied to the later parasitic larvae or the mature worms. The parasitic larvae are also dependent upon successful accomplishment of a series of ecdyses, and if we could control these, we could control the parasitic life of nematodes. * * * * As a result of the writer's observations on the second ecdysis, some pre- liminary experiments have, in fact, been done by Wood, in the Institute of Animal Pathology, to determine whether the lethal effect of bleaching powder upon the infective larvae could be economically applied to them upon the pastures. It will be remembered that bleaching powder is also used, as Goodey (1933) points out, for combating the adults of the plant parasitic nematode Heterodera. It
BEARING OF PHYSIOLOGY OF PARASITIC NEMATODES ON THEIR CONTROL. 279 is too early yet to state any conclusion about these experiments. Before the effect of any dressing could be estimated, it was first necessary to devise a method of estimating the number of larvae killed by it, so that a method of estimating the number of larvae upon a given area of pasture was required. This latter has, indeed, long been desirable as a means of enabling farmers to estimate the degree to which any pasture is infected, so that they may judge its possible effect upon sheep put upon it. Another problem was the elimination of the numerous non- parasitic nematodes found upon the pastures. Wood found that the number of infective larvae could be at any rate roughly estimated by extracting the larvae with a modification of a Baermann apparatus, and that the non-parasitic nematodes were mostly killed, or at any rate immobilised, if this apparatus was filled with a 1 % solution of cone. HCl. instead of with water. The infective larvae of parasitic species are not affected by a few hours immersion in this, at room temperature. This rather rough preliminary technique is being further developed; at the same time the effect of bleaching powder on the pastures is being investigated. Enough has been learnt to show that dressings which bleach but do not necessarily kill the pastures will kill a great many infective nematode larvae. It may therefore be found that such dressings may be of value, if the labour and expense of applying them justifies their use. * * * * II. THE PARASITIC LARVAE AND MATURE WORMS. Veglia (1915) studied the parasitic larvao of Haemonchus contortus, and a considerable literature exists about the parasitic larvae of nematodes inhabiting other parts of the body than the alimentary canal. There is therefore no lack of a basis for further work of this kind, which is important, apart from its bearing on our knowledge of the relationship between host and parasite, because these larvae may do at least as much damage to the host as that done by the mature worms, especially when they migrate through the tissues, like, for example, the parasitic larvae of Ascaris. The environment of both the parasitic larvae and the mature worms contains similar factors, namely, those which govern the physiology of the host, so that the work on the physiology of the mature worms about to be described may be used as a guide for work on the parasitic larvae. It should be remembered, however, that whenever this work on the mature worms has been done upon nematodes removed from their hosts and studied in artificial media, it is doubtful whether it represents normal nematode physiology, because no nematode has ever been kept alive for longer than a few days in any artificial medium. We shall not be able to study the normal physiology of nematodes by direct observation until we can either cultivate them from the egg, or at least keep them alive and healthy under experimental conditions which we can control.
280 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III The indirect method of the histologist and pathologist may, however, teach us a great deal. The papers summarised by Hoeppli (1927) on the methods by which parasitic nematodes may feed, and the work of Fourie (1931), Mueller (1929) and others, demonstrate this. These papers give us information about the histological effects of nematodes on the tissues of their hosts, and also some information about the effects of the parasitic larvae. Hoepplis' summary, and his own work also show that adult nematodes, whatever their parasitic larvae may do, probably feed, as general biology would teach us to expect, in different ways according to the nature of their mouths, and that degrees of parasitism can be discerned among them, similar to those shown by other parasites and indicated by similar structural differences. Some nematodes, such as the hookworms, have buccal teeth with which they browse upon the epithelium of the alimentary canal. The work done upon these species strongly suggests that they do, in fact, digest the tissue which they thus rasp or suck off. It has been suggested that they also help, by the damage they thus do, the entry of pathogenic organisms into the submucosa and the blood. Taylor and Purchase (1931) could not, however, experimentally prove that the entry of pathogenic organisms is thus facilitated by damage done to the alimentary canal. Their method was to introduce into the alimentary canal pathogenic organisms together with, but necessarily outside, the infective larvae. The writer (1933) found that B. coli, and presumably pathogenic organisms as well, could be bottled up, so to speak, inside the intestines of the first parasitic larvae, so that theoretically they could be inoculated by these into the submucosa of the host, into which they would burrow, each larva acting like a hypodermic needle. It is possible, therefore, although attempts to infect animals in this way have so far failed, that nematode larvae may thus transmit disease whether they damage the gut extensively or not. There is here an interesting field for investi- gation which would throw much needed light, not only on the food of both the larvae and the adult worms, but also on the transmission of bacterial diseases by nematodes. * * * * Another interesting problem is opened up by the demonstration by Hoeppli (1927) and others that nematodes embedded in the walls of the alimentary canal may be surrounded by areas of cytolysed tissue upon which may they be feeding. It is supposed that the substances producing this sytolysis are specific enzymes produced by the nematodes to prepare the tissues for digestion; and Mueller (1929) suggests that it is the particular function of the so-called excretory system of nematodes to produce these substances. This system certainly shows little morphological resemblance to any of the excretory organs of other animals.
BEARING OF PHYSIOLOGY OF PARASITIC NEMATODES ON THEIR CONTROL. 281 There is here, therefore, an interesting problem requiring the co-operation of the morbid anatomist, the physiologist and the pathologist. It is typical of a great many problems of the same type that urgently need investigation, because the study of them may help us to treat the specific damage caused by nematodes. Among other problems of this kind are the possible effects of nematodes upon the calcium metabolism of the host, either through indirect effects on the parathyroids or in some other way, and also their effects upon the general meta- bolism of the host. Stewart and Shearer (1933) are investigating these. Much work has also been done upon the effect of vitamins in the diet of animals infected with nematodes. It seems that lack of vitamins increases the liability to in- fection, but this may be only part of the well-known increased susceptibility to disease due to the same cause, because it has been concluded that nematodes do not themselves feed upon the vitamins. The writer found that the addition of vitamins to hanging drops containing first parasitic larvae had no effect upon their development. The effects of the larval stages upon the host, whether these migrate through the tissues or not, need much more investigation. More detailed physiological study is also needed of the larvae of such wholly parasitic species as Trichinella, their " encystment" in the muscles, and the general question why such larvae come to rest in certain situations. It is possible, for example, that their meta- bolism is in some way associated with glycogen deposits, so that the muscles and the liver are particularly favourable to them. Whether a special mode of respira- tion determines such an association is unknown, although there is some evidence that the respiration of nematodes may be similar to that of muscle tissues (Slater, 1928). A similar tendency of cestode larval stages to congregate in certain tissues may have a similar explanation. * * * * Mueller's work (1929) upon the nematode cuticle opens up the general question of excretion by nematode parasites. He found that the cuticle of a freshly killed adult Ascaris was readily permeable, under the conditions of his experiment, to urea and potassium iodide, but that it would not allow, under the conditions of his experiment, glucose to pass through it, unless a 5 per cent. solution of this in saline was used and even then only small quantities came through. These experi- ments need verification and repetition under different conditions282 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III and biochemistry of organisms usually not more than half a millimetre long. The writer's unpublished work on these larvae shows, nevertheless, that such work might give us valuable information. A great deal of work has been done by various workers upon the so-called excretory products of adult nematodes. It is as inconclusive as the work, which is bound up with it, on the question whether nematodes are aerobic or not. Slater (1928) has investigated this latter question and summarises much of the work upon it. The balance of evidence is, perhaps, in favour of either anaerobiosis or some special mode of respiration, which may be akin to that of muscle. The absence from nematodes of specialised respiratory organs also favours this view, as do also such facts as the very low oxygen consumption by the non-parasitic larvae, and the toxic effects of high oxygen tensions upon them (McCoy, 1930). The appearance of fatty acids in media in which nematodes are kept seems also characteristic of them, but it is not yet clear whether these are specific products of nematode metabolism, or of some association they establish with bacteria. If we knew the truth about these questions and could more precisely determine the respiratory and excretory processes of nematodes, we might be able either to deprive them of substances vital to their life, or prevent their excretion of sub- stances which could be toxic to them if they retained them in their tissues. We should also be in a better position to distinguish between the mechanical damage they cause to their hosts and that due to specific effects of their metabolism upon the host's physiology. Enough has perhaps now been said about some aspects of the physiology of parasitic nematodes to emphasise the gaps in this important field of knowledge and to support the view, expressed by the writer elsewhere (1933), that little advance in our control of these parasites is to be expected, until we can relate their physiology to that of their hosts and determine their relationship to the other organisms which may form part of the complex of commensals and parasites living inside their hosts. It is a state of equilibrium between all the members of this complex that we should seek to maintain, because that is the solution of our problem which nature herself adopts. Our task, in other words, should not be the impossible one of attempting to rid human beings or farm animals of all their nematode parasites, or of trying to keep them free from these, but the very difficult but at least possible one of keeping these infections within bounds. It has already been pointed out that, so far as domesticated animals are concerned, the examination of any marketable animal in a slaughter house will show that it has harboured many nematodes without serious damage to its health ; and it is always possible that worm-free animals, even if they could be produced at an economic profitBEARING OF PHYSIOLOGY OF PARASITIC NEMATODES ON THEIR CONTROL. 283 such worm-free animals, and could meet the cost and labour of maintaining them, we should probably only succeed in producing races of domesticated animals which would be more, instead of less, susceptible to diseases due to parasites, a procedure which is exemplified to-day by the various breeds of dogs and other inbred animals fostered by civilisation, if modern man himself, indeed, is not the most striking example of it. For this reason also we shall be wiser to study the plan adopted by nature herself, and to seek to produce animals healthy because they are in equili- brium with their parasites. Among the conditions upon which this equilibrium depends, are the factors governing the so-called resistance and immunity to nematode and other metazoa parasites. Taylor's (1934) recent field experiments relating to this intricate and difficult question, are valuable. We do not know yet whether this so-called immunity and resistance resembles that known to bacteriologists or not. Some of the work summarised by Taliaferro (1929) and also the work done upon specific toxins produced by some nematodes and the antitoxins to these manufactured by the hosts, suggest that it is. The recent work of Stumberg (1933) on the detection of the proteins of Haemonchus in the sera of infected sheep and goats seems parti- cularly promising. Valuable methods of diagnosis of nematode infections, as well as of treatment of them, may emerge from work of this kind. It seems important especially, that we should not allow the immunology of bacterial infections to influence unduly our study of any similar phenomena which the investigation of diseases due to metazoa may bring to light. Much recent work suggests indeed that we are as yet only on the threshold of a field of research the future results of which may alter many of our conceptions of diseases due to metazoa. It may show us, among other things that what is now called an age-resistance to nematode infections is in reality traceable to definite physiological relationships between host and parasite, and that inbreeding, too much coddling and care of domesti- cated animals and other farm practices which tend to weaken resistance to disease that has been acquired in the evolution of the species concerned, may all be doing more harm than good, and that there is a limit to the modern tendency towards elaborate supervision and care of farm stock, beyond which disaster and and not improvement lies. There is, moreover, another reason why we shall do well to study the physio- logical relationship of the host and its parasites, and try to base remedial measures upon these. It will always be cheaper and easier to apply such measures, because they will be readily combined with normal farm practice. They would also relieve us of the dangers inseparable from the use of some of our most efficient drugs. They would relieve us, for example, from the use of carbon tetrachloride which, efficient though it is, may have effects on the host, even when it is used by experienced workers, which are worse than those of the disease which it is designedto cure. K 2
284 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III There are probably few indeed who would not gladly exchange treatments based upon the utilisation of the normal physiological processes for the use of anthelmintics. The latter are rarely satisfactory. The results of the immense amount of labour expended upon them have been very meagre. Carbon tetrachlo- ride is perhaps at once the most powerful and the most dangerous of them. Copper sulphate is useful only against Haemonchus contortus. There are a few others the effects of which are erratic and unreliable. All anthelmintics are expensive and their administration requires skilled labour. Their effects can only be temporary, so that they must be continually administered. The intelligent farmer may be willing to undertake this, and he may do it efficiently, even when many thousands of animals have to be so treated, but the majority of farmers would certainly be glad if they were told that anthelmintics were no longer required. There is also always the problem of how anthelmintics should be best adminis- tered. When they are to be given b y the mouth, the obstacle presented by the three oesophageal dilatations preceding the ruminant stomach largely destroys their efficacy and most of the domesticated animals we wish to treat are ruminants. We are slowly learning something about the mechanism of this " stomach," so that we may feel more certain than we did that some, at any rate, of the drug we give by the mouth does at least enter the abomasum or true stomach, and enters it unchanged, even if we have no such certainty when farm birds are being treated, that we have surmounted the similar obstacle presented by another oesophageal dilatation, the crop. But even when the drugs we give do enter the abomasum unchanged, we cannot say that they reach the nematodes in the intestines un- changed ; and we have no knowledge of how they act upon these. We need, in fact, much more work upon the effect of chemical substances upon " adult " nematodes and upon their larvae. The possible importance of such work is indicated by the writer's observations on the remarkable effects upon the infective larvae of the solutions mentioned above containing mineral and organic sulphides. These observations suggest that sulphides might be used for treatment. If, as Mueller (1929) suggests, the cuticle of nematodes is an albu- minoid or is allied to the albuminoids, these sulphides may have a solvent action on it similar to their action on keratin, so that they would enter the worms readily or enable other toxic substances to do so. They could, perhaps, therefore be used either for their own toxic effect,or as a preliminary treatment to prepare the way for other drugs. H2 S can be produced by B. coli in media containing such organic sulphides as cystein hydrochloride, so that it may prove possible to add to the diet of the host animals some ingredient of this kind, from which the normal bacteria of the intestine would produce a suplhide toxic to the parasites. It is not likely that it would be produced in great amount, so that its effects might not be power- ful, but they would for that reason be less likely to harm the host and would control the parasite all the more efficiently because they would be continuously
BEARING OF PHYSIOLOGY OF PARASITIC NEMATODES ON THEIR CONTROL. 285 exerted. Our object, it should be remembered, is not necessarily to kill all the nematodes present, but to inhibit their activities and propagation, without at the same time injuring their hosts. This mehod of treatment by giving one drug with the object of rendering the parasite more susceptible to another drug given either with it or afterwards, is a method that has not perhaps been applied sufficiently to nematode diseases. If two drugs are thus given together, as for example copper sulphate and mustard are sometimes given, the enhanced effect of their combined administration may be due to the production by intestinal bacteria from one or both of them of substances which, like the H2S just mentioned, render the parasites more sus- ceptible. If we knew more about the chemical composition and permeability of the nematode cuticle, we could extend our application of this principle. Not less important in the treatment of nematode diseases is a preliminary treatment, akin to that essential in the treatment of cestode infections, designed to remove any substances by which nematodes may be protected from any anthel- mintics which we may succeed in getting unaltered into the stomach and intestine. The mucus secretion which nematodes provoke is one of the best protections of this kind that they have, and one of the most serious obstacles to successful treatment. We need much more work directed specifically to find out how this mucus may be removed before anthelmintics are given. It is possible that methods of treating human mucous colitis may be adapted for this purpose. It is certainly true that, so long as we take no special measures to remove this mucus, the full effect of an anthelmintics will not be obtained. Mueller's work upon the mode of action of carbon tetrachloride is also a good example of the physiological approach to the study of anthelmintics. He found that this drug, being fat soluble, is concentrated in those parts of the nematode's body where the fat deposits occur, namely in the muscles, along the nerve cords, and under the cuticle. It is concentrated, therefore, just where its action is most effective, and Mueller suggests that it paralyses rather than kills the nematodes, so that this is why they are passed out of the host. Mueller did not, how- ever, find out why carbon tetrachloride permeated the cuticle. If we knew that, the knowledge might suggest other drugs less dangerous to the host. This physiological attitude to the problems of treatment is even more neces- sary when we remember that not only the " adult " nematodes of some species, but their parasitic larvae also do considerable damage. These often lie embedded in the tissues or migrate through them or are carried by the blood to the lungs, the muscles, the tendons and elsewhere. They cannot, therefore, be directly treated by drugs given by the mouth. If we give these, they must be given with a knowledge of their alteration in the intestine and the absorption of their deri- vatives, and it is the latter which we direct at the nematodes, if we do not, indeed,
286 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III inject them directly into the blood or elsewhere. We should know much better what substances to inject, if we knew something of the physiology of these parasitic larvae. * * * * It must be obvious in the light of all these considerations, that the real method of studying parasitic nematodes and the diseases they cause will not be found until we can control in vitro not only their free living and their parasitic larvae, but the mature worms themselves. Remote as this ideal may seem, we should pursue it if only for the reason that attempts thus to cultivate nematodes will add to our knowledge of their physiology. It will be objected that in vitro experiments do not help us in the control of disease in living animals or plants, and no one who has studied this question will treat this objection lightly ; but the object of our in vitro control of nematodes will not be to gain information which we may hope directly to apply to the treatment of disease, but information of the kind upon which the whole of modern medicine and veterinary practice is based. The future alone will show whether the patient study of nematode physiology by every method at our command, will, or will not, increase our control over them and their effects. It is certainly true that we ought to make use of all these methods, whatever our views of their comparative efficacy, if only for the reason that the parasitic nematodes are among the most serious menaces to the continued success of our race and our civilisation. REFERENCES.FOURIE, P. J. J. 1931. The haematology and pathology of haemonchosis in sheep. Rep. (17th) Dir. Vet. Serv. Anim. Indust. Onderstepoort, Part II. pp. 495-572. GOODEY, T. 1933. Plant parasitic nematodes and the diseases they cause. London, 306 pp. HOEPPLI, R. 1927. "Über Beziehungen zwischen dem biologischen Verhalten parasitischer Nematoden and histologischen Reaktionen des Wirbeltier- körpers." Arch. Schiffs. u. Tropenhyg., XXXI, Beih. 3,205BEARING OF PHYSIOLOGY OF PARASITIC NEMATODES ON THEIR CONTROL. 287 MUELLER, J. M. 1929. Studies on the microscopical anatomy and physiology of Ascaris lumbricoides and Ascaris megalocephala, Z. zellforsch., VIII (3), 361THEILERIASIS OF YOUNG CALVES IN BAGHDAD DAIRIES. BY C. MACHATTIE* Director, Veterinary Vaccine Lymph and Serum Institute, Baghdad. (Reprinted from the Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, Vol. XXVIII.No. 6.) INTRODUCTION. During the years 1917 to 1919, the authorities, with the object of improving and augmenting the indigenous breeds of cattle and supplying the military and civil populations with fresh dairy products, imported from India three thousand five hundred head of Hansi and Sindi breeds; later, in 1921, sixteen Ayrshire bulls were imported. The interval which has elapsed since then has proved that these selected breeds cross well with the indigenous cattle and their progeny are to some extent diffused over the country. Most of the best cows are on the Royal farms, the Government farms and two large commercial dairies in the Baghdad area. This collection of the majority of the best cows into large herds under ex- perienced supervision and within easy access of the laboratory, facilitates investi- gation of diseases such as theileriasis, which requires close supervision of the animals over a period of months. It is necessary to emphasize the fact that no bovine has been imported into Iraq since 1921. Early in 1934, a veterinary assistant was attached to the Royal farms in Baghdad area. His duties were to tour these daily and see that certain measures designed to effect a higher standard of animal management and hygiene were being carried out. On July 9th he arrived at the main dairy just as a herdsman was disposing of the carcase of a young calf by the effective method of throwing it out for jackals, scavenger hawks, etc., to pick clean in the course of the night. A postmortem examination was made and the smears from liver and spleen were forwarded to the writer with a report that the former organ was of a yellow color and the spleen was enlarged. The calf was a female aged 13 days. Smear showed a 90 per cent. to 100 per cent. invasion of the red blood corpuscles by ring-shaped haema- tozoa similar to those shown in Plat XXV, Fig. 1. In the spleen and liver were *This paper is published by the permission of Farouq Beg El-Damlougi, Director of Veterinary Affairs, Iraq, whose kindly aid and encouragement have made the investigation possible. [ Ed. Trans. Roy. Soc. Trop. Med. and Hyg. ] (288)
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. V, Pt. 3. PLATE XXV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 1 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 2 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 3 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 4 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 5 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Theileria annulata in peripheral blood of calf 18 days old. FIG. 2. Schizonts (Koch's "blue bodies") of T. annulata in liver smear. FIG. 3. Young schizont of T. annulata in mononuclear cell of liver. FIGS. 4 & 5. Trypanosoma theileri in blood. FIG. 6. Crithidial forms in squash preparation of tick (Hyalomma aegyptium) taken from calf infected with T. Theileri.
THEILERIASIS OF YOUNG CALVES. 289 abundant and typical plasma bodies either in lymphocytic cells or lying free (Plate XXV, Figs. 2 and 3). The appearances, when considered with the post- mortem report on the solid organs, were sufficient to justify a diagnosis of acute theileriasis. GENERAL OBSERVATIONS. The dairy was visited and the Indian jemadar, in charge of stock since the war, questioned. A summary of his observations combined later with those of jemadars and cattlemen at the other dairies is detailed in this paper, because they show how easy it is for an almost symptomless disease, confined to young calves, to exist in an area for years and yet completely escape the cognisance of all except persons whose occupation necessitates their actually living amongst dairy cattle the whole year round for a number of years sufficient to imprint on their minds that regularly occurring annual inexplicable deaths have certain points in common, such as a marked age factor and nervous disorders often asso- ciated with fits and sometimes with jaundice. The cattleman's experience of the disease is as follows :290 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III On opening up such an animalTHEILERIASIS OF YOUNG CALVES. 291 The result of the investigation has been to show that of the 250 calves, 148 died, of which 119 succumbed to acute theileria infection, 16 to the after effects of this infection and the remaining 13 to other causes. Of the 13 dying of other causes, 10 died during the first 6 days of life without showing any parasitic infec- tion. Of the 250 calves born, 102 survived but these, like the majority of those that died, showed evidence of theileria infection. It seems evident. therefore, that all the calves born in the dairies examined became infected soon after birth with a parasite which appears to be Theileria annulata. The incubation period is usually about 14 days, the infection reaching its height between the 17th and 19th day of life, the whole course of the disease occupying about a week. At the height of the attack 90 to 100 per cent. of the red blood corpuscles are infected, while in some cases plasma bodies can be found in the blood. In nearly all cases these bodies are numerous in the glands and liver. At the crisis the temperature, which has risen steadily during the course of the infection, varies between 105° F. and 106.8° F. The real crisis covers a period of 12 to 24 hours. No appreciable symptoms are to be observed at the height of the attack, the young calf merely lying listlessly in the heat of the sun like normal calves. If forced up, however, it sways and may fall down or may rest its head against a railing or other convenient object. Without any previous warning, it may develop a fit from which it may recover or die. Mixed infections play no part in the mortality for in every young calf up to the age of 3 weeks, with very few exceptions, the only blood parasite present is the theileria. Jolly bodies or anaplasma-like structures occur in small numbers, but in no case were piro- plasms observed, with the possible exception of Babesia bovis on rare occasions. In one calf 6 days old Trypanosoma theileri was found together with the theileria (Plate XXV, Figs. 4 and 5). Smears were made from the body contents of a tick (Hyalomma aegyptium) taken from the ear of this calf. The preparation showed large numbers of flagel- lates of the trypanosome and crithidia types, and similar in appearance to those described by O'Farrell (1913) from this tick in the Sudan. There seems reason to suppose that the flagellates represent developmental forms of Trypanosoma theileri (Plate XXV, Fig. 6). APPEARANCES IN THE BLOOD. Usually as judged from blood films made from the tip of the ear, the theileria first appear in the peripheral blood on the 10th to the 14th day of the calf's life. In two cases, however, they were observed on the 6th day, the calves dying on the 7th and 8th days. The first parasites seen are essentially tailed forms though slenderring, ovoid or elliptical forms also occur. On the 16th to 17th day there is a marked increase in the parasitized corpuscles, the organisms being similar to those which have occurred before with the exception that some of them appear to have L 2
292 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III become distended and bloated to form the full ring. On the 18th day, at the crisis, the majority of the parasites are of the full ring type consisting of a large clear un- stained area without any apparent limiting membrane, but with the chromatin mass of varying shape moulded to some part of the periphery of the ring. It would seem possible in view of the absence of a limiting envelope, that the colourless area is not actually part of the parasite but an area of degeneration of the substance of the red blood corpuscles. It is at this stage that death may occur. If the animal recovers, the full ring parasites disappear almost entirely in the course of 12 hours to be replaced by parasites of the Theileria mutans type. After the crises the blood which, apart from some basophilic degeneration of red blood corpuscles, has hitherto shown little abnormality, now becomes markedly and rapidly changed in that it offers an exaggerated picture of anisocytosis, lymphocytosis, oligocythaemial increase in erythroblasts, normoblasts, megalo- blasts and microblasts, punctuate basophilia, polychromasia and poikilocytosis. The picture is dominated by the great variety in size of the red blood corpuscles, by basophilia and particularly by a remarkable leucocytic increase consisting almost exclusively of lymphocytes. The blood escaping from the cut end of the ear at this stage resembles water tinged a blood-red colour. POST-MORTEM PICTURE. In about half the cases the picture seen on first stripping the skin is that of a marked icterus with haemorrhages of small and large extent. The appearance of the liver is characteristic and of diagnostic importance. It is voluminous, flabby, easily mashed between the fingers and of a peculiar yellow ochre colour. The spleen is usually, but not always, enlarged to about five times its normal size, while its consistence is softer than normal. The heart shows sub-epicardial haemorrhages generally along the auriculo-ventricular groove and endocardial petechiae, varying in size from that of a pinhead to that of a pea, mostly confined to the left side. The other characteristic feature is the presence of small ulcers, 2 to 3 mm. in diameter, in the small intestine and particularly in the abomasum. Each consists of a red ulcerated centre surrounded by a raised red ring. The whole is easily peeled off leaving a small colourless erosion. Though many of ulcers have been examined for plasma bodies these have not been detected in them. Generally 5 to 20 c.c. of yellowish fluid is free in the thoracic and abdo- minal cavity. The kidneys show definite pin-head haemorrhagic areas. As already noted plasma bodies or Kocho blue bodies are very numerous in the pre- crural glands and in the liver (Plate XXV, Figs 2 and 3). They were found in at least 90 per cent. of the calves that died.
THEILERIASIS OF YOUNG CALVES. 293 PREVIOUS LITERATURE. A perusal of the literature shows that there are very few references to the existence of theileriasis in young calves. Mason (1922) observed from birth fifteen calves which were infected with the parasite of Egyptian fever. The earliest infection was on the 59th day of life and the duration 2 to 3 months. There was no mortality and no plasma bodies were discovered. Sergent Edm., Donatien, Parrot, Lestoquard and Plantureux (1927) des- cribe as congenital theileriasis the case of a week old calf described by Magneville (1925). The fact that the calf died suddenly as in the Baghdad cases, that the post-mortem appearances were very similar and that smears of the organs showed Koch's blue bodies seem to indicate that the Baghdad dairy disease may occur in Algeria and possibly in Tunis, Morocco and other parts of North Africa. Turnbull (1926) reports that he had discovered plasma bodies in an 18 days old calf in North-Eastern Rhodesia, where calves suffer from a benign disease which appears to be a form of theileriasis. Theiler and Graf (1728) make reference to a disease of calves in the Marico district of the Western Transvaal associated with a heavy mortality. The former stated that the disease occurred only in calves under the age of 3 months and that once they had passed this age they began to thrive. They called the malady ' liver disease,' as after death an icteric liver and large spleen were found. The disease was investigated only by five short visits. The discovery of Koch's blue bodies in three of the calves was regarded as an accident associated in some way with the mixed infections, including paratyphoid, from which many of the calves were suffering. Theiler and Graf came to the conclusion, after some experimental work with another virus, that Gonderia mutans is actually a species of Theileria in the life-cycle of which plasma bodies play a part. They consider it possible that the cases described from Egypt by Doyle (1924), those from Rhodesia by Turnbull (1926) and the Marico cases may have been instances of infection with the parasite which should be known as Theileria mutans and which may be the cause of serious disease in some places and of little consequence in others. In the case of the Baghdad disease described in this paper, it seems possible in view of the change in character of the parasites after the crisis that Theileria annulata and Theileria mutans are one and the same organism. On the other hand, it has to be admitted that the occurrence of a mixed infection cannot be entirely excluded. CONCLUSIONS. A disease in calves two to three weeks old occurring in Baghdad has been shown to be due to Theileria annulata. Very heavy infections of the peripheral blood occur associated with presence of Koch's blue bodies in the glands and liver.
294 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III There is a mortality rate of about 50 per cent., the acute illness lasting about a week and terminating either in death or recovery by crisis. If recovery occurs, there follows a rapid diminution of the number of parasites in the blood and a change in their characters. At the same time the blood becomes remarkably abnormal in appearance. Perusal of the literature on the subject of theileriasis fails to reveal any parallel to the early infection disclosed by this investigation. REFERENCES Doyle, T. M. (1924). J. Comp. Path. & Therap. xxxvii, 1, 18ABSTRACTS Further studies on the survival time of the bovine tubercle bacillus in soil, soil and dung, in dung and on grass, with experiments on feeding guinea-pigs and calves on grass artificially infected with bovine tubercle bacilli. MADDOCK, E. C. G. (1934). J. Hygiene, 34, 3, 372. The paper is divided into four parts as indicated in the title and also includes a brief account of the technique adopted by the author for the recovery of Myco- bacterium tuberculosis. In the first part evidence is produced to show that changing weather conditions do not materially influence the survival time of the bacillus, for while this was found to reach a maximum limit of 178 days in 1931, it was 152 days in the warmer year of 1932. In the latter case, however, positive results occurred only irregularly after the 61st day, and the retention of infectivity by the organisms seemed to run roughly parallel with the amount of organic matter present. In the second series of experiments three grass plots were infected on 25th April with approximately 120,000, 1,200,000 and 120,000,000 tubercle bacilli per sq. ft. respectively. The result of guinea-pig inoculation with samples taken from each of these plots was positive up to 14, 28 and 49 days respectively. Samples taken during a very hot summer from two grass plots infected three weeks previously with 25,000,000 and 5,000,000 tubercle bacilli per sq. ft. respectively proved non-infective on inoculation into guinea-pigs, but another plot infected on 20th Sep- tember with 7,000,000 bacilli was found infective up to 63 days. The object of the experiments described in the third part was to find out if in- fection could be conveyed in a more natural manner. Eleven batches of guinea-pigs, usually of about twelve each, were allowed access to an infected pasture for 21 conse- cutive days, the interval between the infection of the pasture and the introduction of the guinea-pigs thereon ranging from 1 to 106 days. None of the guinea-pigs con- tracted tuberculosis in this manner, although the grass grazed by them was shown to be infective by subcutaneous inoculation. To ascertain whether the fact that the guinea-pigs in the above experiments were living in the open had anything to do with their resistance to infection, the experi- ment was repeated the following year with a control batch that was fed with cut in- fected grass indoors. The pasture was infected with comparatively heavier doses four times at monthly intervals between June and September and the guinea-pigs of both batches were placed on the infected feed concurrently with the first infection. It was possible to induce tuberculosis in about 50 per cent. of the guinea-pigs of each of the two batches in this manner. It was concluded from the results of the combined experiments that under certain weather conditions, animals, although admitted to pasture within a very short time of its infection, may escape infection with tubercu- losis, but that repeated infection of pasture results in a high incidence of disease in animals grazing on it. (295)
296 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, III The last part deals with a parallel experiment conducted concurrently in calves. Nine calves which had passed the tuberculin test were used, three of which (Group I) were run on infected pasture, three (Group II) were fed indoors on cut infected grass and three remained as controls among the general herd of the Institute. All the three animals of Group I and two of Group II contracted tuberculosis. [V. R. R.] Traitement de la piroplasmosa équine vraie par la gonacrine. [Treatment of true equine piroplasmosis by means of gonacrine]. LOLÉ, G. AND GUILHON, J. (1935). Bull. Acad. Vet. 8 ,172ABSTRACTS. 297 On histological examination the pathogonomic features are the excessive formation of osteoid tissue due to non-calcification of new tissue and the paucity of osteoclasts. This condition (Osteodystrophia malacia) is not the result of de-calcification of fully developed normal bones. It is aetiologically different in different species. In bovines and ovines phosphorus deficiency in grazing pastures (aphosphorosis) is the cause, although it does not seem to affect the horse. It can be controlled by a supplement of phosphates, e.g., bone meal, dicalcium phosphate, sodium phosphate and bran. In dogs Vitamin D. deficiency in the food or failure of the animal's environment to supply sufficient ultra-violet radiation produces true rickets, although this is not the case in grazing ruminants, who get plenty of sunshine which activates ergosterol, a precursor of Vitamin D. present in the skin of animals and various foodstuffs. In goats the condition described as rickets is often complicated with osteodystro- phia fibrosa, and its histo-pathological picture is similar to the one described in the next article under the subject of equines. In the third article, the author describes osteodystrophia fibrosa, " Bran disease ", " Miller's disease " or " big head ", which occurs sporadically amongst horses, especially those under 7 years of age, and engaged in hard or fast work. It is caused by a deficiency of calcium and excess of phosphorus in the diet, e.g., in bran. Excess of phosphorus in some way interferes with calcium metabolism and induces the disease in equines, although this unbalanced ration does not seem to affect bovines. Probably the parathyroids are also concerned in calcium metabolism. The pathognomonic features in this condition are the presence of fibro-cellular and fibrous marrow and increased osteoclastic activity in all the bones. The condition can be easily controlled by attending to the diet. [R. L. K.] G*
298 With deep regret we read the undermentioned ' Obituary Notice ' in the Central Provinces Government Gazette dated the 23rd August 1935 :PUBLICATIONS OF THE IMPERIAL COUNCIL OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH, INDIA 1. Agriculture and Livestock in India. A bi-monthly Journal of Agriculture and Animal Husbandry for the general reader interested in Agriculture or Livestock in India or the Tropics. (Established 1931. Pub- lished in January, March, May, July, September and November. Prepayable subscription Rs. 6 or 9 s. 9 d. per annum inclusive of Indian Postage. Price per part Rs. 2 or 3 s. 6 d. inclusive of Indian Postage.) Volumes I to IV complete are available. 2. The Indian Journal of Agricultural Science. A bi-monthly Scientific Journal of Agriculture and the allied sciences, mainly devoted to the publication of the results of original research and field experiments. (Established 1931. Published in February, April, June, August, October and December. Prepayable subscription Rs. 15 or 24 s. per annum inclusive of Indian postage. Price per part Rs. 3 or 5 s 3d. inclusive of Indian postage.) Volumes I. to IV complete are available. 3. The Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry. A quarterly Journal for the publication of scientific matter relating to the health, nutrition and breeding of livestock. (Established 1931. Published in March, June, September and December. Prepayable subscription Rs. 6 or 9 s. 9 d. inclusive of Indian postage. Price per part Rs. 2 or 3 s. 6 d. inclusive of Indian postage) Volumes I to IV complete are available. 4. Scientific Monographs of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research. NCAG300 5. Miscellaneous Bulletins of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research. NCAGORIGINAL ARTICLES. OBSERVATIONS ON STERILITY IN THE COW IN INDIA, WITH RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ITS CONTROL BY R. L. KAURA, B.V.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., Assistant Serologist, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (With Plates XXVI-XXIX.) (Received for publication on 27th August 1935.) INTRODUCTION Sterility in the female, i.e., the inability to bring forth living young, may be due to the failure of a non-pregnant animal to show 302 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [V, IV hormone secretions and tend to induce a deviation from the normal physiological activities of the female genitalia. Under such circumstances it is no wonder that dairy cows have the worst record for sterility. In this connection Orr and Darling [1932] in a brochure published by the Imperial Bureau of Animal Genetics, state that it would appear that an optimum state of domestication exists in relation to the fertility of animals, and that in the case of the cow the demands made upon it by the factors associated with domestication have outweighed the benefits. Another important factor in relation to sterility is Bang's disease where it exists. Losses to breeders are immense, not only through abortion but also through resultant sterility and a high mortality rate among the young calves. FACILITIES FOR MAKING OBSERVATIONS The condition was mainly investigated and control measures tried at the Government Cattle Farm, Hissar, Punjab, during the period, November 1929 to March 1935, when I had the privilege of working there. This farm maintains a herd of about 7,000 head of one of the finest breeds of Indian cattle, besides sheep, goats and equine stock, and some 5,000 of the cattle were females. Through the ceaseless efforts of the present Superintendent of the Farm, a dairy herd has been evolved from the general herd by careful selective breeding and proper manage- ment and feeding of the stock in order to meet the growing demands of the public. This special herd was of a particular importance in our work in sterility. From the various sub-stations of the Farm, those cows and heifers which were reported to be sterile were collected at the Farm hospital, where they were kept under close observation and a careful examination of the genitalia made. In every case the previous history of the animal was searched out from the office records. Animals showing lesions responsible for sterility of a temporary (curable) nature were suitably treated and restored to breeding usefulness, but those showing lesions causing absolute or permanent sterility were either destroyed and their genital organs carefully examined, or they were sold to butchers on the condition that the diseased genitalia would be made over to the Farm for study when the animals were slaughtered. PHYSIOLOGY OF REPRODUCTION I think it would be well at this stage to describe briefly the physiology of reproduction in the cow, as this would be of help in understanding and describing its pathology. When a heifer reaches sexual maturity, she ovulates and comes into STERILITY IN THE COW IN INDIA AND ITS CONTROL 303 hormone known as 304 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [V, IV I.Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci, & Anim. Husb. Vol. V, Pt. 4. PLATE XXVI [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Photograph showing the internal genital organs of a bovine hermaphrodite "bullock."
STERILITY IN THE COW IN INDIA AND ITS CONTROL 305 (5) Uterus unicornis.306 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, IV (10) Retention cysts in Bartholin's glands.STERILITY IN THE COW IN INDIA AND ITS CONTROL 307 (b) Beta hormone (Progestin).308 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, IV On the other hand, overfeeding, as in show cattle, results in obesity which may be responsible for sterility. It gives rise to irregular lumpy deposits of fat and fatty degeneration and infiltration of the ovaries. Some consider obesity to be the effect of sterility rather than vice versa. The cause may be defective endocrine secretions, probably of the ovary itself or thyroids. The so-called " no lesion " cases of sterility are usually due to a functional cause which may be nutritional or endocrinal. Various generalised infections of the body, especially those of a chronic insidious nature like Johne's disease cause general debility with absence of STERILITY IN THE COW IN INDIA AND ITS CONTROL 309 parturition due to bad hygiene, at coitus through the agency of a bull, through the circulation, by extension from the neighbouring organs and tissues, e.g., the peritoneum, or the infection may have been existing inside the body when a heifer reached puberty, as a result of which she will not hold to the bull. In the latter case according to Williams there is probably a foetal infection which is carried by the circulation to its seat of predilection in the gential organs. The various parts of the cow's genitals being interconnected with a direct passage from the vulva to the ovarian bursa, there is obviously a considerable degree of opportunity for extension of disease processes. The extent and nature of the lesions will naturally depend on the degree and kind of infection and the state of the genital organs. It varies from a simple catarrhal to a muco-purulent, purulent or cystic degeneration of the mucosa of the oviduct, uterus, cervix and vagina. Cystic degeneration in the uterine wall, oviduct, etc., is the result of retention cysts of the mucous glands in the mucosa, the ducts of which have become occluded with the inflammatory exudate. Only the mucosa or in severe cases the muscular and even the serous coats of these organs may be involved in the inflammatory process. These infections, especially of the uterus and Fallopian tubes, may result in cystic degeneration of the Graafian follicle or corpus luteum in the ovary (infection usually occurring from the oviduct or the peritoneum especially when an ovisac is freshly ruptured). These cysts may be single or multiple. Williams [1921] believes metritis to be secondary to ovarian disease and dependent on atony of the genitalia. This is not feasible except in the case of nymphomania. These micro-organisms lead to the production of inflammatory lesions and other destructive changes in the genital tract and bring about sterility in the following ways :310 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, IV (nymphomania) and the animal remains sterile. There is exaggerated sexual desire exhibited by mounting other animals or by standing to be mounted, pro- gressive loss of condition, relaxation of sacrosciatic ligaments which causes a marked depression on either side of the root of the tail which appears elevated, relaxed and flabby condition of the vulva and uterus, dilatation of the cervix uteri and a condition of osteomalacia with danger of fractures (Plate XXIX, Figs. 1 and 2). Quinlan [1929], who kept certain nymphomanic animals under close obser- vation, states that the symptoms of nymphomania disappear after some months, probably when the cysts have destroyed all the ovarian tissue and the ovaries are mere bladders. (v) Cystic degeneration of the corpus luteum.Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. V, Pt. 4. PLATE XXVII Figure 1. Rectal examination of the reproductive organs in a sterile Cow. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Non-pregnantSTERILITY IN THE COW IN INDIA AND ITS CONTROL 311 I. History.312 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [V, IV If pregnancy can be definitely dismissed, the cervix may be secured by means of a pair of cervical forceps (Vulsellum forceps) and retracted towards the vulva with the left hand to facilitate examination per rectum with the right hand. This helps to bring the genital organs within reach if the uterus is in a flabby and atonic (metritic) condition and has gone beyond the brim of the pelvis. The cervix, body and cornua of the uterus can be easily palpated. Normal Fallopian tubes (about 1/8" in diameter) are difficult to palpate, but when diseased, they are easily palpable and may be found diffusedly enlarged or show isolated cystic enlargements. The ovaries are loosley attached and lie, in a non-pregnant case, on the pelvic floor where they can be easily traced and palpated. The broad ligaments of the uterus cannot be felt per rectum, but the middle uterine artery can be felt and its diameter and pulsation are noted in diagnosing early pregnancy. Carefully note the size, tone, consistency, sensitiveness and the contents of the uterus and oviducts. Any other defect like the atrophy of any part or the presence of tumours should be looked for. The presence or absence of cysts or a corpus luteum on the ovaries should also be carefully noted. It is important to differentiate between a cyst, a corpus luteum and a Graafian follicle. A cyst causes irregularity in the STERILITY IN THE COW IN INDIA AND ITS CONTROL 313 Litmus reaction of the vaginal and cervical mucus should be noted. It has been found that some heifers have a pronounced acid reaction in their cervical mucus which is an unhealthy condition and is injurious to spermatozoa. In recent years Stoss and Mai have used forcing of air from the uterus through the Fallopian tubes as a means of diagnosis of salpingitis. The manometer shows 160 m.m. pressure of mercury which gradually sinks in normal tubes but remains constant if the tubes are occluded on account of salpingitis. PROPHYLAXIS AND TREATMENT The aim of the veterinarian and livestock owners should be towards prevention rather than treatment. Treatment should only be applied when the animal may be restored to breeding usefulness without any danger of the condition which induced the sterility being handed on to the offspring. In this connection we must consider the findings of Marshal and Hammond [1926], Wester [1921] and Richter [1919], who have agreed that fertility is here- ditary. In cattle certain families, " shybreeders ", become practically extermi- nated as a result of failure to breed, when other families in the same herds showed normal increase. Possibly indiscriminate in-breeding is also responsible for this condition, to a certain extent. In handling sterility, one should note that the nervous system connects the genital apparatus with the body and this with the outside world. The function of the generative organs is dependant upon normal sympathetic314 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [V, IV (v) Take best hygienic care of the pregnant animals especially during the puerperal period to prevent bacterial infection of the genital tract. Any pathological condition occurring at or after parturition should be suitably treated. The prevention of sterility in a heifer, which has reached breeding age in good sexual health, is pre-eminently a problem of avoiding endometritis. (vi) If several cases of sterility occur on a farm, suspend all breeding opera- tions temporarily and conduct a thorough clinical examination of all the animals. Remove hopelessly sterile animals and sell them to the butcher, whereas, curable cases should be segregated and treated. (vii) Control of Bang's disease.Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. V, Pt. 4. PLATE XXVIII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 1. Vaginal speculum with artificial illumination. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 2. Uterine forceps - correctly applied. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 3. Syringe with a special uterine nozzle attachment. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 4. Double channel uterine catheter. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 5. Cervix dilator. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 6. Cervical dressing forceps. By courtesy of Instituto Superiore di Medicina Veterinaria di Milano (Gerosa and Mirri)
STERILITY IN THE COW IN INDIA AND ITS CONTROL. 315 pessaries or Protargol sticks may be used in cervicitis and vaginitis. Conklin has used sticks made of cocoa butter, animal charcoal and iodoform as absorp- tive and to keep down the bacterial growth. For metritis, flush out the uterus with a warm antiseptic lotion by means of a double channel catheter. If there is a macerated or mummified foetus lying in- side the uterus bring about artificial abortion by dislodging the corpus luteum and inserting a belladonna plug into the cervix which will relax and the expulsion of the uterine contents may occur in about 48 hours. Douching should be conti- nued till the return flow is clear. Then inject 1 to 2 ounces of 5 to 10 per cent Argyrol solution or 1 to 5 per cent mercurochrome solution. Massage the uterus and the ovaries per rectum and rupture any cyst that may be present on the ova- ries. Ovarian and uterine massage stimulates the functional activity of the genital tract, tones up these organs and brings about early repair. Nielsen's iodine treatment gives quite good results and consists of intra- uterine injection of iodine solution into each horn (a hand in the rectum checks its progress), and is left there. It causes an irritant action on the endometrium with a consequent hastening action of uterine involution and repair. In mild cases one injection of 150 to 200 c.c. of 1 per cent solution may effect recovery in about 50 per cent of cases. Wait for a month to judge the efficacy of the first injection and allow service when animal comes in heat. In other cases two or three injections may be required with an interval of one month to effect a cure. In severe cases as " Flour albus " or white flow (purulent metritis) 20 to 25 c.c. of 5 per cent tincture of iodine and for pyometra 50 to 100 c.c. of the same may be injected into each horn. In such cases the cow should not be served after one injection and the treatment should be repeated at one or more week's interval. Rivanol (Bayer) 1 in 1,000 gives more rapid and resulting effects than iodine when the exudate is purulent. Albrechtsen has tried electrolysis treatment with very good results although the procedure is a tedious one. It consists in filling the uterus with copper sul- phate solution, inserting the anode into it and connecting the cathode with the current, the strength of which may be controlled at will. Continue this for 5 minutes in each horn. Fine particles of copper are deposited on the uterine mucosa due to breaking down of the copper sulphate solution. On account of the contraction of the uterine wall occurring due to this treatment, some uneasi- ness is felt by the animal. As a useful adjunct in endometritis, two intramuscular injections of " Con- tramine " in 2 c.c. doses at 6 to 7 days interval may be given. This chemothera- peutic product has a definite bacteriolytic action especially on Brucella abortus Bang. Opperman's yatrin vaccine (a polyvalent sterility vaccine) may be tried in cases of metritis and salpingitis etc.
316 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, IV Salpingitis, if diagnosed definitely, is not worth treating. It is best to fatten the animal for the butcher. The condition may be unilateral but it usually tends to be bilateral. Mild infections may spontaneously improve when the concurrent metritis is suitably treated. When salpingitis is suspected never try to dislodge a persistent corpus luteum as there is danger of infection of the crater from the pavilion of the oviduct. If the condition is unilateral, Williams recommends ovario-salpingectomy. Conklin, who has used Robin's carbon dioxide apparatus to determine the patency of the Fallopian tubes in heifers in which there was no other clinical evidence which might account for sterility, found that in a few cases heifers conceived after passing the gas through the tubes. Ovarian cysts may be ruptured per rectum. If that be not possible, it may be tried per vaginam the walls of which are comparatively stronger and, therefore, more force can be applied. If still no success, which happens when a cyst is deeply situated, then puncture with a trocar per rectum (Plate XXIX, Fig. 4) or per vaginam. These cysts are likely to refill after some time, so the operation may have to be repeated after a few weeks' interval. In cases of only one ovary being involved with a bad cyst or a tumour ovariotomy may be performed. When there is a persistent corpus luteum, it should be dislodged per rectum (Plate XXIX, Fig. 3) or per vaginam. Treat concurrent conditions of the other parts of the genital tract. If there are signs of perioophoritis with adhesions to the surroun- ding tissues or tumours are present in both the ovaries, the case is permanently sterile and is beyond all hope of recovery. In cases of functional sterility, bone-meal, flour and cod-liver oil should be given in addition to a well balanced nutritious corn ration and plenty of green fodder. Exercise is also essential. Turn the animal loose with the bull because cases of " silent heat " which may not be detected by man will probably be detected by the bull and covered. Theelin (Parke Davis & Co.) which is ovarian follicular hormone extract, can be used both as pessaries and injections (5 c.c. twice with four days' interval) along with the administration of Thyroid extract in food. In cases where functional sterility has resulted from disuse atrophy of the uterine mucosa and cotyledons, good results are claimed with wheat germ oil which contains vitamin E. It may be given in doses of 25 c.c. intramuscularly prior to service and at intervals of 6 to 7 days for six weeks afterwards or till con- ception is clinically diagnosed. Corpus luteum extract has been used in bitches to maintain pregnancy but is expensive to use in cattle practice. Grafting of ovaries has been recommended by various authorities, but its ap- plication requires judgment and care. It is more successful in cows which have had calves, but are sterile due to endocrine deficiency and not to any inflammatory condition of the genital tract. In heifers that have never been pregnant and have not shown clinical signs of oestrum and where there is no evidence of ovulation on rectal examination, it is not likely to be of value. The donor should be a heifer
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci & Anim . Husb. Vol. V, Pt. 4. PLATE XXIX [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 1. Ovarian cysts (single and multiple) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 2. Characteristic rump changes in a nympho- manic cow. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 3. Enucleation of corpus luteum per rectum. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 4. Puncture of an ovarian cyst by means of a trocar and cannula per rectum. By courtesy of Instituto Superiore di Medicina Veterinaria di Milano (Gerosa and Mirri.)
STERILITY IN THE COW IN INDIA AND ITS CONTROL. 317 calf of the same breed as the recipient and about 6 to 12 months of age. In youth there is little fibrous tissue in the ovaries because of the few times ovula- tion has occurred. Usually an ovary is grafted on the side corresponding to the one from which it has been obtained. Remove the ovary from the abdomen aseptically, and keep it on a sterile swab as near blood heat as possible. Remove the capsule of the ovary, otherwise anastomosis does not occur when grafted. Divide it into two pieces and aseptically place in " pits " made by removing a piece from the muscles on the neck and the pectoral region. Apply one catgut suture each for the muscle lips and the skin. Sterile cleanliness and asepsis are essential during the operation. Hot saline compresses are applied to the sites of operation to promote blood supply and finally boracic powder is dusted over the wounds. Certain dairy cows come in heat very late after parturition with the result that the dry period is lengthened which is undesirable. To shorten this period " Prolan " has been tried at the Government Cattle Farm, Hissar, with fairly good results. Williams uses Adrenaline chloride and Posterior pituitary extract in cases of nymphomania and claims good results. In cases of balooned vagina or curvature of cervix etc., the use of an artificial inseminator may solve the difficulty. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. It is my pleasant duty to acknowledge my indebtedness to Mr. L. W. Smith, Superintendent, Government Cattle Farm, Hissar, for taking a keen interest and providing all facilities in the prosecution of this work. I am also indebted to Mr. F. Ware, Director of this Institute, for his valuable advice and helpful criticism, in the completion of this paper. REFERENCES. Baker, J. R. (1923). Sterility. N. V. M. A. Ann. Con. York. Beaver, Donald C. (1922). Bacteriology and pathology of sterility in cattle. Minnesota Agr. Expt. St., Tech. Bull. No. 5. Conklin, R. L. (1930). Sterility318 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, IV Hindmarsh, W. L. (1934). Sterility in dairy cows. Aust. Vet. J. 10, pp. 162SULPHUR AND SULPHATE BALANCE EXPERIMENTS WITH SHEEP. BY F. J.WARTH D.Sc., I.A.S., & T. S. KRISHNAN, B.A., Animal Nutrition Section, Bangalore. (Received for publication on 4th July 1935). Early work on rats by Osborne and Mendel, Ackroyd and Hopkins, Daniles and Rich, Gerling, Jones and Finks, Westerman and Rose, Lewis and Lewis and various others has shown that cystine is an essential amino acid which cannot be synthesised by the animal body from other sulphur compounds. With the de- velopment of research on wool production this question came to the forefront again. The cystine content of pasture plants was investigated widely by Osborne, Kozlowski, Sullivan, Aitken, Evans, Chibnall and numerous others, the results still being of a conflicting nature [ Eraser, 1934-35 ] though there is a strong ten- dency to believe that other sources of sulphur may be utilised for this purpose [ King, 1932 ; Rimington and Bekker, 1932 ]. The line of work we have undertaken with sheep is based on earlier experi- ments carried out by one of us [Warth, 1932 ] on cattle in which the sulphur balance was determined. In this work the differentiation of sulphur compounds was restricted to the two broadest classes, organic sulphur and inorganic sulphate. The experiments showed that ingestion of sulphate with food by cattle led to some loss of sulphate and some gain of organic sulphur. The present paper describes similar tests with sheep. PROCEDURE. Two groups of three sheep (the number was later increased to four) were fed the same ration in every respect except that one group received a supplement of sodium sulphate, the other did not. At the end of six months and again at the end of twelve months the groups were reversed with respect to sulphate feeding. There were thus three experimental periods each covering about six months. Dur- ing each period balance experiments were carried out to determine the intake and outgo of sulphur in three forms, namely total sulphur, inorganic sulphate and, by difference, organic sulphur. At the end of each period the animals were shorn and the yield and the sulphur content of the wool determined. (319)
320 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, IV The rationing was based on the use of fodders unusually low in inorganic sul- phate. Thus, the supplement of sulphate brought up the intake to a value cer- tainly no greater than that attainable by feeding a sulphate rich fodder such as Dhub hay without supplement. The animals received a small amount of groundnut cake, half a kilo of fresh Guinea grass to ensure a supply of green grass vitamins and a special sample of Bel- lary hay which was fed ad lib and the daily consumption determined. To avoid complications due to possible mineral deficiency each sheep was also given 2 gms. of calcium phosphate daily. The following figures (Table I) for the sulphur and sulphate content of some fodders show that the material we were able to employ was specially favourable for the work. TABLE. I. Sulphur and sulphate content of some typical fodders. (All forms of sulphur expressed as gms. sulphur per cent). Fodder. Total S. Inorganic SO. Organic S. Bellary hay . . . 0.070 0.038 0.032 Dhub grass . . . 0.632 0.453 0.179 Groundnut cake . . . 0.395 0.037 0.358 Guinea grass . . . 0.127 0.046 0.081 Jouar hay . . . 0.108 0.045 0.063 Paddy straw . . . 0.102 0.042 0.060 Ragi straw . . . 0.151 0.078 0.073 Rhodes grass . . . 0.137 0.057 0.080 It may be mentioned that this work has been made possible largely because we were able to employ a special method for the determination of sulphur. The process is published separately [ Warth & Krishnan, 1935 ]. It should be explained that this sulphur enquiry was superimposed on a simple feeding test with sheep, in which records were made of the food consumption, the live weight fluctuations and the digestibility of the rations. The results of the feeding test are published separately [ Warth & Krishnan, 1935 ], but all the data from it required for computing sulphur balance have been used hero without further reference to details. EXPERIMENTAL. 1. Sulphate balance experiments. The sulphate balance, being somewhat easier to carry out than a full sulphur balance, was determined at frequent intervals throughout one year of intensive study and less frequently during the preceding six months. We have collected
SULPHUR AND SULPHATE BALANCE EXPERIMENTS WITH SHEEP 321 a large number of data. Table II gives typical detailed figures indicating the amounts of sulphate derived from the different ingredients of the ration and show- ing how the sulphate balance is computed, for individuals and for the group. The figures show that all the animals give parallel and similar results and that the group average data are a fair representation of what takes place in each test TABLE II. Sulphate balance experiments. Example of a typical test. (Sulphate expressed as gms. sulphur per day) Sulphate in With Supplement Sheep No. Without Supplement Sheep No. 1 2 3 Average of group A. 4 5 6 Average of group B. Hay . . . 0.377 0.269 0.301 0.316 0.382 0.284 0.274 0.313 Guinea grass . 0.054 0.020 0.050 0.041 0.032 0.042 0.050 0.041 Groundnut cake . 0.020 0.017 0.017 0.018 0.020 0.017 0.017 0.018 Supplement . 0.581 0.581 0.581 0.581 . . . . . . . . Total intake. 1.032 0.887 0.949 0.956 0.434 0.343 0.341 0.373 Fæces . . 0.112 0.073 0.099 0.095 0.078 0.065 0.066 0.070 Digested . . 0.920 0.814 0.850 0.861 0.356 0.278 0.275 0.303 Excreted in urine 0.594 0.481 0.560 0.545 0.176 0.146 0.132 0.151 Balance . . 0.326 0.333 0.290 0.316 0.180 0.132 0.143 0.152 It will be observed that the fæces always contain a small amount of inorganic sulphate. The fæcal sulphate has been determined with the greatest care. Some detailed figures are given later, in Table VI. A reference to this table shows that the fæcal sulphate content is influenced to a determinable extent by the sulphate intake; but a greatly increased intake causes only a small increase in the fæcal sulphate. The same conclusion was reached in the bullock experiment. The D
322 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, IV results of all our sulphate balance experiments are given in the next summarised statement (Table III). TABLE III. Summary of sulphate balance experiments. (Sulphate expressed as gms. sulphur per head per day) Experi- ment No. Ration with sulphate supplement. Same ration without sulphate supplement. Group Intake Outgo Balance Group Intake Outgo Balance 1 . A 0.956 0.640 0.316 B 0.373 0.221 0.152 2 . A 0.907 0.684 0.223 B 0.398 0.295 0.103 3 . A 0.832 0.745 0.087 B 0.280 0.288 SULPHUR AND SULPHATE BALANCE EXPERIMENTS WITH SHEEP. 323 determined by us, is the net result of two different processes, the metabolic production of sulphate and the bacterial conversion to organic sulphur. It should be remarked, that, in the bullock experiments increase of sulphate was never observed even with very low intake of inorganic sulphate. In this respect therefore, cattle seem to be slightly more efficient than sheep. 2. The Total Sulphur Balance. Altogether six determinations were made during the eighteen months of quantitative feeding. In each test individual determinations covering ten days were made with each animal. In the first test there were three animals in each group, in the remaining tests each group consisted of four animals. Indivi- duals did show distinctive features, but for the present we must be satisfied in stating that the individual results, did not differ materially from one another and the group average results represent very satisfactorily the normal course of events in each test. As already explained, both groups received the same basal ration and one group received a supplement of sodium sulphate. In addition to the total sulphur balance the inorganic sulphate balance was determined simultaneously and hence, by difference, the organic sulphur balance was found. The details of a typical total sulphur balance experiment are shown in Table IV. TABLE IV. Details of a typical total sulphur balance experiment. (All forms of sulphur expressed as gms. sulphur per day). Sheep No With Supplement Average of group A. Without Supplement Average of group B. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Intake. Total sulphur in food. 1.378 1.227 1.279 1.435 1.330 0.827 0.800 0.745 0.855 0.807 Total sulphate . 0.887 0.828 0.856 0.918 0.872 0.322 0.324 0.297 0.340 0.321 Organic sulphur. 0.491 0.399 0.423 0.517 0.458 0.505 0.476 0.448 0.515 0.486 Outgo. Total sulphur in urine and fæces. 1.299 1.104 1.213 1.371 1.247 0.757 0.710 0.6 98 0.773 0.735 Total sulphate . 0.721 0.622 0.681 0.734 0.690 0.257 0.230 0.220 0.271 0.245 Organic sulphur . 0.578 0.482 0.532 0.637 0.557 0.500 0.480 0.478 0.502 0.490 Balance. Loss of Total sulphur. 0.079 0.123 0.066 0.064 0.083 0.070 0.090 0.047 0.082 0.072 Loss of total sul- phate. 0.166 0.206 0.175 0.184 0.182 0.065 0.094 0.077 0.069 0.076 Gain of organic sulphur. 0.087 0.083 0.109 0.120 0.099 324 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, IV The results of the full work, condensed to show group average data only, are given in Table V. TABLE V Total sulphur balance. (All forms of sulphur expressed in gms. sulphur per day per head) Group. Experiment No. Total sulphur Sulphate sulphur Organic sulphur Sulphur content in Intake Balance Intake Balance Intake Balance Live- weight increase Wool With Supple- ment. A. { 1 1.427 SULPHUR AND SULPHATE BALANCE EXPERIMENTS WITH SHEEP. 325 of these opposite processes has been measured. The actual activity of organic sulphur production was therefore greater than the figures show. Secondly, the gain recorded does not include organic sulphur stored in wool and in the live- weight increase. The actual gain is therefore greater than the figures given, by this amount. The sulphur storage in wool and live-weight increase attained in our experiment is shown separately in Table V. The figures for wool are accurate determinations based on wool yields and analyses; the figures for live-weight increase are based on estimates from the carefully studied live-weight fluctuations. The gain of organic sulphur may be seen in another way from our figures, for, feeding of inorganic sulphate has brought about an increase of organic sul- phur both in the faeces and in the urine as the following data in Tables VI and VII show. TABLE VI. Total sulphur and sulphate in fæces. (All expressed as gms. sulphur in 100 gms. fæces) Experiment No. Sulphate Total sulphur With supplement Without supplement With supplement Without supplement 1 . 0.025 0.018 0.142 0.125 2 . 0.026 0.019 0.155 0.129 3 . 0.022 0.013 . . . . 4 . 0.023 0.019 . . . . 5 . 0.023 0.016 0.145 0.132 6 . 0.022 0.017 . . . . 7 . 0.022 0.017 . . . . 8 . 0.021 0.017 0.131 0.130 9 . 0.019 0.015 . . . . 10 . 0.019 0.015 0.130 0.114 11 . 0.018 0.014 . . . . 12 . 0.019 0.012 0.135 0.107 Average 0.022 0.016 0.140 0.123
326 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, IV TABLE VISULPHUR AND SULPHATE BALANCE EXPERIMENTS WITH SHEEP. 327 4. The Loss of Total Sulphur. The loss of total sulphur shown in Table V does not take account of sulphur stored in the wool and the live-weight increase. The loss is not as great as the figures of Table V suggest. Allowances which have to be made for the stored sul- phur are shown in Table VIII TABLE VIII. Loss of total sulphur. (In gms. per day.) Intake Balance (loss) Accounted for in wool & live- weight increase Unaccounted (loss) With supplement . . . 1.386 0.179 0.070 0.109 Without supplement. . . 0.809 0.085 0.078 0.007 TABLE IX. Gain of organic sulphur. Sulphate balance Gain of organic sulphur Intake Balance (loss) Recorded in Table V Contained in wool and live- weight increase Total. Un- accounted (loss) With Supple- ment. 0.916 0.221 0.042 0.070 0.112 0.109 Without supple- ment. 0.337 0.064 328 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [V, IV 5. Total Gain of Organic Sulphur It was noted, in discussing the results of Table V, that the gain of organic sulphur there recorded was not the total gain and should be increased by the amount of sulphur stored in the wool and the live-weight increase. The total gain of organic sulphur thus obtained is shown in Table IX. The data of this table have to be considered from several points of view. In the first place, to complete the consideration of the loss of total sulphur discussed above, it is evident now that this loss of sulphur falls on the inorganic sulphate of the ration. The loss of sulphate, which we know occurs, is accounted for, according to Table IX, partly, by a conversion to organic sulphur, which is not a true loss of sulphur but only a conversion to another form. The re- maining loss is not accounted for. This is a true loss which must take place by the formation and voiding of gaseous sulphur compounds. The table shows that both the conversion into organic sulphur and the true loss due to the formation of volatile sulphur compounds are greatly increased by increasing the sulphate in the ration. The second point of considerable interest is that the unsupplemented ration, very low in sulphate content, which in Table V gave an apparent loss of organic sulphur, now, when account is taken of the sulphur stored in wool and live-weight increase, shows that even with this low sulphate intake, there was a net con- version of some sulphate to organic sulphur, that, in fact, the organic sulphur balance of the animal on this ration was only maintained by conversion of some sulphate to organic sulphur. Thirdly, it may be noticed that the sulphur stored in wool and live-weight increase was actually more without a supplement than with a supplement. There is, however, no great significance in such a com- parison. The capacities of the animals were not known when they were grouped. It happened that one group produced more wool and live-weight increase and by chance this group spent more time on the unsupplemented ration. With regard to the organic sulphur available for wool production, the figures are as follows :SULPHUR AND SULPHATE BALANCE EXPERIMENTS WITH SHEEP 329 With our animals, therefore, a shortage of organic sulphur for wool produc- tion should not occur. Under the circumstances it would be useless to look for any marked effect which organic sulphur formed by conversion of sulphate might produce. 6. Sulphides in Faeces We have shown in Table VI that a sulphate supplement to a ration produces an increase of organic sulphur in the faeces ; but by the method of analysis em- ployed sulphides would be determined as organic sulphur. Hence it became necessary to determine sulphides in faeces. Briefly, the method adopted for this determination is as follows :330 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, IV completely conjugated with sulphate. Hence, when the food was deficient in sulphate the urine did not show a trace of free sulphate ; all was in the ethereal form. Clearly, the sulphate thus utilised is not available for any other purpose. Other phenolic bodies were found to have a decided tendency to combine with sulphate, too, but could only do so when excess of sulphate was present. Later these facts were used for estimating phenols in urine [Warth and Das Gupta, 1932 ]. Similar results have now been obtained by us in our sheep experiments. The urines from our unsupplemented ration never showed a trace of free sulphate, all was present in the ethereal form and the amount may be taken to represent the conjugation of para-cresol only. The urines from the corresponding supple- mented ration always contained a large amount of free sulphate and an increased amount of ethereal sulphate, the increase, as indicated above, being due to con- jugation of other phenols. The results obtained by us with sheep are shown in Table XI in which each figure is a group average. In each test the two groups had identical food, while one group received a sulphate supplement in addition. The figures show that a very large proportion of sulphur in the food is employed for the detoxication of the phenols produced during metabolism. TABLE XII Urinary ethereal sulphate per 1,000 gms. dry matter of food consumed, as gms. sulphur Experiment No. Without Supplement With Supplement 1 . . . . . . . . . 0.208 0.419 2 . . . . . . . . . 0.305 0.514 3 . . . . . . . . . 0.338 0.567 4 . . . . . . . . . 0.307 0.466 5 . . . . . . . . . 0.393 0.454 6 . . . . . . . . . 0.345 0.460 7 . . . . . . . . . 0.348 0.484 8 . . . . . . . . . 0.390 0.429 The supplement was fed to group A in the first three tests and to group B in the remaining ones. The fodders seem to have produced phenols somewhat more uniformly during the five later tests.
SULPHUR AND SULPHATE BALANCE EXPERIMENTS WITH SHEEP 331 SUMMARY Sulphur and sulphate balance experiments have been carried out with sheep. It was found that in the process of alimentation there is always a loss of total sulphur and sulphate. When the sulphate content of the ration is low the loss of total sulphur is very small. It was possible in such cases to account for almost all the ingested sulphur. On the other hand, when the amount of sulphate in the ration is considerable a large real loss of sulphur occurs, indicating that volatile sulphur compounds (H2S, etc.), are formed. In contrast to the losses of total sulphur and sulphate sulphur it was found that a gain of organic sulphur occurs. This organic sulphur is formed from sulphate and the amount produced increases with the amount of sulphate ingested. That this increment of organic sulphur plays a part in the metabolism of the animal is indicated by the fact that the organic sulphur content of the urine is increased by ingestion of inorganic sulphate. These results confirm and considerably amplify the earlier experiments with bullocks. REFERENCES Fraser, A. H. H. (1934-35). Nutr. Abs. & Revs., 4, 9. King, A. T. (1932). Nature, 129, 938. Rimington, C. & Bekker, J. G. (1932). Nature, 129, 687. Warth, F. J. (1932). Ind. Jour. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., 2, 225. Warth, F. J. & Das Gupta, N. C. (1932). Ind. Jour. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb, .,2, 281. Warth, F. J. & Krishnan, T. S. (1935). Ind. Jour. Vet. Sci. &Anim. Husb., 5, 210. THE ETIOLOGY OF HUMP SORE IN CATTLE : A PRELIMINARY REPORT BY P. G. PANDE, M.SC., M.R.C.V.S., Veterinary Investigation Officer, Gauhati, Assam. (With plates XXX and XXXI) (Received for publication on 25th March 1935.) INTRODUCTION Of the chronic diseases of the bovine skin in India, hump sore is one that has for many years baffled the attempts of field veterinary workers to elucidate its cause and provide an efficient method of treatment. It is only during recent years, however, that the skin affections of animals have received attention from veterinary research workers in India, and although such conditions are not acutely fatal, it has been pointed out by Kerr [1933] that in cattle they are responsible for causing loss of condition and retarding growth and development. In Assam, where stunted growth and general loss of condition are common features of cattle, hump sore has been recognised as one of the factors responsible for this state of affairs. Since the inception of the Civil Veterinary Department in Assam in 1906, hump sore in cattle had been looked upon as a disease of unknown etiology, and as one not amenable to any form of treatment. With the approval of the Superin- tendent, Civil Veterinary Department, Assam, therefore, an investigation on this disease was commenced in the early part of November 1933 with a view to ascer- tain its etiology and evolve a rational method of treatment. For about a month the investigation was confined to the headquarters of the department at Gauhati, where a study of the lesions in various stages of development together with a routine examination of smears obtained from them was made the primary consi- deration. Animals received at the headquarters hospital for treatment were utilised in this investigation, though special arrangements were also made with the local municipal authorities and the Manager, Government Cattle Breeding Farm, Khanapara, with a view to obtain a large number of affected animals for the study of the lesions. This preliminary report embodies the results of clinical (332)
ETIOLOGY OF HUMP SORE IN CATTLE 333 field work and examination of smear preparations only, since time and facilities for a more extensive investigation were not available at this stage. The important results which have been obtained from this investigation are, however, thought fit for publication, while an account of the more thorough work, which is now in progress, will be made the subject of a further publication. The main object in publishing this preliminary report is to draw the attention of the profession in this country to a skin disease of cattle in Assam and Bengal, which is caused by a species of Filaria, so that efforts may be made by clinicians in the field to ascertain whether such a form of skin disease, or one closely allied to it, and caused by similar parasites exists in other provinces. DESCRIPTION OF THE DISEASE It is a skin disease appearing in the form of a sore generally localised in or about the region of the hump. In rare cases the lesions are found situated at the yoke place, flat of the neck, and over the region in front of the anterior margin of the scapula. No acute systematic disturbance has been observed in animals having lesions of hump sore, but the condition is known to assume most dis- tressing features at times, due to continuous attacks of flies which deposit their eggs on the sores and set up a condition of myiasis. The condition does not exist throughout Assam province, but is peculiar to plains cattle, in which the incidence is so high that one engaged in professional work would not fail to find the lesion in almost every bovine that comes to his notice. In the majority of cases the quiescent lesion of winter assumes activity during the rains and the condition per- sists throughout the life of the animal. The disease does not occur in hill cattle, and it has been observed on several occasions that affected cattle, when taken from the plains to a hilly tract, develop freedom from the disease without any treatment. The lesion has been observed to arise in the form of multiple shotty infiltra- tions in the dermis of the hump. They cause pruritis, the animal rubs the part vehemently against a tree trunk or a wall with the result that they break up and coalesce to involve a bigger area of the skin. The lesion becomes ulcerative by repeated acts of rubbing, and this constitutes the first observable form of the dis- ease. All present forms of treatment being ineffective during the entire course of the disease, the lesion progresses with the result that a circular area of skin of varying dimensions assumes the form of a sore. Three types of lesions have been recognised depending upon the time of the year and the stage of development. They are as follows :334 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [V, IV are found on young animals, their ages varying from 12 to 18 months. As a result of pruritis, initial lesions may show excoriation and loss of hair, and this is followed by an exudation of lymph-like fluid which dries up, forming a crust on the surface. Those initial lesions, which were not associated with pruritis, were found sur- mounted with hair and a debris of exfoliated epithelium. Quiescent Lesion.ETIOLOGY OF HUMP SORE IN CATTLE. 335 etiology and " peculiar to bovines and rarely to buffaloes. It appears as a warty growth on the neck (yoke place), sides of the hump, fetlock, back and elsewhere. After an inflamed or contused skin due to an accidental or intentional violence there appears upon an unbroken contusion or contused wound, some wart-like growth very recurrent, baffling all known treatments, even thermocautery or actual cautery without any appreciable constitutional derangement. The growth (naked eye, macroscopic appearance) almost gives the picture of an epithelioma ". From the above quoted description of " Calcutta Sore " it appears probable that Dey was referring to more than one diseased condition, including trauma produced by the goading instrument commonly used for cart-bullocks and buffaloes. INVESTIGATION At the commencement of the investigation, attention was devoted to the mic- roscopical examination of smears and crusts obtained from the lesions. Although bacteriological examination of the lesions was not made, it appeared from the character of the lesions that micro-organisms were not likely to be involved in this disease. On perusal of the available literature, it appeared that the lesion of hump sore bore a certain resemblance to equine bursati on the one hand, and to Oriental Sore of man and domesticated carnivores on the other. Reference was available in an article on bursati by Datta [1933], regarding the occurrence of bovine bursati in Egypt, and it appeared reasonable to suspect, therefore, that helminthic parasites might be held responsible for producing the lesion of hump sore, and that the statement by Lingard [1905] that bursati occurs in bovines was not without foundation. Portions of affected skin for histological examination could not be obtained in the beginning and it was, therefore, proposed to examine the tissue for helminthic parasites when opportunity occurred and materials were available for the purpose. Examination of smears for the presence of helminths or leishmania bodies continued at Gauhati for some days, but the results were so far inconclusive (protocol No. 2). In the month of November, 1933, the writer came across all the three types of lesions from which smears were examined with negative results. In view of no definite findings, it was resolved to carry out differential count of leucocytes in the blood smears of all the three types of lesions. While the leucocytes in the smears from initial lesions showed no marked variation from a normal count, the smears from an active lesion showed a preponderance of eosinophiles, and those from a quiescent one showed a large number of lymphocytes (protocol No. 1). An opportunity was availed of by the writer to make an extensive investiga- tion of this disease in December, 1933, in the rural areas of Tezpur and Sootia, where the incidence of the disease was reported to be very high. The animals, which were all of local breed, were stunted in growth and degenerate in health.
336 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [V, IV By this time of the year no active lesions were to be seen, and so the investigation was confined to quiescent and initial lesions only. On the 21st December, 1933, the writer succeeded in finding microfilariae in a quiescent lesion in a cow at Tezpur, and after that time these parasites were constantly observed in smears prepared from a large number of cases in the same district. It is to be stated that the microfilariae could not be detected in smears prepared from initial lesions, though a sufficient number of them were examined in the course of the investiga- tion. In making smears for microscopical examination at Tezpur the procedure was to currette away the surface of the sore at a selected spot, and collect tissue materials from its deeper part. The failure to observe the parasite at Gauhati in the beginning was due to the fact that smears from the superficial part of the sore were prepared for examination, while the parasites were situated in the deeper structures of the sore. By following the technique adopted at Tezpur the writer has subsequently been able to observe the parasites in all cases of the disease with quiescent lesions. An opportunity for collecting pieces of diseased tissue was availed of during the post-mortem examination of a bullock at the Government Cattle Breeding Farm, Khanapara, Gauhati. Histological examination of the tissue revealed the presence of adult worms in sections prepared from it. The parasite was found lying in the papillary portions of the corium immediately underneath the rete malpighi. At a later stage of the investigation, attempts were made to recover live parasites from the lesions, but only a few of them were recovered. On examination they were found to possess certain affinities with sub-family Setarinae of the family Filariidae, but the exact identity of the parasites could not be determined due to lack of a sufficiently large number of specimens for examination. In July, 1934, when active lesions were available for examination, the writer was able to isolate microfilariae from these also. Though adult worms have been isolated from a comparatively few cases of the disease, microfilariae have been observed in 100 per cent. of the cases with advanced lesions. So far the disease has been investigated in the districts of Kamrup, Darang, Sylhet, Cachar and Sibsagar, and in affected areas of all the districts the disease was found always associated with microfilariae in the lesions. Smears prepared from all the cases were stained with Leishman's stain which brought out the morphological details of the parasites quite clearly. The granular body and the empty spaces which are the essential features of the microfilariae were clearly observed (Plate XXXI). In smears,embryonated ova (Plate XXX) were found in groups of 4 to any number, the group being embedded in a cellular matrix composed of plasma cells and lym- phocytes generally, though eosinophiles have also been observed. In dehaemoglo- binised smears, however, the microfilariae were found free (Plate XXXI). The microfilariae showed no motility when observed in wet preparations made of blood mixed with tissue scrapings.
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. V, Pt. 4. PLATE XXX [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Microfilariae in shell. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG 2. Microfialria in dehaemo-globinised smear.
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. V, Pt. 4. PLATE XXXI [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Showing quiescent lesion of hump sore. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Showing active lesion of hump sore.
ETIOLOGY OF HUMP SORE IN CATTLE. 337 At the headquarters at Gauhati twenty cases of the disease were examined within a period of 9 days and 76 smears in all were prepared for microscopical examination. A total of 110 cases of the disease distributed over five districts of the province have been investigated since the discovery of the parasite in a case at Tezpur and the results are given in protocol No. 3. CONCLUSIONS 1. Hump sore of cattle in Assam is a very common affection, the rate of infec- tion being 90 per cent. It is not known to exist in the hill cattle of Assam. Lesions of the disease have also been observed in the cattle of Bengal, Bihar and Orissa. 2. The lesion of the disease presents a sore-like appearance, and is generally noticed on or near the hump. The chief symptom is that of pruritis which is very marked in animals having an active lesion during the monsoon. 3. The description of " Calcutta Sore ", which has been described as affecting cattle in Bengal, does not correspond to that of hump sore. It is likely that under this title a variety of skin affections of cattle, with which hump sore has been confused, have been included. 4. It is a filarial disease, the microfilariae as well as adult worms having been isolated from the lesions. ACKNOWLEDGMENT My thanks are due to Mr. W. Taylor, M.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., Officiating Director, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, for his confirmatory opinion on my findings ; to Colonel A. Olver, C.B., C.M.G., F.R.C.V.S., Animal Husbandry Expert to the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research, for giving encouragement in publishing this preliminary report; and to the Director, School of Tropical Medicine Calcutta, for affording facilities in the preparation of photomicrographs. REFERENCES Datta, S. C. A. (1933). Ind. J. Vet. Sc. Anim. Husb. 3, 217-236. Dey, Debakar, Rai Sahib. (1928). Ind. Vet. J. 4, No. 4. Kerr, P. J. (1933). Proceedings of the First Meeting of the Animal Husbandry Wing of the Board of Agriculture and Animal Husbandry, 173-174. Lingard, A. (1905). Observations of Filaria Embryos found in general circulation in Equidae and Bovidae, Fasciculus 1, Bursati Ldn. F
338 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, IV PROTOCOL No. 1. Showing the results of differential count of leucocytes from different types of lesions of Hump Sore in cattle. Serial number of cases Serial number of smears Neutro- philes Eosino- philes Baso- philes Mono- cytes Lympho- cytes Remarks Initial lesions 14 61 55.0 4.0 0.46 4.54 36.0 Show no variation from the normal count. 62 56.4 5.2 0.4 4.5 33.5 16 67 52.5 5.25 0.5 5.5 36.25 68 54.0 6.0 0.45 5.0 34.55 Quiescent lesion 1 11 20.2 7.3 0.8 3.6 68.1 Show preponder- ance of lympho- cytes. 12 25.4 10.0 0.4 2.0 62.2 13 21.02 8.9 0.56 1.60 67.92 14 23.50 10.2 1.0 2.0 63.3 15 10.1 5.0 2.6 5.2 76.1 16 24.2 13.5 2.3 4.8 56.2 17 12.0 20.0 0.5 3.5 64.0 18 12.25 16.8 0.8 1.1 69.05 19 20.5 13.0 0.5 2.0 64.0 20 18.0 15.0 2.0 2.5 62.5 2 26 20.0 15.5 1.5 3.0 60.0 27 15.0 19.5 2.0 4.5 59.0 28 22.5 16.0 0.5 3.0 58.0 29 14.5 15.05 2.8 1.0 66.65 30 15.05 20.25 2.0 3.5 59.20 Active lesion 3 36 25.5 38.0 0.5 2.0 34.0 Show preponder- ance of eosino- philes. 37 20.0 40.5 1.0 3.0 35.5 38 23.5 35.05 1.2 2.5 37.75 39 25.0 39.55 0.5 2.55 32.40 40 26.5 34.0 1.5 2.0 36.0
ETIOLOGY OF HUMP SORE IN CATTLE. 339 PROTOCOL No. 2. Showing the result of preliminary examination of materials obtained from lesions of Hump Sore of cattle at Gauhati hospital. Serial number of cases Serial number of slides Date and year Types of lesions from which materials were obtained Nature of the materials obtained for examination Result of microscopical examination Remarks 1 1-10 10-11-1933 A quiescent lesion . Peripheral crust emulsified in saline. Epithelial debris, dirt and hair. Leishman's stain was used in staining all the smears. 11-20 10-11-1933 Ditto . Puncture blood smears. Theileria mutant. 2 21-25 11-11-1933 A quiescent lesion . Smears from surface scraping. Spores of fungi, dirt and cocci. 26-30 11-11-1933 Ditto . Puncture blood smears. Thelieria mutant. 3 31-35 12-11-1933 An active lesion . Smears from surface scraping. Cocci and saprophytic fungi. 36-40 12-11-1933 Ditto . Puncture blood smears. Theileria mutant. 4 41-42 13-11-1933 All quiescent lesions Puncture blood smears. Nothing unusual. 5 43-44 6 45-46 7 47-48 8 49-50 9 51-52 14-11-1933 All quiescent lesions Peripheral crust emulsified in saline. Nothing unusual. 10 53-54 11 55-56 12 57-58 13 59-60 15-11-1933 An active lesion . Tissue smears from the surface of the sore. Fibroblasts and fibrin filaments, and eosinophiles in fair number. 14 61-62 16-11-1933 An Initial lesion . Smears from tissue scraping. Fibroblasts and cocci. 63-64 16-11-1933 Ditto . Puncture blood smears. Theileria mutans. 15 65-66 17-11-1933 An active lesion . Puncture blood smears. Nothing unusual. 16 67-68 17-11-1933 An initial lesion . Puncture blood smears. Nothing unusual. 17 69-70 18-11-1933 All quiescent lesions Tissue smears from the surface of the sore. Fibrin filaments and fibroblasts. 18 71-72 19 73-74 20 75-76
340 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, IV PROTOCOL No. 3. Showing the results of smear examination of the lesions of Hump Sore in five districts of the province. Serial number of cases Date and year Types of the lesions examined Results of micro- scopical examin- ation Remarks Tezpur (Darang) 1 21-12-1933 A quiescent lesion Microfilariae 2-14 25-12-1933 All quiescent lesions . Microfilariae 15-20 29-12-1933 All initial lesions Microfilariae not seen Sootia (Darang) 21-25 2-1-1934 All quiescent lesions . Microfilariae 26-31 5-1-1934 All quiescent lesions . Microfilariae 32-37 10-1-1934 All quiescent lesions . Microfilariae 38-40 11-1-1934 All initial lesions Microfilariae not seen Gauhati (Kamrup) 41-42 14-1-1934 Quiescent lesions . Microfilariae 43-45 15-1-1934 Quiescent lesions . Microfilariae 46-49 16-1-1934 Quiescent lesions . Microfilariae 50-52 18-1-1934 Quiescent lesions . Microfilariae 53-55 15-3-1934 Quiescent lesions . Microfilariae . One bullock being a subject of Johne's disease was slaughtered, and histological examination of the skin showed adult worm in section.
ETIOLOGY OF HUMP SORE IN CATTLE. 341 PROTOCOL No. 3342 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, IV PROTOCOL No. 3SOME DIGESTIBILITY TRIALS ON INDIAN FEEDING STUFFS, PART IX. AMERICAN COTTON SEEDS II. (1 F AND 43 F) BY P. E. LANDER, M.A., D.SC., F.I.C., I.A.S., Agricultural Chemist to Government, Punjab, Lyallpur AND PANDIT LAL CHAND DHARMANI, L.AG., B.SC. (AGRI.), Agricultural College, Lyallpur (Received for publication on the 18th September 1935.) In an earlier publication [Lander and Dharmani, 1929] of this series an account was given of the feeding values of certain American and Desi cotton seeds as determined by digestibility trials at Lyallpur, using oat hay as a basal ration. One of the objects of that investigation was to ascertain how far the prevailing prejudice against American cotton seed as a feeding material on account of adhering lint held good. It was shown that this prejudice could not be substan- tiated. Since this paper was written, certain new cottons have been produced, of which 1 F and 43 F appear to be the best from the point of view of cotton pro- duction. The seeds of these two cottons are also fuzzy, and it might be expected that they would meet with the same prejudice as the other American seed men- tioned above. It was therefore decided to submit the seed of these two types to chemical analysis and feeding trials in order to obtain data comparable with the earlier data obtained in 1928 on American (289 F, 285 F and 4 F) and Desi cotton seeds. It might be mentioned that from their appearance the seeds of 1 F and 43 F appear to possess more adhering lint than the other American varieties. This is not necessarily so, however, as will be seen from the following statement which shows the weight of lint per 100 parts of each of the seeds in question. Cotton seed Lint percentage 289 F . . . . . . . . . 14.74 4 F . . . . . . . . . 5.00 1 F . . . . . . . . . 10.46 43 F . . . . . . . . . 14.52 Desi (Mollisoni) . . . . . . . . . 7.71 (343)
344 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [V, IV The trials with 1 F and 43 F were conducted during the first 3 months of 1935, using oat hay grown at Risalewala near Lyallpur as a basal ration. Six heifers in two groups of three were used in these trials. One pound of the cotton seed was fed per day to each animal, but two of the animals on 1 F seed received 2 lbs. per day in order to see if doubling the quantity of cotton seed fed produced any marked differences in the digestibility figures. There was no appreciable difference to record. The oat hay was itself a maintenance ration for these heifers taking moderate exercise, and its chemical composition as compared with the oat hay fed in the 1928 trials is shown in table 1. It will be noted that, although there are certain small differences in some of the constituents, these are not wide, and the two hays were approximately equal in nutritive value. The general procedure and technique followed was the same as described in earlier publication [Lander and Dharmani, 1929] of the series and we need only consider the data obtained. Table I shows the complete chemical and mineral analyses of 1 F and 43 F cotton seeds and for the sake of comparison corresponding data for the other cotton seeds already investigated are also shown. It will be seen that the two types of seed are very rich in phosphates and calcium but that the calcium/ phosphate ratio is very wide, the optimum ratio in a feed being approximately 1.0 to 0.8. This unbalanced calcium/phosphate ratio is common to all cotton seeds and a factor which must be taken into consideration in computing rations for young growing animals or for milch cows. There are no other features among the new analytical data of sufficiently striking a nature to need comment. Table II shows the digestibility data obtained from the new American seeds together with the corresponding figures of the older seed for comparison. The striking feature brought out in this table is the high digestibility of the protein of the new seeds as compared with the old. This finds a reflection in table III in which are set forth the starch equivalents and digestible protein in 100 lbs. of the seed together with the albuminoid ratios of all the cotton seeds investi- gated. The first two of these factors in the case of 1 F and 43 F are conspicuously higher than in the case of the older seed. These trials lead one to the conclusion that the new cotton seeds 1 F and 43 F contain a protein content as high as, if not higher than, the old seeds and that the protein is very highly digestible and from this point of view the seeds con- stitute a highly nutritious ration ; any fear or prejudice on the part of zamindars that their fuzzyness would prove deleterious to animals can therefore be dis- missed, as no ill effects were noticed in the animals during the six weeks the trials lasted. REFERENCE Lander P. E. & Lal Chand Dharmani (1929). Mem. Dept. Agri. India, Chem. Ser. 10, 6.
DIGESTIBILITY TRIALS ON INDIAN FEEDING STUFFS 345 TABLE I Chemical composition Name of the feed Per cent on feed as such Per cent on oven dried feed Moisture Dry matter Ash Fat Fibre Protein Nitrogen free extract Ash Fat Fibre Protein Nitrogen free extract 1935 Oat hay . . 8.30 91.70 8.54 2.22 31.76 4.44 44.74 9.31 2.42 34.64 4.84 48.79 1 F American cot- ton seed. 12.17 87.83 3.82 20.19 22.07 16.00 25.75 4.35 22.99 25.13 18.22 29.31 43 F American cot- ton seed. 10.50 89.50 3.66 17.70 25.46 15.56 27.12 4.09 19.78 28.44 17.38 30.31 1928 Oat hay . . 4.00 96.00 6.94 1.81 33.98 5.00 48.27 7.23 1.89 35.40 5.21 50.27 285 F American cotton seed. 4.42 95.58 4.01 18.76 25.96 18.13 28.72 4.20 19.63 27.16 18.97 30.04 289 F American cotton seed. 6.33 93.67 4.95 18.77 26.20 18.13 25.62 5.29 20.04 27.97 19.36 27.34 4 F American cotton seed. 6.71 93.29 4.63 20.73 20.96 17.50 29.47 4.96 22.23 22.47 18.76 31.58 Desi cotton seed 6.78 93.22 4.73 17.64 21.67 14.38 34.80 5.08 18.92 23.25 15.43 37.32
346 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [V, IV TABLE IDIGESTIBILITY TRIALS ON INDIAN FEEDING STUFFS 347 TABLE II Digestibility factors. Name or number of the animal Ration Oat hay eaten perday lbs. Cotton seed eaten per day lbs. Digestibility coefficients of the feed Digestible nutrients per 100 lbs. of the feed Dry matter Ash Fat Fibre Protein Nitrogen free extract Dry matter Ash Fat Fibre Protein Nitrogen free extract 1935 169 Oat hay alone (Basal ration for 1 F and 43 F). 12.4 ... 63.75 40.64 72.52 68.05 50.90 65.96 58.46 3.47 1.61 21.61 2.26 29.51 171 Do. 12.5 ... 62.72 42.15 75.68 66.50 45.05 65.07 57.52 3.60 1.68 21.12 2.00 29.12 G 1 Do. 11.3 ... 66.00 45.55 75.68 70.22 51.81 67.84 60.52 3.89 1.68 22.30 2.30 30.35 166 Do. 14.0 ... 56.01 43.44 73.88 57.12 43.47 57.98 51.36 3.71 1.64 18.14 1.93 25.94 G 2 Do. 13.2 ... 63.20 48.83 78.38 66.78 52.93 63.68 57.96 4.17 1.74 21.21 2.35 28.49 S 1 Do. 9.5 ... 62.91 43.09 80.63 65.96 50.22 64.71 57.69 3.68 1.79 20.95 2.23 28.95 166 1 F American cotton seed (With oat hay). 10.7 2.0 81.42 65.45 94.12 83.82 78.13 73.78 71.50 2.50 19.00 18.50 15.50 19.00 G 2 Do. 12.6 2.0 79.14 52.36 91.64 79.30 84.38 69.90 69.50 2.00 18.50 17.50 13.50 18.00 S 1 Do. . 9.6 1.0 77.44 78.54 89.16 58.91 87.50 77.66 68.00 3.00 18.00 13.00 14.00 20.00 169 43 F American cotton seed (With oat hay). 11.9 1.0 88.88 75.00. 94.45 88.00 87.50 88.88 80.00 3.00 17.00 22.00 14.00 24.00 171 Do. . 11.7 1.0 84.44 75.00 88.88 80.00 93.75 81.48 76.00 3.00 16.00 20.00 15.00 22.00 G 1 Do. . 1928 12.1 1.0 86.66 75.00 88.88 80.00 81.25 92.60 78.00 3.00 16.00 20.00 13.00 25.00 115 Oat hay alone . 8.6 ... 61.62 25.00 68.74 64.38 46.51 67.46 59.15 1.74 1.24 21.88 2.33 31.96 116 Do. . 10.9 ... 63.38 27.63 75.00 67.01 47.27 67.30 60.84 1.92 1.36 22.77 2.36 32.43 117 Do. . 9.2 ... 59.68 23.44 70.59 64.54 43.47 62.61 57.29 1.63 1.28 21.93 2.17 30.28 120 Do. . 7.6 ... 57.80 24.53 71.42 61.23 39.47 61.30 55.49 1.70 1.29 28.80 1.97 29.73 115 285 F American cotton seed (Basal ration oat hay). 8.1 3.0 59.58 50.00 94.64 53.84 61.10 63.03 56.95 2.01 17.75 13.98 11.08 18.10
348 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [V, IV TABLE IIDIGESTIBILITY TEIALS ON INDIAN FEEDING STUFFS 349 TABLE III Feeding value of the cotton seeds per 100 lbs. Name of the seed Per 100 lbs. of the seed Albuminoid ratio 1: Starch equivalents. Digestible protein lbs. 1935 1 F . . . . . . . 81.10 13.33 5.9 43 F . . . . . . . 85.95 14.00 6.2 1928 285 F . . . . . . . 77.95 12.23 6.0 289 F . . . . . . . 68.25 11.50 5.6 4F . . . . . . . 62.85 10.67 5.5 Desi . . . . . . . 69.57 8.00 8.6
SOME OBSERVATIONS ON "CIRCLING" DISEASE OF SHEEP IN HYDERABAD STATE. BY M. R. MAHAJAN, M.R.C.V.S., Veterinary Investigation Officer, H. E. H. the Nizam's Dominions, Hyderabad. (With plates XXXII and XXXIII.) (Received for publication on 6th July 1935.) The disease occurs in the Mahbubnagar district and the local name of the disease is ' Tirgudu Potrogam' but ' Potrogam' is more commonly employed. The word ' Tirgudu Potrogam ' signifies ' circling ' disease and I think this name is appropriate until a definite diagnosis is arrived at, although it has been pre- viously referred to as a ' Gid-like ' disease. The losses from this disease are sea- sonal and shepherds definitely state the period between Aridra karthi (about 21st June) and Mogha karthi (16th August) as the time when losses occur. Cases are rare before or after this period. Some shepherds blame the new shoots of grass that come up with the onset of rains, while others, the dried up shoots of grass found in the interval between two successive rains. Goats that graze with the sheep and other animals are not reported to suffer. This disease is said to occur every year in some places and in others every two or three years. Some villages were reported to be free altogether from the disease. In the year 1933, while on tour at Devarkadra three sheep which died from this disease were available for post-mortem examination. No lesions were detected except for the presence of numerous helminthic nodules in the mesen- teric lymph glands, and portal and interlobular cirrhosis of the liver. The present investigation was undertaken in July and August 1934. The flocks of thirty-five villages were inspected and the disease was reported to have occurred in thirty-three of them. The mortality was about 500 sheep and it was said that the disease was widespread this year. Twenty cases were kept under close observations mostly at Makhtal, Narayan. pet, Tilkapalli and Puljal villages and morbid materials from these were collected and forwarded for laboratory examination. Usually hoggets are attacked, but as male ones are sold off to the butcher the ewe-hoggets are the usual victims. It is said that all sheep aged four months and above are susceptible. SYMPTOMS The shepherd is quick in recognising the affected sheep, and knowing that the disease is fatal, slaughters them without delay to make the carcass pay. (350)
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. V, Pt. 4. PLATE XXXII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 1. Case No. 2 of Narayanpet. Sleeping standing and nose touching the ground. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 2. Case No. 5 of Makhtal. Circling to right side. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 3. Case No. 13 of Makhtal. Circling to left side.
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. V, Pt. 4. PLATE XXXIII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 1. Case No. 1 of Tilkapalli. Unable to support herself ; also showed Coenurus cerebralis in brain. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 2. Case No. 5 of Makhtal. Staggering gait and falling down. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] 3. Case No. 2 of Narayanpet. Struggling before death.
OBSERVATIONS ON "CIRCLING" DISEASE OF SHEEP. 351 The animal is usually first noticed to be sick when the flock is let out for grazing at about 10 o'clock in the morning. The affected sheep is dull and does not attempt to follow the flock. When it attempts to do so, it has a staggering gait, the head and body is swayed in either direction, and control is lost. Cases kept under my observation appeared quite alert to begin with, head lowered and off feed. One gets the impression that the affected sheep is actually sleeping on its feet and the nose touches the ground. The teeth chatter, and the sheep tries to nibble the grass or the sand whatever may be found at the spot. When approached, it darts away and takes up the same position again and it soon becomes apparent that it is moving in a circle. This goes on and the circle becomes smaller and smaller till the sheep circles in its own long axis. When exhausted, an un- controllable swaying movement starts, the animal is very dull, has a staggering gait, and later falls or sits down. The swaying movements increase, the head is twisted to one side, and there is laboured respiration. The sheep then extends itself on the ground, struggles with its legs and the head is lifted and dashed to the ground quite frequently. The latter symptoms become exaggerated and finally there is a last stretching of the body, and death follows. The symptom of circling is typical and almost constant. Some circle to the right while others to the left. While under observation one sheep (left side turner) was made to stand with its left side to the wall. She walked right along the wall and at the corner followed the same procedure, but would not turn to the right. When obstruction is met with, the forehead is kept pressed against it. Most of the cases observed turned to the right. There were definite signs of encephalitis in that the affected sheep spends its time apparently sleeping on its feet. If roused, the animal moves with a stumbling gait, its head is turned to the right or to the left and there is a tendency to turn in that direction only. The symptoms just described represent a typical case. Variations are noticed. Some sheep do not show the early symptoms. Diarrhoea is reported in some, but perhaps this is not so, since at this time green grass is available in plenty and faeces are normally soft. Nasal discharge is seen, but this is general at this time of the year. Partial blindness is also noticed. No rise of tempera- ture has been observed and one case only exhibited a sanguineous discharge from the nostrils at death. Cases may also occur while animals are out grazing or during the night, when the affected sheep wanders off by itself and is found either lying down or even dead in the morning. One case was found dead in a ditch one morning. It has been pointed out that the disease is fatal, but a case at Puljal village had apparently recovered after an attack as stated by the owner. The course of the disease is per-acute and fatal. The usual duration is twelve to eighteen hours but cases were seen that died within six to seven hours of showing symptoms.
352 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, IV POST-MORTEM FINDINGS Twenty post-mortem examinations were made. Almost all organs were found normal except the brain and spinal cord which showed engorgement of blood vessels, and blackened brain membranes due perhaps to stasis of venous blood. This was seen particularly involving the lower portions of the brain between the posterior part of the cerebral hemisphere and the cerebullum. One animal revealed in addition to the above a Coenurus cerebralis cyst of the size of a small walnut situated in the anterior left hemisphere of the cerebrum and a few Oestrus ovis in the nasal chambers. Besides these, a varying degree of helminthic infesta- tion in different organs was seen in most of the cases. LABORATORY EXAMINATION Smears of blood and of various internal organs were examined with negative findings, and so also were the smears made from the brain and the medulla. In one instance only a smear from the lesion in the brain revealed small rod-shaped bacilli. The following is the report from the Director, Imperial Institute of Veteri nary Research, Muktesar, on the materials submitted from cases of this disease :OBSERVATIONS ON CIRCLING DISEASE OF SHEEP. 353 Liver and gall-bladder.354 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, IV [1931 and 1933]. ' Gid' has also to be considered, but I am of opinion that the finding of ' Gid ' parasite in the case at Tilkapalli is of little importance. The annual loss from the disease is reported to be heavy. I understand that this disease also occurs in other districts of the Nizam's Dominions.Further investigation is in progress. I am indebted to Mr. B. K. Badami, Director, Veterinary Department, Hyderabad-Deccan, for his valuable suggestions and securing facilities for this investigation; and to the Director, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, for examination of materials. My thanks are also due to Mr. Narsingh Pershad, Veterinary Inspector, Mahbubnagar, for the help rendered. REFERENCES. Gill, D. A. (1931). Veterinary Journal, 87, 2, 60ON THE UNSUITABILITY OF THE EXISTING METHODS FOR THE DETERMINATION OF FATS IN BIOLOGICAL MATERIAL BY P. A. SESHAN, Animal Nutrition Section, Bangalore. (Received for publication on 23rd May 1935.) During the course of work in connection with a previous paper on the Diges- tion of Fats by Bullocks [Seshan, 1932] it was noticed that the methods available for the determination of fats were far from satisfactory. A reference to the litera- ture on the subject yields two methods in common use. One is a direct extrac- tion of the material with ether or alcohol or both and in some cases with other solvents such as benzene or chloroform. In the other method, the material is subjected to a preliminary hydrolysis followed by a wet extraction with solvent. It is evident from the reports of workers, early as well as recent, that the recovery of fats obtained from any material, plant or animal, by these methods or their modifications is not quite quantitative. While it is generally recognised that the results obtained are not absolute, the impression often arrived at is that what is left over in the material, of fats, is negligible in quantity and immaterial. An attempt is made in this paper, as a result of numerous tests, to emphasise the magnitude and the nature of the errors that are usually accepted as within experi- mental limits. The seriousness of this incomplete extraction of material for a determination of lipoids can best be realised by a brief review of the literature on the subject. It is apparent that no uniform period of extraction has been adopted by workers. Work on the subject is largely confined to a quantitative and qualitative study of fats extracted during various periods as it suited individual workers and their purposes. While such variations are too numerous to detail, a few of the varia- tions between workers, whose avowed object was the determination and estimation of total fats or lipoids might be mentioned. They are (1) four refluxings in a Soxhlet with methylene-di-chloride or sixteen with ether sulphuric [Jonas, 1930] for a determination of fats in wood pulp, (2) three extractions of 2 to 5 grams of dried faeces with alcohol and a subsequent treatment with warm ether several times [Allodi and Palomba, 1932] for a determination of faecal fat, (3) extraction of 5 grams of dried material for four hours being found sufficient, in spite of the (355)
356 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, IV recommendation of others for sixteen hours [Tomala and Takala, 1932] for a determination of raw fat in fodder, (4) extraction of 5 grams of material for twenty. four hours with cold ether [Waksman and Tenney, 1928] for a quantitative analysis of plant material, (5) extraction of 1 gram of powdered material with ethyl ether in a Soxhlet for twenty hours [Folin and Wentworth, 1909-10] for a determi- nation of fat and fatty acids in faeces, (6) extraction of about 2 grams of material in a Soxhlet for sixteen hours with ethyl ether [Book of Methods, A. O. A. C., 1931], (7) extraction of about 10 grams of moist faeces spread on a paper coil or mixed with sand, with ether for two days [Long, 1906] and so on. Surely, it is beyond all probability that such divergent methods would give values of total fats in any material, which would be at all comparable or even complete. Among the few attempts at a study of the rate of extraction with solvents may be mentioned two. An estimation has been made [Maxwell, 1891] of the fatty bodies in vegetable organisms on dry fine powder. The following table shows the results of extraction with ether in a Knorr apparatus :DETERMINATION OF FATS IN BIOLOGICAL MATERIAL. 357 Evidently the alcohol treatment has not completed the extraction as is often believed to be the case. Consequent on this experiment a period of forty hours ether extraction was adopted as sufficient. The neglected fraction was over 10 per cent. of the normal. No doubt the limits in these cases were set with a view to bring the operations within practicable periods, on the assumption that what was still left in the material was insignificant. EXPERIMENTAL. 1. Extraction method. The recovery of fats from any material without an appreciable change in the nature of the compounds in which the fatty acids are present is altogether a dis- tinct problem. The first common method of determination usually used is a con- tinuous extraction of the dried material with a volatile solvent. For all practical purposes, the changes incidental to the processes of drying and extraction are not taken serious account of. In all the experiments reported here, the sample was thoroughly dried and ground to pass through a 40-50 mesh sieve. The extrac- tions with ethyl ether were all carried out in paper thimbles in Soxhlet tubes, with 2-5 grams of dried material in each. Where more fat was required for examina- tion, it was collected from a series of such thimbles. While ether is generally used for extraction, this extract is subsequently taken up with petrol ether to give a determination of purer fats as opposed to other fatty bodies such as waxes, resins or lipins. That the solvent power of petroleum ether is not so specific, is shown clearly by the following figures :358 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [V IV Given sufficient time petrol ether has extracted almost as much as ethyl ether. But a great drawback to this extraction method is that, so far at least as fodder and faeces containing a large bulk of interfering carbohydrates are con- cerned, it has been found well nigh impossible to take the ether extraction to com- pletion. The following illustrates the point :DETERMINATION OF FATS IN BIOLOGICAL MATERIAL 359 evaporated to dryness only after filtration. These results were calculated to a 100 gram basis from the results of experiments with smaller quantities. Small manipulative errors would thus appear magnified. Further the amount of extract obtained during a period would depend upon the amount of ether that passed through the material. A variation in the temperature of the water-bath would cause a corresponding variation in the amount of the extract. These causes partially explain the irregularities in the rate of extraction. But the really important fact is that, though with small quantities of sub- stances during one or two periods the extract was small, a sufficiently prolonged period of 60 hours has yielded appreciable quantities. This shows clearly that the extraction has not ceased. Nevertheless, about 50 per cent more lipoids from ragi straw and about 30 per cent more from faeces have been recovered than would have been the case if the extraction had been confined to the 16 hours recommended by the Official method [Methods of analysis, A. O. A. C, 1931]. Further work has shown that the extraction might still be continued with profit. But such a lengthy extraction ceases to have any value as a practicable routine laboratory method. That the later extraction, little though the extract be, is not complete even with such a highly proteid fatty substance as groundnut cake is also impor- tant. Allusions to such a drawback in the case of animal tissues such as kidneys and liver are also to be found [Jowett and Lawson, 1931]. Viewed in the light of the results obtained in this paper with ragi straw, it is clear that if about 50% of fatty bodies already obtained are still left over in a material, resisting the action of solvents, it would appreciably vitiate the results of a quantitative analysis of fractions, such as, the sterols and other aliphatic. alcohols, the chlorophyll derivatives, the phospho and galacto-lipins and the fatty acids. The value of the results, qualitative or quantitative, obtained'with such a method is further minimised when, as is made clear by the following figures, the subsequent extracts are richer in fatty acids than the first fractions :360 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [V, IV An examination of the saponification values incidentally obtained in other experiments also indicates that the resistant fractions consist, at least in part, of fatty acids. The results are given below :DETERMINATION OF FATS IN BIOLOGICAL MATERIAL 361 The completion of the hydrolysis was put to the test by rehydrolysing the residue after extraction and repeating the whole process. Not only did this yield a comparable quantity of non-volatile fatty acids but also an appreciable titration for steam-distilled acids. The accompanying table gives the relevant figures from three independent tests with ragi straw and with faeces. The figures obtained on hydrolysis of a sample of faeces already ether extracted for 54 hours are of extra importance. Showing the unsuitability of alkali hydrolysis. Ether extractives expressed as milligrams fatty bodies per 100 grams of dry material No. of test Nature of test Analysis Ragi straw Faeces Faeces ether extracted for 54 hrs. I Alkali hydrolysis for 24 hours. Volatile acids . . 32 19 14 Non-volatile acids . 468 1,193 636 Total . 500 1,212 650 Rehydrolysis of resi- due from above. Volatile acids . . . . 10 12 Non-volatile acids . 199 377 282 Total . .. 387 294 II Alkali hydrolysis for 24 hours. Volatile acids . . 31 35 Non-volatile acids . 600 1,314 Total . 631 1,349 Rehydrolysis of resi- due from above. Volatile acids . . 15 10 Non-volatile acids . 621 1,240 Total . 636 1,250 III Alkali hydrolysis for 24 hours. Volatile acids . . 31 32 Non-volatile acids . 517 1,286 Total . 548 1,318 Rehydrolysis of resi- due from above. Volatile acids . . 13 11 Non-volatile acids . 669 1,619 Total . 682 1,630 I
362 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [V, IV That the extracts obtained by ether with every subsequent hydrolysis are fatty substances has also been tested fairly well. The following figures detail the neutralization or ester values of the fatty acids obtained on different occasions :DETERMINATION OF FATS IN BIOLOGICAL MATERIAL 363 CONCLUSIONThese observations suggest that the alkali hydrolysis method does not offer a suitable means for a quantitative determination of fats. One has, therefore, of necessity to resort to extraction methods alone for a determination of lipoids in plant products. Ether alone or with alcohol has been found unable to do it. Other solvents have been tried by a few but not with much thoroughness. [Maxwell, 1891, Jowett & Lawson, 1931, Walker, 1933]. Under the circumstances, it was thought advisable to make a study of the composition of the ether extrac- tives at successive stages, so that the information then available on the nature of the persistent fractions may help in deciding upon suitable and ready solvents for such fractions. Work is proceeding along these and similar lines. SUMMARYThe discrepancy in accepting figures obtained by the usual extraction method is pointed out. The difficulty of extraction, the incompleteness of the estimation, the differing nature of the subsequent extracts and hence the inadequacy of the method are all supported by experimental results. The alkali hydrolysis method is improved in technique by the substitution of dry extraction for a wet one, making the process easier and surer. The destructive nature of alkali hydrolysis is revealed. The results obtained suggest the formation of fatty acids from carbohydrates during the hydrolysis. Other tests indicate the presence, in the acids formed, of groups with lower mole- cular weights and unsaturated linkages also. It is concluded that a satisfactory method has yet to be evolved by means of extraction only. The author gratefully thanks Dr. F. J. Warth for his inspiration and valuable guidance throughout. REFERENCES Allodi, A., and Palomba, G. (1931). Chem. Zentr. II, 603. Chibnall and Channon (1927). Bio-chem. Jour., 21, 225. Gephant, J. C., and Csonka, T. A. (1914). Jour. Biol. Chem., X, 19, 522. Jonas, K. B., Wochbl (1931). Papier-Fabr., 61, 25A, 97 to 98. Jowett and Lawson (1931). Bio-chem. Jour., 25, 1981 to 82. Leathes and Raper (1925). Monographs on Bio-chem., The Fats, page 59. Long, J. H. (1906). Jour. Amer. Chem. Soc., 28, 704. Maxwell, W. (1891). Amer. Chem. Jour., 13, 13. Methods of analysis (1931). A. O. A. C., 3rd Edn., pages 170 and 279. Otto Folin and Wentworth (1909). Jour. Biol. Chem., 7, 421. Seshan, P. A. (1932). Ind. Jour. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb., 2, 4, 333 to 337. Sharpe, J. S. (1913). Jour. Biol. Chem., 7, 96. Sperry and Bloor (1924). Jour. Biol. Chem., 40, 522. Tomula, E. S., and Takala, E. (1932). Acta Chemica Fenica., 5, 1 to 4. Waksman, S. A., and Tenney, F. G. (1927). Soil Sci., 24, 275 to 283. Walker, L. S. (1933). Jour. A. O. A. C, 16, 190 to 191.
ACUTE AMPHISTOMIASIS OF CATTLE IN ASSAM: A PRELIMINARY REPORT BY P. G. PANDE, M.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., Veterinary Investigation Officer, Assam. (Received for publication on 10th April 1935.) INTRODUCTION. In October 1934, reports of cattle mortality from certain villages of the Kamrup district were received by the Civil Veterinary Department of the province, in which it was stated that about 60 per cent of the infected animals had died of the disease. It was considered expedient, therefore, that the outbreak should be investigated, and the cause of the disease ascertained, if possible. During the course of the investigation which commenced in November, 1934, about fifteen villages were visited, and about forty animals were examined post- mortem. Over one thousand animals were examined clinically, where faeces and blood examination for helminthic ova and protozoan parasites respectively had yielded negative results. Samples of dung from affected animals, however, upon a closer examination with the naked eye were found to contain minute pinkish bodies which, when pressed between two slides and examined under the microscope, were discovered to be the immature amphistomes. Postmortem evidence regarding the pathogenic effects of these forms of the parasite was obtain- ed from forty animals which were known to have voided immature amphistomes in their dung. On autopsy these forms were found attached to the mucous coat of the pylorus, and further back to the mucosa of the duodenum and the ileum. Although during past years considerable attention has been given by workers in this country to diseases caused by the helminths, it is a truism to say that amphistomes have enjoyed the reputation of being harmless parasites for a long time. It is due to this that no record is available to show that these parasites which normally inhabit the rumen and reticulum of cattle are able to produce a disease amongst livestock culminating in a severe economic loss. Losses in sheep due to immature forms of Cotylophoron cotylophorum are known in South Africa where the condition has to some extent been investigated. The writer has been informed by the veterinary assistant surgeon in whose jurisdiction the investigation was made that losses from similar outbreaks in the past in his jurisdiction were attributed to Fasciola, but evidence has been brought forward in the present communication to indicate that an exaggerated importance has been hitherto given to the question of fascioliasis of cattle in Assam. During postmortem examination of animals in the present outbreak one was struck with the rarity of this class of parasite in the liver, though upon clinical examination one would not have entertained any doubt in diagnosing the condition as fascioliasis. (364)
ACUTE AMPHISTOMIASIS OF CATTLE 365 Another outbreak with a similar mortality report was investigated in Cachar district in February, 1935, where also immature amphistomes were found to be the cause of the trouble. Before the investigation in this district was made by the writer in February, 1935, he was informed by the veterinary assistant surgeon that the condition had been persisting in those localities for the preceding five months, and besides a few immature flukes in the liver and Mecistocirrus digitatus in the abomasum, to which the cause of the outbreak was assigned, no other form of parasite known to be pathogenic to cattle was discovered. It is to be noted, however, that from 10 cases on which an autopsy was performed the writer was able to recover a large number of immature amphistomes attached to the mucosa of the small intestines in the Cachar outbreak. It is doubtful, therefore, whether during the earlier investigations a complete and careful post- mortem examination of carcases was made. So far, this disease has been investigated only in the districts of Kamrup and Cachar, and although no investigations have personally been made in other parts of the province, it is suspected that it may occur as an epizootic in other parts of the province. SYMPTOMATOLOGY. The disease is characterised in its initial stage by an oedematous infiltration in the subcutis of the intermandibular space. Slight thermal reaction has been observed during this stage of the disease and is atrributed mainly to inflammatory processes in the alimentary canal. Later, a pronounced degree of anorexia sets in; the animal goes off colour and the suspicion of disease becomes confirmed. The oedema subsides naturally in about a week, but on cauterization (a practice followed by the people) with a hot iron, it begins to disappear within twenty-four hours, and develops again on the third day of treatment. The oedema has also been noticed in the subcutis of the prepuce of bullocks and this follows the same course. After this phase of the disease, the animal shows diarrhoea, the consistency of the faeces becoming softer day by day until it assumes a fluid character. No blood has been observed in recently passed diarrhoeic fluid, but stringy mucous flakes have been observed and when these were examined under the microscope they were found studded with numerous young amphistomes in various stages of development. The diarrhoeic fluid is dark in colour and gives an offensive odour. Although the appetite returns at this stage, emaciation rapidly sets in, eyes become sunken, and the perineal region at the root of the tail sinks considerably. The animal continues like this for about a week or more. Finally it lies down, defaecates in the recumbent position, and shows a hurried respiration. The pulse becomes feeble and frequent, and the animal succumbs within a period varying from fifteen to twenty days. Samples of urine collected from recent cases as well as from cases after death showed no abnormality whatsoever. The mucous membrane of external orifices
365 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, IV was found considerably anaemic. Examination of blood smears from about a dozen clinical cases showed varying degrees of anaemic changes in the red blood cells, and eosinophiles on differential count numbered as high as 29 % on an average. EPIZOOTIOLOGY Outbreaks of acute amphistomiasis are known to have a seasonal occur- rence, and the appearance of the disease is to be suspected immediately after the monsoon which is about the end of September. It has further been observed that acute amphistomiasis alternates with rinderpest, which it immediately follows in the month of October and continues as late as the end of February, which is about the time when reports regarding outbreaks of rinderpest are in- variably received. Rinderpest in its turn is known to continue as late as Sep- tember after which time acute amphistomiasis makes its appearance. In the district of Kamrup, where an investigation on acute amphistomiasis was made in November and December, the local people call those diseases in which diarrhoea is a. marked symptom as " Sera ", and they asserted that since March, 1934 Sera had been responsible for causing death in cattle of their villages. Upon a scruti- nised inquiry from well-informed people, however, it appeared that from March to September, though the disease was characterised by diarrhoea and known as Sera, it was also associated with mouth lesions, and the writer therefore con- cluded that it was rinderpest which took its toll for those seven months. The cause of the mortality in October, November and December, when the outbreak was investigated, was found to be due to infection with immature amphistomes, and it is to be remarked that the outbreak started immediately after the rinder- pest had subsided. The outbreak at Cachar was investigated in February at three tea estates, and on perusal of a mortality chart compiled by the medical officers of these estates, it appeared that the outbreak in these localities continued from October to February. On the results of clinical investigation and information rendered by the veterinary assistant surgeons of Kamrup and CacharACUTE AMPHISTOMIASIS OF CATTLE 367 In both the outbreaks investigated by the writer, bovines of all ages were found affected, but in calves the disease was found to take a more acute form. Calves as young as three months old have been found dead after an illness of three days, where a clinical and postmortem examination did not reveal any evidence of coccidiosis, but a considerable degree of enteritis was found associated with the presence of what appeared to be the post-developmental stage of cercariae in the necrotic mucoid discharge of the duodenum and the ileum. The rate of mortality has been known to vary in different periods of the outbreak, the heaviest being in the months of November and December. In certain villages where an extensive investigation was carried out, and where other ruminants besides cattle were reported to die, the position can be summarised in the following Table. TABLE I Showing the rate of mortality amongst cattle, goats and buffaloes in different periods of the outbreak in Kamrup district Locality Kinds of ruminants Total number of animals Number that died Period of outbreak Percentage mortality Barnigaon Cattle . . 600 200 October, Novem- ber and Decem- ber. 33 Goats . . 56 10 October . . 17.8 Buffaloes. . 10 1 October . . 10 Deharkuria Cattle . . 325 100 October, Novem- ber and Decem- ber. 30.7 Goats . . 30 6 October . . 20 Buffaloes . . 10 1 October . . 10 Honaidi Cattle . . 550 200 October, Novem- ber and Decem- ber. 36.3 Goats . . 35 8 October . . 22.8 Buffaloes . . 16 2 October . . 12.5 Tapabari Cattle . . 400 100 October, Novem- ber and Decem- ber. 25 Goats . . 50 10 October . . 20 Buffaloes . . 20 4 October . . 20 Bihdia Cattle . . 900 350 October, Novem- ber and Decem- ber. 38.8 Goats . . 45 12 October . . 26.6 Buffaloes . . 20 4 October . . 20
368 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [V, IV From the above table it appears that while the disease in cattle continued from October to December, in goats and buffaloes it showed no tendency to continue further than October. In the Cachar outbreak the investigation was made in the early part of February at the tea estates of Dewan, Bartoll and Lollong. No goats or buffaloes were kept in these tea estates ; hence no information upon the disease in these classes of ruminants is available. The position of the Cachar outbreak is reviewed in Table II. TABLE II Showing the rate of mortality amongst cattle of three Tea Estates in Cachar district in different periods of the outbreak Locality and the total number of cattle Period of outbreak Number of dead cattle Percentage mortality DewanACUTE AMPHISTOMIASIS OF CATTLE 369 The above figures were obtained from the medical officers of these estates, where they kept a regular cattle register, and the number of deaths in cattle due to this disease was duly recorded. It appears from the table that the rate of mortality tends to decline as the close of winter approaches, and in the month of February only a few clinical cases could be collected for examination. During the investigation the grazing grounds were fully surveyed in both the outbreaks and some very interesting evidence thus accumulated points to the source of infection and the probable agent of transmission of the disease. In the monsoon of 1934 the affected areas in Kamrup district were subjected to severe flood and practically all the grazing grounds were under water. In normal times the waysides of the paddy fields, the Pathars at river banks, and certain embankments provide grazing grounds for the cattle in these areas. When the rains are not abnormally severe, the bhils and other waste lands provide pasturage. For the whole month of August and part of September 1934, these grazing grounds were completely inundated, and the general health of cattle was much below the average due to lack of fodder. The practice universally adopted in these areas during the time of flood for obtaining a supply of green fodder is to collect a long grass (locally called Nal) that grows in the shallow water of the Brahama- putra on its banks. These grasses grow in knee deep water of the river, and are collected thrice a week for the feeding of the stock. When the flood receded in the month of September 1934 there was a general lack of vegetation on the opened uplands, and the practice, therefore, continued late into September. In addition, however, cattle were allowed free access to the paddy fields where grass could be procured for grazing. In Cachar district, though there had been an unusually high rainfall, no information has been received that there was any flood in the localities where investigation was made. The tea estates are usually situated on a higher level than the general ground surface which mainly consists of bhils and paddy fields. These bhils, though they contained rain water, afforded a good pasturage for the cattle throughout the monsoon period, and in the month of September when the harvesting was over the cattle were put on paddy stubbles. In the month of February 1935, when the investigation in these tea estates had been under progress for some time, the grazings were found very poor in the paddy fields, but the bhils carried a fair growth of grass on which cattle were frequently grazed. The total area of available bhils would not exceed 100 acres in any of the tea estates, and it would appear, therefore, that over-stocking of these each year was an inevitable factor. A survey of the molluscan fauna of the affected localities in Kamrup district has revealed the existence of five types of water snails out of which three were found infected with amphistomal cercariae. In the Cachar district only one type of snail with amphistomal cercariae was seen in the bhil around the affected tea estates. K
370 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [V, IV TABLE III Showing the rate of infection of snails with cercariae in Kamrup and Cachar outbreaks Locality Source of Snail Types of snail Types of cercariae Percentage of snails found infected Kamrup district. Brahamaputra Viviparus bengalensis. Amphistomal cercariae 30 Non.amphistomal cer- cariae. 20 Viviparus dissimilis. Amphistomal cercariae 50 Limnoea acumi- nata. Amphistomal cercariae 3 Non-amphistomal cer- cariae. 35 Cachar district. Bhils of Dewan, Bar- toll and De. wan Tea Estates. Melanidae sp. Non.amphistomal cer- cariae. 15 Viviparus bengalensis. Amphistomal cercariae. 10 Non-amphistomal cer- cariae. 2 It appears from the table that the infection in the Viviparus type of snail with amphistomal cercariae was fairly high in the Kamrup district in November and December, and the rate of infection in the same genus of snail was consi- derably reduced in February in the Cachar outbreak. These amphistomal cercariae were characterised by the presence of a ventral sucker situated anterior
ACUTE AMPHISTOMIASIS OF CATTLE 371 to the root of the tail. They had a comparatively small oral sucker at the anterior end. The oesophagus behind the mouth bifurcated into two intestinal caeca. A pair of conical eyes could be seen situated externo-laterally behind the oral sucker. The cercariae encountered in this outbreak were similar to those studied by Rao and Ayyar [1932], obtained from Planorbis exustus (Deshayes), and Limnea luteola (Lamark) in Madras. On feeding their cercariae to a calf these authors have succeeded in recovering mature forms of Paramphistomum cervi. Experi- mental feeding with the object of recovering the mature stage of the parasites concerned in this outbreak was not possible in field investigation, but there are reasons to believe that the immature forms of several amphistomes are likely to be involved in this outbreak. Some of the immature forms of the parasites recovered from the lesions were submitted to the Director, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, who reported that the parasites belonged to the genus Paramphistomum. POSTMORTEM FINDINGS The record of postmortem findings submitted below relates to about fifty cases examined in the field. The changes have been found fairly uniformly, and a general consideration of these, therefore, is indicated. The subcutaneous tissue was found infiltrated with gelatinous exudate in the intermandibular space, and also in the prepuce of bulls. Muscles were found atrophied and anaemic in appearance. The subcutaneous fat was found soft and gelatinised. The super- ficial lymphatic glands were found enlarged and oedematous in appearance. Im- portant changes were noticed in the organs contained in the abdominal cavity. The visceral and the parietal layers of the peritoneum presented a normal appearance, but the cavity contained about a gallon of clear serous fluid. The mesenteric veins were very prominent, and the veins running over the serous coat, dilated. Changes in the liver were characterized by the engorgement of its blood vessels, and the absence of Fasciola gigantica in the bile ducts was observed. Maceration of small pieces of the organ in a porcelain basin did not reveal the presence of any immature forms of the parasite, but in the Cachar outbreak a few immature forms of Fasciola were discovered in the sediment after macera- tion. No important changes were noticed in the kidney except that the peri- renal fat was reduced in amount and rendered soft and gelatinous, and the glomeruli were markedly prominent. No marked changes were, however, dis- covered in spleen. The pancreatic ducts inside the pancreas were found packed with Eurytrema pancreaticum. This parasite was, however, not noticed in the pancreas of animals examined in the Cachar outbreak. In the Kamrup outbreak the rumen and reticulum did not contain any mature amphistomes, but an average of 200 parasites was observed in the rumen and the reticulum of cattle examined in the Cachar outbreak. Important changes were observed in the abomasum
372 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [V, IV the entire length of duodenum, and ileum, but further back the changes were less conspicuous. The intestinal changes have been considered as pathognomonic. and are therefore described in a greater detail. In the fourth stomach of some carcasses Mecistocirrus digitatus was found in numbers varying from two to four hundred, but in almost every carcass examined in the Kamrup outbreak, the fluid content was found to contain numerous imma- ture amphistomes. The pyloric end of the stomach showed considerable thicken- ing, and evidence of oedematous infiltration in its submucous coat. Patches of congestion associated with mucoid discharge were noticed on the mucous coat. Numerous minute petechiae were also observed with the help of a hand lens. Further away from the pyloric orifice, immature amphistomes were observed embedded in the mucous coat, and setting up a varying degree of inflammation around them. When detached with a pair of forceps, distinct petechiae were observed at the sites of their attachment. The duodenum and the ileum showed lesion of acute catarrhal enteritis associated with the presence of immature amphistomes embedded in the mucous coat. The lumen contained a dirty, whitish mucous of inflammatory origin, and the duodenal wall particularly presented a thickened and an oedematous appearance. After scraping away the mucoid discharge, bands of congestion were noticed on the mucous coat of the duodenum. No marked thickening of the iliac wall was noticed, but similar inflammatory changes were observed on its mucous coat. The immature amphistomes were few and far between in this part of the alimentary canal. The associated lymphatic glands were markedly con- gested in the medullary region. The caecum, colon and rectum presented no abnormalities. No changes were noticed in the organs contained in the thoracic cavity. PATHOGENESIS In discussing the pathogenesis of the characteristic lesions, certain facts relating to the life-history of the causative parasite cannot be overlooked, since the life-history has a direct bearing on the pathogenesis of the disease. The encysted meta-cercariae are ingested by the animals probably in the month of September. A large number of them are likely to be ingested by cattle when they are put on marshy lands, and drink water from bhils. Since an enormous number of immature amphistomes were found in the fourth stomach, and rela- tively few were noticed as mature parasites in their normal habitats in the early part of October, one is inclined to suppose that after ingestion the meta-cercariae find their way direct in the fourth stomach. Here they undergo development after disintegration of their resistant covering. The average time taken to reach this stage of development varies from two to three weeks. These developing forms are from time to time forced down the alimentary canal with the current
ACUTE AMPHISTOMIASIS OF CATTLE 373 of drinking water, and later on become attached to the mucosa of the duodenum, ileum and probably colon. It has been observed that the pyloric orifice, duo- denum and ileum are the most favourable situations for the development of these forms. Those meta-cercariae which remain inside the colon and the caecum do not develop to any extent, and only very few of them are to be found attached to the mucous coats. Since the amphistomes are normally found in the rumen and the reticulum of cattle, they reach their destination by migration which continues from October to February. In the month of October when the out- break in the Kamrup district was investigated, no mature amphistomes were seen inside the rumen or the reticulum, but a large number of immature forms was seen in the abomasum, duodenum and the ileum. Since the disease was reported to have started in the month of October, the cercariae were ingested probably in the month of September, and now upon the evidence that no mature parasites were discovered in the rumen in November, it is concluded that it took more than two months for the ingested cercariae to attain maturity and complete migration. The prevalance of the disease for about five months is due to continued ingestion of the cercariae in November and December, since in these two months also the snails were found infected with amphistomal cercariae. When the liberated meta-cercariae become attached to the gastric and intes- tinal mucosa, considerable irritation is set up resulting in acute congestion of the blood vessels of the mucous coats. The immature amphistomes also penetrate into the gastric and the intestinal mucosa, and become lodged in the submucous coats producing a varying degree of hyperaemia of the blood vessels there. The loose alveolar tissue of the submucosa becomes considerably filled up with inflammatory exudate, and this gives an oedematous and thickened appearance to the gastric and the intestinal wall. As a result of hyperaemia of the mucous and the submucous coats, there is an extensive exudative infiltration of the fluid in the intestinal lumen which renders the faeces fluid. The bands of congestion noticed on the mucosa are due to diffuse hyperaemic congestion of the minute capillaries of gastric and intestinal mucosae. Simultaneously with the above changes, marked proliferation, and consequent destruction of mucous cells take place producing a lesion characteristic of catarrhal enteritis. Sometimes the proliferation of the mucous cells is so extensive that the embedded young am- phistomes become completely dislodged from the mucosa and could be detected in the mucous discharge. No marked fibrosis has been observed as the disease runs an acute course. The parasite around the site of its attachment evokes a pronounced degree of leucocytic infiltration, and numbers of eosinophiles are seen in the zone of congestion as noted before. DISCUSSION The clinical and epizootiological evidence together with the postmortem findings in the outbreak strongly suggest that the amphistomes, formerly believed
374 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [V, IV to be innocuous, are definitely associated with a disease in their immature stage. It will be remembered that many forms of helminthic parasites were simultane- ously encountered in carcasses from both the outbreaks, and, therefore, a discus- sion regarding the pathogenic effects of these is indicated with the idea of ascer- taining how far they were concerned in this outbreak. In this connection there are three forms to be considered, viz.:ACUTE AMPHISTOMIASIS OF CATTLE 375 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 1. An outbreak of disease amongst cattle, which prevailed in Assam from October, 1934 to February, 1935, was investigated and found to be an acute amphistomiasis. No literature is available to show that the disease in cattle has been recognised in India during past years. 2. The disease starts immediately after the rains, and is said to alternate with rinderpest in its occurrence. 3. Emaciation and diarrhoea constitute the main clinical features of the disease, the rate of mortality varying from 30 to 40 per cent. 4. The snails Viviparus bengalensis and Limnaea acuminata are the possible intermediate hosts of the parasites of acute amphistomiasis. 5. The essential lesion is that of catarrhal enteritis, the immature amphis- tomes being intimately connected with the lesion. 6. The immature amphistomes recovered from the lesion have been classi- fied as belonging to the genus Paramphistomum, which take more than two months to attain maturity, and reach their normal habitats by migration. 7. There is no evidence to suspect that other helminthic parasites recovered from the carcasses of affected animals were in any way connected with the disease. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I am greatly indebted to the Director, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, for furnishing me with a report regarding the identity of the parasite, and the histology of the involved tissues ; and to Col. A. Olver, C.B., C.M.G., F.R.C.V.S., Animal Husbandry Expert to the Imperial Council of Agri- cultural Research, for showing much interest in this investigation, and giving encouragement in publishing this report. REFERENCES Assam (1928). Annual Report, Civil Veterinary Department. Rao, A., and Ayyar, L. S. (1932). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. and Anim. Husb. 2, 402-405. Stewart, W. L. (1934). Vet. J. 90, 403.
JOWAR (SORGHUM VULGARE) POISONING IN CATTLE BY G.K.SHARMA,G.P.V.C., Clinical Assistant, Punjab Veterinary College, Lahore. (Received for publication on 30th August 1935.) INTRODUCTION The subject of plant poisoning in animals has received very little attention in India, which is mainly due to the difficulty in its diagnosis from the clinical symptoms alone, and the fact that the majority of field veterinarians are unable to secure the collaboration of a chemist for analysis of the suspected sample of fodder or ingesta. The paper deals with sorghum (Sorghum vulgare)poisoning, which is by far the most common form of plant poisoning in India. As will be seen from what is stated later, this plant, although normally forming a wholesome fodder for animals, is liable, under certain conditions, to acquire highly toxic properties with the pro- duction of hydrocyanic acid. A simple chemical test, suitable for adoption under field conditions, is described for the detection of this acid both in the ingesta and the plant itself. In India our knowledge of poisonous plants, their active principles, phar- macological actions and their antidotes is incomplete, and there is a large field awaiting exploration in this direction. It would, therefore, be a valuable addition to veterinary toxicology if veteri- narians in India would record any cases of plant poisoning with which they deal, along with the result of their chemical test, or, the report from a chemical examiner. TOXICITY Sorghum vulgare is a tall plant extensively cultivated throughout India for fodder and grain. It is sown in the hot weather before the commencement of the rainy season, and if rains do not set in early the plant gets wilted and stunted and acquires poisonous properties. It is popularly held by cultivators that the poisonous effect of sorghum is not due to the plant itself but to certain species of insects which may attack it. Stephen [1896] analysed the plant and found that it contained 75 per cent of potassium nitrate per ounce of plant, and he attributed the poisonous symptoms to this. Dunston and Henry [1902] isolated a cyanogenetic glucoside from the (376)
JOWAR (SORGHUM VULGARE) POISONING IN CATTLE 377 plant and named it Dhurrin. This glucoside under the effect of an enzyme usually present in the plant is broken up into prussic acid, dextrose and parahydroxy- benzaldehyde. The enzyme may sometimes be supplied from another plant mixed with the fodder. Bach [cited by Dunston and Henry, 1906] considered that the production of hydrocyanic acid is a stage in the plant anabolism. The nitrates present in the cell-sap are converted into a small amount of nitric acid by oxalic and carbonic acids. The free nitric acid thus produced is continuously reduced by formaldehyde, producing hydroxylamine, which immediately combines with formaldehyde, forming formaldoxime. The latter is turned into formamide, which under normal conditions is hydrolysed, yielding ammonium formate to supply ammonia and formic acid to the plant. When there is scarcity of rain, the formamide by simple dehydration gives rise to prussic acid and water. Ac- cording to Willaman and West [1916] the production of any large amount of prussic acid in sorghum, when the water supply is inadequate, results from a lack of glucoside stimulation. The increased amount of hydrocyanic acid is thought to be produced for the purpose of stimulating hormones. The view most widely held at present, however, is that prussic acid is an in- termediate product of protied synthesis ; hence plants will contain a larger amount of the acid when protein metabolism is most active.There are certain factors which influence the toxicity of sorghum. Thus an animal may eat within twenty-four hours a certain quantity of the plant con- taining prussic acid without any ill effects, whereas the same quantity if eaten within six hours would cause death. Seddon and King [1930] found that fresh and dry plants containing 0.02 and 0.05 per cent of hydrocyanic acid respectively may be considered dangerous to sheep, but the toxicity varies with the amount of glucoside and enzyme present in the plant. The younger and more succulant plants produce lethal amounts of prussic acid, and after seven weeks they may contain a little quantity, or, may be absolutely free from prussic acid. According to Burtt-Davy [1912] and Couch [1932] a soil rich in nitrates increases the prussic acid contents of the plant. Swanson [1921] made some experiments and found that the toxicity of the plant when dried and stored is decreased, and when dried in the shade contains none, or, only a trace of hydrocyanic acid. Acid feeds facilitate the liberation of prussic acid from the glucoside by hydrolysis, whilst alkaline food stuffs have the opposite effect. ABSORPTION Prussic acid diffuses through the cell membrane extremely rapidly. It is absorbed by the blood vessels in the mouth, 378 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [V, IV In the body a certain percentage of the prussic acid taken in is converted into relativly non-toxic sulpho-cyanate and is eliminated by the kidneys and lungs. It paralyses the oxidative enzymes, which are responsible for the gaseous exchange between the red blood corpuscles and the tissues. The internal respiration is thus interfered with, and a condition of internal asphyxia is produced. Prussic acid is an active poison of the nervous system, causing first stimulation and later on paralysis of the vasomotor and respiratory centres. SYMPTOMS A large amount of prussic acid causes death almost instantaneously with spasms and respiratory paralysis, but smaller amounts produce the following symptoms:JOWAR (SORGHUM VULGARE) POISONING IN CATTLE 379 The following method which is known as the vest-pocket test, [Henrici, 1926] is suitable for adoption under field conditions and may be found handy by veterinary workers in this country :380 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [V, IV PREVENTION Animals should not be fed on stunted sorghum plants especially when they are green. Kesser [1930] found that rabbits fed on green food and ferrous chloride showed a great resistance to cyanide poisoning. Steyn [1931] has shown, that sulphur is an excellent preventive of prussic acid poisoning in sheep. It can be mixed with licks at the rate of 5 to 7½%. When climatic conditions are favourable for hydrocyanic acid poisoning, bovines should be dosed with two table-spoonfuls of sulphur daily. Sheep and goats should be given one tea-spoon- ful every fourth day, and should have free access to sulphur licks. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The author is highly indebted to F. Ware, Esquire, F. R. C. V. S., I. V. S., Director, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, for his kind advice, and the facilities for literature provided at the Institute. Thanks are also due to Mr. S. K. Sen, and Mr. R. L. Kaura, Muktesar, for their friendly criticism. REFERENCES Burtt-Davy, J. (1912). Botanical Investigations into Geilsiekte. 2nd Rept. Dir. Vet. Res. U. of South Africa, 181-221. Couch, J. F. (1932). Poisoning of Live-Stock by Plants that produce Hydrocyanic Acid. United States Dept. of Agric. Leaflet No. 88. Dunston, W. R., and Henry, T. A. (1902). Cyanogenesis in Plants. Proc. Roy. Soc. of London. 70, 153-154. Dunston, W. R., and Henry, T. A. (1906). The Chemical Aspects of Cyanogenesis in Plants. Rept. 76th meeting Brit. Assoc. Adv. Sci., 138-144. Heffter, A. (1923). Handbuch der Experimentellen Pharmakologie, Berlin. Henrici, M. (1926). Preliminary Report upon the Occurrence of Hydrocyanic Acid in the Grasses of Bechuanaland. 11th and 12th Repts. Dir., Vet. Educ. and Res. U. of South Africa, 331-364. Hubert Bunyia (1935). Jour. of Amer. Vety. Med. Assoc., Washington, U.S.A. Kesser, F. (1930). Arch. Expt. Path. U. Pharm. 156 Bd., 340-345. Seddon, H. R., and King, R. O. C. (1930). The fatal dose for Sheep of Cyanogenetic Plants, containing Sambunigrin or Prunasin. Jour. Counc. Sci. and Ind. Res. Australia. 3, 14-24. Stcyn, D. G. (1931). Geilsiekte and its detection in the Field. Jour. S. African Vety. Med. Assoc. 2, 23-26. Stephen. (1896). Agr. Ledger 3, 24. Swanson, C. O. (1921). Hydro cyanic Acid in Sudan grass and its effects on Cattle. Jour. Amer. Soc. Agronomy 13, 1. Willaman, J. G., and West, R.M. (1916). Hydrocyanic Acid in Sorghum. Jour. Agric Res. 6, 261-272.
ANTHELMINTICS FOR THE WORMS OCCURRING IN THE ALIMENTARY CANAL OF THE HORSE. BY G. D. BHALERAO, M.Sc., Helminthologist, Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar. (Received for publication on 6th September 1935.) In this country the horse is as essential an animal for military purposes as is the bullock for agricultural operations. Enquiries are therefore often directed to this Institute from the various military authorities and breeding establishments in this country in regard to the treatment of verminous infections in horses. To reply to such enquiries individually is often a difficult matter, and involves consi- derable loss of time. It is therefore proposed to indicate in the following few pages the lines of treatment that have been adopted in recent years for the control of worms occurring in the digestive tract of the horse in the hope that it may prove useful to all those who are in contact with this particular form of equine disability in this country. Strongyles are undoubtedly the most formidable scourge of the digestive tract of horses, and in addition to these the stomach worms (Habronema spp.), Ascarids, tape worms and pinworms (Oxyuris) require consideration and their treatment will be appropriately dealt with here. The schistosomes will, however, be excluded from this note. I. Strongyles. Several drugs have from time to time been tried as remedies for treating the strongyles of the horse. It is intended to consider here only a few of the more important of them. (1) Oil of chenopodium.382 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, IV pregnancy. Chopra and Chandler [1923], quoting DeBlieck and Bandet, consider this drug to be of great value in the treatment of the strongyles of horses. They advise that hard capsules should not be used, since they are liable to be bitten by the animals. Taylor [1930] also in a paper read before the 11th International Veterinary Congress, London, considers oil of chenopodium to be the best drug for the treatment of the strongyles of horses. He also testifies that the best results are obtained after fasting the animals for 36 hours, but a preliminary fast of 24 hours is essential. Turner [1930] recommends this drug with castor oil. The dose, he considers optimum, is 4 c. c. for 110 kgs. of body weight. Henry [1931] also agrees with others in recommending this drug in a dose of 10-15 c. c. (Le Roux) and 16-20 c. c. [Hall] in capsules followed either by linseed oil or castor oil (½ litre for foals, ¾ litre for 2 year-olds and 1 litre for adults) or preceded by a litre of linseed oil and followed by a ball of aloes. The most recent experience with this drug in cases of non-blood-sucking strongyles of horses is that of Monnig and Marais [1933] who advocate the administration of the drug either in capsules or by a stomach tube, although according to these authors, oil of chenopodium can be given as a drench mixed with raw linseed oil. (2) Carbon tetrachloride.ANTHELMINTICS FOR THE WORMS IN ALIMENTARY CANAL OF THE HORSE. 383 (6) Terebenthin-benzol (commercially known as " Vitan " and " Pyrethrine ") has proved to be very unsatisfactory according to Marotel [1933]. (7) Thymol.384 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, IV Marais [1933], are of the opinion that the same remedies that are useful in cases of strongyles are also effective against oxyurids. The drug which has been re- commended most for this worm is oil of chenopodium. Hall [1930] recommends turpentine as an alternative in a dose of 60 c. c., the contra-indication in this latter case being derangements of the kidney. Hutyra and Marek [1926] re- commend repeated rectal injections of vinegar and soap water as the best treatment for oxyuriasis of horses. According to Railliet, thymol (15 to 20 grams.) given with mucilaginous water and followed by a laxative is the best. Koslowsky recommends pANTHELMINTICS FOR THE WORMS IN ALIMENTARY CANAL OF THE HORSE. 385 Hall M. C., Wilson, R. H., & Wigdor, M. (1918). The anthelmintic treatment of equine intestinal strongylidosis. J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc. 54, 47-55. SELECTED ARTICLES SOME OBSERVATIONS ON THE BLEEDING OF FOWLS. BY A. L. CLAY, B.V.SC., AND W. J. B. MURPHY, B.V.SC., Veterinary Officers, Department of Agriculture, New South Wales.(Reprinted from the Australian Veterinary Journal, Volume XI, No. I, Feb. 1935.) The authors have now had several years' experience of the blood-testing of fowls in pullorum disease control work. Poultry farmers generally have been found on first acquaintance with the operation to be rather anxious as to the effects of blood-letting on their birds. The observations which are given in this article reveal that even under field conditions the reaction of the birds to, and any losses occurring following blood-letting are not such as to give rise to any anxiety. METHOD OF BLEEDING An assistant grasps both legs in one hand and suspends the bird with head down and the ventral surface towards the operator. With his free hand the assistant extends a wing to one side so as to expose its medial surface and at the same time in such a way as to form a right angle between the radius and ulna and the metacarpus. By this means the forearm of the wing is brought into the most suitable position for operation. If the right wing is intended for operation, the bird's legs are held with the right hand and wing with the left, and vice versa. The operator for his part is seated, and, the feathers in the vicinity having previously been plucked by the assistant, he makes a transverse incision with a sharp scalpel on the medial surface of the wing a half to one inch proximal to the distal ends of the radius and ulna. In the position stated are situated the wing vein and an accompanying artery. The vessels are made prominent by tensing the skin backwards over the ulna with the thumb and fore-finger of one hand. The aim is to incise the vein without actually severing it in twain. Actually the artery is also frequently incised and sometimes completely severed. If blood is to be taken from the left wing of the bird, the operator uses his right hand to make the incision, and vice versa. Blood collects in a depression which is present at the selected site and about 2 c.c. are run off into small bottles. These are placed in flat wooden boxes provided with numbered portholes, the boxes being stood on one side in an upright position until such time as the bloods have coagulated. Under favourable conditions one hundred birds can be dealt with in an hour. (386)
BLEEDING OF FOWLS 387 AFTER-EFFECTS OF BLOOD-LETTING The important after-effects of blood-letting are possible mortality and lowered egg production. MORTALITY This occurs either as the result of actual haemorrhage or gangrene of the wing. With increasing age there appears to be greater risk of fatal haemorrhage, so that more care is necessary with second year birds than with pullets or first year stock. Individual birds bleed with varying freedom, and in certain cases it is necessary to adopt measures to arrest haemorrhage. Cotton wool applied with the pressure of the fingers is nearly always a satisfactory procedure:. On rare occasions the use of haemostates has to be resorted to. These are used not to crush the incised vessel (this being extremely difficult), but to seal the lips of the skin incision until such time as a clot has formed subcutaneously. This procedure has two drawbacks, firstly inasmuch as it tends to aid the occurrence of gangrene, and secondly because of the fact that deviation of the vessels occurs, making the site unsuitable for future blood-lettings. The care that should be exercised in securing blood samples under field condi- tions consists of:388 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, IV LOWERED EGG PRODUCTION No actual figures can be quoted in respect to this aspect of the question, but inquiries have been made of owners of flocks which had been bled. In only one instance was it reported that a definite decline had occurred, and the general impression of the owners was that egg production was not materially affected. It is probably not the actual taking of blood that is likely to diminish egg production so much as the handling which is inseparable from the operation. A great deal depends upon the owner's handling of the birds in preparation for the operation. Birds have to be handled on three distinct occasions, viz.:THE DIAGNOSIS OF JOHNE'S DISEASE BY THE USE OF JOHNIN BY F. C. MINETT, Research Institute in Animal Pathology, Royal Veterinary College, London. (Reprinted from the Journal of Comparative Pathology and Therapeutics, Vol. XLVIII. Part 2, June 1935.) In the literature on Johne's disease there are many references pointing to the value of allergic tests for the detection of preclinical cases or as a means of supporting the diagnosis in cattle showing suggestive symptoms. For this purpose avian tuberculin or johnin have been used subcutaneously, intravenously or in- tradermally. Conclusive evidence as to the value of such tests for detecting infected animals lies, of course, in the demonstrating of Johne's bacilli in the intestinal wall or glands, but for several reasons this evidence is not always obtain- able. One difficulty is the cost of bringing the animal to post mortem. Other reasons are that there is no convenient animal for test inoculation, that infected animals do not always show distinct microscopic lesions, and that even on micros- copic examination of films from the intestine or glands acid-fast bacilli may not be found. In order to establish the diagnosis, therefore, it may be necessary to make histological preparations or to attempt cultural isolation of the organism. In the latter case there is, of course, some technical difficulty and especially is this so in early cases. The objects of the work set out as briefly as possible in this paper were to study the behaviour of animals infected with Johne's disease when subjected at intervals to a number of intradermal tests with Johnin, and to examine them after death for Johne's disease and tuberculosis. Nearly all the cases to be described were derived from seven herds previously reported [Minett, 1933] in which johnin testing of all the adult stock had been carried on as a routine over a period of about two years, usually at intervals of about three to four months.* In six of these herds Johne's disease was known to be causing loss and of a total of 499 adult animals present at the first or second test 16 per cent gave clearly positive reactions and 72 per cent did not react. In the series of 39 animals mentioned below where the post mortem examination for Johne's disease was positive, 21 were tested three to five times, one was tested seven times while 17 could be tested once or twice only. It was not always possible to apply more than one or two tests, either because the animals were approaching an advanced clinical stage and, in consequence, were disposed of, or because the owners were averse to keeping * The tests were carried out with the assistance of Messrs. R. S. Roberts, W. Orr and A. J. James. (389)
390 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, IV cattle which were known to be reactors. This, however, afforded an opportunity of purchasing reactors while they were still in good or fair condition and of killing them for immediate examination. The following classes of animals are considered: (1) Thirty-nine, which had shown a definite reaction to johnin on at least one occasion and which were proved on post mortem examination to be affected with Johne's disease. (2) Seven, which had shown a definite reaction to johnin but which were not proved on post mortem examination to be affected. (3) Seven, which had shown a definite reaction to johnin but which for various reasons could not be examined post mortem. The subse- quent history, however, strongly suggested that they were affected with Johne's disease. (4) Six animals, which had not reacted, but which were found post mortem to be affected. Of the animals in classes 1 and 2,13 remained throughout in fair bodily condi- tion and five were fat; 17 others showed symptoms shortly before slaughter. In seven cases the bodily condition was noted to vary from time to time, there being periods of unthriftiness with some looseness of the bowels. Four were clinical cases from the start. Fourteen of the animals were kept under observation at the Institute for periods varying from three to six months and in two cases as long as a year, partly in order that their clinical condition might be followed, but parti- cularly so that further tests might be made with johnin, tuberculin, or with avian tuberculin. The johnin used was a ten-fold concentrated product, prepared by Dr. A. L. Sheather by growing a well-adapted strain of Johne's bacillus on Sauton synthetic medium containing extract of M. phlei. This product was selected partly as the result of a preliminary test on infected cattle and partly as being less likely to cause non-specific reactions than one prepared on a medium containing animal fluids. It was injected according to the method first suggested by Dunkin [1928] into the skin of the neck in dose of 0.2 c.c. followed 48 hours later by a similar injection at the same site. All infections and readings were made by myself. Caliper readings in millimeters were taken prior to injection and again 48 hours and 72 hours after the first injection, when notes were also made of the character of any swellings. In some of the earlier cases a single injection of 0.2 c.c. johnin was made into one of the anal folds, with or without a simultaneous injection in the skin of the neck. In the summarised notes below no details are given to indicate the intensity of the reactions as this would take much space and would appear to be unnecessary. It may be assumed, however, unless there is a state- ment to the contrary, that the reactions were unmistakably positive, i.e., a swelling at the 72nd hour reaching at least twice the normal skin thickness at that point,
DIAGNOSIS OF JOHNE'S DISEASE BY THE USE OF JOHNIN. 391 with diffuse and rather soft oedema and sometimes slight pain. Reactions des- cribed as " slight " or " indefinite " were those which fell short in some particular, e.g., where the maximal thickening attained was rather less than twice that of the normal skin or where the oedema was not diffuse and lacked the easily compressible texture of a typical reaction. The anal fold test was considered positive if the injected fold was two to three times the normal thickness or more at the 48th hour. On some occasions the animals were tested at the same time by the single intradermal method with ordinary tuberculin or with avian tuberculin, con- centrated products from glycerine broth cultures being used in doses of 0.1 c.c. In all cases, save nine, examined after death, the animals were slaughtered at the neighbouring abattoir and always in the presence of a member of the Institute staff. The intestine, intestinal and other glands were immediately brought back to the laboratory and dealt with the same day. THE EXAMINATION FOR TUBERCULOSIS AND JOHNE'S DISEASE. The following in outline was the procedure ordinarily adopted in making the post mortem examination. Tuberculosis.392 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, IV together with some of the intestinal glands, were used for the cultural examination. For this purpose the bowel was thoroughly washed with tap water, the superficial layers of the mucosa from several areas scraped with a blunt knife and transferred to a sterile mortar. In the case of the glands the surfaces were cauterised and material from the interior removed to a second sterile mortar. From other glands films were prepared and portions of the tissue transferred to fixative. The material in each mortar was crushed into a paste, sterile sand being used in some cases, and was then mixed with about 40 c. c. sterile saline. Each suspension was then divi- ded between two centrifuge tubes of 80 c. c. capacity and to one tube in each set was added an equal volume of 20 per cent anti-formin, the other tube in each set receiving a similar amount of 40 per cent anti-formin. The suspensions were left at room temperature for 30 minutes, being shaken at intervals, and the tubes were then filled with sterile saline, centrifuged, the supernatant replaced with fresh saline, and, after shaking, again centrifuged. The deposit was used for making films and for sowing tubes of liver extract-phlei-egg medium, prepared in the manner described by Dunkin [1928] except that gentian violet was omitted. In some instances, a liquid medium was used, consisting of equal parts of liver extract and broth and containing glycerine extract of phlei and a small quantity of potato mash. Two to four tubes of medium were seeded from each deposit; sometimes, in addition, tubes of medium were seeded direct from the anti-formin mixtures at intervals according to the method of A. S. Griffith [1916]. The culture tubes were tightly capped and incubated at 38° C. for six to eight months, being inspected at monthly intervals. If a growth resembling that of the Johne's bacillus appeared, this was examined microscopically and if acid-fast organisms were present a subcul- ture was made to the phlei-egg medium and to plain egg and a portion inoculated to one or two guinea-pigs subcutaneously. Acid-fast organisms of the proper morphology, which grew very slowly on the pheli-egg medium and which failed to grow on plain egg and which produced no lesions in the guinea-pigs killed two months later, were accepted as Johne's bacilli. REACTORS PROVED ON post mortem EXAMINATION TO BE AFFECTED WITH JOHNE'S DISEASE. (NOTEDIAGNOSIS OF JOHNE'S DISEASE BY THE USE OF JOHNIN. 393 1. Guernsey. Age unknown. Showing wasting and diarrh394 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, IV 11. Guernsey heifer, rising two years. NR1, slight R101, R214, NR311, R 401. R(tuberculin) 21 and 214. In poor condition and scouring after the test of day 311. K 409. T lesions present in bronchial glands ; gp inoculated from the intestinal glands did not become infected. Lesions of J in intestine ; histologically there were exten- sive alternations and very large numbers of J ; cultures were positive. 12. Shorthorn bull. 3½ years old. R 1 (anal). In good condition for 186 days when active signs of J developed. K 195. No T lesions. Lesions of J in intestine and J in films, sections and cultures of intestine. 13. Guernsey heifer, rising 2 years. In fair condition at first. R1. Slight R 22 (tuberculin). Reported to be very thin and scouring on day 92 K 102. No T lesions. Lesions of J in intestine, J in the films of intestine and isolated in culture. 14. Shorthorn. Second calver. In fair condition. R1, NR 92 (also anal). R 1 (tuberculin), NR 8 (subcutaneous tuberculin). Became very emaciated by day 92. K 99. No T lesions. Lesions of J in intestine and J in films of intestine and isolated in culture. 15. Shorthorn heifer. About 2 years old. R1, slight R 97, when reported to be scouring. NR21 (tuberculin). Carcase in moderate condition when K on day 158. No T lesions. Lesions of J in intestine, J seen in films from intestine and isolated in culture. 16. Shorthorn. Yearling heifer. NR1, R97 and 204. NR21 (tuberculin), R 204 (tuberculin). K 220. No T lesions. Lesions of J in intestine, J seen in films from intestine and isolated in culture. 17. Jersey heifer. From alleged T-free herd. R1 and 97. NR1 (tuberculin). K 155. No T lesions and 2 gp inoculated from pharyngeal and intestinal glands failed to become infected. Unfortunately, material from the bronchial glands was not inocu- lated. Lesions of J in intestine and J seen in antiformin preparations and isolated in culture. 18. Shorthorn heifer. Nearly 2 years old. Scouring at times, latterly rather badly, but did not become emaciated. Slight R1, R92 (also anal), and 175, NR 267. R (tuberculin) 1 and 175. K 273. One mediastinal gland contained calcerous areas, which could not be demonstrated by gp inoculation to contain tubercle bacilli. 2 gp inoculated from the bronchial, pharyngeal, submaxillary and intestinal glands did not become infected. Lesions of J in intestine. J seen in films of intestine and isola- ted from intestine. (NOTE.DIAGNOSIS OF JOHNE'S DISEASE BY THE USE OF JOHNIN. 395 20. Shorthorn. Yearling heifer. NR1, 101, 311, 401, 486 and 575, R214, NR 575 (avian tuberculin). NR (tuberculin) 214 and 575. Wasted and showing diarrh396 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, IV 28. Cross-bred heifer. R1, 101, 214, 311 and 401. R (tuberculin) 21 and 214. In fat condition when K on day 430. No T lesions and 2 gp inoculated from bronchial, pharyngeal and intestinal glands did not become infected. Ileo-cæcal valve was con- gested ; J were seen in anti-formin preparations, were easily found in sections of the intestine, but were not cultivated therefrom. 29. Shorthorn cow. Aborted first calf and lost much condition. In good condition on day 1. Second calf, day 69, after which wasted somewhat. R1, 57, 154 and 225 NR (tuberculin) 1,154 and 225. K 233. No T lesions seen and 2 gp inoculated from the bronchial, pharyngeal and intestinal glands did not become infected. No lesions of J and no J seen in anti-formin preparations of intestine. J cultivated with great difficulty from intestine. 30. Shorthorn, Second calf, day 45. Poor condition after first calf, but improved and remained in fair condition after second calf, though scouring at times. R1 (also anal), and 57. NR 154 and 225. R (tuberculin) 1 and 154. NR (tuberculin 225 K 233. No T lesions and 2 gp injected from the bronchial, pharyngeal and intestinal glands did not become infected. Very slight congestion of ileo-cæcal valve, but no J seen in antiformin preparations of intestine, J isolated in culture. 31. Shorthorn. From alleged T-free herd. Second calf day 283. Rather un- thrifty condition throughout. NR1 (anal), R (anal) 123 and 227, slight R 346. NR (tuberculin) 225. K501. No T lesions and 2 gp injected from the bronchial glands did not become infected. Ileo-cæcal valve deeply congested, but no J seen in films. Sections of the intestine showed very small numbers of acid-fast bacilli like J and slight histological alterations. J were not isolated in culture. (NOTE.DIAGNOSIS OF JOHNE S DISEASE BY THE USE OF JOHNIN 397 36. Red poll. First calver. From alleged T-free herd.R1. K 126. Intestine alone examined, no lesions of J present, but J seen in films from intestine and cultivated therefrom. 37. Shorthorn. First calver. From alleged T-free herd. Good condition throughout. R1 (anal), 18 (anal), 99, 201. NR 152 (tuberculin). K208. No T lesions. No lesions of J and no J in films. 28 sections from 10 sites in the small and 5 sites in the large intestine were searched but no J were seen and there were no characteristic histological changes. J, however, were isolated in culture. 38. Shorthorn cow. Remained in good condition. R1, 92 (also anal), 190 and 267. The reaction on day 1 was slight. Indefinite R (tuberculin) 1, NR (tuberculin) 8 (subcutaneous), 190 and 267. K 310. No T lesions and 2 gp injected from bron- chial, mediastinal, pharyngeal and submaxillary glands and 2 gp injected from the intestinal glands did not become infected. Slight congestion of the ileo-cæcal valve and early J lesions present in ileum. No J seen in antiformin preparations of intestine or in sections but J isolated in culture. 39. Ayrshire cow. 4½ years. From alleged T free herd. R1 and 92. R92 (tuberculin). K 15. No T lesions seen in 2 gp inoculated from bronchial, pharyngeal and submaxillary glands and 2 from intestinal glands did not become infected. No lesions of J seen, though the mesenteric glands were rather watery. No J seen in films or sections from small or large intestine or mesenteric glands, but J colonies appeared in small numbers on media sown with material from small and large intestine. REACTORS IN WHICH THE EXISTENCE OF JOHNE'S DISEASE POST MORTEM WAS NOT PROVED Seven cases fall under this heading, though with 4 of them the diagnosis post- mortem was doubtful. With two exceptions, all were adults. All seven animals had definitely reacted to johnin and were purchased from herds in which Johne's disease was known to exist. Most of the cases were dealt with quite early in the work and a sufficiently extensive examination was not made. 40. Had not reacted to tuberculin and no evidence of T postmortem. In a smear of the small intestine after much search two or three clumps of acid- fast bacilli rather like J were seen. Antiformin deposits prepared from the ileo- cæcal valve, small and large intestine, were injected into gp but did not set up T. No definite changes and No J were found in sections from the small or large intestine. Cultures were not attempted. 41. Had shown intermittent diarrh398 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, IV 43. A bull. Did not react to tuberculin and no T lesions seen postmortem. Ileo- cæcal valve deeply congested. Cultural examination was extensive and many fruit- less attempts were made by periodic subculture to demonstrate J. After 8 months' incubation a tube of the liver extract-broth medium showed slight scaly surface growth in which acid-fast bacilli were present but no subcultures could be obtained. 44. No evidence of T. Antiformin preparations showed no acid-fast bacilli micros- copically, sections from three different sites in the ileum gave no indication of J. The cultural examination was not extensive. 45. A yearling calf, badly affected with T. Unfortunately, most of the culture from intestine and gland were contaminated. 46. A yearling calf, badly affected with T. Cultural examination of the intestine and glands for J was extensive, but the result was negative. This animal was from a group of 6 calves, 2 of which were proved later to be infected with avian tubercle bacilli. The johnin reaction in this case may have been due to infection with either avian or bovine tubercle bacilli. REACTORS IN WHICH THE PREVIOUS OR SUBSEQUENT HISTORY SUGGESTED JOHNE'S DISEASE During this work there have been a small number of animals which for various reasons could not be brought to postmortem examination, but where the history was suggestive of Johne's disease. Such cases go to substantiate the value of johnin, but do not, of course carry as much weight as those which could be thoroughly examined after death. 47. Shorthorn. Second calver. R1, 84, 196, 293 and 426. Calved a few weeks after day 426. Reported by the owner to have died a few days after calving, greatly wasted, due probably to Johne's disease. 48. Shorthorn cow. Belonged to same herd as No. 47 and mother believed to have died of J. R1, 98, 293, 391 and 524 ; NR 182. NR 524 (tuberculin). Reported to have lost flesh rapidly by day 674 and the butcher found it to be " one of the worst cases ever opened ". 49. Shorthorn. First calver. R1, when thin and scouring. Second calf day 61. Sold before day 90 " with every appearance of Johne's disease ". 50. Shorthorn. First calver. Reported by owner to have scoured badly for a time. 51. Shorthorn. Second calver. Reported by owner to scour at times. 52. Shorthorn. Third calver. Reported by owner to have scoured badly for a time. Nos. 50, 51 and 52 belonged to the same herd. 53. Friesian. Third calver, R December. Reported to have been scouring during the previous summer.
DIAGNOSIS OF JOHNE'S DISEASE BY THE USE OF JOHNIN 399 NON-REACTORS FOUND TO BE AFFECTED WITH JOHNE'S DISEASE. It is to be noted that three of these were tested once only and that one of the remainder was an advanced clinical case from the start. 54. Welsh heifer. Good condition. NR1 (anal). Showed symptoms shortly after K 48. No T lesions. Advanced lesions of J in intestine. J seen in smears and sections of intestine and isolated in culture. 55. Welsh heifer. Very poor condition. NR1 (also tuberculin). K15. No T lesions. Advanced lesions of J in intestine and numerous J in films therefrom. 56. Shorthorn cow. Fair condition. NR1 (anal). Owner suspected J shortly before slaughter. K 295. No T lesions. Slight lesions of J in intestine ; examination of sections showed numerous giant cells and small numbers of scattered J ; J isolated in culture. 57. Ayrshire heifer, in first pregnancy. Very poor and scouring. NR (also anal), 1, 111 and 132. NR 132 (tuberculin). K 141. No T lesions. No definite J lesions and no J found in films of intestine. In sections of the intestine there were numerous giant cells, but only three small acid-fast bacilli like J could be found after much search. J isolated in culture. 58. Shorthorn cow. Fair condition. NR1 (also anal) and 62. Slight R 22 (tuberculin), NR 43 (tuberculin subcutaneous). Wasted rapidly after day l. K. 66. T lesion found in one submaxillary gland only and gp inoculated from it became tuber- culous. Ileo-cæcal valve congested and slight lesions of J in ileum. J seen in films and in very large numbers in sections of the small and large intestine and were isolated in culture. 59. Shorthorn heifer. Fair condition. NR1 and 101. Thin at time of second test and became very emaciated by day 199 when K. No T lesions. Advanced lesions of J in intestine, J seen in films and in enormous numbers in sections of intestine and cultivated therefrom. DISCUSSION Reports in the literature dealing with the value of johnin, prepared in various ways and injected in most cases by the subcutaneous or intravenous route are given by Twort and Ingram [1913], M'Fadyean, Sheather and Edwards [1916], Beach, and Hastings [1922] and others. The diagnosis postmortem was based on the presence of lesions visible to the naked eye and on the finding of acid-fast bacilli in smears of the intestinal mucous membrane. As to the use of johnin intrader- mally, Broerman and Fogle [1932] reported the results of tests by the single in- jection method. Definitely positive reactions were obtained in 27 animals and of these 19 were brought to postmortem. A positive diagnosis by microscopic examination of films from the intestine was made in twelve of the 19, but slight or marked naked-eye lesions were present in three of the others. Of the eight animals not brought to postmortem, one was a clinical case. Dunkin [1928] refers to 17 reactors, of which the fate was known and which were detected in field tests by the
400 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, 'V double intradermal method. Of these eight were clinical cases and the remainder were found to be affected with Johne's disease on postmortem. Houthuis, whose results of johnin testing were reported in 1932, has made it clear to me by private communication that he examined postmortem 42 cattle of which 38 were found to be affected with Johne's disease. The diagnosis was based on an exhaustive histological examination of the intestine and glands, since macroscopic evidence of disease was absent in several cases. Johnin testing was carried out by the double intradermal method. Forty-one of the animals were tested with johnin prepared by Sheather on the Sauton synthetic medium and of these 27 reacted ; eight of the non-reactors, however, were advanced clinical cases and the other four non- reactors were positive on postmortem examination. Twenty-eight of the 42 were tested with johnin prepared by Dunk in according to the method described by him in 1928 ; of these 25 reacted, two of the non-reactors were advanced clinical cases and the remaining one was found to be affected on postmortem examination. Of the 27 reactors to Sheather johnin 25 were found to be affected with Johne's disease and two with tuberculosis only. Of the 25 reactors to Dunkin johnin 24 were found to be affected with Johne's disease and one with tuberculosis only. The results obtained with the series of 59 animals now recorded are summarised in Table I TABLE I Postmortem Examination. Johnin. + Johnin. - + . . . 39 6 + . . . 7 .. No p. m. History suggestive of Johne's disease 7 .. 53 6 From this it may be seen that of 46 reactors which were examined postmortem 39 were definitely proved to be infected with Johne's disease. The remaining seven animals were dealt with at an early stage of the work and postmortem was incomplete ; nevertheless, in four of them acid-fast bacilli which may have been those of Johne's bacilli were met with. In three of the 39 cases, viz., Nos. 37, 38 and 39, the disease was at a very early stage and a definite diagnosis was effected by cultural methods only. In two cases (Nos. 28 and 31) cultural methods failed and a diagnosis was established by finding acid-fast bacilli in films or sections of the intestine. Altogether, of the 53 animals which reacted, 39 were definitely infected
DIAGNOSIS OF JOHNE'S DISEASE BY THE USE OF JOHNIN 401 and there is evidence to indicate that eleven of the remaining 14 were also infected. Of the six animals which did not react, three were tested once only and four of the six were at an advanced clinical stage. Out of the whole series of animals two were Ayrshires, a breed not commonly reported as infected ; these belonged to a herd in England which was being recruited with this breed. In those infected animals which were subjected to several retests it was found that strong reactions were not produced every time. Occasionally, on retest the reaction was slight or indefinite, or even negative. In this connection special attention should be directed to Case 20. There may, of course, be differences of opinion as to the interpretation which should be placed on slight swellings, but this does not alter the conclusion that much variation may occur in the degree of local response. The differences may be due either to variations in the potency of the johnin used or to variations in the allergic state of the animal. The former explanation seems unlikely for several reasons. Firstly, the reagent was always made in the same way and by the same person, and variation in its properties would be less likely with a synthetic medium than with one containing albuminous fluids. The strain of Johne's bacillus used for seedling the medium gave rich growths on it and the contents of four flasks were mixed before the cultures were concentrated. Secondly, some quite definite positive reactions were obtained with every batch of the reagent used. With regard to the second explanation, it is agreed that the allergic condition created by the Johne's bacillus is relatively low, e.g., as compared with that induced by the tubercle bacillus; moreover, it would not be expected that an infected animal, even though it remained in fair condition, would maintain the same level of allergy at all times. The fact that cattle affected with Johne's disease may react well at one test and indefinitely at a subsequent one has been noted by others, though no extensive series of repeat tests has been reported. This is one of the reasons why repeated testing would be required in any serious attempt to eradicate the disease. There was nothing to show from the postmortem examinations that the reactions to johnin were connected with tuberculous infection. Tuberculous lesions were found in eight of the 39 animals, were not found in 26, and in five cases a complete postmortem was not possible. It may be noted that nine of the 26 animals referred to did show what was interpreted as a positive reaction to tuber- culin, but in four of the nine animals control tests on guinea-pigs were not made. As it happened, however, in the present series tuberculosis was not set up in, any guinea-pig inoculated from apparently healthy glands. SUMMARY An account is given of 59 cattle of which 52 were examined postmortem for Johne's disease and many for tuberculosis, fifty-three of the 59 animals had reacted to the double intradermal test with johnin, many of them on more than one occasion. Thirty-nine of the 53 were conclusively proved to be infected with
402 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [V, IV Johne's disease, while there was presumptive evidence of this infection, either from postmortem examination or from the history of the case, in eleven of the re- maining 14. Six of the 59 animals did not react to johnin, but three of them were tested once only and four of the six were at an advanced clinical stage. Repeat tests with johnin on a number of the animals showed much variation in the degree of local response, a result which is attributed to variations in the allergic state. REFERENCES Beach, B. A., and Hastings, E. G. 1922. J. Inf. Dis., 30, 68. Broerman, A., and Fogle, A. E. 1932. J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc., 81, 795. Dunkin, G. W. 1928. J. Comp. Path. and Therap, 41, 94. Griffith, A. S. 1916. Lancet, i, 723. Houthuis, M. J. J. 1932. Vet. Rec., 12, 1488. M'Fadyean, J., Sheather, A. L., and Edwards, J. T. 1912. J. Com. Path. and Therap, 25, 217 ; Ibid., 1916, 29, 134 and 201. Minett, F. C. 1933. Veterinary Record, 13, 1074. Twort, F. W., and Ingram, G. L. Y. 1913. A Monograph on Johne's Disease. Bailliere, Tindall & Cox, London.
ABSTRACTS The sheep nasal fly. A method of treatment for sheep infected with larvae of Oestrus ovis DU TOIT, R., and CLARK, R. (1935). J. South Afric. Vet. Med. Assoc. 6, 25- 32.) The treatment consists of an injection into each frontal sinus of 2 c. c. of a mixture of equal parts of carbon bisulphide and liquid paraffin by means of the following instrument (Fig. 1) . [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Trocar and canula as used for injection into the frontal sinuses of sheep. Natural size. (403)
404 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, IV It consists of a small canula, roughty 1½inches long, which is sweated to a stout metal rod having a dilated base, in such a manner that the canula projects 5/16th inch beyond the base. A rigid steel trocar, having a solid brass head fits into the canula and projects 1/8th inch beyond it. The head of the canula fits the nozzle of a Record syringe. The actual injection is made by driving in the guarded trocar and canula up to the guard flange by means of one sharp blow with a wooden mallet. In sheep showing a fair development of horn, or horn-buds approximately half-an- inch in length, the injections are made one-quarter of an inch orally to the middle of the bases of the horns, one injection being given on each side of the head. In the case of hornless sheep, the injections are made one-quarter of an inch from the mesial plane of the head on each side, on a transverse line extending between points one-quarter of an inch above the centres of the bony orbits of the eyes. The injection may be followed by symptoms of pronounced intoxication, e.g., violent sneezing and incoordination of movement, but these, as a rule, pass off entirely within half an hour. The method, however, has not been found safe for sheep under about six months of age. [S. K. S.]. Recent research in poultry nutrition A. R. G. EMSLIE. Imperial Bureau of Animal Nutrition, Technical Communication, No. 5, September 1934. In this monograph the author reviews the recent experimental work dealing with six phases of poultry nutrition, namely, " purified diets ", vitamins, minerals, " leg weakness ", mineral balance experiments and hatchability. Work on simplified diets (in which protein, fat, carbohydrates, etc., are supplied in " purified " form) has not progressed sufficiently far to enable one to tabulate all the nutritional factors required by chickens. The work which has so far been done in this connection does not seem to have much immediate practical bearing, but it is of great scientific importance in as much as it is possible to study in the laboratory a number of nutritional disturbances affecting fowls kept commercially by simply varying the diets. A knowledge of the etiology of various diseases can thereby be gained and curative and preventive measures can be instituted. The chicken's requirements for some of the vitamins has received considerable attention from the practical standpoint, but much more remains to be studied. The clinical appearance of chickens suffering from vitamin A deficiency is not very specific. The feathers are ruffled and ' staring ', and the birds are hunched up. A staggering gait, incoordination of movements, drowsiness and disinclination to move may be other features. The blood uric acid content increases to a high value and is a diagnostic feature. When however yellow maize is more than 25 per cent of the ration or some cod liver oil is given and a good grass range is provided, vitamin A deficiency is unlikely to occur. An inadequate supply of vitamin D to growing chickens will result in certain symptoms of malnutrition. Chief of these is the flexible state of the limb and breast bones and beaks. The limb and breast bones often become crooked. Postmortem
ABSTRACTS. 405 examination will often, but not invariably, reveal a beaded condition of the ribs and enlargement of the parathyroids. The ash percentage of the leg bones is subnormal and bone and plasma phosphatase values are high. Prevention under commercial conditions can be done most simply by feeding 0.5406 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [V, IV swelling usually persists from eight months to two years, average one year, but occa- sionally it may even persist for six years. As long as this focus persists, the animal is resistent to a superinfection with the natural disease. In animals which had previously contracted the infection, the swelling is rapidly eliminated either by absorption or abscess formation. As a proof of the unquestionable harmlessness of the method, mention is made of its rapidly increasing popularity, as judged from the increase in the number of premuni- tions effected, i.e., from 803 during 1929 to 12,866 for the first five months in 1934. Again, out of 33,341 premunised animals not a single case of infection traceable to the vaccination is said to have occurred. As evidence of its efficacy, the claim is put forward that the disease had been eradicated in about 140 herds by the adoption of premunition. Exceptions were noticed only in instances where premunition had not been repeated after the disappear- ance of the original nodule and in those cases where the vaccination was undertaken after the animals had contracted the infection naturally. [V. R. R.].
NOTE The Maynard-Ganga Ram Prize. In 1925 the late Sir Ganga Ram, Kt., C.I.E., M.V.O., R.B., Lahore, with that generosity for which he was so well known, handed over to the Punjab Government a sum of Rs. 25,000 for the endowment of a prize of the value of Rs. 3,000 to be called the Maynard-Ganga Ram Prize and to be awarded every three years, for a discovery, or an invention, or a new practical method which will tend to increase agricultural production in the Punjab on a paying basis. The competition is open to all throughout the world. Government servants are also eligible to compete for it. Entries for the next award were invited by the 31st December, 1933. None of the entries was considered to be of sufficient merit and it has been decided by the Managing Committee of the prize that the award should be postponed for another year and that further entries should reach the Director of Agriculture, Punjab, Lahore, on or before the 31st December, 1935. * * * * * * * * Applications are invited for " The Maynard-Ganga Ram Prize " of the value of Rs. 3,000 which will be awarded for a discovery, or an invention, or a new practical method tending to increase agricultural production in the Punjab on a paying basis. The prize is open to all, irrespective of caste, creed or nationality, and Government servants are also eligible for competition. The applicants should prove that some part of their discovery, invention, etc., is the result of work done after the prize was founded in 1925. The Managing Committee reserves to itself the right of withholding or postponing the prize, if no satisfactory achievement is reported to it. All entries in competition for the next award should reach the Director of Agriculture, Punjab, Lahore, on or before the 31st December, 1935. (407)
408 NOTICE Copies of the undermentioned publications are available for free distribution, provided the cost of packing and postage or railway freight is met by the indentor. Application should be made to the Secretary, Imperial Council of Agricultural Research (Publication Section), Imperial Record Department Building, New Delhi :409 PUBLICATIONS OF THE IMPERIAL COUNCIL OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH, INDIA 1. Agriculture and Livestock in India. A bi-monthly Journal of Agriculture and Animal Husbandry for the general reader interested in Agriculture or Livestock in India or the Tropics. (Established 1931. Pub- lished in January, March, May, July, September and November. Prepayable subscription Rs. 6 or 9s. 9d. per annum inclusive of Indian Postage. Price per part Rs. 2 or 3s.6d. inclusive of Indian Postage.) Volumes I to IV complete are available. 2. The Indian Journal of Agricultural Science. A bi-monthly Scientific Journal of Agriculture and the allied sciences, mainly devoted to the publication of the results of original research and field experiments. (Established 1931. Published in February, April, June, August, October and December. Prepayable subscription Rs. 15 or 24s. per annum inclusive of Indian postage. Price per part Rs. 3 or 5s 3 d. inclusive of Indian postage.) Volumes I to IV complete are available. 3. The Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry. A quarterly Journal for the publication of scientific matter relating to the health, nutrition and breeding of livestock. (Established 1931. Published in March, June, September and December. Prepayable subscription Rs. 6 or 9s. 9d. inclusive of Indian postage. Price per part Rs. 2 or 3s. 6d. inclusive of Indian postage.) Volumes I to IV complete are available. 4. Scientific Monographs of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research. NCAG410 NCAGINDEX TO AUTHORS A PAGE ANANT NARAYAN RAO, M., " A Note on Taenia solium Linneus 1758 in the Madras Presidency " . . . . . . . . 28 ii THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY PAGE DU TOIT, R. and CLARKE, R., " The Sheep Nasal Fly. A Method of Treatment for Sheep Infected with Larvae of Oestrus Ovis ". (Abstract) . . . . . . . . 403 E ELVEHJEM, C. A., HART, E. B., JACKSON, H. C. and WECKEL, K. G., "The Nutritional Value of MilksINDEX TO AUTHORS iii PAGE KRISHNAN, T. S. (WARTH, F. J. and) . . . . . 210, 216, 319 KRISHNA AYYAR, N., "The Influence of Progressive Ripening of Fodders on the Mineral Nutrition of Cattle. Part II. Urine Characteristics as Influenced by Progressive Ripening of Fodders " 140 KRISHNA AYYAR, P. V., " A Statistical Study of the Body Weight Figures of Special and Ordinary fed Calves at Pusa " . . . 251 KRISHNA IYER, P. R. and SARWAR, S. M., " Bovine Surra in India, with a Description of a Recent Outbreak " . . . . . . 158 L LANDER, P. E. and DHARMANI, PANDIT L. C., " Some Digestibility Trials on Indian Feeding Stuffs. Part IX. American Cotton Seeds II. (1 F and 43 F) " . . . . . . . . . . 343 LAPAGE, G., " The Bearing of the Physiology of Parasitic Nematodes on their Treatment and Control " . . . . . . . 274 LOGÉ, G. and GUILHON, J., " Traitement de la piroplasmosa équine vraie par la gonacrine. [Treatment of true equine piroplasmosis by means of gonacrine] ". (Abstract) . . . . . . . . . . 296 M MACHATTIE, C., " Theileriasis of Young Calves in Baghdad Dairies " . 288 MADDOCH, E. C. G., " Further Studies on the Survival Time of the Bovine Tubercle Bacillus in Soil, Soil and Dung, in Dung and on Grass, with Experiments on Feeding Guinea-pigs and Calves on Grass Artificially Infected with Bovine Tubercle Bacilli." (Abs- tract) . . . . . . . . . . 295 MAHAJAN, M. R., " Some Observations on the " Circling Disease " of Sheep in Hyderabad State " . . . . . . . . . . 350 MINETT, F. C., " The Diagnosis of Johne's Disease by the Use of Johnin " 389 MOHAN, R. N. (BANERJI, P. C. and) . . . . . . . . . . 64 MURNANE, D., " Carbon Tetrachloride, its Effect on the Appetite of Sheep" . . . . . . . . . . 108 iv THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY R PAGE RAJAGOPALAN, V. R. (DATTA, S. C. A. and) . . . . . 117 RINJARD, P. (VALLEE, H. and) . . . . . . . . . . 405 ROSS, I. C., " The. Passage of Fluids Through, the Ruminant Stomach, II, with Observations on the Effect of Long Starvation on Anthel- mintic Efficacy". (Abstract) . . . . . . . . . . 113 INDEX TO SUBJECTS A PAGE. Amphistomiasis (acute), of cattle, in Assam . . . . . . . . . . 364 Andamans, helminth parasites of the Indian elephant from . . 35 Anoplocephala manubriata from the Indian elephant . . . . 40 Anthelmintic efficacy, effect of long starvation on . . . . 113 Anthelmintics for the worms in alimentary canal of horse . . . 381 Assam, acute amphistomiasis of cattle in . . . . . . 364 Avian hosts, two new monostomes (trematoda) from, in British India . 49 B Bengal, goat tissue vaccine for the control of rinderpest in . 67 Biological material, determination of fats in . . . . . 355 Bleeding of fowls in Pullorum disease . . . . . 386 Blood characteristics as influenced by progressive ripening of fodders . 148 Bovine nasal schistosomiasis . . . . . . . . 266 vi THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY PAGE Cattle Diseases and pestsINDEX TO SUBJECTS vii Cattle Diseases and pestsviii THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. PAGE. Feeding and feeding stuffsINDEX TO SUBJECTS ix PAGE I Instructions to authors of publications of the Imperial Council of Agri- cultural Research . . . . . . . . 123 J Johne's disease, diagnosis of . . . . . . . . 389 X THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. P PAGE Parafilaria bovicola Tubangui, 1934, haemorrhagic filariasis in cattle caused by . . . . . . . . 207 Parasitic infestation of sheep and improved pastures . . . . 104 Paragonimus wester mani in two dogs in the Madras Presidency . . 30 Pasteurized vs. raw milk, nutritional value of . . . . . . . . 199 Pasture grasses in India, minerals in . . . . . . . . 184 Pastures, improved, and parasitic infestation of sheep . . . 104 Pjenderius birmanicus from the Indian elephant . . . . . . . . 37, 39 INDEX TO SUBJECTS xi PAGE Sheep, improved pastures and parasitic infestation of . . . 104 