ICAR. 15. VIA 650. Vol. VII 1937 THE Indian Journal of Veterinary Science AND Animal Husbandry Issued under the authority of The Imperial Council of Agricultural Research Annual subscription Price per part Rs. 6 or 9s. 9d. Rs. 2 or 3s. 6d. PUBLISHED BY THE MANAGER OF PUBLICATION, DELHI. PRINTED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, NEW DELHI. 1938. Price annas 3 or 4d.
List of Agents in India from whom Government of India Publications are available. (a) PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENT BOOK DEPOTS. MADRAS :The Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry Editorial Committee SIR BRYCE C. BURT, C.I.E., M.B.E., B.SC., I.A.S., Vice-Chairman, Imperial Council of Agricultural Research. COL. SIR ARTHUR OLVER, C.B., C.M.G., F.R.C.V.S., F.N.I., Animal Husbandry Expert, Imperial Council of Agricultural Research. W. BURNS, D.Sc., I.A.S., Agricultural Expert, Imperial Council of Agricultural Research. F. WARE, C.I.E., F.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., F.N.I., Director, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar. RAO BAHADUR B. VISWANATH, F.I.C., F.C.S., Director, Imperial Agricultural Research Institute. BURCH H. SCHNEIDER, PH. D., Professor of Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Allahabad Agricultural Institute. F. R. BHARUCHA, D. SC., Professor of Botany, Royal Institute of Science, Bombay N. C. MEHTA, I.C.S., Secretary, Imperial Council of Agricultural Research. The Editorial Committee, in its work of examining papers submitted for publication, is assisted in an honorary capacity by a large number of scientists working in various parts of India. 1. Editorial communications including books and periodicals for review should be addressed to the Secretary, Imperial Council of Agricultural Research, Publication Section, New Delhi. 2. TWENTY-FIVE reprints of contributions are supplied free of charge to the authors thereof, but additional copies can be had, provided notice is given at the time of returning the proofs. Approximate rates for the supply of 50 additional reprints are as follows :ORIGINAL ARTICLES "KUMRI" (SECOND PROGRESS REPORT) BY PROF. P. G. MALKANI, B.A. (HONS.), B.SC. (LOND. VET.), M.R.C.V.S., Research Officer and Professor of Pathology and Bacteriology, Bihar Veterinary College, Patna [Received for publication on 26th February 1936] INTRODUCTION MATERIAL for investigations forming the subject-matter of this progress report was obtained from seven cases of " Kumri " sent to the laboratory from different parts of the province. The animals were kept at the laboratory under observa- tion and treatment for variable periods and then destroyed humanely under chloroform. Careful post mortem examination was held in each case and tissues were removed and preserved for histopathological studies. Clinical observa- tions, results of the examination of blood, urine, faeces and the cerebro-spinal fluid and post mortem findings are incorporated in this report, while the correlation of the histopathological findings is held in abeyance as the greater part of this work on the central nervous system still remains to be done. CLINICAL OBSERVATIONS The cases under investigation were fairly representative of the disease in various stages. All the animals were " aged ". Out of 7 cases2 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [VII, I In all cases paresis of both the hind legs (paraplegia) was present. This was shown by the characteristic stance"KUMRI" (SECOND PROGRESS REPORT.) 3 EXAMINATION OF URINE Chemical and microscopical examination of the urine was carried out on several occasions. In all advanced cases the urine was invariably bright yellow in colour, and its consistency was such that it poured like thick linseed oil. On standing, a thick yellowish somewhat flaky sediment settled down at the bottom of the flask. Chemical examination showed that this turvidity was entirely due to carbonates and excessive amount of phosphates. This yellowish colour and thick oily consistency, with the characteristic sedimentation on standing, appeared to be so striking and invariable a feature in all advanced cases, that it might prove very helpful in the diagnosis of the disease. It was repeatedly found, that during the improvement resulting from the specific therapy advocated by this laboratory, there was a noticeable change in this character of the urine. Chemical examination failed to reveal any other abnormality. Microscopic examination showed crystals of carbonates and triple phosphates in abundance, and in each case, cylindroids were present. Repeated examination for schistosome ova gave negative results. EXAMINATION OF THE BLOOD Repeated examination of blood smears from each case failed to reveal any parasites. No corpuscular abnormalities, e.g., anisocytosis, poikilocytosis, polychromasia, or nucleated red cells were met with. Each case, however, showed a slight but distinct increase in the number of eosinophiles, and this was proved by the differential count, which showed the eosinophiles to be 14-16 per cent of the total number of leucocytes (normal for the horse being 3-4 per cent.) H4 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [VII, I in surra, and each sample carefully examined for protozoan and helminthic (schis- tosomes and filaria) parasites. The results were in all cases negative. The fluid was found to be clear in all cases except one, in which the turbidity was obviously due to accidental admixture with blood. Examination of the cellular content of the fluid by Thoma Zeiss counting apparatus revealed, in three cases, only a " slight mononucleur Pleocytosis ". Two of the four samples showed traces of glucose, while the other two failed to show any glucose when tested with Fehling's reagent. Pandy's test gave, in two cases, an " Opalescence " showing the presence of globulin. No quantitative examination of albumen could be carried out, but qualitative examination by Aufrecht's method showed about equal amount of albumen in all the four cases. POST-MORTEM FINDINGS All the cases at the laboratory were humanely destroyed by chloroform and careful post mortem examinations were carried out. The abnormalities noted in connection with the different parts were as follows :"KUMRI" (SECOND PROGRESS REPORT.) 5 Peritoneum 6 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [VII, I In the different regions of the spinal cord also, close searching, combined with cover slip and smear examination, failed to reveal any protozoa, helminths or their ova. In two cases gelatinous infiltration was observed around the cord in the dorsal and lumbar regions. In no case was there however, any macros- copic evidence of patchy or leptomeningitis. Even in the cases in which the lumbar region of the cord showed disorganization, there was no morbid alteration of the dural, arachnoid, and pial membranes. The morbid anatomy of the substance of the cord, as revealed by close inspec- tion of its cut surface, appeared to vary according to the stage at which the animal was destroyed. In less severe cases, and specially those that had responded to treatment, the grey matter did not show anything beyond a few punctate hae- morrhages, specially in the lumbar region of the cord. In more advanced cases there was a distinct vascularity of the grey matter giving it a pink appearance. In the case which was clinically very advanced, and which gave no response whatsoever to specific therapy with compounds of antimony, the lumbar portion of the cord appeared to have had undergone such disorganisation that the line of demarcation between the grey and white matter was rendered quite indis- tinct. The white matter did not show any marked naked eye abnormality in five cases. In two other cases (Bhutani and Arrah Black) the white matter of the first part of the lumbar cord showed, specially in the vicinity of posterior cornuas, small pea-sized tumour-like growths. Only one such tumour was present in the Bhutani, while the Arrah pony showed two, one near each cornua of the grey matter. The surface of the cord opposite to that containing the tumours showed in each case a cavity in which the tumour was apparently lodged in the intact cord. Histological examination, now in progress, will reveal whether these growths are neoplasmatic gliomas, or merely the result of hypergliosis. DISCUSSION Clinical observations detailed in this report have revealed sufficient uni- formity in the syndrome to justify regarding " Kumri " as an entity. The para- plegia with the elements of ataxy and spasticity, the absence of muscular wasting of trophic and sensory disturbances and the non-affection of rectal and vesical sphincters are seen in each case. Many workers have written about the diffi- culties of diagnosis in cases of " Kumri". Series of observations have shown that wherever with the symptom complex, usually described, one gets the charac- teristic thick sedimenting urine, rich in phosphates, and showing cylindroids on microscopical examination, one can be pretty certain that one is dealing with a case of " Kumri." The results of the chemical and microscopical examination of the cerebro- spinal fluid would appear to show some points of correspondence with the syndrome met with in human disseminated sclerosis, in so far as the slight cell increase and
''KUMRI" (SECOND PROGRESS REPORT.) 7 the weak globulin reactions are concerned. It remains to be seen whether Lange's Colloidal Gold reaction will yield a " paretic " type of Lange's curve, and whether quantitative examination of the protein will reveal little or no excess, for, then the correspondence between the two diseases would be exactA PRELIMINARY MICROPHOTOGRAPHIC STUDY OF THE FAT GLOBULES OF THE MILK OF INDIAN BREEDS OF COWS AND BUFFALOES BY ZAL R. KOTHAVALLA, B.AG. (BOM.), B.SC. AGRI. (EDIN.), N.D.D. (SCOT.) AND S. D. SUNAWALA, M.Sc., A.I.I.Sc. (Received for publication on 7th October 1936) (With Plates I-VI) INTRODUCTION THE size, shape and number of fat globules of milk are of practical importance in the separation of milk, the churning of cream, the shipping of milk or cream over long distances, in cheese-making and in the manufacture of other products of milk. The size of fat globules bears a relationship to the churning of cream as the cream with larger fat globules churns with less agitation than that in which the smaller globules predominate. The size is of further importance in connection with the handling and shipping of milk. Milk having large globules churns more rapidly and when transported over long distances may show evidence of partial churning in the form of butter granules on the surface, which makes the milk unsuitable for marketing purposes. Most of the Western breeds of cattle have been studied and classified according to the suitability of their milk for different dairy products like butter, cheese, milk, etc., depending on the size, shape and number of fat globules in it. For example, the Channel Island breeds, (e.g., the Jersey and the Guernsey) are known as " butter breeds " due to the fact that besides containing a higher percentage of fat their milk contains fat globules of large size, which makes them very suitable for easy churning and consequently for butter-making. Similarly of all the British breeds the Short Horn and the Ayrshire are considered more suitable for cheese-making because of their milk having fat globules of medium size and fairly uniform in shape. The Indian breeds of cattle had not, however, been syste- matically studied so far from that point of view and this work was, therefore, undertaken by the authors to ascertain whether by the study of the size, shape (8)
MICROPHOTOGRAPHIC STUDY OF FAT GLOBULES OF MILK. 9 and number of fat globules in the milk of various Indian breeds of cows and buffaloes, a similar classification could be made which would help the dairyman in the choice of the breed of cow or buffalo most suitable for his requirement. Early history of the detection of fat globules in milk.10 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [VII, I Amrutmahal, etc., although unintentional was unavoidable due to lack of proper response from the sources from which the samples were to be obtained:MICROPHOTOGRAPHIC STUDY OF FAT GLOBULES OF MILK. 11 be detrimental to the fat globules when used in fairly large quantities, was found to be most suitable. The minimum quantity of formalin required for keeping the milk fat globules in their original condition for even upto a fortnight, was found by experiments to be about six drops to a pound of milk. The above conditions were found to be most practicable, since the samples received from such distant places as Baluchistan, Punjab and Assam were in the most satisfactory condition for the purposes of this experiment. The experimental work was carried out during the first quarter of the year during which time the summer had not advanced so far as to have very harmful effect on the samples during transit. Method employed in taking the photographs.12 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [VII, I Number, size and shape of fat globules in the milk of the breeds of Indian cattle TABLE I N.B.MICROPHOTOGRAPHIC STUDY OF FAT GLOBULES OF MILK. 13 TABLE III In this table the breeds have been arranged according to the size of the fat globules present in their milk. Breed Diameter of globules of normal size (in microns) Globules of normal size Four globulos of biggest size* Murrah buffaloes . 5.7 5.7 5.7 5.7 5.7 11.0 10.0 9.0 8.6 Nagpuri buffaloes . 5.7 5.7 5.7 5.7 5.7 11.4 11.4 10.0 9.2 Surti buffaloes . 5.4 5.4 5.4 5.4 5.4 10.0 9.2 8.6 8.6 Ayrshire cows . 3.7 3.7 3.7 3.7 3.7 7.1 7.1 7.1 6.3 Kangiam cows . 3.7 3.7 3.7 3.7 3.7 11.4 11.4 11.0 10.0 Half-bred cows . 3.4 3.4 3.4 3.4 3.4 7.1 6.3 6.3 6.3 Scindi cows . 3.4 3.4 3.4 3.4 3.4 10.0 7.3 7.1 7.1 Hariana cows . 3.4 3.4 3.4 3.4 3.4 10.0 7.1 7.1 7.1 Tharparkar cows . 3.4 3.4 3.4 3.4 3.4 6.3 6.3 5.7 5.7 Ongole cows . . 3.1 3.1 3.1 3.1 3.1 6.3 6.3 5.7 5.7 Gir cows . . 3.1 3.1 3.1 3.1 3.1 6.3 5.7 5.7 5.7 Dhanni cows . 2.9 2.9 2.9 2.9 2.9 5.7 5.7 5.7 5.7 Krishna Valley cows 2.9 2.9 2.9 2.9 2.9 5.7 5.7 5.7 5.7 Malwi cows . 2.9 2.9 2.9 2.9 2.9 6.3 5.7 5.7 5.7 Assamese cows 2.9 2.9 2.9 2.9 2.9 6.3 5.7 5.7 5.7 Kankrej cows . 2.9 2.9 2.9 2.9 2.9 8.7 7.1 7.1 7.1 * N.B.14 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [VII, I CONCLUSION From the above observations it can, therefore, be concluded that:Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. VII, Pt. I ] PLATE I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Compact outfit manufactured by Messrs. E. Leitz, Watzler for taking direct micro-photographs.
Ind. Jour, of Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. Vol. VII, Pt. I ] PLATE II MICROPHOTOGRAPHS OF FAT GLOBULES IN MILCH BREEDS OF COWS. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] No. 1. Scindi [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] No. 2. Gir [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] No. 3. Tharparkar [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] No. 4. Hariana
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. VII, Pt. I PLATE III MICROPHOTOGRAPHS OF FAT GLOBULES IN MILCH BREEDS OF COWS. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] No. 5 Kankrej [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] No. 6. Ongole [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] No. 7. Krishna Valley
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. VII, Pt. I. PLATE IV MICROPHOTOGRAPHS OF FAT GLOBULES IN BREEDS OF COWS. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] No. 8. Half Bred (Milch) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] No. 9. Ayrshire (Milch) [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] No. 10. Kangiam (Draft Breed)
Ind. Jour. Vet, Sci. & Anim. Hus., Vol. VII, Pt. I PLATE V MICROPHOTOGRAPHS OF FAT GLOBULES IN DRAFT BREEDS OF COWS. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] No. 11. Assamese [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] No. 12. Malvi [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] No. 13. Dhanni
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. VII, Pt. I ] PLATE VI MICROPHOTOGRAPHS OF FAT GLOBULES IN MILCH BREEDS OF BUFFALOES [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] No. 14. Murrah Buffalo [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] No. 15. Surti Buffalo [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] No. 16. Nagpuri Buffalo
THEILERIASIS OF CATTLE IN INDIA BY S. K. SEN, M.Sc., F.R.E.S., AND M. K. SRINIVASAN, G.M.V.C., Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Muktesar. [Received for publication on 30th October 1936] (With Plate VII and three text-figures). CONTENTS PAGE INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . 15 SOURCE OF STRAIN . . . . . . . . 18 HOST SUSCEPTIBILITY . . . . . . . . 21 INCUBATION PERIOD . . . . . . . . . 21 SYMPTOMS . . . . . . . . . . . 21 BLOOD PICTURE . . . . . . . . . . 26 HAEMATOLOGICAL CHANGES IN RELATION TO PROGNOSIS . . . 27 POST-MORTEM APPEARANCES . . . . . . . . 28 VIABILITY OF STRAIN . . . . . . . . 28 LOCALIZATION OF ' VIRUS ' . . . . . . . . 28 IMMUNITY TESTS . . . . . . . . . . 29 IDENTITY OF PARASITE . . . . . . . . 30 CURATIVE TREATMENT AND PROPHYLAXIS. . . . . . 33 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS . . . . . . . . 34 REFERENCES . . . . . . . . . . 36 INTRODUCTION BOVINE theileriasis, as a condition distinct from redwater (Babesia bigemina infection) of cattle, was first recognized in India in 1925, when Edwards reported the occurrence in hill bulls of a species of protozoan parasite conforming with the (15)
16 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. ] VII, I description of Theileria mutans. Previous to this, Theileria parasites in India used to be designated as " small piroplasms ", as distinguished from B. bigemina or " large piroplasms ", the presence of any of these forms in blood smears being held to " indicate infection with the causative agent of tropical ' red- water ' " [Edwards, 1925]. About the same time, Cooper, working at this Insti- tute, discovered certain structures, indistinguishable from Koch's blue bodies, in the lesions of bulls that had died after inoculation with rinderpest virus, these lesions presenting a resemblance to those of East Coast Fever, the blood picture in these fatal infections having been later characterized by Edwards [1930] as follows : " Almost 100 per cent of the cells were invaded, often with numerous parasites, and in some cases the elongated bacillary forms of piroplasms were frequent or even preponderated, instead of the oval form usually found almost exclusively in the latent type of infection". Structures, similar to those discovered by Cooper, have since been not infrequently encountered in this country, both in the blood and organ smears from acute cases of natural theileriasis in cattle, the parasite concerned in all such cases having been believed to be T. mutans, which, as is well known, is of widespread occurrence in the blood of cattle in India. The conditions under which this species of parasite, which is normally innocuous for the bovine species, attains the status of a virulent variant for these animals have been the subject of speculation, and the view has been tentatively advanced that the parasite might "gain special pathogenic properties in the body of a highly susceptible host'' [Edwards, 1925], this possibility being suggested by the fact that Brumpt, in Paris, succeeded in exalting an Algerian strain of T. mutans by passag- ing it through French cattle that were normally free from infection with this parasite. It would appear that this was the only position that could be taken at the time concerning the identity of the parasite, particularly in view of the fact that all attempts to transmit the disease experimentally were consistently nega- tive, this being held to be suggestive of the existence of a "carrier" infection in the majority of the cattle population in, this country. Since the foregoing observations were published, however, the position in regard to bovine theileriasis in different parts of the world has passed through a series of vicissitudes and the problem has now attained a degree of complexity which is perhaps not shared by any other protozoan disease of animals. In India itself, a mass of new facts has come to light necessitating a revision of the view previously advanced in regard to the specific identity of the parasite involved in fatal cases of theileriasis in cattle. One salient fact that has emerged out of the controversy that has centred, round the question of the identity of these parasites is the unreliability of their morphological features as an indication of the extent of their pathogenicity. As pointed out by Sergent and his collaborators [1927], the actual pathognomonic element in theileriasis is the presence of the plasma bodies, so that the question of the specific identity of the theileria parasites themselves assumes a position of only secondary importance. On the other hand,
THEILERIASIS OF CATTLE IN INDIA. 17 recent evidence would appear to point to the conclusion that even these bodies possess but a limited qualitative significance from the standpoint of pathogenesis, in view of their association, although in " extremely rare " numbers [du Toit, 1930 a] with T. mutans, which, as already mentioned, is regarded by common con- sent as a harmless species. A number of biological properties have been postulated from time to time as capable of being utilized for the differential diagnosis of the various species of Theileria parasites, but with, the acquisition of more intimate knowledge concerning these properties, they have been found to possess but little specific value. Thus, the causal agent (T. parva) of East Coast Fever, which at one time had been believ- ed to be non-inoculable with blood, has now proved to be definitely, although with difficulty, transmissible in this manner, whilst Bevan [1924] has even advanced the theory of latency, in an unrecognised form, of T. parva parasites in a proportion of recovered cases, although it has been, an almost established opinion that the immunity developed after recovery from T. parva infection is both solid and sterile. A similar view has also been more recently expressed by Walker [1930], who reports having obtained evidence of the fact that " recovery from an original attack of T. parva did not confer a solid and lasting immunity ". Finally, the status of T. parva itself, as the causal agent of East Coast Fever, has been questioned by Richardson [1930], who would seem inclined to the view that the condition is in, reality induced by an ultra-visible virus. It would thus appear that it is the quantitative combination of a number of dissimilar elements that is now held to be diagnostic of the different species of Theileria parasites. Thus, as Richardson [1930] points out, there is " little to dis- tinguish between T. mutans and T. parva except the more numerous blue bodies and parasites in the latter infection ". Furthermore, referring to certain blood smears sent by Cooper from India and showing numerous blue bodies, Richardson remarks that " had they been encountered in Africa, they would have led to the diagnosis of East Coast Fever ". The systematic side of theileriasis has thus assumed the aspect of a com- parative science, with a considerable amount of scope for the expression of indi- vidual opinions, and this makes it a matter of difficulty to reach an objective decision on the several issues involved, particularly in regard to the relationship of one form of Theileria parasite to another. This is strikingly illustrated in the discordant views held on the subject. Thus, while, according to Carpano [1930], Tropical Piroplasmosis, East Coast Fever and T. dispar infection are all one and the same condition and caused by T. annulata, Van Saceghem [1924], on the other hand, regards T. parva as the only " good " species and T. dispar and T. mutans merely forms of this. Doyle [1924], however, disputes the identity of T. mutans with T. parva and considers the latter as being limited to Africa south of the equator D
18 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [VII, I and T. mutans as being responsible for the forms of theileriasis occurring in Egypt, Sudan, Transcaucasus and the Mediterranean littoral. The unique practice of classifying the disease in different categories in accordance with the name of the locality in which it is known to occur, (e.g., " East Coast Fever ", " Egyptian Fever ", " Mediterranean Coast Fever ", " Tropical Piroplasmosis ", etc.), further illustrates the difficulty of adopting the conventional method of designating the condition on the basis of the specific identity of the causal organisms. It would seem that a considerable amount of further data will have to be acquired in regard to the nature of the problem of theileriasis itself before its solu- tion can be attempted on a rational basis, and it is mainly with the object of con- tributing towards that end that the present article has been written. It is hoped that the observations embodied herein will be found to contain some new matter for consideration, particularly in relation to pathogenesis of the disease and the phenomenon of immunity. The present paper deals with work carried out, during the period from June 1932 to August 1934, with a strain of Theileria parasites isolated from a fatal case of the disease in a hill bull at Muktesar. The strain is still being kept alive by passaging, but the observations carried out after August 1934 mainly concern a method of treating the condition with anti-serum and they will form the subject of a second communication. The paper also includes, at relevant points, brief references to the more im- portant outbreaks of theileriasis that have occurred during recent years among Friesian bulls imported into India for the use of the Military Dairy Department. It is our pleasant duty to express our grateful thanks to Mr. F. Ware, F.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., Director of the Institute, for much helpful advice and guidance and for keeping us constantly alive to the importance of this investigation. In our account of the outbreaks of theileriasis among imported bulls, we have freely drawn from the observations recorded by Dr. J. T. Edwards, the late Mr. Hugh Cooper, Captain S. C. A. Datta and Mr. P. R. Krishna Iyer, and for this we are greatly indebted to them. Our thanks are due to Mr. Sunder Rao and Mr. Ahmed Baksh, Artists, for preparing the illustrations. SOURCE OF STRAIN Previous to the work described in this paper, several attempts had been made to transmit the disease experimentally to hill bulls, but, as already mentioned, these attempts had been unsuccessful. On going over the records of these trials, it seemed to us that the failure to transmit the disease in this manner might have
THEILERIASIS OF CATTLE IN INDIA. 19 been due to the fact that the infective material had lost its viability by the time it was used for sub-inoculation into experimental animals. In the present trials, therefore, the material for sub-inoculation was derived from an animal that was destroyed in extremis at a stage when its blood showed Theileria parasites to the extent of about 1 to 10 in each red blood-corpuscle, associated with fairly large numbers of Koch's blue bodies found both free and in the large mono-nuclear leucocytes. Oboldouef and Galouzo [1928], in experimenting with a species of Theileria, designated by them T. turkestanica, used emulsions of gland materials and defibri- nated blood for purposes of subinoculation. On the other hand, Walker and Whitworth [1929], in Kenya, in the course of their experiments upon the artificial immunization in East Coast Fever, observed that the disease could be transmitted not only by the inoculation of blood and gland juice, but also of spleen pulp, this last having yielded the largest percentage of successes. The infective materials used in our experiments comprised, in addition to the three mentioned above, emulsions of liver, kidney and lung. The quantity of infective material used ranged from 100 to 200 c. c. and the inoculations were given by the intravenous route, one bull being used for each type of inoculum. The results obtained in the case of the two bulls which received the liver and lung emulsions were of an entirely negative order, but all others developed symptoms of acute theileriasis as a result of the infective inoculation, and in three out of these four animals the disease progressed to a fatal issue (it is, however, noteworthy that material derived from liver has since proved infective). The batch of four reactors mentioned above formed the starting point of the present inquiry, the strain being carried on from these and maintained to this day in hill bulls by blood inoculation. An injection of 5 c. c. of blood usually resulted in infection, but, in order to ensure against the strain being lost, the quantity actually used as a routine procedure was 20 to 30 c. c. administered subcutaneously, the blood being drawn at the height of thermal reaction, when the parasites, as also Koch's bodies, appeared in fairly large numbers in the peripheral circulation, although in a few cases the disease was also successfully reproduced by the inoculation of blood drawn at the height of temperature but containing only few parasites and apparently no Koch's bodies. In all, forty-four sub-passages, involving the use of 273 bulls, have been carried out (Table I) without any evidence of the strain having undergone either attenuation or exaltation in virulence. Nearly 47 per cent of the animals proved refractory to the infection, whilst the mortality rate amongst those that developed the disease as a result of infective inoculation amounted to nearly 76 per cent.
20 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [VII, I TABLE I Showing the number of sub-passages carried out through hill bulls and their results No. of passages No. of bulls used for each passage No. of reactors in each passage Average incuba- tion period in days Deaths Recoveries Immune or non- reactors Remarks I . . *6 4 14 3 1 2 * Infective materials from the original (natural) case. II . . 6 3 16 3 .. 3 III . . 2 1 16 .. 1 1 IV . . 4 3 19 3 .. 1 V . . 4 4 15 4 .. .. VI . . 4 4 19 2 2 .. VII . . 4 1 16 1 .. 3 VIII . . 6 3 16 2 1 3 IX . . 6 3 16 3 .. 3 X . . 6 3 18 3 .. 3 XI . . 8 4 16 2 2 4 XII . . 10 6 15 6 .. 4 XIII . . 6 3 15 3 .. 3 XIV . . 4 2 18 1 1 2 XV . . 8 1 18 1 .. 7 XVI . . 8 5 14 5 .. 3 XVII . 6 6 16 4 2 .. XVIII . 9 5 18 3 2 4 XIX . . 10 5 15 4 1 5 XX . . 6 4 15 4 .. 2 XXI . . 6 3 14 2 1 3 XXII . 6 3 16 3 .. 3 XXIII . 6 2 15 2 .. 4 XXIV . 6 4 16 3 1 2 XXV . 6 2 16 1 1 4 XXVI . 6 4 17 4 .. 2 XXVII . 6 3 15 2 1 3 XXVIII . 6 1 19 .. 1 5 XXIX . 6 4 17 4 .. 2 XXX. 7 3 16 2 1 4 XXXI 6 3 14 1 2 3 XXXII . 6 3 16 .. 3 3 XXXIII . 6 2 15 .. 2 4 XXXIV . 6 2 20 2 .. 4 XXXV 6 2 16 2 .. 4 XXXVI . 6 1 23 1 .. 5 XXXVII . 12 6 18 3 3 6 XXXVIII . 6 2 17 1 1 4 XXXIX . 5 4 16 3 1 1 XL . 6 3 16 2 1 3 XLI . 6 6 16 4 2 .. XLII . 6 6 15 6 .. .. XLIII . 6 2 16 2 .. 4 XLIV . 6 4 15 3 1 2 273 bulls 145 or 53.1 per cent 16 days (average of 145 reactors) 110 or 75.86 per cent 35 or 24.14 per cent 128 or 46.9 per cent
PHEILERIASIS OF CATTLE IN INDIA. 21 HOST SUSCEPTIBILITY All experimental evidence points to the conclusion that the parasite is specific to cattle. Its infectivity was tested upon two buffaloes, two sheep, two goats and a rabbit, but the results were negative. INCUBATION PERIOD The period of incubation of the disease, i.e., the time intervening between the infective inoculation and the appearance in the circulating blood of either the parasites or Koch's bodies or both, associated with an elevation of the body temperature, was found to be 13 to 23 days, the average of about 145 reactors being 16 days. SYMPTOMS The first noticeable symptom of the disease is an elevation of the body tem- perature, which may be to the extent of 3 to 4 degrees or more above the normal, this being accompanied by a running from the eyes, mouth and nostrils. The animal, however, continues to feed well during the first two or three days after the onset of these symptoms, but as the disease advances it develops progressive inappetence, until eventually it goes completely off its feed. At the beginning of the pyrexial period, the faeces are very hard, but diarrhoea soon sets in, and when the disease runs a prolonged course, the evacuations are frequently mixed with blood and mucus, although the urine usually remains unchanged. By this time, the animal becomes greatly emaciated and assumes a recumbent position. In a majority of cases, the prescapular and precrural glands are enlarged and tender, whilst the visible mucous membrane of the eyes shows varying degrees of icterus and petechiae. In a proportion of cases (Fig. 1), the temperature suddenly drops down to subnormal before death ensues, but when death occurs early, the temperature usually remains high, whilst in a few instances it has been found to fluctuate within wide limits. A careful examination of blood smears taken at the first rise of body temperature frequently reveals the presence, although in very rare numbers, of either the parasites or Koch's bodies, and in a few instances both have been observed in the same smear, but the presence of these is demonstrable in large numbers only from about the third day of the disease. In fatal cases, the disease usually runs a course of 3 (Fig. 2) to 11 days, the average of about thirty-five cases being 5 . 5 days. Recovery, when it takes place, extends over a period of 4 to 17 days, the average of nine recovered cases being 8.2 days (Fig. 3). It is of interest that in a few instances the parasites continued to make their appearance, although in very small numbers, in the blood circulation for about 2 days after the animals had, to all appearances, accomplished a clinical recovery and had resumed their normal feeding.
22 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Somewhat prolonged incubation period (17 days). Temperature drops Suddenly to subnormal before death occurs.
THEILERIASIS OF CATTLE IN INDIA. 23 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Incubation period very much prolonged (21 days). Duration of illness very short (about 3 days).
24 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
THEILERIASIS OF CATTLE IN INDIA. 25 The symptoms described above present a striking contrast, in several essential points, to those observed at Lahore, during November 1928, in an outbreak of natural theileriasis which occurred amongst a batch of twelve pure-bred Friesian stud bulls imported from South Africa. These observations, as made by Dr. J. T. Edwards and incorporated in a manuscript report left by the late Mr. Hugh Cooper, were as follows : " The symptoms of the disease consist of suddenly occurring and prolonged fever. The temperature remains constantly very high (105° to 107°F.) but no other symptoms are exhibited for the first few days. As soon as parasites (T. mutans) appear in the blood stream, however, the temperature begins to waver, to fall and rise again, but usually it never becomes so high as in the early stage. It is with the appearance of the parasites in the blood that other symptoms are shown. The most striking and characteristic symptom is profuse lachrymation. A watery discharge may also exude from the nostrils. The affected animals exhibit pica, or depraved appetite, to a marked degree. The coat becomes harsh and ' staring ' and the animals become pro- gressively weaker, and lose condition, when the superficial lymphatic glands are seen distinctly protruding beneath the skin. The loss in condition occurs in spite of the fact that the animals may feed quite well until within a day or two of death. The flanks particularly become hollow, and in the bull which died at Lahore breathing became hurried and apparently very painful, as seen in pleurisy. This symptom might have been attributable to the extreme anaemia exhibited. Estimations made show that the red blood-corpuscles are probably reduced in some cases to as low as about one-fifth of the normal. The visible mucous membranes become markedly anaemic in appearance, and in the latter stages some degree of icterus is present. Diarrhoea may supervene, and death is usually protracted. In the bull which died at Lahore, until very shortly before death it appeared that recovery might still take place, as parasites had become markedly reduced in number in the blood, and the animal was still able to move about readily ". It should be mentioned that the rate of mortality in this outbreak was relatively low, for death occurred only in three (25 per cent) out of the twelve animals affected, the degree of severity of the affection observed in the remaining nine animals being stated to be as follows :26 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [VII, I On the other hand, the thermal symptoms observed in these animals were usually of a remittent type, although in a few instances the temperature continued to remain high and even went up to 107°F. The condition in the Kirkee outbreak was, to all appearances, a chronic form of theileriasis, as is evidenced by the history of some of the animals. Thus, in one instance, the disease, after running an indifferent course, with periods of prolonged absence of any clinical symptom, suddenly assumed an acute form and progressed to a fatal issue after lasting for only one or two days. The examination of blood smears from the affected animals, however, showed, as a rule, the presence of only rare Theileria parasites and Koch's bodies, but in one instance the blood smears showed numerous parasites in the acute stage of the disease, about 50 per cent of the red blood-corpuscles being invaded, although the anaemic changes were almost negligible. It is worthy of note that in the Kirkee outbreak death occurred in only three out of a batch of ten affected bulls (30 per cent), so that this relatively low mortality rate presents a striking parallel to what was found to be the case in the Lahore outbreak, BLOOD PICTURE As already mentioned, the parasites make their appearance within the first few (usually one to three) days of the first rise of body temperature, although at this time they occur in extremely small numbers, not more than one parasite being seen in any one corpuscle. As the disease, however, advances, they rapidly in- crease in number and may eventually invade 50 to 100 per cent of the red blood- corpuscles, as many as ten parasites having been seen in a single corpuscle. In regard to Koch's bodies, these usually vary in number from " rare " to " numer- ous ", a maximum of ten having been seen in a single field. Both forms (gamonts and agamonts) have been observed and it is also not unusual to encounter occasional examples of " split up " forms. Koch's bodies have also been encountered in preparations made from the internal organs, e .g., lymphatic glands, spleen, liver, lungs, kidneys, testicles and even from lesions in the stomach. The Theileria parasites are usually seen as round or slightly oval forms, having the appearance of signet rings (Plate VII), and they are mostly uniform in size, measuring from one to two microns in diameter. The chromatin, particularly that at the peripheral portion of the parasite, takes the stain well, two chromatin spots being sometimes connected together, but the cytoplasm, which takes a pale blue colour when stained with Giemsa's or Leishman's stain, can only be seen in outline. It is extremely rare to encounter the rod forms of the parasite, and when they are present they presumably represent the " carrier " forms of T. mutans, inasmuch as the latter are commonly met with even in the incubative stage of the disease. It is of interest that Babesia bigemina, in " rare " to " very large " numbers, was observable in more than 60 per cent of the bulls that reacted to artificial infection with theileriasis, both during the period of incubation and in the early
Ind. Jour.Vet. Sci. & Anim. Hus., Vol. VII, Pt. I. PLATE VII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Theileria sp. (Type B), associated with Koch's blue bodies, as seen in acute infections in Indian (Hill) cattle × 1,000.
THEILERIASIS OF CATTLE IN INDIA. 27 stages of the disease, but they completely disappeared as soon as the Theileria parasites appeared in fairly large numbers and in no instance were B. bigemina parasites seen in the blood in the acute stage of theileriasis or during the period immediately following this stage. The occurrence of these parasites in the incubative stage of Theileria infection did not appear to be associated with any special clinical symptoms, except for an occasional rise in the body temperature. It is of interest that the occurrence of B. bigemina has also been, found by Sergent and his collaborators [1927] to be associated with T. dispar, the latter having been isolated by them by rapid passage in vivo and by the use of trypanblue. The blood picture described above would appear to differ in some essential features from that described by Cooper (in manuscript report) in the case of the outbreak of theileriasis amongst imported bulls at Lahore, mentioned earlier in this paper, for in this outbreak the parasites did not appear in the circulating blood until " after the first few days of fever ", although later on they increased progressively in number. Cooper also mentions the fact that although in the case of the Lahore outbreak the percentage of invaded corpuscles reached as high as 70 in. certain instances, with from one to ten parasites in a single corpuscle, these gradually decreased in number towards the latter part of the disease, so that not more than 3 to 4 per cent of the corpuscles were found invaded at the time of death. In the animals that recovered, " the parasites were still present in very small numbers until the investigation was concluded ". Concerning the occur- rence of Koch's bodies, Cooper mentions the interesting fact that, while in cases of acute theileriasis amongst hill bulls these bodies progressively increased in number as the disease advanced and were usually numerous at death, they were encountered in extremely small numbers throughout the course of the infection in the Lahore outbreak and in the case of one bull, they were " almost if not quite absent" at death. On the other hand, the blood smears taken from one of the bulls that died at Kirkee and forwarded to this Institute showed, on microscopical examination, very large numbers of parasites, about 50 per cent of the red blood-corpuscles being invaded. The parasites were mostly round forms, but ovoid and bacillary forms were also present. The majority of these were in singles, but parasites in groups of two or three were also common, with a maximum of six individuals seen in a single corpuscle. HAEMATOLOGICAL CHANGES IN RELATION TO PROGNOSIS The sequence of changes occurring in the blood of an affected animal has been found to furnish a fairly reliable indication as to its chances of recovery (Fig. 3). In the event of prognosis being good, the first noticeable change in the blood picture is the occurrence of anisocytosis, not infrequently associated with a distortion of a proportion of the red blood-corpuscles. Later, polychromatophilia supervenes and this is usually associated with granular basophilic degeneration, whilst it is not even unusual to notice at this stage a certain amount of punctate degeneration of nucleated red cells.
28 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [VII, I POST-MORTEM APPEARANCES The most constant post-mortem findings are a thin and watery character of the blood, oedema and enlargement of the superficial and internal lymphatic glands and of the spleen and a gelatinized condition of the body fat. There are petechiae of the serous and mucous membranes and also of the epicardium and endocardium and large numbers of irregular petechial marks on the larynx, pharynx and the trachea. The lungs are frequently oedematous, whilst the abomasum usually shows characteristic ulcers which may vary in size from a pea to a rupee coin, these ulcers consisting of a central block of necrotic area surrounded by a haemorrhagic zone. Similar ulcers, associated with petechial marks, may be found along the whole length of the intestines. There may be haemorrhagic infarcts present in the kidneys, but this has not been found diagnostic of the condition. The thoracic and abdominal cavities usually show varying quantities of serous and sero- sanguineous fluid. Unfortunately little exact information, for comparison with the foregoing des- cription, is available concerning the post-mortem appearances in the cases of natural theileriasis that have occurred amongst imported Friesian bulls in this country. In one of the animals that died at Lahore, the liver showed necrotic patches with a yellow centre and a deep greenish periphery and extending through- out the parenchyma, whilst the bile was "thick like the consistence of thin porridge". The abomasum showed many minute petechiae confined only to the centre, whilst the mucous membrane was found to contain " intense lesions of a peculiar kind consisting of innumerable circumscribed small patches in all stages of development into wellformed ulcers ". The post-mortem appearances in, the case of two imported bulls which died at Kirkee consisted of an enlargement of the liver and spleen, and in one of the animals the kidney, too, was enlarged, whilst in the other there was evidence of vegetative epicarditis, associated with the occurrence of petechiae under the epicardium. VIABILITY OF STRAIN A short series of experiments was carried out to determine the length of time for which Theileria parasites remain viable both at room temperature (21°-22° C.) and in the refrigerator. For this purpose, blood showing large numbers of these parasites was drawn under sterile precautions and defibrinated before storage and its infectivity was tested, at different intervals, upon bulls. It was observed that blood kept at room temperature remained infective up to 96 hours and that stored in the refrigerator completely lost its infectivity within six days. LOCALIZATION OF " VIRUS " In view of the opinion expressed by Richardson [1930] that the causal agent of East Coast Fever might in reality be an ultra-visible virus, a series of experiments, as detailed below, was carried out to test the infectivity of serum and laked blood after these had been filtered.
THEILERIASIS OF CATTLE IN INDIA 29 Experiments with filtered serum.30 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [VII, I An examination of this table shows that animals after recovery from the infection develop what, to all appearances, is a solid and sterile immunity, this being in contrast with the type of immunity observed in the imported bulls, for in the latter case "it is believed that recovery from an attack leaves no real immu- nity and that the animals almost certainly remain ' carriers ' of the parasite and are liable to relapses at any subsequent time " [Cooper]. It will be observed that in three out of the ten animals subjected to these tests, recovery had occurred spontaneously, and this may afford an explanation for the fact that, as already mentioned, nearly 47 per cent of the animals sub-inoculated with blood derived from acute cases of theileriasis failed to develop the infection, for the resistance exhibited by these animals might have been due to their having had attacks of the disease early in life. A possibility of this kind is suggested by the fact that, according to Walker [1930], " in young calves infested by hand with ticks contain- ing a pure infection of Theileria parva it was not unusual to find a lower percentage mortality as compared with adults infested by hand with the same batch of infected ticks ". On the other hand, in a recent communication MacHattie [1935], in Baghdad, has recorded the occurrence of a fatal outbreak of T. annulata infec- tion amongst a batch of dairy calves which were only two to three weeks old, whilst sporadic instances of similar infection have also been mentioned by Mason [1922], Sergent and his collaborators [1927], Turnbull [1926], and Theiler and Graf [1928]. It is worthy of note that, with a few exceptions, all the animals in this in- vestigation had been previously utilized in rinderpest work, and whether this fact in any way determined the development of the theileriasis reaction in them is a matter that would seem to demand attention. IDENTITY OF PARASITE In the confused state of our present knowledge concerning the systematic position of the theileria parasites in general, it would be hardly profitable to enter upon a lengthy discussion of the specific identity of those involved in acute or fatal cases of the disease in India. As already indicated in the introduction, the problem of theileriasis itself requires further clarification before any useful dis- cussion can be undertaken concerning the identity of the parasites. Thus, the condition met with in India would appear to comprise (besides T. mutans in- fection) two distinct forms, which, for the sake of convenience, may be designated as Type A and Type B, their position in du Toit's [1930 a] scheme of classification being as follows :THEILERIASIS OF CATTLE IN INDIA 31 TABLE III Showing the difference between various strains of Theileria including those occurring in India (After du Toit) Serial No. 32 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, I It will be seen from the foregoing table that while Type A possesses characters which are mostly identical with those described for T. annulata, Type B, although it has the largest number of diagnostic points in common with T. dispar, neverthe- less differs from it in the considerably higher rate of mortality. It is to be mentioned, however, that du Toit [1930b] has expressed the opinion that the name dispar should be regarded as a synonym of annulata and that the latter should be regarded as valid on grounds of priority, so that there are only three species of Theileria of cattle, namely, T. parva, T. annulata and T. mutans* This view would also appear to be largely shared by Theiler [1930] himself, as is evidenced by the expression " T. dispar or annulata " frequently used by him. On the other hand, Donatien and Lestoquard [1931] have contend, ed that it is T. annulata that should be sunk as a synonym of T. dispar and T. mutans, whilst Sergent, Donatien Parrot and Lestoquard [1932] have even referred to the possibility of T. dispar undergoing a morphological modification towards the end of the acute stage of the disease and becoming completely attenuated in virulence (presumably to the extent of being indistinguishable from T. annulata). It seems to the present writers that the case for T. annulata is better than that for T. dispar, for whereas the latter name is almost exclusively applied to the parasite found in Algeria, T. annulata (or parasites almost identical with it) has been described from several countries around the Mediterranean Sea, including those bordering on Algeria itself, e.g., Tunis [Ducloux, 1905] and Morocco [Velu and Eyraud, 1915], so that it would appear more than probable that the Algerian infection is merely a variant of the more widely distributed form of theileriasis which goes by the name of Mediterranean Coast Fever and is believed to be due to T. annulata. It has, however, been pointed out recently by Yakimoff and his collabora- tors [1932], that the proportion of round and rod forms of these parasites varies within such wide limits in the different forms of theileria infections that this character can hardly be of any value for classificatory purposes, so that, considering the acuteness of the infection, the rate of mortality and the type of immunity reaction, it cannot be regarded as altogether improbable that Type B represents merely a variant of T. parva, but of depressed virulence. On the other hand, the evidence is so overwhelming in favour of the view that the parasite (Type A) concerned in outbreaks of acute theileriasis amongst imported Friesian bulls belongs to the species T. annulata, that it is only necessary to con- sider the possible manner in which these animals might have contracted the infection. An examination of the history of some of these animals shows that, prior to embarkation from South Africa, they were immunized against African "piro- * This is why Type B has been provisionally designated as T. annulata in the Annual Report of this Institute for the year ending March 1933 (p. 29).
THEILERIASIS OF CATTLE IN INDIA 33 plasmosis ", by which term B. bigemina infection is doubtless meant. It is there- fore reasonable to conclude that the clinical symptoms exhibited by a proportion of these animals while en route to India, as already mentioned earlier in this paper, cannot have been those of redwater, nor of T. parva infection, for in. the latter event, the disease would not have run a chronic course, as was found to be the case with a large majority of the animals. The possibility, therefore, suggests itself that the organisms were acquired during the course of the voyage, the infecting material having been, in all probability, tick-infested fodder. Evidence of this is further afforded by the fact that the records in the possession of this Institute contain particulars of two cases of theileriasis which occurred among Friesian bulls imported direct from Holland. It would be idle to dogmatize as to the exact locality where the infection might have been contracted, but it is probable that this occurred at some point along the Mediterranean Coast, where, as is well known, T. annulata infection is widely prevalent. CURATIVE TREATMENT AND PROPHYLAXIS A fairly large number of drugs34 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, I It will be seen that recovery was obtained in only 38 of the 146 animals (26 per cent) used in these trials and that the best results were obtained with Atebrin, whilst " Bayer 205 " and Gonacrine ranked second in the list. On the other hand, some allowance has to be made for the fact that, in a small proportion of cases, recovery has been found to occur spontaneously, so that the actual efficacy of these remedies is probably less than that indicated by the percentages worked out above. A short series of experiments was also carried out to test the value of the so- called" premunition " against this disease, in view of the highly encouraging results reported to have been obtained by Sergent and his collaborators [1931] against T. dispar infection in North Africa by the adoption of this method. Twelve bulls were each injected subcutaneously with 20 c. c. of blood drawn at the initial stage of the disease, i.e., on the very first appearance of the febrile symptoms, it being assumed that the blood so drawn would be free from parasites or Koch's bodiesTHEILERIASIS OF CATTLE IN INDIA 35 The species of parasite concerned in this form of theileriasis possesses characters which are mostly identical with those described by du Toit [1930 a] for Theileria annulata, and all available evidence points to the conclusion that the infection is exotic in origin, the organisms being probably acquired by the animals during the course of their voyage to India. (2) Theileriasis in Indian cattle.36 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, I Twenty drugs were tested as to their efficacy for this condition, but the results were unsatisfactory. A short series of trials was also carried out to test the value of premunition against the disease and the results were encouraging. The species of parasite concerned in this form of infection presents a close resemblance to Theileria dispar, as described by du Toit [1930a]. REFERENCES Bevan, Ll. E. W. (1924). East Coast FeverTHEILERIASIS OF CATTLE IN INDIA 37 Sergent, E., Donatien, A., Parrot, L., & Lestoquard, F. (1931). La premunition contre les piroplasmoses bovines dans l'Afrique du Nord. Ann. Inst. Past. 47, 63-72. *PNEUMONIA IN FOALS DUE TO CORYNEBACTERIUM EQUI BY V. R. RAJAGOPALAN, G.M.V.C., Assistant Veterinary Research Officer, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Muktesar [Received for publication on 22nd December 1936] (With Plates VIIIPNEUMONIA IN FOALS 39 A thorough search into the current periodical literature has shown that an organism identical with the one found in India has been previously incriminated in certain other countries as a cause of pneumonia in foals, although this has not yet been described in any text-books on veterinary medicine or bacteriology. This is, however, the first time that the occurrence of this organism as the specific cause of pneumonia in foals has been recorded in India, or indeed in Asia. Magnusson [1923] was the first to describe a pigmented diphtheroid in associa- tion with specific pneumonia in foals and he recorded 12 cases of its incidence in a breeding establishment in Southern Sweden. To this organism he assigned the name Corynebacterium equi. Subsequently Meissner and Wetzel [1923], Lutje [1923] and Lund [1924] recorded its incidence in Germany. Outside Europe this condition has been described in South Australia by Bull [1924] and by Dimock and Edwards [1931] in America. Since 1924, when this condition was first brought to the notice of this Institute, a number of cases have been known to occur year after year in at least two of the horse-breeding establishments in the Punjab. At first it was thought that the condition was a form of strangles, for, among a batch of foals in a paddock, several became ill, and some cases developed the typical sub-maxillary lesion of true strangles, while others developed into cases of pneumonia. Subsequent epide- miological observations and transmission experiments proved that the two condi- tions were quite distinct. Thus, pneumonic cases were known to occur during several seasons in which no strangles cases occurred : Out of a batch of 15 mares with foals at foot which had been made up straight from the foaling boxes (i.e., the mares which foaled in the open were brought into a loose box for about 9 days and then drafted into a paddock) into a fresh paddock in which there had been no animals for several months previously and which had had no history of strangles, eight foals went down with fever and pneumonia, none of them showing external signs of strangles. Strangles was finally eliminated by reproducing the typical pneu- monia in young foals with Corynebacterium equi, which had been maintained in subculture. Although the disease may occur through all the seasons of the year, it will be observed from Fig. 1 that its incidence is highest in the summer months.
40 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VI [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
Ind. Jour. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Hus., Vol. VII, Part I. PLATE VIII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Foal No. 386. Infected by instillation of culture into the nostrils. Note the swelling of the hock joints. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Natural case of C. equiPNEUMONIA IN FOALS 41 There would also appear to be a definite age susceptibility to this disease. The writer had an opportunity to examine an extract of the history of foals bred in one of the infected breeding establishments, and here the average age at which death took place from pneumonia worked out at two months and six days. There were cases which died within one month of birth and rare cases which died at as late as 7 months, but the majority of cases (60 per cent) died between the first and third month of birth, vide Fig. 2. Carne [1927] in Australia has described an atypical case of the disease in an eight-year-old mare. Here the chief lesion was located in the kidney in the form of a haemorrhagic nephritis, the lungs showing only a few pea-sized nodules in the place of the large abscesses that are found in the lungs in cases of the typical disease in foals. SYMPTOMS The onset is marked by a low fever, which after a day or two may attain 104- 105° F. or over. There is concurrently a watery discharge from the eyes and the nostrils. There is laryngitis with a sharp choking, dry cough. There is also snoring. The foal becomes very dull, its appetite is impaired and its pulse and respiration are increased. Occasional cases show symptoms of joint-ill (Plate VIII, figs. 1 & 2). Indeed, one of the cases that was forwarded to this Institute had actually been destroyed for joint-ill. The hock is the joint that is usually involved, the swelling sometimes extending to the fetlock. Soon, symptoms of pneumonia set in with marked distress in breathing, which is of the abdominal type. There is a double-heave in expiration. Moist rales and crackling gurgling noises may be heard on auscultation. There is constipation followed by diarrhoea with pale yellow frothy faeces. The foal loses weight, becomes very emaciated and dies within 8 to 10 days, although occasionally death may not occur for 20 days after the onset of the symptom. In foals that were artificially infected by the intra- nasal route, the period of incubation was found to be from six to eight days. POST-MORTEM FINDINGS The carcase is emaciated. The ribs are prominent, and where joint-ill is present, the hock-joint contains slightly haemorrhagic gelatinous fluid. On open- ing the thoracic cavity, the lungs are found to be studded particularly in the middle and the right lobes, with abscesses of the size of a small pea to that of an egg or even larger (Plate IX, fig. 1 & Plate X, fig. 1). These abscess cavities contain fluid or inspissated pus, which may emit a characteristically bad odour. The medias- tinal lymph glands are enlarged and contain huge abscess cavities (Plate IX, fig. 2). The mucous membrane of the intestines is congested and contains slimy frothy G
42 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG.2
Ind. Jour. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Hus., Vol. VII, PLATE IX [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Foal No. 386. The appearance of the lungs in situ. Note the bunch of abscesses and areas of hepatisation. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Foal No. 386. The anterior mediastinal gland with abscesses. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Microphotograph of C. equi Smear from 24 hours broth culture stained Leishman (×1200). Note the beaded appearance of the rods.
Ind. Jour. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Hus., Vol. VII, Part I PLATE X [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Foal No. 386. The lungs. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG.2. C. equi. 36 hours growth in a petri-dish kept in an upright position. Note the mucoid nature of the growth, flowing down. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. C. equi. 48 hours growth on agar slant. Growth had begun to flow and gather at the bottom.
PNEUMONIA IN FOALS 43 faeces. Histologically the pleura of the affected lungs is seen to be infiltrated with epitheloid cells. The interlobular septa are considerably thickened due to fibrinous infiltration and newly formed thin-walled blood vessels. There is evidence of acute bronchitis and peri-bronchitis, the bronchioles containing numerous neutrophiles and cast off epithelial cells held together in a fibrino-mucin : extensive parenchy- matous destruction is evident between the lobules, the alveoli are collapsed and their walls are infiltrated with neutrophiles and large mononuclears, the former in various stages of degeneration. The invading organisms are found almost every- where lying in clumps, enclosed within peculiar giant-cell-like formations. It would appear that when these formations become very numerous in any part, then the lung tissue there undergoes necrosis and the softening of the necrosed tissue gives rise to the pus-like material in the large abscesses to be seen by the naked eye. In advanced stages where the entire lobule presents to the naked eye the appearance of a suppurative lesion, the histological picture presented is one of a mass of necrosed cells with large clumps of the organisms lying about. BACTERIOLOGY Corynebacterium equi, the causal organism, is recoverable in pure culture and sometimes mixed with other contaminants, particularly streptococci, from the lung abscesses. The organism is a short cocco-bacillus with the axis straight or slightly curved. Many are found to be almost coccoid in tissue smears and in smears from solid media. They measure from 1.2 to 1.5 µ in length and 1 to 1.2 µ in breadth. In liquid cultures they occur in comparatively longer rods. These may measure up to 3 to 5 µ in length. Sides are usually parallel or slightly bulging, ends rounded. They occur in clumps in tissue smears and singly or in pairs in smears from broth culture. Some show a central or subterminal fusiform enlargement. They are non-motile and non-sporulating. No capsules were demonstrable by the Hiss's copper sulphate method. It is gram-positive but non-acid fast. Stained by Leishman's stain it takes the basic stain and is beaded. The beads may be bipolar and in long rods from broth cultures, they may number as many as 4 or 5 distributed through the length of the rod (Plate IX, Fig . 3). The organism does not take the Neisser's stain well and no metachromatic granules are demons- trable. On solid media the colonies are circular, about 0.6 to 1.2 mm. in 24 hours but grow considerably bigger by the 24th or 36th hour, measuring as much as 6 mm. They are raised amorphous and have a smooth shining surface. They have an entire margin, are butyrous in consistency and are readily emulsified into a homogeneous emulsion when rubbed down with water. In the first few days they are of a dull-fawn colour but later develop into a brick-red or pink colour (Plate XI). The organism grows abundantly in stroke culture, and is mucoid in appearance, but it does not draw off into a thread when touched by a platinum
44 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, I loop. Very soon, within 24 to 48 hours, the growth begins to flow down the incline of the agar slope and gathers at the bottom (Plate X, Figs. 2 & 3). In stab cultures growth is confined to the surface. There is a moderately good growth in broth culture, with a slight uniform tur- bidity, which is sometimes more marked in the top layer. There is a slight imper- fect granular surface ring growth at the junction of fluid and glass and this has a tendency to climb up the wall of the tube on shaking. In long-standing cultures in flasks, islands of granular scum may be seen unevenly distributed over the sur- face. There is a moderately abundant powdery deposit which takes on a fawn colour with age. The deposit disintegrates almost completely on shaking. No special odour is attached to these cultures. It grows profusely in blood agar, but produces no haemolysis. Resistance.Ind. Jour. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Hus., Vol. VII, Part I. PLATE XI [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] C. equi : 4 days' growth in agar plate kept in an upright position. Note the pink colouration
PNEUMONIA IN FOALS 45 TABLE I Experimental infection of small animals Animal species Animal No. Nature of culture Dose Method Reaction Agglutination test Result of experiment Culture Lesions 290 B Broth 48 hours 1 c.c. Intra-perito- neal. Slight tempera- ture ? 8th to 11th day. Not tested. Lived. Dis- continued. Guinea pigs 292 Subcutaneous. Nil Lived. Disconti- nued. Not examined. 222 Agar. Brown 4 opa- city. 0.25 c.c. Nil Lived. Discon- tinued. Sterile. No lesions. Intra-tracheal Nil 223 0.25 c.c. Lived. Discon- tinued. Sterile. No lesions. Rabbits 169 Broth. 2 days growth 5 c.c. Drenched Nil 18th day ne- gative. Destroyed 28th day. Blood } Nega- Lung tive. 170 Agar. Brown 4 opa- city Temperature re- action from 18th day. Destroyed 20th day. Lung nodules and lung substance pure culture. Blood46 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, I TABLE II Body weight Agglutination Animal number Age Mode of infection On arrival lbs. At death or discon- tinuance On arrival 10 days after in- fection 20 days after in- fection Result Symptoms and lesions Culture Foal 88 Young Drenched with 1 litre culture. .. .. Neg. .. .. Died 14th day. Pneumonia. Asbcesses in the lungs. Pure culture of C. equi from the abscesses. Foal 93 1 year Drenched with 1 litre broth culture. 196 .. Neg. Neg. Neg. Lived Slight temperature from 14th to 19th day only. Not attempted. Foal 94 1 year Drenched with 100 c.c. broth culture. 190 .. Neg. Neg. Neg. Lived No reaction . . . . Ditto. Foal 95 1 year Intravenously 100 c.c. broth culture. 176 .. Neg. Neg. Neg. At death negative. Destroyed 45th day. Temperature reaction from the 12th day. Swelling of off-hind fetlock from 14th day which extended to the hip accompanied with much pain. The swel- ling began to decrease by the 33rd day. Supprunative arthritis. Pus from limbPNEUMONIA IN FOALS 47 extended downwards. Symptoms of pneumo- nia started 9th day, be- came very aggravated by the 13th day and the animal died on the 18th day. Post-mor- tem :48 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [VII I It will be observed that young foals (e.g., 88, 386, and 287) readily contracted the typical disease with the characteristic lesions after infection both by the oral and nasal routes. It has been relatively difficult or impossible to reproduce the typical disease in older ponies by infection by any route. Nevertheless, it will be observed that two ponies, one after infection by the oral route (pony 93) and the other after infection by the intravenous route (pony 90) developed a slight but undoubted febrile reaction, and that a third pony, after infection by the intrave- nous route (pony 95) developed a suppurative arthritis in addition to the febrile reaction. Corynebacterium equi was re-isolated from the abscesses from the case of suppurative arthritis and from those of typical penumonia. The organism was also recovered from blood and faeces during life and from nasal mucosa, spleen, mediastinal gland and lung abscesses after death from foal 387, the only case in which all these were attempted. It is remarkable, however, that no agglutinins were detectable in the blood serum of any of the infected foals or ponies. An attempt was made to exalt the virulence of the organism by intra-pul- monary inoculations through rats in series, to see if they could be sufficiently exalted for the production of the typical disease in adult ponies, but no success was obtained by this means. PREVENTION The late Mr. Cooper of this Institute attempted to assess the value of vaccina- tion as a preventive for the disease. Only donkey foals about 6 months old were procurable. A carbolised heated vaccine and a living culture that had been main- tained in subculture for a number of years were tried for their immunising proper- ties by subcutaneous inoculations. After an interval of 4½ to 5½ months the vaccinated foals and two control unvaccinated foals were drenched with 1 litre of broth culture sown direct from the pus obtained from the lung of a naturally in- fected foal. The results are tabulated in Table III. TABLE III Donkey Foal No. and age at the time of coming under experiment Vaccination Result of test for immu- nity. On 27th August 1027, each animal was drenched with 1 litre of broth culture sown direct from pus of a natural case Preparation and dose No. and dates of doses Reaction after vaccination 43 6 ½ months. Living diptheroid (C. equi) agar emul- sion (48 hours growth), 400 mill. per c. c. Subcut- aneous 1 c.c. 5 injections month- ly from 11th April 1927 to 12th August 1927. Abscess from each in- jection. No reaction. 46 10½ months. Abscess 1st, 4th and 5th injections. No reaction.
PNEUMONIA IN FOALS 40 TABLE III50 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [VII I TABLE IV Serial No. Animal No. Date of birth Disease Date of onset Treatment Mercurochrome 25 to 35 c. c. of 1 per cent solution intraven- ously. Tincture iodinePNEUMONIA IN FOALS. 51 21 Filly of B. M. Silver-cup. 5th April 1929 . . Pneumonia . 30th May 1929 . . Mercurochrome52 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY, [VII, I It may be noted here that out of 37 cases treated, 18 are shown as having developed specific symptoms of pneumonia. Of these 18, fifteen had been cured by adoption of this line of treatment. Of the other 19 animals two were cases of bronchitis, two of diarrhPNEUMONIA IN FOALS 53 REFERENCES Bull, L. B. (1924). J. Comp. Path. Ther. 37, 294. Carne, H. R. (1927). Dept. of Agric. New South Wales, Sci. Bull, No. 29. Veterinary Research Report No. 3, p. 31. Dimock, W. W. and Edwards, P. R. (1931). J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assn. 78, 809. Kessler (1926). J. Bact. 13, 47. Lund, L. (1924). Deut. Tierartzl. Wchnschr. 32, 4. Lutje, F. (1923). Ibid 31, 559. Magnusson, H. (1933). Archiv. f. wiss. w. prakt. Tierkeik 50, 22. Meissener, H. and Wetzel, R. (1923). Deut. Tierartzl. Wchnschr. 31, 449. Salle, A. J. (1930). J. Bact. 20, 389.
THE SULPHUR CONTENT OF SOME INDIAN GRASSES BY F. J. WARTH AND T. S. KRISHNAN, Animal Nutrition Section, Bangalore [Received for publication on 28th October 1936] ON account of its possible bearing on wool production the question of the sulphur content of pasture grasses has received a considerable amount of attention, Aitken [1930], Evans [1931], Askew and Bishop [1933], Pollard and Chibnall [1934]. The present short survey originated through an observation made in the course of other work to the effect that grasses of the tribe Chlorideae appear to contain an unusually large amount of sulphate. We have carried out a series of analyses to test this point. Two types of material were collected and examined, viz., natural herbage and cultivated pure grass species. Natural herbage was collected from four distinct types of land. In each place numerous small patches, 1 to 3 sq. ft. in area, were selected and from each area all the specimens of the predominant species were separated and prepared for analysis. Thus it has been possible to compare the nitrogen and sulphur content of various grasses, without the interference of differences in soil and climate, as they were growing side by side in the natural state. Some patches, especially those on richer and more moist soils, yielded five or six species while others, on arid land, yielded only two species. Altogether twenty such patches were sampled botanically and the different species from each patch were analysed separately for total sulphate and total sulphur by our own method [Warth and Krishnan 1935], as well as for total nitrogen. In all about 150 samples were analysed. Samples of pure species were obtained from plots grown by the Animal Nutri- tion Section at the Bangalore Dairy. The sampling was done by completely harvesting a small area. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 1. Patches of natural herbage.SULPHUR CONTENT OF SOME INDIAN GRASSES 55 TABLE I Nitrogen and sulphur content of various grasses growing side by side in the natural state (Expressed as per cent on dry basis) Area Grass patch Name of grass Total sulphur Sul- phate sulphur Orga- nic sulphur Total Nitro- gen North Dairy Plots. No. 1 Panicum Crusgalli . . . 0.203 0.076 0.127 2.080 Panicum javanicum . . . 0.198 0.060 0.138 2.226 Digitaria sanguinalis . . . 0.166 0.043 0.123 1.790 Andropogon annulatus . . . 0.168 0.077 0.091 1.356 Panicum maximum . . . 0.120 0.032 0.088 1.483 Eragrostis sp. . . . . 0.218 0.095 0.123 1.641 Clitoris barbata* . . . 0.420 0.289 0.131 1.921 North Dairy Plots. No. 8 Andropogon contortus . . . 0.130 0.069 0.061 0.823 Andropogon pertusus . . . 0.115 0.045 0.070 1.117 Chtoris barbata* . . . 0.400 0.290 0.110 1.419 Digitaria ciliata . . . 0.127 0.052 0.085 1.189 Eleusine Indica* . . . 0.286 0.185 0.101 1.274 Eragrostis sp. . . . 0.155 0.047 0.108 1.156 Panicum maximum . . . 0.107 0.038 0.069 0.956 South No. 2 Cynodon dactylon* . . . 0.503 0.345 0.158 2.424 Dairy Cynodon dactylon* . . . 0.527 0.393 0.134 2.281 Plots. Panicum javanicum . . . 0.205 0.077 0.128 2.252 South Dairy Plots. No. 5 Panicum maximum . . . 0.168 0.068 0.100 1.522 Chloris barbata* . . . 0.331 0.218 0.113 1.779 Panicum javanicum . . . 0.184 0.069 0.115 1.751 Military Grass Farm. No. 1 Andropogon pertusus . . . 0.137 0.055 0.082 1.180 Andropogon contortus . . . 0.1 16 0.044 0.072 0.908 Clitoris barbata* . . . 0.281 0.180 0.101 1.078 Cymbopogon sp. . . . 0.135 0.058 0.067 1.222 Eragrostis . . . 0.171 0.052 0.119 1.148 Panicum javanicum . . . . . 0.061 . . . . Species of Tribe Chlorideae marked *. The figures show that amongst grasses growing side by side in the natural state, species of the tribe Chlorideae contain much more sulphate than is found in other species. The same fact is borne out equally clearly from all the other patches as well. 2. The average nitrogen and sulphur content of different species.56 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, I TABLE II Average sulphur content of grasses. Per 100 parts dry plant Name of grasses No. of samples Total Sulphur Sulphate Sulphur Organic Sulphur Total Nitrogen Nitrogen : Organic Sulphur Ratio Panicum crusgalli . . 2 0.188 0.059 0.129 2.160 17 Panicum javanicum . 7 0.202 0.068 0.134 2.167 16 Panicum maximum . 8 0.123 0.038 0.085 1.353 16 Pennesetum cenchroides . 6 0.196 0.077 0.119 1.962 16 Andropogon contotus . 6 0.123 0.059 0.064 0.870 14 Andropogon annulatus . 4 0.163 0.083 0.080 1.157 14 Andropogon pertusus . 1 0.115 0.045 0.070 1.117 .. Sorghum vulgare . 1 0.137 0.030 0.107 1.986 .. Holcus sp. . . 1 0.245 0.031 0.215 1.502 .. Cymbopogon . . 3 0.106 0.034 0.071 1.064 15 Aristida sp. . . 2 0.120 0.037 0.083 1.164 14 Eragrostis sp. . . 6 0.187 0.067 0.120 1.396 12 Rhodes grass . . 6 0.234 0.129 0.105 1.774 17 Eleusine coracana . . 8 0.405 0.281 0.124 2.353 19 Elcusine Indica . . 1 0.286 0.185 0.101 1.274 .. Chloris barbata . . 8 0.477 0.359 0.118 1.704 14 Cynodon dactylon . . 5 0.562 0.423 0.139 2.228 16 The last 5 grasses belong to the tribe Chlorideae. From the results given in Table II, it will be observed that the sulphate content of the cultivated grasses agrees with the results obtained in the case of natural grasses. The data do not reveal any other specific differences in sulphate content. The low value for Panicum maximum appears to be characteristic of this species. The average value recorded here for this grass agrees with the figures obtained from numerous determinations made by us in connection with other work. The organic sulphur is present, presumably, mainly as protein sulphur, since it fluctuates with the nitrogen content, as the above figures show. In view of the high sulphate values it is of considerable interest to enquire whether the protein of the Chlorideae is unusually rich in sulphur. The values for the nitrogen : organic sulphur ratio indicate that there is no sign of greater richness of sulphur in the proteins of the Chlorideae. As the nitrogen values refer to the total nitrogen and the organic sulphur includes non-protein sulphur, the above ratio is not an exact measure of protein sulphur, but as far as the figures go, they suggest that the proteins of the Chlorideae do not contain significantly higher amount of sulphur than those of other species. On the other hand it would seem that the proteins of Eragrostis may be somewhat richer in sulphur content. 3. Distribution of sulphate between leaf and stalk.SULPHUR CONTENT OF SOME INDIAN GRASSES 57 TABLE III Sulphate content of stalks and leaves of grasses. Sulphate expressed as grms. sulphur per 100 parts dry grass Species Stage of maturity Stalks Leaves Elusine coracana . . . . . flowering . . . 0.362 0.147 Do. . . . . . full flower . . . 0.390 0.203 Do. . . . . . dead ripe . . . 0.518 0.199 Rhodes grass . . . . . full bloom . . . 0.221 0.133 Andropogon contortus . . . . . Do. . . . 0.054 0.023 Pennesetum cenchroides . . . . . Do. . . . 0.051 0.031 Panicum maximum . . . . . Do. . . . 0.044 0.025 Sorghum vulgare . . . . . Young . . . . 0.026 0.009 Cynodon dactylon . . . . . Full bloom . . . 0.326 0.275 Lucerne . . . . . . Do. . . . 0.099 0.199 From the figures in Table III, it appears to be a general rule with grasses that the stalk contains more sulphate than the leaf. Lucerne apparently behaves differently, and we have another set of figures for the same plant, determined on a different occasion, which also corroborates the above results. The additional figures are given below :58 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, I SUMMARY Amongst grasses growing side by side in the natural state, it was found that species of the tribe Chlorideae contain more sulphate than is present in other species. There was no corresponding excess of sulphur in the proteins of these species. The stalks of grasses contain more sulphate than the leaf. In lucerne, the reverse is true. REFERENCES Aitken, A. A. A. (1930), Biochem. J., 24, 250. Askew, H. O. and Bishop, L. (1933), Nutr. Abs. & Revs., 2, 472. Evans, R. E. (1931), J. Agric. Sci., 21, 806. Pollard, A. and Chibnall, A. C. (1934), Biochem. J., 28, 326. Warth, F. J. and Krishnan, T. S. (1935), Ind. Jour. Vet. Sci. and Anim, Husb., 5, 210.
IS THERE A RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE VIRUSES OF RINDERPEST AND DOYLE'S DISEASE ? V. R. RAJAGOPALAN, G.M.V.C., Assistant Veterinary Research Officer, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Muktesar. [Received for publication on 22nd December 1936] IT was suggested by Kylasam Aiyer[ 1931] that a relationship exists between the Madras Fowl Pest virus (Doyle's disease virus) and the rinderpest virus. If this were substantiated it would lead to far-reaching developments. It was, therefore, decided to verify the correctness of this supposition. Mr. Ware, the Director of this Institute, laid down the outline of the work to be undertaken in this connection and the experiment was completed during 1931. As no further communication has since appeared on the subject either in support or against the above statement, it is now considered desirable to record the results obtained at this Institute. The two most reliable methods of establishing identity of viruses are by cross- immunity tests and serum-virus neutralisation tests. It was decided to attempt only cross-immunity tests for this preliminary investigation. The plan of the experiment was as follows :60 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [VII, I THE EXPERIMENT 1.RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN VIRUSES OF RINDERPEST AND DOYLE'S DISEASE 61 TABLE I [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] (The re-test inoculations shown against column six were cone as a rule, on the 10th or 11th day after the last inoculations.)
62 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [VII, I This shows clearly that Doyle's disease virus neither gives rise to rinderpest in bulls nor does it confer any protection to bulls against a subsequent infection with rinderpest. It also shows that Doyle's disease is not inoculable into bulls. II.RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN VIRUSES OF RINDERPEST AND DOYLE'S DISEASE 63 TABLE II The retest inoculation shown against column six were done, as a rule, on the 10th or 11th day after the test inoculation).
64 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [VII, I These results conclusively show that rinderpest-virus neither gives rise to Doyle's disease in fowls nor does it confer any protection on fowls against a subse- quent infection with Doyle's disease virus. SUMMARY It has been shown that rinderpest virus does not give rise to Doyle's disease in fowls and vice versa and that no cross immunity occurs between the two viruses. REFERENCEKylasam Aiyer, K. (1931). Ind. Vet. Jour. 7, 340.
ABSTRACTS The diagnosis of mastitis. STARR, L. E., PRESCOTT, T. H., and HUFFMAN, J. (1936). J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assn. N. S. 41, 468. Based on experience of the systematic examination of a dairy herd, the authors draw conclusions on the comparative value of various recognised tests for the diagnosis of bovine mastitis. The following are the tests considered:66 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, I (8) Bacteriological examination : Plate counts and examinations for signifi- cant micro-organisms are made. Correlating the results, the authors draw the conclusion that:ABSTRACTS 67 producing farm animal has unnatural nutritive requirements and the ordinary farm ration is too often a mere compromise between imperfect nutritional knowledge and economic expediency. Progressive depletion of minerals in pasture lands exerts quite an apparent in- fluence on the general well-being of the stock resulting in conditions like osteophagia, delayed maturity &c. Speaking generally, the balance between the potential produc- tivity of a breed and the natural fertility of soils is a main factor influencing the distribu- tion of different breeds of domesticated herbivora. The mineral deficiency can be combated by supplying the deficient mineral element in adequate amount either by direct feeding or indirectly through crops by manuring the soil. Vitamins, unlike minerals, may be synthesised by the animal body from precursors in the food, and its requirements may and do vary between closely related species. Vitamin deficiencies, as a cause of disease, are of comparatively minor importance in all farm stock, unlike laboratory rodents and human beings and can be ignored in the case of grazing herbivora, but the nearer the conditions under which farm animals are kept to those of the laboratory the more evident the need for vitamins becomes. If the animal is to leave no progeny, then production in dairy cows, bacon pigs and laying hens can be safely forced to its ultimate limit by the aid of concentrated food, but where an animal is to be used for breeding then it should be fed as nearly as possible on its natural food, and it is highly probable that there may be undiscovered food factors in natural foods such as grass and milk which are of importance in live-stock feeding. Based on the results of a number of natural immunity tests on grazing sheep, Anderson and others suggest the presence of a property in growing grass, which has an influence on the defensive mechanism of the animal's tissues. (R. L. K.) Allantoin, a constituent of maggot excretions, stimulates healing of chronic discharging wounds. ROBINSON, W. (1935). J. Parasit., 21, 354-358. A noticeable feature in the maggot therapy of infected wounds is the rapidity of the healing process, and this seemed to the author to be suggestive of the fact that maggots do not merely feed upon necrotic tissue and destroy bacteria but that they also excrete into the wound some substance which is endowed with special curative properties. Investigation showed that this substance was allantoin, which not only occurs as a constituent of maggot excretions, but is a component of urinary secretions of lower animals and is also distributed among plants, where it is found chiefly in the embryos of seeds. For extracting allantoin, the author placed several thousand nearly full-grown maggots in glass funnels stoppered with cotton. The maggots were occasionally sprayed lightly with water to facilitate excretion and drainage and the excretions were collected in beakers. From this liquid, allantoin was separated as a crystalline substance and its identity was confirmed by comparing its melting point and crystallographic properties with those of an authentic sample.
68 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, I In his actual therapeutic experiments, however, the author used a 0.5 per cent aqueous solution of commercial allantoin, this being applied daily to the wounds in the form of soaked gauze dressings. The efficacy of this remedy was particularly tested upon chronic non-healing wounds with unhealthy inactive tissue, and in all such cases, small areas of pinkish granulation tissue could be seen growing in the wounds after the first few applications. The treatment was painless and inexpensive. The author, however, does not claim that allantoin treatment can be entirely substituted for maggot therapy, in view of the fact that maggots play a definite role by removing dead tissue and pus-forming bacteria. [S. K. S.]
NOTE FOURTH INTERNATIONAL GRASSLAND CONGRESS THE Fourth International Grassland Congress is to be held in Great Britain in July 1937, under the Presidency of Professor R. G. Stapledon, C.B.E., M.A., Director of the Welsh Plant Breeding Station and the Imperial Bureau for Herbage Plants, Aberyst- wyth, Wales. The previous Congresses in this series have been held in Europe and mem- bership was more or less confined to European members, but delegates will come to this Fourth Congress from Great Britain, the British Dominions and Colonies, U. S. A. and numerous other countries members of the International Grassland Congress Association (Central Office in Leipzig, Germany). The paper-reading sessions will be held in Aberystwyth from July 13th to 19th, but intending participants will be able to join in a tour of centres of grassland interest and selected farms both before and after these sessions. The tour will be made partly by motor coach and partly by rail. Delegates can choose one of the following options :70 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, I hostels, etc., in Aberystwyth and the neighbourhood can be obtained from the Joint Secretaries. The charges for the other three options are as follows :APPENDIX INSTRUCTIONS TO AUTHORS OF PUBLICATIONS OF THE IMPERIAL COUNCIL OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH* 1. All manuscripts should be clean, clear and carefully revised. Only one side of the paper should be used, and as far as practicable the original type-written copy and not a carbon copy should be sent. Capitals should be sparingly used, and all the necessary punctuation should be done in the MS. and not left for introduction in proofs. 2. The title of a paper should not be lengthy. 3. It is desirable that the MS. should have suitable heads and sub-heads. In numbering the principal divisions of a paper roman numerals should be used. The use of arabic figures and (a), (b), (c), etc., is generally reserved for numbering the sub-divisions coming under each head. 4. Articles submitted for publication either in the Indian Journal of Agricul- tural Science or in the Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Hus- bandary should be accompanied by abstracts for publication in Agriculture and Live-stock in India. Abstracts should be concise, but should be long enough to explain the matter dealt with ; ordinarily no abstract should exceed 200 words. 5. When a word or line is intended to be printed in italics it should be under- lined with a single line, in SM. CAP. with two lines, in CAPITALS with three lines, and when in Antique (heavy type) with a wavy line (~~~~~~~~~). 6. In descriptive matter, numbers under 100 and all numbers occurring at the beginning of a sentence should be in words. 7. Local names for crops, technical operations, etc., should be defined where they first occur in the text, e.g., rabi (spring crop). The use of local weights and measures should be avoided as far as possible. Vernacular names, such as jowar, bajri, should be in italics without a capital letter, and each such name where it first occurs should be followed by its scientific equivalent in brackets, e.g., jowar (Andropogon Sorghum). It is usual to write the initial letters of varietal names in capitals, e.g., Striped Mauritius, Dharwar-American cotton and Broach cotton. *Spare copies of these Instructions can be had on application to the Secretary, Imperial Council of Agricultural Research (Publication Section), New Delhi. (71)
72 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [VII, I 8. Botanical and zoological names are printed in italics and should be under- lined in the MS., e.g., Triticum vulgare L.; Diplodia Corchori Syd.; Pyrilla aberrans Kirby. The International rules of Botanical Nomenclature and the Inter- national rules of Zoological Nomenclature should be followed. The names of chemical substances should not be written with a capital letter ; they are printed in roman type (e.g., calcium carbonate, prussic acid). 9. The following and similar abbreviations may be used freely :APPENDIX. 73 author's name followed by the year of publication enclosed in brackets; when the author's name occurs in the text, the year of publication only need be given in brackets. If reference is made to several articles published by one author in single year, these should be numbered in sequence and the number quoted after the year both in the text and in the collected references. This system of referencing is used in the Biochemical Journal with slight modification, and will be clear from the following illustration :74 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY. [VII, I 16. Line drawings should be made with clear black lines on smooth white paper, preferably Bristol board. Rough paper should be avoided. Care should be taken that all the lines are drawn firmly ; scratchy or grey lines, produced by the ink being thinned down, are not permissible. Drawings should be larger than the required size. All lettering should be neatly and clearly put in, care being taken to make all lettering sufficiently large to stand reduction. 17. For half-tone work copy should be made on glossy silver paper and of the same size or larger than the size required. 18. For three-colour work, copy may be oil painting, water-colour, coloured photograph or coloured transparency, and larger than the size required. In pre- paring copy, one should use only the primary colours, in any combination, as only inks of primary colours are used in printing. Originals can be enlarged, if neces- sary, but this should be avoided if possible. 19. For detailed instructions regarding preparation of illustrations, it would be of advantage to refer to Mr. C. M. Hutchinson's article on " Photographic Illustra- tions" in the Agricultural Journal of India, Vol. XI, Pt. 3, July 1916, and Mr. A. W. Slater's paper on " The Preparation and Reproduction of Scientific Illustrations" in the Proceedings of the Third Entomological Meeting 1919, which has been reprinted as Bulletin No. 114 of the Agricultural Research Institute, Pusa.
PUBLICATIONS OF THE IMPERIAL COUNCIL OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH, INDIA. 1. Agriculture and Live-stock in India A bi-monthly Journal of Agriculture and Animal Husbandry for the general reader interested in Agriculture or Live-stock in India or the Tropics. (Established 1931. Pub- lished in January, March, May, July, September and November. Prepayable subscription Rs. 6 or 9s. 9d. per annum inclusive of Indian postage. Price per part Rs. 2 or 3s. 6d. inclusive of Indian postage.) Volumes I to VI complete are available. 2. The Indian Journal of Agricultural Science A bi-monthly Scientific Journal of Agriculture and the allied sciences, mainly devoted to the publication of the results of original research and field experiments. (Established 1931. Published in February, April, June, August, October and December. Prepayable subscription Rs. 15 or 24s. per annum inclusive of Indian postage. Price per part Rs. 3 or 5s. 3d. inclusive of Indian postage.) Volumes I to VI complete are avail- able. 3. The Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry A quarterly Journal for the publication of scientific matter relating to the health, nutrition and breeding of live-stock. (Established 1931. Published in March June, September and December. Prepayable subscription Rs. 6 or 9s. 9d. inclusive of Indian postage. Price per part Rs. 2 or 3s. 6 d. inclusive of Indian postage.) Volumes I to VI complete are available. 4. Scientific Monographs of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research NCAG76 PUBLICATIONS OF THE IMPERIAL COUNCIL OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH, INDIA NCAGPUBLICATIONS OF THE IMPERIAL COUNCIL OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH, INDIA 77 NCARORIGINAL ARTICLES GENETIC PRINCIPLES AND THE PROBLEM OF CROSS- BREEDING FOR MILK YIELD IN INDIAN CATTLE BY J. B. HUTCHINSON Institute of Plant Industry, Indore, C. I. AND N. R. JOSHI Allahabad Agricultural Institute, Allahabad, U. P. (Received for publication on 21st August 1936) INTRODUCTION NUMEROUS attempts have been made in India to combine the milk yield of Western dairy cattle with the hardiness and suitability to local conditions of Indian breeds. It is not proposed in this note to attempt any form of summary of the results of these efforts, but rather to put forward for the consideration of Indian stock-breeders certain genetic principles which appear to bear on the problem, THE AIM Indian cattle have been subjected to countless generations of rigorous natural selection for ability to withstand singularly hard conditions, and no one would dispute the view that for hardiness, vigour, size, conformation, and suitability for draft purposes, the desired type can best be obtained by selection within the indigenous breeds. The principal character of value under Indian conditions in which Western breeds excel the indigenous cattle is milk yield. Two practices, besides straight selection, are in vogue at present among breed- ers who are attempting to improve Indian milking cattle. The first, and much the commoner, is to grade up a herd of indigenous cows by repeated breeding back to Western bulls. This is the predominating policy of the military dairy farms. The second is the one which the experiment reported by Littlewood [1933] was designed to test, namely the inter-breeding of cross-bred cattle in an attempt to establish a new intermediate strain. Littlewood [1933] also reports (79) B
80 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II on the performance of a few animals obtained by breeding the cross-breds back to the Indian breed. This constitutes a third method. The inter-breeding method appears to have been entirely abandoned in India and we are not aware of any sustained attempt having been made to grade up by breeding back to indigenous cattle, though this is the method advocated by Littlewood [1933] as a result of his experience. An examination of the three breeding practices enumerated above shows that two of them are designed to incorporate in the intended new Indian milking breed more of the Western character than is wanted. Continued grading to Western bulls will result in a strain carrying only such Indian characteristics as are maintained by selection, either natural or human. Inter-breeding will also result in the incorporation of many unwanted Western characters, unless selec- tion is practised of an intensity which the slow-breeding habits of the cow renders a practical impossibility. There remains the method of breeding back to the indigenous type. This method will result in a progressive approach to the in- digenous type in all attributes on which selection for the Western character is not practised. Selection need only be practised for characters influencing milk yield, and the object of the experiment becomes simply that of breeding an almost purely Indian type, with a high milking capacity. This, we believe, is the proper aim for those who wish to improve the milk production of the cattle of the country, and not simply to provide specialised milking animals to be maintained by large dairies under special conditions. THE PROBLEM There is a very prevalent opinion that cross-breeding schemes, to have any hope of success, must be large, and consequently expensive. It was expressed by Littlewood [1933] as follows :CROSS BREEDING FOR MILK YIELD IN INDIAN CATTLE 81 selection is admirably summarised by Lush [1935], and he concludes that fifty to sixty per cent of the heifers bred must be retained for replacement alone, in a dairy herd. The actual number of animals available, therefore, does not limit the selec- tion intensity, and there is, in fact, much to be said in favour of a herd of mode- rate size and limited financial demands. India has suffered severely from the abandonment, on grounds of economy, of promising breeding schemes before they had gone far enough to be of practical utility. For this reason also, improvement by cross-breeding has a considerable advantage over improvement by selection, in that there is an immediate and considerable rise in milk yield, which enables a cross-bred herd to pay for its keep, where an indigenous herd frequently does not. Two factors, which depend largely on the design of the experiment, influence the efficiency of selection. The first is the number of characters for which selec- tion is exercised. Consider for the moment heifers alone, of which fifty per cent must be retained to maintain the herd. If selection is exercised on five indepen- dent characters of equal importance, the intensity of the selection exercised on each character is no greater than if the proportion to be retained were [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] or eighty-seven per cent [Lush, 1935]. To put it in another way, only half the heifers can be discarded, or the herd will be depleted. Obviously it is not possible to discard the worst half on all five characters and it will only be possible actually to discard the worst thirteen per cent82 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II characters in which the breeder is not particularly interested. For instance, the size and type of animal required can usually be decided beforehand from a con- sideration of the conditions of the tract for which the scheme is to be carried out, and a suitable indigenous breed selected. The foreign breed with which it is to be crossed should not differ more than necessary from it in those characters. Such matings as Sindhi × Holstein are likely to introduce far more variability in size and form and butter-fat content than, for example, Hariana x Holstein-Freisian or Sindhi × Jersey, and will consequently take longer to breed back to a uniform type in which inter-breeding can be started, and from which bulls can be provided for the improvement of cultivators' cattle. A SUGGESTED BREEDING SCHEME F1 It should be remembered that the F1 is not a segregating generation, and F1 animals will only differ in those characters, genes for which were heterozygous in one or both parental stocks. As such differences may be expected to be un- important relative to the differences between the breeds, no selection need be exercised among F1 heifers. Since sex is determined by the distribution of the sex chromosome, the above statement must be modified if any sex-linked genes for milk production are carried by the sire. The F1 generation will then be of two types, heifers which will have received sex-linked genes for milk production from their sire, and bulls which will not have received them. Evidence for sex-linkage of some of the genes responsible for milk production has been summarized by Smith and Robison [1933], who conclude that it is very suggestive, but not conclusive. Of the bulls used in the breeding of Western cattle breeds some have been what is known as ' prepotent sires ' and the ex- ploitation of these has led to their contributing a disproportionate share, com- pared with other bulls, to the ancestry of the breed. Since prepotency for milk production results largely from a bull's ability to transmit his dam's excellence to his daughters, the fact that all daughters receive a sex-chromosome from their paternal grand-dam and only half receive any given autosome from her will result in stronger selection for any genes for milk production situated in the sex chromo- some, than for those situated in autosomes. It is, therefore, to be expected that a disproportionate share of the genes for milk production carried by breeds heavily selected for that character will be sex-linked. The importance of this conclusion for a cross-breeding scheme with Indian cattle is that, if the effects of sex-linkage can be safely ignored, F1 bulls are geneti- cally as valuable as F1 heifers for the production of the first back-cross (or quarter-
CROSS BREEDING FOR MILK YIELD IN INDIAN CATTLE 83 bred) generation, and practically, they are much more valuable, since they can sire many calves, whereas each heifer can produce only say six or eight calves in her life. From the summary by Smith and Robison [1933] we conclude that in the Western breeds examined the proportion of milk-yield from sex-linked genes to that from autosomal genes is not high enough to demonstrate their existence with certainty. If that is so where the genetic variance for milk production is com- paratively small (i.e., within breeds) it is likely to be at most a very small pro- portion of the whole in a cross between two breeds differing widely in milking capacity, so that, even allowing for sex-linkage of milk production genes to the extent suggested by Smith and Robison's data, the loss resulting from the use of F1 bulls in a breeding project of the type under discussion is likely to be negli- gible. We suggest, therefore, that both sexes of the F1 generation should be bred back to the indigenous breed. Then all the available females in the herd can be made to contribute to the back-cross generation, and the maximum number of animals will be provided for selection. A direct check on the accuracy of the above estimate of the importance of sex-linkage in the inheritance of milk yield will then be possible. Since both grand-dams of all back-cross heifers are of the indigenous breed, a figure x can be calculated for each animal representing the increment in milk yield over the mean yield of its two grand-dams. If sex-linkage is important, the mean of x for heifers with F1 dams will be significantly greater than the mean of x for heifers with F1 sires. First back-cross or quarter-bred This is the first segregating generation, and selection must, therefore, be exer- cised. We suggest that all quarter-bred bulls should be eliminated from the herd, since the performance of their dams (in a non-segregating generation) will pro- vide only a negligible amount of information concerning their value. All heifers will be bred back to a good bull of the indigenous breed, and selections made on the basis of milking performance. Two points should be noted : first the im- portance of the indigenous bull. The fact that high milking capacity is being introduced from the Western breed does not release the breeder from the neces- sity of using the best available indigenous stock. What little is known concern- ing interaction between genes in quantitative inheritance suggests that genes causing small increments in yield in a low-yielding strain may cause much greater increments in strains of higher milking capacity [Smith and Robison, 1931]. Secondly, the importance of selecting the quarter-bred heifers on milk production alone. The process of further back-crossing will be relied upon to breed out any disadvantageous characteristics which may be carried by good milking animals.
84 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II It is not possible to lay down in advance the intensity of selection to be exer- cised among heifers in each generation, but it should approach on the average that which will allow maintenance of the strength of the herd, and very little more. Second back-cross or eighth-bred The second back-cross animals will resemble the indigenous breed closely in most respects. The heifers should be bred back again to an indigenous bull, and selected as in the quarter-bred generation. The second back-cross bulls may be relied on to sire calves almost always superior to those of Indian breeds bearing no foreign ' blood.' They may, therefore, be used in a village cattle improvement scheme, and if suitable arrangements are made for estimating the value of their progeny, the best of them can be picked out and brought back into the herd. Later generations Heifers of the third back-cross generation should also be back-crossed to the indigenous breed, and selected on milking performance. As soon as bulls of the second back-cross generation have been tested (on village cattle), the best of them may be brought in and mated to the selected cows of the third back-cross genera- tion. Thereafter, inter-breeding will proceed among heifers selected in each generation on their own milk yield and bulls selected on the performance of their progeny out of village cows. It should be remembered that when inter-breeding is commenced, all charac- ters of importance will have to be observed, and those besides milk yield which prove not to have been fixed by the back-crossing process will have to be fixed by selection. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS Six quarter-bred cows whose performance is recorded by Littlewood [1933] averaged 3,995 lbs. of milk per lactation as against an average of 4,068 lbs. by nineteen F2 cows. The difference is negligible, so that with the advantage in favour of the quarter-bred that the whole of the selection can be concentrated on milk yield, the production average of the parents of a second back-cross should be considerably higher than that of the parents of an F3. The available evidence indicates that the heterozygotes of milk-yield factors are on the average nearly intermediate between the homozygotes. (The Mt. Hope Index gives 0.7 [Goodale, 1927]). The inter-breeding of the best of the third back-cross animals should, therefore, result in the production of a proportion of heifers with a higher milking capacity than their parents. The advantages of milk production in the first generation which cross-breeding gives over selection in an indigenous herd is increased in the breeding scheme here discussed by the increment in yield obtainable by inter-breeding at the end of the period of back- crossing.
CROSS BREEDING FOR MILK YIELD IN INDIAN CATTLE 85 The fear is sometimes expressed that cross-breeding between widely different types will result in genetic incompatibility, and consequently weakly and unbalanced animals. The risk of such misfortunes is minimised by the back- crossing method, as it ensures the re-building of a balanced indigenous type, with only a minimum of introduced genes. Care must be taken to watch for evidence of linkage (repulsion) between milk-yield genes and genes of the indigenous breed which would otherwise be automatically fixed. If such are detected, the breeder must himself decide whether they are of sufficient importance for him to direct his selection towards the discovery and propagation of cross-over individuals, or whether he can afford to allow some deviation from the indigenous type in charac- ters other than milk yield. This breeding scheme is aimed primarily at providing superior cattle which can be relied on to improve cultivators' stock. It is, therefore, important to decide at what stage untested bulls can be put to village cows with confidence, not mere- ly that on the average their effect will be beneficial, but that there is no greater risk than with good indigenous stock that any individual will have a deleterious influence. If the best available indigenous stock is used in the breeding scheme, second back-cross bulls, selected for vigour and conformation similar to that of their indigenous sires should be safe for distribution. At that stage it is suggested that bulls should be tested for the milk production of their daughters, and the best of them used for inter-breeding with the best third back-cross heifers. Given the confidence of the cultivators and provided a simple method can be devised of estimating the yield of their cows from periodic test milkings, the testing, and the subsequent return to the herd, of the best bulls should be a practical proposition. In conclusion, it may be remarked that the breeding method here outlined is but a modification for Indian conditions of the methods of grading up adopted with great success in North and South America, South Africa, and elsewhere. The exceptionally hard conditions in India make it necessary to grade up to the indigenous instead of to the Western breed, but there is no reason why this modi- fication should affect the chances of success. The cattle-breeders of the great new cattle countries have used the best bulls in the world regardless of cost. If this was worth while when the ground lost by the accidental introduction of an inferior animal could be regained by replacement with a better, it is much more important that the best possible Western bulls should be used to start such a scheme, as is here suggested, where Western blood will be introduced once only. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The ideas here presented first developed in the mind of the senior author as a result of a discussion of cattle-breeding problems with Dr. Burch H. Schneider, of the Allahabad Agricultural Institute. The granting of study leave at the
86 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II Institute of Plant Industry, Indore, to the junior author by the Allahabad Agri- cultural Institute provided an opportunity of working them out. Though Dr. Schneider does not associate himself with the views expressed, we take this oppor- tunity of expressing our indebtedness to him for his criticisms of the manu- script. REFERENCES Goodale, H. D. (1927). Am. Nat. 61, 539. Littlewood, R. W. (1933). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 3, 325. Lush, J. L. (1935). Emp. J. Exp. Agric. 3, 25. Smith, A. D. B. & Robison, O. J. (1931). Proceedings of the International Dairy Con- gross, Copenhagen. A CHECK-LIST OF THE NEMATODE PARASITES OF THE DOMESTICATED ANIMALS IN BURMA BY J. BHATTACHARJEE, B.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., F.C.S. Offg. Veterinary Research Officer, Insein, Burma (Received for publication on 28th January 1937) I. INTRODUCTION ALTHOUGH attempts have been made to record the nomatode parasites of the domesticated animals in Burma by Evans and Rennie [1910], Gaiger [1910, 1915] and quite recently by Bhalerao [1935], yet our knowledge of these parasites is far from being complete. The present article is yet another attempt not only to place on record an up-to-date knowledge of these parasites, but also to encourage collection of these parasites by those who have ample opportunities of obtaining material, as a great deal of collecting will have to be undertaken before our know- ledge of these parasites can be considered anything like complete. Unless specified, all the parasites listed in this article were identified by the author not only from the collections of the Veterinary Research Laboratory, Insein, Burma, which were in a good state of preservation, but also from large numbers of fresh parasites collected by him in the course of his post-mortem examinations on many experimental animals. The host animals considered in this article are chiefly mammals, viz., elephant (Elephas indicus), cattle (Bos indicus), buffalo (Bos bubalus), sheep (Ovis aries), goat (Capra hircus), horse (Equus caballus), mule (Equus asinus × Equus caballus), dog (Canis familiaris), cat (Felis catus var. domesticus), and pig (Sus cristatus). II. CLASS NEMATODA Rudolphi, 1808, emend. Diesing, 1861. Family ASCARIDAE Baird, 1853. Genus Ascaris Linnaeus, 1758. Ascaris lumbricoides Linnaeus, 1758. Syn., Ascaris suum Goeze, 1782. Ascaris ovis Rudolphi, 1819. Ascaris suilla Dujardin, 1845. Host. Pig. Situation. Small and large intestines. First record of this parasite from Burma. Ascaris vitulorum Goeze, 1782. Host. Cattle. Situation. Small intestine. Recorded by Bhattacharjee, 1930 [Mitchell, 1931] Genus Parascaris Yorke and Maplestone, 1926. (87)
88 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II Parascaris equorum (Goeze, 1782). Syn., Ascaris equorum Goeze, 1782. Ascaris equi Schrank, 1788. Ascaris megalocephala Cloquet, 1824. Host. Horse. Situation. Small intestine. First record of this parasite from Burma. Genus Toxocara Stiles, 1905. Toxocara canis (Werner, 1782). Syn., Lumbricus canis Werner, 1782. Ascaris marginata Rudolphi, 1802. Belascaris marginata Railliet and Henry, 1911. Host. Dog. Situation. Oesophagus, stomach, small intestine. First record of this parasite from Burma. Toxocara lonchoptera (Diosing, 1851). Syn., Strongylus elephanti Rudolphi, 1819. Ascaris lonchoptera Diesing, 1851. Belascaris lonchoptera Leiper, 1911. Host. Elephant. Situation. Bile-ducts. Recorded by Evans and Ronnie [1910]. Evans [1910]. Gaiger [1910], Bhalerao [1935]. None in the laboratory collection. Family OXYURIIDAE Cobbold, 1864. Genus Oxyuris Rudolphi, 1803. Oxyuris equi (Schrank, 1788). Syn., Trichocephalus equi Schrank, 1788. Lepturis curvula Schlotthaubor, 1860. Oxyuris curvula Rudolphi, 1803. Oxyuris mastigodes Nitzsch, 1857. Host. Horse. Situation. Caecum, colon. Also recorded by Gaiger [1910], Bhalerao [1935] Family TRICHURIDAE Railliet, 1915. Genus Trichuris Roederor, 1761. Trichuris ovis (Abildgaard, 1795). Syn., Trichocephalus ovis Abildgaard, 1795. Trichocephalus affinis Rudolphi, 1802. Trichuris affinis Rudolphi, 1802. Host, Cattle, sheep goat. Situation. Caecum, colon.
NEMATODE PARASITES OF THE DOMESTICATED ANIMALS IN BURMA 89 Trichuris ovis (Abildgaard, 1795)90 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II Choniangium epistomum (Piana and Stazzi, 1900). Syn., Sclerostoma epistomum Piana and Stazzi, 1900. Asifia vasifa Lane, 1914. Host. Elephant. Situation. Large intestine. Also recorded by Meggitt, 1933 [Smith, 1933]. Genus Decrusia Lane, 1914. Decrusia additicta (Railliet, Henry and Bauche, 1914). Syn., Strongylus additictus Railliet, Henry and Bauche, 1914. Decrusia decrusi Lane, 1914. Host. Elephant. Situation. Large intestine. Also recorded by Meggitt, 1933 [Smith, 1933]. Genus Equinurbia Lane, 1914. Equinurbia sipunculiformis (Baird, 1859). Syn., Sclerostoma sipunculiforme Baird, 1859. Cylicostomum sipunculiforme Railliet, Henry and Bauche, 1914. Nematode No. 4. Evans and Ronnie, 1910. Host. Elephant. Situation. Intestine, caecum. Also recorded by Evans and Rennie [1910]. Railliet, Henry and Bauche, [1914]. Meggitt, 1933 [Smith, 1933], Bhalerao [1935]. Genus Murshidia Lane, 1914. Murshidia falcifera (Cobbold, 1822). Syn., Strongylus falcifer Cobbold, 1882. Nematode No. 3. Evans and Rennie, 1910. Host. Elephant. Situation. Caecum. Also recorded by Evans and Rennie [1910]. Railliet, Henry and Bauche, [1914]. Meggitt, 1933 [Smith, 1933], Bhalerao [1935]. Murshidia indica (Ware, 1924). Syn., Pterydopharynx indica Ware, 1924. Host. Elephant. Situation. Caecum. Also recorded by Meggitt, 1933 [Smith, 1933]. Murshidia murshida Lane, 1914. Host. Elephant. Situation. Caecum, large intestine. Also recorded by Meggitt, 1933 [Smith, 1933]. Genus Oesophagostomum Molin, 1861.
NEMATODE PARASITES OF THE DOMESTICATED ANIMALS IN BURMA 91 Oesophagostomum columbianum (Curtice, 1890). Host. Cattle, sheep, goat. Situation. Caecum, large intestine. Also recorded by Giles, 1892, [Bhalerao 1935]. Bhattacharjee, 1930 [Mitchell, 1931]. Oesophagostomum radiatum (Rudolphi, 1803). Syn., Strongylus inflatum (Schneider, 1866). Oesophagostomum dilatatum (Railliet, 1896). Oesophagostomum vesiculosum Ratz, 1898. Oesophagostomum bovis Schnyder, 1906. Host. Cattle, buffalo. Situation. Large intestine. Recorded by Bhattacharjee, 1930 [Mitchell, 1931]. Oesophagostomum venulosum (Rudolphi, 1809). Syn., Strongylus venulosus Rudolphi, 1809. Host. Goat. Situation. Large intestine. First record of this parasite from Burma. Genus Quilonia Lane, 1914. Quilonia renniei (Railliet, Henry and Joyeux, 1913). Syn., Evansia renniei Railliet, Henry and Joyeux, 1913. Nematevansia renniei Ihle, 1919. Quilonia quilona Lane, 1914. Host. Elephant. Situation. Caecum, large intestine. Also recorded by Evans and Rennie [1910]. Railliet, Henry and Joyeux, [1913]. Meggitt, 1933 [Smith, 1933], Bhalerao [1935]. Quilonia travancra Lane, 1914. Syn., Evansia travancra Railliet, Henry and Bauche, 1915. Nematevansia travancra Ihle, 1919. Host. Elephant. Situation. Caecum, large intestine. Also recorded by Meggitt, 1933 [Smith, 1933]. Genus Strongylus Mueller, 1780. Strongylus equinus Mueller, 1780. Syn., Sclerostomum equinus Looss, 1900. Strongylus armatus Rudolphi, 1802. Sclerostomum quadridentatum Sticker, 1901. Host. Horse, mule. Situation. Caecum, colon. Also recorded by Gaiger [1910, 1911]. Boulenger [1921], Bhalerao [1935]. Genus Trichonema Cobbold, 1874.
92 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II Trichonema aegyptiacum Railliet, 1923. Syn., Strongylus tetracanlhum Mehlis, 1831. Host. Horse, mule. Situation. Colon. Also recorded by Giles, 1892 [Bhalerao, 1935]. Family SYNGAMIDAE Leiper, 1912. Genus Syngamus V. Siebold, 1836. Syngamus laryngeus Railliet, 1899. Syn., Syngamus laryncheus minor Smit, 1922. Host. Buffalo, cattle. Situation. Larynx. First record of this parasite from Burma. Family TRICHOSTRONGYLIDAE, Leiper, 1912. Genus Haemonchus Cobb, 1898. Haemonchus contortus (Rudolphi, 1803). Syn., Strongylus contortus Rudolphi, 1803. Host. Cattle, sheep, goat. Situation. Abomasum, small intestine. Recorded by Bhattacharjee, 1930 [Mitchell, 1931]. Genus Mecistocirrus (Railliet and Henry, 1912). Mecistocirrus digitatus (V. Linstow, 1906). Syn., Nematodirus digitatus Linstow, 1906. Strongylus digitatus V. Linstow, 1906. Hos . Cat le, buffalo. Situation. Abomasum. First record of this parasite from Burma. Genus Nematodirus Ransom, 1907. Nematodirus filicollis (Rudolphi, 1802). Syn., Ascaris filicollis Rudolphi, 1802. Host. Cattle. Situation. Abomasum. First record of this parasite from Burma. Genus Trichostrongylus Looss, 1905. Trichostrongylus colubriformis (Giles, 1892). Syn., Strongylus colubriformis Giles, 1892. Strongylus inslabilis Railliet, 1893. Trichostrongylus instabilis Looss, 1905. Host. Sheep. Situation. Abomasum. Recorded by Giles, 1892 [Bhalerao, 1935]. None in the laboratory collection. Family Acuariidae Seurat, 1913. Genus Parabronema Baylis, 1921.
NEMATODE PARASITES OF THE DOMESTICATED ANIMALS IN BURMA 93 Parabronema smithi (Cobbold, 1882). Syn., Filaria smithii Cobbold, 1882. Spiroptera smithi Railliet, Henry and Bauche, 1914. Host. Elephant. Situation. Gastric tumour. First record of this parasite from Burma. Family GNATHOSTOMIDAE Railliet, 1895. Genus Gnathostoma Owen, 1836. Gnathostoma spinigerum Owen, 1836. Host. Cat. Situation. Stomach. First record of this parasite from Burma. Family PHYSALOPTERIDAE Leiper, 1908. Genus Chlamydonema Hegt, 1910. Chlamydonema praeputiale von Linstow, 1889. Syn., Physaloptera praeputialis Linstow, 1889. Chlamydonema felineum Hegt, 1910. Host. Cat. Situation. Stomach. First record of this parasite from Burma. Family SPIRURIDAE Oerley, 1885. Genus Spirocerca Railliet and Henry, 1911. Spirocerca sanguinolenta (Rudolphi, 1819). Syn. Spiroptera sanguinolenta Rudolphi, 1819. Host. Dog. Situation. Oesophagus, stomach, aorta. Recorded by Bhattacharjee, 1930 [Mitchell, 1931]. Genus Habronema Diesing, 1861. Habronema megastoma (Rudolphi, 1819). Syn., Filaria megastoma Rudolphi, 1819. Spiroptera megastoma Rudolphi, 1819. Host. Horse. Situation. Stomach tumours. Also recorded by Giles, 1892 [Bhalerao, 1935]. Habronema muscæ (Carter, 1861). Syn., Filaria muscæ Carter, 1861. Dermofilaria irritans Rivolta, 1884. Host. Horse. Situation. Stomach. First record of this parasite from Burma. Family THELAZIIDAE Railliet, 1916. Genus Thelazia Bosc, 1819.
94 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II Thelazia callipNEMATODE PARASITES OF THE DOMESTICATED ANIMALS IN BURMA 95 Setaria equina (Abildgaard, 1789). Host. Horse, cattle. Situation. Peritoneal cavity, eye, circulatory system, thoracic cavity. Also recorded by Neumann [1905]. Evans and Rennie [1910]. Bhattachar- jee, 1930 [Mitchell, 1931], Bhalerao [1935]. Setaria labiato-papillosa (Alessandrini, 1838). Syn., Filaria labiato-papillosa Alessandrini, 1838. Host. Cattle. Situation. Peritoneal and pleural cavities. Recorded by Bhattacharjee, 1930 [Mitchell, 1931]. Setaria marshalli Boulenger, 1921. Host. Cattle. Situation. Peritoneal cavity. Recorded by Boulenger [1920]. Thwaite, 1927 [Bhalerao, 1935]. Baylis [1929]. III. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The author wishes to record his thanks to the Director of Veterinary Services, Burma, the Veterinary Research Officer, Insein, Burma, and the officers of the Department for providing the facilities to carry out this work and the encouragement they have given him. Also to Mr. J. Smith, B.Sc, M.R.C.V.S., late Field Veterinary Research Officer, Insein, Burma, for his collections of elephant parasites during his stay in Burma. REFERENCES Baylis, H. A. (1929). A Manual of Helminthology. London, xi + 303 pp. Bhalerao, G. D. (1935). Helminth Parasites of the Domesticated animals in India. Sc. Mon. No. 6 of the I.C.A. R., Delhi, 365 pp. Boulenger, C. L. (1920). On some filarid parasites of cattle and other ruminants. Parasitol. 12, 341-349. 96 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII II Khalil, M. (1922). A revision of the nematode parasites of elephants, with a des- cription of four new species. Proc. Zool. Soc., 922, 205-279. Mitchell, D. T. (1931). Report on the Veterinary Department, Burma, for the year ended the 31st March 1930. Rangoon, 28-29. Monnig, H. O. (1934). Veterinary Helminthology and Entomology. London, xvi+402 pp. Neumann, L. G. (1905). Parasites and parasitic diseases of domesticated animals. London, xvi +697 pp. Railliet, A., Henry, A., and Bauche, J. (1914). Sur les Helminthes de l'elephant d' asie (1) 111 Nematodes B. Bull. Soc. Path. Exot. 7, 206-210. Railliet, A., Henry, A., and Joyeux, C. (1913). Un nouveau strongylide des singes. Bull. Soc. Path. Exot. 6, 264-267. Smith, J. H. (1933). A Report on the Investigation of Diseases of Elephants. Rangoon, 13. Yorke, W. and Maplestone, P. A. (1926). The Nematode Parasites of Vetebrates. London, x+536pp.
HAEMATOLOGICAL STUDIES IN INDIAN DAIRY ANIMALS BY N. S. SANKARANARAYANAN, G.M.V.C. Animal Nutrition Section, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 13th February 1937) (With one text-figure) ALTHOUGH investigations have been carried out in other countries to fix haerma- tological standards for domestic animals, such work has not been attempted in this country and no records are available of the typical blood picture of Indian dairy animals. Napier and Das Gupta [1935] working on human haematology have found certain deviations in the blood picture of the Bengal population from foreign standards. The present work was undertaken with a view to find out whether any such variation exists between Indian cattle and foreign ones. The buffalo, an important dairy animal in India, is also included. It is hoped that these figures will be of practical value to the veterinarian who has now to depend upon foreign standards. This paper records the results of a study of the blood of nearly 100 animals of different breeds belonging to the Imperial Dairy Institute at Bangalore. The following were the animals examined, all the cows being in milk :98 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II BLEEDING AND SAMPLING Samples of blood were drawn either from the jugular vein or the marginal or dorsal vein of the ear. No significant differences between the samples were noticed. At the beginning of these investigations counts were made only on fresh blood. Sometimes owing to accidents the vein had to be punctured again for the second pipette within a few minutes after the first attempt. These latter samples were found to be abnormal due to concentration of leucocytes at this spot. Hence all the counts had to be made on the sample drawn at the very first attempt. This was made possible only by using sodium oxalate [Napier and Das Gupta, 1935] as an anticoagulant, its concentration being one mg. per c.c. of blood. Blood counts were made on the fresh and oxalated samples to see whether the anti-coagulant interfered with the accuracy of the results. It was noticed (Table I) that the erythrocyte count was unaffected. However, structural changes in the cells were noticed, the red cells becoming crenated and some of the leu- cocytes failing to take the nuclear stain. Even the film, when stained with Giemsa, appeared reddish, perhaps due to the effect of oxalate on the haemoglobin of the red cells. But in the fresh oxalated samples the lymphocytes alone possessed an affinity for the nuclear stain, and as the other forms of leucocytes, particularly neutrophils and monocytes were indistinguishable without their nuclear stain, an apparent increase in the lymphocytes was noted when differential counts were made. This might perhaps be the reason for Kerncamp [1933] say- ing that lymphocytes increase in oxalated blood. In the smear prepared with a twenty-four hours sample even the lymphocytes fail to take the nuclear stain. Eosinophile nucleii remain colourless even in the fresh oxalated sample, but the cells could be identified by the stained granular cytoplasm. Hence, for differential counts and for study of structural characters of blood elements, fresh and pure blood alone should be used. But fresh oxalated blood could safely be employed for erythrocyte and leucocyte counts. TABLE I Erythrocyte counts in pure and oxalated blood in millions per c.c. Animals Pure and fresh blood Fresh oxalated blood Oxalated blood 24 hours old Oxalated blood 48 hours old Bullocks . . . . 8.400 8.608 8.416 7.976 HAEMATOLOGICAL STUDIES IN INDIAN DAIRY ANIMALS 99 DILUTING FLUID For diluting fluid a 3 per cent citrate solution was employed and the results agree with those obtained by the use of Toisson's or Hayem's fluids (Table II). TABLE II Blood counts in three different diluting fluids in millions per c.c. of blood Samples examined Citrate solution Toisson's solution Hayem's solution Scindi . . . . . . . 7.464 7.160 7.324 Bullock I . . . . . . . 9.920 10.456 . . Scindi S . . . . . . . 7.192 7.000 . . Gir No. 5 . . . . . . . 9.020 8.984 9.128 Scindi 253 . . . . . . . 7.632 7.520 . . Cross-bred cow 576 . . . . . 9.024 8.976 . . Cross-bred cow 472 . . . . . 9.336 . . 9.256 Cross-bred cow 409 . . . . . 7.032 . . 7.056 Gir 24 . . . . . . . 9.144 . . 9.240 The citrate solution, however, is preferable for the following reasons :100 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II TABLE III Blood counts of healthy animals of Bangalore Farm No. Animals Erythrocytes in millions Leucocytes in thousands Maximum Minimum Average Maximum Minimum Average 1. Bullocks (Mysore) 8.732 8.400 8.570 16,000 7,550 12,050 2. Scindi cows . 9.892 7.104 8.498 14,400 12,000 12,840 3. Scindi bulls . 9.554 8.696 9.272 15,200 12,400 . . 4. Gir cows . . 9.128 6.776 8.923 19,800 10,400 12,000 5. Gir bulls . . . . . . 9.024 . . . . 15,600 6. Buffaloes Murrah 11.296 7.544 9.682 20,800 10,400 13,200 7. Buffalo bull . . . . . 7.500 . . . . . . 8. Scindi bulls . 9.680 9.072 9.476 . . . . 12,000 9. Half-bred cows 8.044 5.680 6.876 16,000 7,550 11,200 10. Quarter-bred cows. 9.960 8.592 9.269 16,400 8,600 13,300 11. Three-eighth-bred cows. . . . . 8.520 . . . . 14,000 12. Five-eighth -bred cows. 7.360 7.672 7.142 . . . . 11,600 13. Ayrshire bull . .. . . 6.088 . . . . 10,200 14. Sheep local . 14.672 10.280 14.149 12,000 8,200 10,200 15. Human . . 5.520 5.376 5.448 . . . . . . Erythrocytes From Table III, it may be seen that the erythrocyte count in pure Indian cattle is far above those in the Ayrshire bull and the half-bred cows, the mean rang- ing from 7.5 to 9.6 millions per c.c. of blood, the buffalo topping the list with 9.6 millions average with a maximum count of 11.2 millions. It would be in- teresting to compare the above figures with those reported by different workers elsewhere. Fraser [1931] working in Cambridge after an extensive study has given " under seven millions " as the average count for British cattle. He further quotes the figures of other European workers which are in close agreement with his own. The American figure of 6.6 millions as reported by Nicols [1935] agrees with that of Fraser. Norris and Chamberlain, quoted by Fraser [1931], working on Australian cattle have reported that the erythrocyte counts range from seven to ten millions per c. c. of blood. However, it is remarkable that the numerical findings for the half-bred cows and the pure Ayrshire bull agree closely with European and American figures and those of Indian cows agree with the figures given for Australian cattle. Friedberger and Frohner [Nicols, 1935] report that there is a tendency to anaemia in dogs of improved and delicate breeds. Napier and Das Gupta [1935] also citing other workers, report that women and men of
HAEMATOLOGICAL STUDIES IN INDIAN DAIRY ANIMALS 101 India generally give a lower blood count and lower Hb figures compared with Europeans and the reason suggested is that Indians are of lower vitality and stamina. Perhaps the above reasons may also be applicable to cattle. Another interesting feature seen in the same table is the figure for animals of subsequent crossing. The Bangalore Farm is now experimenting upon quarter- breeding to see whether quarter-bred cows could be made to suit Indian condi- tions. So far as the blood picture is concerned the quarter-breds are similar to the pure Indian cattle. The three-eighths-bred and the five-eighths-bred cows have given counts midway between those of half-bred and quarter-bred cows and from the following chart it would seem that the erythrocyte count in the cross-bred animals is inversely proportional to the extent of foreign blood content in them. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
102 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II The graph for the pure Indian cattle represents the average for them exclud- ing the buffaloes. The fact that the bulls give higher counts than the respective cows is also noteworthy, and this fact is also recorded by Fraser [loc. cit.]. The buffalo bull, however, gave a lower count and this may be due to the old age of this particular animal. Leucocytes From Table II it may be observed that the white cells have a range from seven to twenty thousands per c. c. of blood including the buffalo with an average of 13.4 thousands. Fraser's figure is from three to fifteen thousands for European cattle which also is lower than that of the Indian cattle. Nicols' figure for American cattle is nine thousands which is also low. Nicols [loc. cit.] also finds a wide variation in the white cell counts of normal animals amounting to 100 per cent. However, Indian cattle have not given a figure lower than 7,000 and the upper limit is 19' 8 thousands in Gir cows and twenty thousands in buffaloes. Such high figures have also been obtained by Sergent and his collaborators [Fraser, 1931] in the case of Algerian cattle. The remarks made about erythrocyte counts in Indian and foreign cattle hold good in leucocyte counts also. But it is remark- able to note that the half-bred cows while agreeing with European cattle in eryth- rocyte counts differ from both European and Indian cattle in leucocyte counts. The other cross-bred animals show the same relationship to the half-bred cow in their white cell count as in that of the red cell count. Here also the quarter-bred cows behave exactly similar to pure Indian cattle. As already stated human subjects and sheep were included to test the accu- racy of the technique and it is interesting to note that the human figures for erythrocytes closely agree with the standards. In sheep, Fraser has recorded a range from 7.6 millions to 14.4 millions per c. c. for red cells and 4.4 to 13.0 thousands for white cells ; whereas the figures for local sheep are 10.2 to 14.6 millions for red cells and eight to twelve thousands for the white cells, which figures do not vary much from those of Fraser except in the range. EXAMINATION OF BLOOD SMEARS The film for studying the erythrocytes and for making differential counts of leucocytes was made by the ordinary method of taking smears direct from the puncture. Of the two stains Giemsa's and Leishman's recommended for stain- ing the film, Giemsa's is found to be more satisfactory for reasons stated by Fraser [loc. cit.]. After washing, the film appears light pinkish blue in the case of normal blood. If the smears are made from the oxalated blood, the film appears light brick red as stated already. This same colour has also been noticed to a certain extent in films made from non-oxalated anaemic blood. Thus Giemsa's stain forms a sort of indicator of anaemic blood.
HAEMATOLOGICAL STUDIES IN INDIAN DAIRY ANIMALS 103 In the stained film the red cell appears pinkish. In all samples examined Microcytes and Megalocytes were observed and with the exception of Gir cattle no animal showed Poikilocytes, Punctate basophilia or any such pathological specimen of red cells. This fact indicates that the animals examined were in normal health so far as the erythrocyte count is concerned. This remark applies to buffaloes also. One noteworthy character in the buffalo blood is that there is a tendency for the red cells to form into rouleaux and the smear is likely to be mis- taken for that of the horse but for the differences in the character of the leucocytes. Among the leucocytes, the small lymphocytes far exceed the number of other forms put together and they are usually found in large numbers at the beginning of the smear, while the polymorpho-nuclears are found mostly at the finish. The appearance of the polymorpho-nuclears at the tail end of the smear may perhaps be due to their lightness or phagocytic movements causing them to be swept off towards the tail end in the act of spreading the drop of blood. The concentra- tion of the different forms of leucocytes in different parts of the film makes it necessary to adopt a special method of counting, so that the apparent and the actual counts may not be far different. Series of fields in lines from one end of the film to the other end when counted, give more or less uniform results. The following observations were recorded :104 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II TABLE IV Differential counts No. Animals Polymor Eosinoph Mono. Range per cent Poly. Eosino. Mono. Per cent Per cent Per cent 1. Mysore bullocks . 21 9 70 16HAEMATOLOGICAL STUDIES IN INDIAN DAIRY ANIMALS 105 preferential treatment and are well looked after in the farm give a higher percen- tage. Again, the Gir cows which are found to be anaemic, which itself may be due to helminthiasis, show a lower count. However, the following points which were noticed are worth recording here :106 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II TABLE VI Blood counts in some Gir cows of Bangalore farm Animals Types Erythro- cytes in millions Leucocytes in thousands Differential counts Polymor. Eosino. Mono. Others Cow 28 Brown . 6.776 19.800 20 16 62 2.0 HAEMATOLOGICAL STUDIES IN INDIAN DAIRY ANIMALS 107 The author wishes to express his gratitude to Mr. Z. R. Kothawalla, the Imperial Dairy Expert, Bangalore, for permitting him to take blood samples from the dairy herd at Bangalore. REFERENCES Kerncamp, H. C. H. (1933). Amer. Vet. Med. Ass. 83, 666-672. Nicols, R. E. (1935). Vet. Med. 30, 289-295. Fraser, A. C. (1931). Univ. Camb., Inst. Ani. Path., 1st Rep. 29, 30-31. Napier, L. E. and Das Gupta, C. R. (1935). Ind. Jour. Med. Res. 23.
A PRELIMINARY REPORT ON CANINE SCHISTOSOMIASIS IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY* BY M. ANANT NARAYAN RAO, G.M.V.C. Lecturer in Parasitology, Madras Veterinary College (Received for publication on 16th March 1937) (With Plate XII) THE first case of schistosomiasis in a dog in India was recorded by Rao and Ayyar [1935]. The animal was brought to South India from Jubbulpore where apparently, it got the infection in the jheels. The subject of this paper is a dog, aged about eighteen months, belonging to a flower merchant of Gudiattam, North Arcot District. This dog, it is reported, was born in Kuppam of Chittoor District, and as a pup, was taken to Gudiattam where it remained most of the time before it was brought to Madras. The owner said that it is very fond of swimming and he allowed it this pleasure in the ponds in his lands at Gudiattam. The clinical history of the case is that it has had frequent attacks of dysentery and is not keeping such good condition as the owner expects it to have, consistent with the care bestowed upon it. The examination of its faeces showed a large number of ova of schistosomes resembling those of S. suis [Rao and Ayyar, 1933]. This is the second case of dysentery in a dog caused by schistosomes to be reported from India and the first indigenous case to be reported in the Madras Presidency. It is possible that a careful search into the causes of dysentery in dogs may reveal more cases of schistosomiasis. This finding of schistosome ova resembling those of S. suis in the faeces of a dog from North Arcot District adds importance to the previous findings referred to below. Rao and Ayyar [1933] found S. suis in pigs brought from North Arcot District and slaughtered in Madras. Figs, when being driven from this district to the various markets, would naturally disseminate infection to certain species of snails in ponds en route. It, therefore, seems possible that this dog contracted schistosomiasis in one of such infected ponds in which it was allowed to swim. The author has had no opportunities of examining pigs slaughtered in districts other than North Arcot, and hence is unable to report the existence of this schisto- some in other pig-breeding areas of this Presidency. There is some evidence to show that S. suis exists in Benga1 and Central Provinces. Maplestone collected some from pigs slaughtered in Calcutta and these were described by Bhalerao [1934]. *Paper read at the 24th Session of the Indian Science Congress held at Hyderabad, Deccan, January 1937. (109)
110 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II Rao and Ayyar [1935] reported the case of a dog from Jubbulpore which evidently had S. suis infection. Hence it may be that this parasite is more widely spread in India than is known at present; nor is there any information regarding the patho- logical conditions set up by this parasite in pigs and the consequent economic loss to the pig-breeding industry in India. Description of the ovum. It was possible to obtain ample material for study of the ova. The blood-tinged flakes of mucous contained a very large number of living, dead and ill-developed ova. The dimensions in microns are as follows :SELECTED ARTICLES THE CONTROL OF ANIMAL DISEASES IN RELATION TO OVERSTOCKING AND SOIL EROSION BY H. E. HORNBY Director of Veterinary Services, Tanganyika Territory (Reprinted from the Empire Journal of Experimental Agriculture, Vol. V, No. 18, April, 1937, 143-154) SOIL erosion has been defined as ' the corrosive action of natural forces on the surface of the earth ', and a certain amount of erosion, which in most places is more than balanced by rock decay, is a normal process. To-day, however, the term generally implies an accelerated loss of soil so far above the normal that it constitutes a very serious loss of the natural wealth of many countries. This accelerated loss is almost entirely due to disturbance by man or his domestic animals of the vegetative cover which alone can prevent the shifting of soil by rain and wind. Throughout the world generally it is probable that injudicious cultivation is by far the most important source of soil erosion, and especially wherever the rain- fall is both high and well distributed. Thus Eden [ 1 ] in his small monograph on soil erosion gave very little space to damage by stock, and the committee on soil erosion in Ceylon [ 2] did not mention stock at all. It is in countries where the rainfall is low, or sufficiently seasonal to permit an annual dry season of several consecutive months, that damage by domestic animals may equal or exceed that done by the cultivator. Thus on page 12 of the Final Report of the Drought Investigation Commission of the Union of South Africa [ 3 ] it is stated that ' Deterioration in the vegetal covering of the drier parts of the Union has been brought about mainly through the practices of kraal- ing, herding, and overstocking, together with an insufficient number of drinking places, and overgrazing '; and on page 15, ' Soil erosion is caused, mainly, by de- terioration of the vegetal cover brought about by incorrect veld management.' Also Bennett and Chapline [ 4 ] lay the blame for the appalling soil losses which are occurring in the United States of America almost equally on the shoulders of the cultivator and the stockman. We are not concerned, however, with appor- tioning blame ; our present purpose is to emphasize the fact that overstocking is an important cause of soil erosion, and that wherever it exists it calls for serious consideration and scientific intervention. Even in those areas where there is as yet no apparent overstocking, the possibility of its occurrence should be borne in mind, and preventive measures be instituted when necessary. (309)
CANINE SCHISTOSOMIASIS IN THE MADRAS PRESIDENCY 111 round the body of the miracidium at this region. Another similar ring is seen round the region of the excretory pores in the posterior third of the body. In the body of the miracidium are found a large number of polyhedral germinal cells [Plate XII, figs. 1 (c) and 3]. The cuticle shows an inner lining of rows of tiny cells, the germinal epithelium. The excretory system consists of a pair of flame cells on either side of the mesial half of the miracidium. The anterior flame cell is situated in a level with the posterior secretory gland and the posterior flame cell is in a level with or a little behind the excretory pore. The tubule from each flame cell unites with its fellow from the opposite direction just behind the posterior secretory gland. The common duct thus formed, after looping to some extent, opens in the excretory pore on the margin of the posterior third of the body. Some interesting features in the anatomy of this miracidium are the absence of the ciliary girdle and the presence of some refractile bodies, about three in the visual section or six in all, around the digestive sac. These bodies were found to move within certain limits and their nature and function are not known. Such bodies have not been observed hitherto in the miracidia of the other species of schistosomes studied by the author. A comparison, in a tabular form, of the pre- sence and location, etc., of the ciliary girdle on the different miracidia is interesting and the following table gives the necessary details :112 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II TABLE IA PRELIMINARY STUDY OF THE INFLUENCE OF ACCESSORY FACTORS ON THE PRODUCTION OF MILK BY INDIAN GOATS BY K. P. R. KARTHA Animal Husbandry Bureau, Imperial Council of Agricultural Resea" (Received for publication on 9th April 1937) (With seven text-figures) THE quantity of milk yielded by an animal in a lactation is not a single entity ; it is the resultant of a complex of forces. It is of very great interest to the practical breeder to know what factors affect the yield and how and to what extent they influence the yield. A knowledge of this will enable him to assess the true economic worth of his animals and to control the various factors, as far as it lies in his power, in such a way as to get the maximum return from his stock. It will also help him to explain the underlying physiological processes. An attempt is made in the following pages to analyse the available data regarding goats with a view to study the influence of various environmental factors on milking efficiency. Although India possesses a population of forty-nine million goats, goat-breeding is in the hands of illiterate villagers who do not keep records. For accurate records we have to turn to the farms where organised breeding of goats is carried on. Unfortunately such farms are rare and as the work has not been in progress for a long time the data available are not sufficiently voluminous to yield conclusive evidence. The reliability of the conclusions presented below is limited by this fact and they should be considered tentative until confirmed by results from other farms. The' data are obtained from the records of the Government Cattle Breeding Farm, Hissar. These records contain all the details which are usually recorded in the case of cows, viz., dates of birth, dates of calvings, lactation yields, days in milk, days dry, yield at peak, average daily yield, etc., etc. For convenience of manipulation the relevant details are copied on cards ; one card is used for each lactation and the figures are entered in a certain fixed order so as to avoid the labour of copying the headings. These cards are dealt out as required by the particular investigation. (113)
114 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II The herd consists of 175 goats ; but in some of these all the information is not complete ; rejecting the latter only 103 animals are available for this study. These 103 animals comprise a total of 234 lactations distributed as follows accord- ing to age : TABLE I Distribution of lactations according to age Age in lactation No. of lactations Percentage of total 1st lactation . . . . . 103 43.63 2nd INFLUENCE OF ACCESSORY FACTORS ON MILK BY INDIAN GOATS 115 The distributions of the lactation yields, lactation lengths, service periods and dry periods are given in the form of frequency polygons in Figs. 1 to 4*. The means, standard deviations and coefficients of variations of these characters are given in Table III. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Frequency distribution of lactation yields [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. Frequency distribution of service periods. * To economise space the tables are not reproduced here. But these can be seen from the correlation Tables IX to XI.
116 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VIT, II [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 3. Frequency distribution of lactation lengths [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 4. Frequency distribution of dry periods
INFLUENCE OF ACCESSORY FACTORS ON MILK BY INDIAN GOATS 117 TABLE III Statistical constants* of distribution of lactation yield, lactation length, dry period and service period Name of constant Lactation yield lbs. Lactation length (days) Service period (days) Dry period (days) Mean . . . . . . 403.0 152.64 127.94 119.24 Standard Deviation . . . . 171.4 50.64 81.38 74.08 Coefficient of variation . . . 42.53 33.19 63.57 62.16 It will be seen from the coefficients of variation that the ' service ' and ' dry periods ' are highly variable. I. THE INFLUENCE OF THE SEASON OF KIDDING The frequency-distributions of lactation yields, lactation lengths and service periods of lactations commencing in the various months of the year are given in Tables IV to VI and the averages of these characters for the various months are entered in Table VII and illustrated in Fig. 5. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 5. Influence of season of kidding on lactation length and service period. * The standard errors of these are not calculated as they are not made use of in this paper.
118 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II TABLE IV The influence of season of kidding on lactation yield Frequency distribution of yields of milk in lactations commencing in the different months of the year Yield in lbs. Class mid- points January February March April May June July August September October November December Total 75 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 125 .. 1 1 .. .. 1 .. 1 1 1 1 1 8 175 .. 3 .. .. .. 1 2 .. 1 2 2 3 14 225 1 1 2 1 .. 3 .. 1 1 8 1 1 20 275 2 2 .. .. 3 3 1 3 2 5 1 2 24 325 4 1 2 3 4 3 1 3 3 4 1 1 30 375 4 2 2 1 2 5 1 6 2 3 3 4 35 425 1 2 3 5 .. 2 .. 2 .. 1 3 2 21 475 3 5 2 3 .. .. .. 4 .. 3 2 7 29 525 1 .. .. .. .. 2 1 2 .. 1 .. 5 12 575 1 3 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 7 625 2 1 2 1 1 .. .. .. .. 1 2 2 12 675 .. 2 .. .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 4 725 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 .. .. .. .. 4 775 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. 1 2 6 825 .. .. 1 .. .. 1 .. 2 .. .. 1 .. 5 875 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 925 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 975 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,025 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Total . 20 24 16 16 11 21 7 29 10 29 19 32 234 Mean yield in lbs. 425 425 428.1 428.1 379.5 351.2 360.7 468.1 280 312.9 425 446.9 403
INFLUENCE OF ACCESSORY FACTORS ON MILK BY INDIAN GOATS 119 TABLE V The influence of season of kidding on lactation length Frequency distribution of lengths of lactations commencing in different months of the year Lactation length in days. January February March April May June July August September October November December Total 70 .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. 1 .. .. .. 3 6 90 .. 2 1 2 .. 4 3 2 2 5 2 1 24 110 4 2 2 .. 3 7 1 10 2 12 3 4 50 130 .. 2 .. 4 3 3 1 6 2 5 1 2 29 150 1 3 2 3 3 3 .. 2 3 3 3 1 27 170 7 5 1 4 2 1 1 2 .. .. 1 3 27 190 .. 3 8 2 .. .. 1 2 .. 1 3 9 29 210 3 4 1 1 .. 1 .. 2 2 .. 3 3 19 230 .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 2 5 10 250 2 1 1 .. .. .. .. 2 .. 1 .. .. 7 270 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 .. 3 290 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 3 Total 20 24 16 16 11 21 7 29 10 29 19 32 234 Mean lactation length (days) 188.0 170.0 172.5 151.25 137.3 118.4 124.3 140.4 132.0 131.4 167.9 170.0 152.64 G
120 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II TABLE VI The influence of season of kidding on service period Frequency distribution of service periods of lactations comencing in the different months of the year Service period in days Class mid-point January February March April May June July August September October November December Total 10 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 2 .. 2 5 30 .. 1 .. 2 .. 4 2 6 1 4 .. 1 21 50 5 .. .. 2 .. 4 1 5 4 5 1 .. 27 70 1 3 .. 3 3 4 .. 2 3 1 2 2 24 90 2 2 .. 1 2 4 .. 2 .. 6 2 .. 21 110 2 3 2 2 1 1 1 .. 1 .. 2 6 21 130 1 6 4 .. 2 .. 1 2 .. 2 2 3 23 150 3 2 2 2 .. .. .. 6 1 2 5 4 27 170 2 2 5 .. 1 2 .. 1 .. 1 2 3 19 190 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. 3 .. 4 9 210 .. 2 1 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. 6 230 1 .. .. 1 .. .. 1 1 .. .. .. 3 7 250 .. .. 1 1 .. 1 .. 1 .. 1 .. 1 7 270 .. 1 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. 1 5 290 2 .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 5 310 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. 2 330 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 350 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 1 370 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 390 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 410 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 430 .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 450 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 470 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 Total . 20 24 16 16 11 21 7 29 10 29 19 32 234 Mean service periodINFLUENCE OF ACCESSORY FACTORS ON MILK BY INDIAN GOATS 121 TABLE VII Influence of season of kidding. Month of kidding No. of lactations averaged Average lactation yield Average days in milk Average service period Average daily yield from kidding to kidding January . . . . 20 425 188 138 1.647 February . . . . 24 425 170 152.5 1.407 March . . . . 16 428.1 172.5 165 1.358 April . . . . 16 428.1 151.25 121.25 1.579 May . . . . 11 379.5 137.3 162.7 1.214 June . . . . 21 351.2 118.4 92.9 1.444 July . . . . 7 360.7 124.3 84.3 1.543 August . . . . 29 468.1 140.4 112.1 1.786 September . . . . 10 280.0 132.0 70.0 1.273 October . . . . 29 312.9 131.4 104.5 1.227 November . . . . 19 425.0 167.9 140.5 1.461 December . . . . 32 446.9 170 155 1.466 Total . 234 403 152.64 127.94 1.45 It will be seen from these that kiddings are not distributed over the various months in any regular order, except that in the months of May, July and September they are less frequent. Greatest frequency, however, occurs during the season October to February, showing that the period May to September is more favourable for conception than the remaining period of the year. The larger frequencies in June and August cannot be explained properly ; but for these two irregularities the goats may generally be said to be prone to freshening during the winter months. With the exception of an irregularity in August, the average lactation yields are generally above the average of the herd for November to April and below the average during the remaining six months. But the average lactation lengths and service periods follow the same trend. The goats kidding in May to October conceive quicker than others and consequently go dry sooner. This necessarily makes the lactation lengths shorter and the average lactation yields lower. (The influence of lactation length and service period on lactation yield is examined in a later section). But a lower lactation yield does not mean lower economic efficiency. That animal is economically most efficient which yields the largest quantity of milk during a given period of time, and when lactations are studied the economic worth is best measured by the average daily yield during each
122 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II kidding interval. These averages are given in the last column of Table VII. They do not afford any definite indication that kidding in a particular season would enhance the economic value of the animal. On the other hand it would be advantageous, in the interests of a level supply of milk, to have the matings controlled, as far as possible, in such a way that kiddings are evenly distributed in the different months of the year. Seeing that lactation yields vary according to the season of kidding, it is necessary, in judging animals by their lactation yields, to have a measure of the variation. Figures in Table VIII are worked out with this object in view. These figures indicate what percentage should be added to or subtracted from lacta- tion yields of goats kidding in the various months of the year so as to reduce them to the average for the whole year. TABLE VIII. Correction for month of kidding Month of kidding Correction per cent January . . . . . . . . . . . INFLUENCE OF ACCESSORY FACTORS ON MILK BY INDIAN GOATS 123 TABLE IX Correlation between lactation yield and service period Days124 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II INFLUENCE OF SERVICE PERIOD Table IX shows the correlation between service period and lactation yield. The coefficient of correlation is as low as 0.2658 which would seem to indicate that service period has little or no influence on the yield of milk in a lactation. This is contrary to experience. The explanation lies in the fact that the duration of the milking period is dependent not only on pregnancy but on other factors as wellINFLUENCE OF ACCESSORY FACTORS ON MILK BY INDIAN GOATS 125 TABLE X Correlation betioeen lactation length and service period Class mid-point. Service period126 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II TABLE XI Correlation between lactation yield and lactation length Days in milk Yield 70 90 110 130 150 170 190 210 230 250 270 290 Total 75 .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 125 2 4 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 8 175 3 6 5 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 14 225 1 2 13 2 2 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 20 275 .. 4 11 2 3 2 1 1 .. .. .. .. 24 325 .. 3 6 7 5 3 4 .. .. 1 .. .. 30 375 .. 3 7 6 8 5 3 3 .. .. .. .. 35 425 .. 1 3 2 4 4 4 1 2 .. .. .. 21 475 .. .. 3 3 2 5 7 6 3 .. .. .. 29 525 .. .. .. 4 1 1 2 2 2 .. .. .. 12 575 .. .. .. .. .. .. 3 3 .. .. .. 1 7 625 .. .. .. .. 1 4 1 1 1 3 .. 1 12 675 .. .. .. 1 .. 1 1 .. .. 1 .. .. 4 725 .. .. .. .. .. .. 2 .. .. 1 1 .. 4 775 .. .. .. 1 1 2 .. 1 1 6 825 .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 2 1 1 .. .. 5 875 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. 1 925 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 975 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,025 .. .. .. .. .. .. 1 .. .. .. .. .. 1 Total . 6 24 50 29 27 27 29 19 10 7 3 3 234 Mean of columns . 166.7 237.5 287.0 419.8 388.0 471.3 492.24 511.8 565.0 632.1 608.3 658.3 .. Mean yield . . . . . 403 Ibs. Mean days in milk . . . . 152.64 days Standard deviation of yield . . . 171.4 lbs. Standard deviation of days in milk . 50.64 days Coefficient of correlation 0 . 6448.
INFLUENCE OF ACCESSORY FACTORS ON MILK BY INDIAN GOATS 127 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 6. Relation of lactation yield to lactation length. The coefficient of correlation is 0.6448. Figure 6 shows the increase in milk yield corresponding to an increase in the length of lactation. It will be seen that the curve cuts through the data fairly well. The regression equation shows that on an average the yield of milk in a lactation increases at the rate of 2.18 lbs. per day increase in the length of lactation. The equation obtained is128 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II TABLE XII Correction for lactation length* Lactation length in days Percentage to be added to or sub- tracted from lacta- tion yield to obtain yield for 150 days 60INFLUENCE OF ACCESSORY FACTORS ON MILK BY INDIAN GOATS 129 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 7. Relation between average kidding interval and average yield. OPTIMUM KIDDING INTERVAL Sufficient material is not available for examining the more important ques- tion of optimum length of kidding interval. Rejecting those which have not remained in the herd for at least three lactations we are left with only thirty-five goats. Their average kidding intervals, lactation lengths, daily yield during life- time, etc., are presented in Table XIII. Two indices are adopted for measuring the economic worth130 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II TABLE XIII Average lactation yield and average kidding interval during life time No. No. of lactations averaged Total yield of milk during life-time Total days in milk (a) Total days dry (b) Total kidding interval (a + b) Average lactation yield during life- time Average kidding interval during life- time Average lacta- tion length Average day period Average daily yield during life- time 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1 3 1,473 546 605 1,151 491 384 182 202 1.28 2 4 2,198 637 784 1,421 550 355 159 196 1.55 3 3 886 338 347 685 295 228 113 116 1.29 4 3 1,603 561 303 864 534 288 187 101 1.85 5 5 2,616 840 407 1,247 523 249 168 81 2.10 6 3 804 464 348 812 268 271 155 116 .99 7 5 1,806 532 588 1,120 361 224 106 118 1.61 8 4 2,182 671 494 1,165 546 291 168 124 1.88 9 4 2,033 553 560 1,113 508 278 138 140 1.83 10 4 2,372 727 747 1,474 593 369 182 187 1.61 11 3 892 327 435 762 297 254 109 145 1.17 12 4 1,166 497 303 800 291 200 124 76 1.46 13 4 742 456 317 773 186 193 114 79 .96 14 3 1,284 468 301 769 428 256 156 100 1.67
INFLUENCE OF ACCESSORY FACTORS ON MILK BY INDIAN GOATS 131 15 5 1,729 693 849 1,542 345.8 308 139 170 1.12 16 4 1,716 789 473 1,262 429 316 197 118 1.36 17 5 2,422 715 518 1,233 484 247 143 104 1.96 18 5 1,512 585 719 1,304 302 261 117 144 1.16 19 5 1,628 734 467 1,201 326 240 147 93 1.36 20 4 2,176 870 297 1,167 544 292 218 74 1.86 21 4 1,542 527 474 1,001 385.5 250 132 119 1.54 22 3 1,002 400 323 723 334 241 133 108 1.39 23 5 1,442 778 576 1,354 288 271 156 115 1.06 24 4 1,591 512 503 1,015 398 254 128 126 1.57 25 4 2,663 604 392 996 666 249 151 98 2.68 26 3 1,695 556 184 740 565 247 185 61 2.29 27 3 914 451 362 813 305 271 150 121 1.13 28 3 1,044 423 343 766 348 255 141 114 1.37 29 3 1,118 468 366 834 373 278 156 122 1.35 30 3 1,121 509 315 824 374 275 170 105 1.36 31 3 1,082 439 239 678 361 226 146 80 1.60 32 4 1,043 460 300 760 261 190 115 75 1.37 33 3 1,614 485 247 732 538 244 162 82 2.21 34 3 1,420 485 219 704 473 235 162 73 2.01 35 5 1,880 877 486 1,376 376 273 175 97 1.38
132 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II SUMMARY Data are presented showing the influence of season of kidding and length of lactation on lactation yields of goats ; and corrections are worked out for eliminating the effect of these factors. It is found that excepting in the case of September and October kidders the corrections in respect of season are not of considerable magnitude. Length of lactation has an appreciable effect on the magnitude of the lactation yield. Goats are found to go dry very often for reasons other than pregnancy. The influence of service period could not, therefore, be ascertained. Sufficient data are not available for studying the influence of age and dry period. The limited material available goes to show that the optimum kidding in- terval for goats is eight to nine months, which corresponds to a service period of three to four months. The volume of data being very limited, the conclusions drawn are only tenta- tive. REFERENCES Sanders, H. G. J. Agric. Sc. 17, 339, 502 ; 18, 46, 209. SELECTED ARTICLE RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN THE CHEMISTRY OF VITAMINS* BY B. B. DEY, M.Sc., D.Sc., F.I.C. Professor of Chemistry, Presidency College, Madras and Honorary Reader in Chemistry to the University of Madras [Reprinted from The Indian Medical Journal, Vol. 31, No. 1, January 1937] GENERAL OBSERVATIONS THE subject of vitamins is now a very common one. Even a non-scientific man knows about it. These vitamins at one time were considered to be some- thing abstract, whose actual chemical entity was very doubtful and I think I can say that many well-known men of science used to be rather sceptical about the real existence of vitamins. Our requirements are complex. Mere food with, nitrogenous substances like protein, etc., will not supply enough to keep us func- tioning normally. We must have certain things more which we call accessory factors. The so-called accessory food factors which have not been heard of by the preceding generation and which were regarded 25 years ago by men even in scientific circles as elusive and imaginary bodies have now been proved to be definite chemical entities. It seems that we require some training with regard to our food, otherwise we feed ourselves wrongly and acquire some disease. Without vitamins we suffer from certain diseases. If we take too much of them, we suffer from some other diseases, which are known as ' Hypervitaminosis ', one example of this being rickets. If you want the formation of heavy and strong bones you want a lot of vitamin D, but if you take too much of it you get pains all over the body. One of the worst effects of ' Hypervitaminosis ' is the calcification of the entities134 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II suffer from ' Hypervitaminosis ', i.e., a surfeit of vitamins, the symptoms of which are worse and more to be dreaded than ' Avitaminosis ' or a deficiency of vitamins. It was known for a long time that there were certain diseases caused by a lack of some nutrient in our food. There is something in the food the absence of which causes us disease. This vitamin deficiency has been traced to certain very common diseases. It sometimes takes the form of beri-beri, which is very common in India, particularly among the populations who use rice as their staple food. Beri-beri is caused by the lack of a certain type of vitamin. Rickets is also caused by the absence of a particular vitamin. We have a common disease known as scurvy which is a skin disease, and which is found to be caused by the absence of the particular vitamin C. There is a curious resemblance of vitamins to the hormones and the enzymes in the physiological activity when occurring in minute traces, but the vitamins differ from the latter, inasmuch as they can- not apparently be synthesized by the body and have to be obtained from some outside source. Thus there is an element of change in the matter of supplying the essential vitamins in our foods which explained the occurrence of such diseases as mentioned above, affecting the human race brought up on highly artificial diets, although the primitive man, with his simple habits and tastes and healthy instincts for natural food, had no difficulty in obtaining all the essential vitamins in his food. It was Hopkins who first laid the foundation of quantitative nutrition work just before the war, so that really the subject of nutrition is hardly 25 years old. The employment of this method of animal feeding experiment in a strictly quanti- tative sense has revealed the existence of quite a number of hitherto unrecog- nised members of the different types of vitamins and led to our present know- ledge of the subject. This work has been taken up by other workers in different parts of the world. The same method is adopted in India in the Coonoor Nutri- tion Institute. 'There are a few other workers in India, not very many, carrying nutrition work. Either rats, guinea pigs, or pigeons which are available in large numbers are found suitable animals for experimentation. Striking progress has been made possible only by the international co-operative efforts of teams of workers qualified in such diverse subjects as medicine, physiology, organic chemistry, physical chemistry and even statistics. The six vitamins regarding the chemical identity of which there remains little or no doubt at present, have been named A, B1, B2, C, D and E. I will tell you briefly the sources of each and the method of concentration and also the manner in which they are tested, both chemically and biologically. Vitamin A is found in all kinds of calorial matter, in fruits and also in milk and butter and in certain oils obtained from fishes like cod, halibut or other sea- fish. It has been found that sea-water-fish liver contains a fairly large amount
DEVELOPMENTS IN THE CHEMISTRY OF VITAMINS 135 of vitamin A. The vegetable sources are plantains, bananas, tomatoes, carrots, spinach, apricots, etc. Apricots are considered recently by American workers to be the best and the richest source of vitamin A. In a concentrated form vitamin A is prepared chiefly from cod-liver oil. Here we have national patriotism. An amusing example of this is afforded by the rival claims of Professors Drummond and Hilditch who, on behalf of the British Empire Marketing Board, had emphasised the unrivalled medicinal value of the cod-liver oil produced in Scotland and New-foundland, whilst the Norwegian workers claimed their cod-liver oil to be superior and to possess twice the potency of the New-foundland oil. However, it is gratifying to learn that the Indian fish- liver oils particularly that from " Vetki", a fish quite common in the Madras market, are much superior to the cod-liver oil in this respect. An Indian chemist, Guha of Calcutta, published results of his work on vita- min A, by the expedient of measuring the intensity of the blue colour developed by mixing the liver oils with antimony trichloride in chloroform solution under standard conditions. I wish you can find out the concentration of vitamin A in the particular substance. The method that he used was very simple and can be carried out by any person without any training. The liver of the fish was taken out, thoroughly ground with sodium sulphate or hydro-sodium sulphate and this powdered dried substance was weighed and extracted rapidly with ether. It dissolved in antimony. The substance was dried and it was spontaneously evaporated under an electric fan leaving a deep yellow oil. He took 4 c.c. of oil and dissolved it in 4 c.c. of chloroform and treated this with the solution of anti mony, left for 30 seconds and in this way he obtained the following results :136 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II Prolonged vitamin A deficiency produces diseases of the nervous system chiefly of the mucous membranes and lastly, by no means the least, it causes the person who is suffering from this deficiency to be readily attacked by infectious diseases. Vitamin B is always found on the outer surface chiefly in seeds, cereals, grains, pulses, etc. It is found in the embryo of the seed and not on the whole of the seed. In the case of rice it is the main bulk which we eat, but the embryo is a very small part and this embryo is simply lost during the milling and polishing operations. If you want polished or milled rice, it is mostly deprived of the embryos and it is vitamin-free and there lies the danger of populations depend- ing on this rice as their food, suffering from deficiency diseases caused by the lack of vitamin B1, chiefly beri-beri. Vitamin B1 is found in eggs, particularly in the embryo tissues, also in fish livers, fruits, chiefly figs, grapes and lastly it is found in that wonderful substance called " yeast ". Yeast is now the chief source of this vitamin. Vitamin B1 has been, prepared in a pure condition from yeast. There have been schools of workers on vitamin B1 throughout the world. All these workers prepared almost simultaneously crystalline B1 hydrochloride. It was really wonderful how each arrived at the same result almost at the same time. The biological assay of vitamin B1 deficiency was established recently, by the electro-cardiographic method of Harris of determining the heart beats of rats suffering from vitamin B1 deficiency and the careful study of the conditions under which they develop. This method has proved invaluable in identifying the crystalline vitamin B1 hydrochloride, synthesized by Williams a few months ago with the natural vitamins, the method of measuring the resistance of the capil- lary walls of the skin in vitamin C deficiency by observing the minimum pressure required to produce haemorrhages in the skin under standard conditions, the calcification or " lime test " of McCollum, based on X-ray examination of the bones of puppies, etc. Although these appear to be rather complex and difficult to carry out, the experimental technique has been perfected to such an extent in individual laboratories as to make these well-defined quantitative tests of great accuracy serve to detect and estimate the nearest traces of particular vitamin occurring in different food-stuffs. The most interesting fact we have recently concerning vitamin B2, the growth- promoting factor, is its identification with certain organic compounds which are called flavines. These are nitrogenous organic matter which have been found to be characterised by the yellow colour. I may tell you that ghee-yellow con- tains flavine. It will be surprising to know how ghee contains flavine. It does. Flavine prepared from various sources were tested and they all agreed in one characteristic, namely the yellow colour. Ghee-white has been found to give vitamin B2.
DEVELOPMENTS IN THE CHEMISTRY OF VITAMINS 137 Vitamin C has been found chiefly in fruits, among which are oranges, grapes, lemons. Seeds contain none, unless they germinate. Eggs likewise contain none. There is a special variety of vegetable in Hungary known technically as ' Vitapric '. This is the richest source of vitamin C. The application of the spectroscope in the study of vitamins has met with phenomenal success, most of the vitamins being found to give very characteristic absorption bands in the ultra-violet region of the spectrum, the intensity and persistence are found to correspond quantitatively to the amounts of vitamins present. II. STRUCTURAL FORMULAE OF THE VITAMINS A AND B Although the vitamin problem might justly be regarded as bio-chemical in its inception, the interest had widened considerably in the course of the last three years and it would be more appropriate now to treat them as problems of out- standing interest for the organic chemist. With regard to vitamin A, two distinct lines of attack had been most fruit- ful of results, viz., the examination of the oils derived from the livers of fish, chiefly cod and halibut, and the exhaustive study of certain vegetable pigments named " Carotenoids " or Lipochromes, which had been extracted from such common vegetables as carrots, tomatoes, maize, etc. While the concentration of the un- saponifiable matter of the liver oils constituting nearly one per cent of the original oil and containing all the vitamin activity, by crystallisation, precipitation of impurities like sterols and fractional distillation in a high vacuum led, on the one hand, to the isolation of a fairly pure specimen of this vitamin, the intensive study of the pigment of carrots resulted on the other in the isolation of an orange red crystalline substance which was found to have the action of vitamin A when fed to animals. Although this red colouring matter, which had been named " Carotene " and the purest form of vitamin A were similar in their biological action and also in many of their chemical properties such as destruction by oxida- tion and ozonisation and the development of a blue colour with antimony tri- chloride, the recognition that they were different bodies was not long to follow, the discrepancies being finally explained by the brilliant work of Moore, who during the years 1929-31, demonstrated conclusively that carotene was converted into vitamin A in the animal body ; it thus became clear that carotene was an immediate precursor of vitamin A and that plants could synthesise only carotene but not vitamin A while the animal organisms converted the carotene into vita- min A chiefly in the liver. The experimental work on the carotenoids and of Karrer's preparation of pure vitamin A from halibut liver oil have opened a new method of purification of compounds of these types which had been named " chro- matographic analysis " and which had proved to be of the greatest value in these researches. The method, technique of which had been perfected by Kuhn, Zech- meister and others, was shown to be, in principle, essentially that of capillary
138 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II analysis, being based on the fact that the adsorbability of a number of allied sub- stances on any one adsorbent is frequently susceptible of very fine differentiation enabling a separation between them being made which was impossible by other methods. This chromatographic adsorption analysis is now the most delicate method at the disposal of the chemist for work in this field, the purification of vitamin A by Karrer and also by Heilbron and others having been accomplished with its aid. " Perhydro-vitamin A " was synthesised in the laboratory of Karrer in Zurich and this could be identified with that obtained from the natural vitamin by re- duction. (This part of the lecture was illustrated fully with lantern slides). The original vitamin B1 curative to beri-beri, variously known as "Aneurin", " Torulin ", " Oryzanian ", etc., has been the subject of much research by Jansen and Van Veen in Java, Ohdake in Japan, Windaus in Germany, Peters in England and Williams in America, who had all prepared in their laboratories the pure vitamin in crystalline form at about the same time hardly a year ago. A rough idea of the difficulties of experimental work with this vitamin which had been prepared by diverse workers from rice, bran, rice polishings, yeast, etc., would be realised from the figures given recently by Peters in a paper wherein he showed that 4½ tons of yeast had to be worked up to get about 3 grms. of this vitamin under the most favourable conditions. The previous work of Windaus made us understand the oxidation products of this vitamin and how the precipitation properties and the adsorption curves of the vitamin resembled closely those of his- tidine and cytosine respectively. Further careful investigations by Williams and his co-workers of the Department of Physiological Chemistry, Teacher's College, Columbia University, New York, during the last year culminated in the synthesis of vitamin B1 hydrochloride three months ago. (The various degra- dation products of the vitamin and the syntheses were illustrated with slides). Biologically evidence is growing that vitamin B1 is concerned in some oxida- tive mechanism in carbohydrate metabolism, an attractive hypothesis being that it played the role of a co-enzyme in an oxidative enzyme system, e.g., a dehydro- genase. Highly interesting work on these lines is carried out by Peters and his collaborators of the Oxford School who had succeeded in demonstrating the accu- mulation of abnormal amounts of lactic acid and pyruvic acid in the brains of pigeons suffering from polyneuritis (deprivation of vitamin B1) and they corre- late them with the lowered oxygen consumption of the brain tissues of these birds. Future years would reveal many other important aspects of the action of these vitamins and I hope, now that their structures have been determined, that che- mists would be able to make them available to medicine and biology.
DEVELOPMENTS IN THE CHEMISTRY OF VITAMINS 139 III. VITAMIN B2 While synthesis had satisfactorily settled the identity of vitamin B1, vitamin B2 appeared to be made up of at least two major components which produced different physiological effects, one having the power to prevent or cure the cessa- tion of growth while the other affected the peculiar disease known as pellagra. While these two factors occur associated together in the natural vitamin B2 con- centrate and are difficult to separate, the important discovery has been made in the course of the last three years that the growth-promoting factor of vitamin B2 belonged to a class of yellow-colouring matters called "flavins," a number of which has been isolated from different sources, e.g., egg-white (ovoflavin), whey (lacto- flavin), liver (hepatoflavin), kidneys (renoflavin), and even urine (uroflavin), which were all very similar in properties, displaying a strong yellowish green flourescence in aqueous solutions and being generally stable towards mineral acids and oxidis- ing agents but decomposed by alkalis and by irradiation. The crystalline orange- brown lactoflavin obtained by Kuhn from whey (nearly 1 grm. from 5,400 litres) which represented the most active preparation of the growth-promoting factor of vitamin B2 had been intensively studied during the last year leading to important developments taking place in the chemistry of these flavins. The investigation of the products obtained by the irradiation of lactoflavin in alkaline and alcoholic solution was followed by the recognition of these bodies as alloxazine derivatives and the establishment of their constitutional formulae by syntheses. From these de- compositions a complete picture of the structure of lactoflavin was deduced, a pentose chain being considered on chemical grounds to be attached to the position 9 in the alloxazine ring. The immediate outcome of these researches was the identification of the natural lactoflavin with 6, 7-dimethyl-9, d-ribo-flavin by the exhaustive study of the chemical and biological properties of all the eight possible stereo-isomeric pentose-flavins which had been synthesised. The excellent yields of these products obtained by Kuhn and his collaborators by their processes of synthesis and the strong growth-promoting actions of both the 6, 7-dimethyl and the 7-methyl-9, d-ribo-alloxazines encourage the hope that these would be available in quantity for medical practice in the near future. The interesting discovery of the new yellow-oxidation enzyme in yeast juice by Warburg and Christian has now been proved to be made up of lactoflavin phosphoric ester associated, with a protein, the growth-promoting factor of vitamin B2, thus becoming the prosthetic group in Warburg's oxidation enzyme. It is highly important to know this relationship for a proper understanding of the physiology of vitamin B2 action, inasmuch as it appears to indicate that this vitamin is needed for the elaboration of an essential enzyme concerned with biological oxidations, which the animal organism by it- self is incapable of synthesizing. With regard to the other factor of the " B2 complex ", namely, the anti-pellagra or the anti-dermatitis component, very little is known as yet about its chemical
140 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II composition except that it is found to be equally susceptible to inactivation by visible light. This component is now being designated as vitamin B6, the old name vitamin B2 being reserved for the growth-promoting factor alone. As a result of recent experiments on the distribution of vitamin B6, it has been found to be present in considerable amounts in fish muscle (herring, salmon and haddock) and attempts are now being made to prepare it in a pure condition from these sources. VITAMIN C The determination of the structure of vitamin C and ultimate synthesis con- stituted another outstanding chemical triumph in recent years. One of the charac- teristics of vitamin C is that of curing a very well-known disease known as scurvy. This disease is chiefly found among soldiers, prisoners and sailors, particularly among soldiers who are actually in a camp and who mostly depend on tinned ra- tions, prisoners who are often given somewhat starch food materials and sailors who also depend on the food materials which they carry in the vessel. The pe- culiar characteristic of this disease is the degeneration of the capillary walls of the skin. The generous supply of orange and lemon juice and of fresh vegetables has been known to cure this disease. It has been recognised that the anti-scorbutic principle is concentrated in fruit- juices. The chemical investigation of vitamin C began only, four years ago when several workers in different parts of the world independently and almost simul- taneously recognised that the sugar acid isolated in 1928 by the Hungarian investigator Prof. A. Szent-Gyorgyi from the adrenal cortex of oxen which he called ' Hexuronic acid ' and the anti-scorbutic principle known as vitamin C were really one and the same. The progress made from this time onwards in the chemical examination of this material has been amazingly rapid, beginning with the discovery of methods of easy preparation of the substance in quantity from a number of sources such as orange and lemon juice and particularly from Paprica or Hungarian red pepper fruits, and ending with the determination of its chemical constitution by Haworth, Hirst and others in co-operation with Szent-Gyorgyi in England, followed finally by the syntheses of the vitamin nearly three years ago by the two schools of research, one led by Haworth in England and the other by Reichstein in Switzerland. Vitamin C has now been named by general agree- ment " Ascorbic acid " and the contents of this acid of some fruit preparations are given below :DEVELOPMENTS IN THE CHEMISTRY OF VITAMINS 141 Striking and unexpected effects of vitamin C have been revealed recently by clinical medical experiments. It seems that with the aid of this vitamin an effec- tive cure could be obtained of many diseases such as nephritis, haemophilia, pyor- rhoea, etc., against which medicine and surgery were previously helpless. These curative effects in pathological conditions which were never suspected before to have any connection with a lack of vitamin seem to be very suggestive indicating humanity to be suffering probably from a lack of vitamin C on a much more ex- tensive scale than has hitherto been supposed. It is, therefore, considered a great triumph for chemical science that in the short space of a couple of years this mys- terious accessory factor of foods had been identified, its structure determined, its synthesis effected and finally mad e available for medicine and industry. The recent observations of Prof. Szent-Gyorgyi and others seem to show that in paprica, at any rate, vitamin C is accompanied by a substance of similar importance and related activity, particularly effective in curing certain acute pathological conditions characterised by a morbid fragility of the capillary walls of the skin, which by careful fractionation and study, has been identified as a pure flavon or flavonol-glucoside. These results lack confirmation yet, but if found to be correct, the large group of vegetable dyes known as flavons and flavonols will also have to be added to the list of substances playing an important role in animal life. IV. VITAMIN D Although the problem of the chemistry of vitamin D had been attacked only some seven years ago, the special deficiency disease known as rickets for which this vitamin was the specific cure, had been recognised much earlier, the condi- tion being principally one of weakness and malformation of the bony structures as might be seen by the deformity of the leg bones and better by means of X-rays, which revealed a curious coarse structure and frayed appearance at the ends of the bones indicative of unsatisfactory calcification. Rapid advances in the study of rickets were made at the time of the Great War when, on account of various circumstances and particularly of the blockade of Central Europe, these defi- ciency diseases, particularly rickets among children, became very common in those countries. The scientific study of rickets was first made possible by Mellanby in England who experimented with puppies, and showed how this disease could be produced in the puppies at will, certain dietary factors present in cod-liver oil and to a lesser extent in butter being found to play the primary part in curing this disease. The confusion which arose from the similarity of distribution of this anti-rachitic factor for dogs and the growth-factor known as vitamin A was cleared up by the experiments of the American workers, Sherman, McCollum and others, who made the interesting discovery that when the cod-liver oil was heated in air at 100 degrees, the growth-promoting factor ' A ' was destroyed, while the anti-rachitic factor remained. Vitamins A, B and C having already been recog- nised, the new vitamin was called Vitamin D.
142 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II A new and rather disturbing factor was introduced into the scientific study of human rickets in 1919, with the discovery that the disease could be cured in child- ren by exposing them to ultra-violet radiation and the realisation which came with it that many hitherto unexplained observations on human rickets, such as the seasonal increase in this disease in late winter and early spring after deficient sun- light, its high incidence in Northern countries with less sun-light and in slum children in smoky cities, could be best correlated with this discovery of the cura- tive effect of sun-light. There were thus two mysterious indeterminates in the picture, namely, the vitamin D of cod-liver oil and ultra-violet radiation, and this led to various speculations, one of the most attractive and popular theories being that ultra-violet radiation synthesized this vitamin in the body of the animal. The right trial was blazed at last by the experiments of Hess, Steenbock and others in America who made the important observation that food freed from vitamin D could be endowed with anti-rachitic properties by irradiation. The progress of the search for the particular constituent of the food which was activatable in this way, resulting finally in the discovery that it was the natural sterols chole- sterol in animals and phytosterol in vegetablesDEVELOPMENTS IN THE CHEMISTRY OF VITAMINS 143 Calciferol and Suprasterols I and II, which formed stages in a continuous trans- formation, and which could be isolated by the careful adjustment of experimental conditions and studies. With the collection of this material the chemistry of vitamin D in this sense of structural organic chemistry had just begun to unfold. (The methods which had been particularly serviceable in the elucidation of the structures of these photo-isomerides, such as oxonolysis, catalytic hydrogenation, selenium dehydrogenation and addition with maleic anhydride (Diels-Alder reac- tion) were discussed in detail and how the constitution of ' Calciferol ' had been established with tolerable certainty by these methods was explained with the aid of slides). In the light of these findings, the view which prevailed at the beginning, that the active anti-rachitic principle in fish-liver oils was nothing else than acti- vated ergosterol, and that all foods and animal tissues which were capable of being rendered anti-rachitic by irradiation contained only ergosterol, was shown to be no longer tenable the accumulated evidence indicating the existence of many other pro-vitamins although the exact nature of these remained unknown. That calciferol or as it might be called the synthetic vitamin D, was different from the natural vitamin D of cod-liver oil, had been demonstrated satisfactorily by several workers recently and it was now considered probable that any sterol which contained a conjugated system of ethylenic linkages in positions 5, 6, 7 and 8 should be capable of being transformed into an anti-rachitic factor by irradiation with ultra-violet light, a view which received striking support lately from an observation made with a synthetic derivative of cholesterol (7 dehydro- cholesterol) which could be converted into a highly active anti-rachitic product. THE NEW ANTI-STERILITY VITAMIN We shall now consider vitamin E (Evans) which is prepared from the oil extracted from wheat embryos by the usual process of removal of saponificable matter, chromatographic absorption, distillation in high vacuum, etc. This vita- min has been called anti-sterility vitamin. The chemical examination of the most active fraction (a pale yellow oil) obtained in this way showed it to have an unsaturated structure and to be of the nature of a cyclic ketone capable of exhi- biting ketonal changes, with a molecular weight of about 450 and having two oxygen atoms one of which could be acetylated. It was fairly stable and could be hydrogenated in the presence of palladium without losing its activity but bromina- tion, acetylation and oxidation destroyed its potency. Although the successful treatment of sterility in cows and of habitual abortion in women by means of this concentrate had been reported recently, the actual function of vitamin E in the body was not definitely known, and the important questions as to whether this vitamin was related in any way to the numerous hormones which regulated the normal reproductive cycle or if the deficiency of this vitamin was associated in any way with disturbances in the functions of the pituitary glands or of the corpus luteum had not yet been adequately examined. K
144 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II In conclusion, I hope I have made it clear in the discourses which I have been giving during the past week that a great body of accurate knowledge about food and nutrition has been gained recently through the co-operative labours of che- mists and biologists. What only a few years ago were mysterious and intangible growth-promoting, anti-scorbutic or anti-rachitic properties in good food-stuffs caused by certain unidentified and probably unidentifiable bodies called vitamin and given vague descriptive letters like A, B, C, etc., had now been proved by the chemist to be definite organic substances the structural formulae of which had been determined and which, in at least three instances, had been synthesized in the laboratory. The consequences of these discoveries could not fail to be of far-reaching importance. Nutrition and food are the first weapons of preventive medicine and the clinician of the future would be enabled to prescribe an exact dose consisting of a given number of International Units of the standardised synthetic vitamins for curing or preventing disease and place the science of nutri- tion, which was hardly a science upto now, on a scientific and logical basis. Nutrition should be regarded as one of the most important subjects in the present day. It is possible for instance by treatment of population with these vitamins not only to cure existing diseases but also to protect them from the ravages of dreadful diseases like haemophilia, pyorrhoea, nephritis, or some of the diseases like scurvy, rickets and so on.
ABSTRACTS The Chemotherapy of Dirofilaria immitis. HERBERT G. JOHNSTONE. (Amer. J. Trop. Med., 16, 207-224, 1936). STUDIES on the chemotherapy of Dirofilaria immitis were undertaken by Johnstone with the hope of eventually finding some specific remedy for the treatment of the various types of human filariasis. In an interesting résumé the author points out that various drugs have been extensively used over a period of years for the treat- ment of human filariasis with disappointing results. Numerous chemotherapeutic agents have been advocated, and upon administration have shown promise during the initial trials only to be discarded following a more widespread application. No satisfactory treatment for heartworm was known until a group of Japanese workers reported some success with certain antimony compounds. Itagaki and Makin [1927] used intravenous injections of sodium antimony tartarate which caused the disappearance of microfilariæ from the peripheral blood of seventeen dogs. However, living adult worms were found after death of the dogs tested. Wada [1927] treated seven dogs with the average dose of 0.011 grm. of neostibnal per kg. administered subcutaneously for ten to twenty times. Microfilariæ disappeared from the peripheral circulation in all the dogs treated and in one of the animals a dead worm was found. Intravenous injections of carbon tetrachloride and solutions of neutroflavine have also been tried with negative microfilaricidal action. Philipp [1931] was the first to report good results with Fouadin, a proprietary anti- mony compound, in the treatment of heartworm disease. Underwood and Wright [1932] reported favourably on the use of Fouadin in four infested dogs. They found that best results were obtained when treatment was pushed to the limit of tolerance in order to obtain a maximum concentration of the drug as soon as possible. Popesco [1933] treated fourteen dogs with Fouadin with excellent results. The first injection varied from 2146 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II Fouadin used by Underwood and Wright [1932]. The author carried out chemotherapeutic experiments to test the effect of large and even toxic doses of Fouadin on the heartworm of the dog. He came to the conclusion that whereas the drug given intramuscularly within a short period of time had marked microfilaricidal action, its large and even fatal doses exerted little or no damaging effects on the adult worms. He also tried the effects of Carbarsone, Hexylresorcinal Trypanblue or sodium antimonite on the heartworm disease of the dog with negative filaricidal or microfilaricidal results. The effect of Roentgen therapy was also tried on D. immitis in situ with disappointing results. A useful list of forty references concludes the paper. [H. D. S.] Turning sickness, a protozoan encephalitis of cattle in Uganda. Its relation with East Coast Fever. R. W. M. METTAM AND J. CARMICHAEL. (Parasi- tology 28, 254, 1936). " TURNING SICKNESS " or " Vizengerara ", as natives call it, has been reported to cause damage to cattle in different parts of Uganda. In acute cases onset is sudden and animals otherwise known to be healthy develop violent nervous symptoms, such as spin- ning or turning in one direction with lack of coordination of movement, until dizzy, when they collapse to the ground to rise up again within a few minutes. At this stage the animal is comatose while salivation may be profuse. Muscular twitches at the time of paroxysms are prominent. Respiration is hurried while the pulse is very weak or quite imperceptible. The eyelids are wide open with injected conjunctiva and dilated pupils. Sometimes local hyperaesthesia is also noticeable. A noteworthy feature of the disease is the absence of any fever. At times complete blindness may ensue which may be permanent or temporary. DiarrhABSTRACTS 147 The differential diagnosis of equine abortion with special reference to a hitherto undescribed form of epizootic abortion of mares. W. W. DIMOCK AND P. R. EDWARDS. (The Cornell Veterinarian 26, 231-240, 1936). THE article deals principally with what the authors designate as virus or epizootic abortion. Incidentally, the authors review the history of equine abortion in the U.S.A., and record brief notes on other forms of equine abortion such as salmonella abortion, streptococcic abortion, and abortions due to other miscellaneous causes. In occurrence and characteristics, the virus abortion is rather typical of an epi- zootic disease. It often assumes serious proportions. The diagnosis of this disease must often be approached indirectly through a process of elimination. If the fetuses in an outbreak show the lesions described below, no bacteria are found in the organs and tissues, and the blood of the mares that abort is negative to the agglutination test for salmonella infection, then the disease is probably epizootic or virus abortion. The affected mares show no premonitary symptoms of approaching abortion. With few exceptions, the afterbirths are passed immediately, and the mares, parti- cularly those aborting between the seventh and ninth month of gestation, do not suffer from any ill-effects. They return to normal as promptly as do mares following normal parturition. Some or all of the following changes are usually found in the aborted fetuses : An accumulation of serous fluid in the thoracic cavity in over one-third of the cases, particularly in those thrown between the eighth and tenth month of gestation ; liver enlarged, engorged and of a dark-bluish colour ; numerous small white degenerated areas placed just beneath the capsule of the liver ; congestion of the mesenteric and colic lymph glands ; and haemorrhages in the heart in the form of petechial and lineal areas. Occasionally, the first few fetuses from an epizootic may not show the above lesions. Various attempts were made to implant the virus in small animals and to transmit the disease to pregnant guinea-pigs and pregnant mares. A mixture of a wide variety of material was used to overcome any possible localisation of the virus in one or more of the fetal tissues. Mice inoculated intra-cerebrally with a view to demonstrate a neurotropic virus remained healthy. Non-pregnant rabbits injected intra-venously, intra-peritoneally and intra-cere- brally and non-pregnant pigs injected intra-peritoneally also remained healthy. Of seven pregnant guinea-pigs, one aborted three immature fetuses and five gave birth to litters containing both live and dead ones. Nine pregnant mares were fed and injected. Two of these aborted, the fetuses presenting the characteristic tissue changes and remaining bacteriologically sterile. To prove the filterable nature of the etiological agent, the authors infected three pregnant guinea-pigs and ten pregnant mares with filtrates of fetal fluids and organs. All the three guinea-pigs gave birth to dead or immature pigs. Three of the mares aborted. the other seven foaling normally.
148 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II Housing in stalls vacated by an aborted mare and feeding with water from the same source as the infected mares did not lead to abortion in pregnant mares. But a mare given the same feed and water as the infected mares and placed in a stall where a mare had aborted and into which fetal membranes of aborted fetuses were thrown and left for two or three hours on each of four occasions aborted. Although all their experimental cases did not give positive results, the authors consider that abortion was produced in a sufficient number to indicate that the disease is infectious and that the infectious agent is a filterable virus. The authors recommend the following measures for the control of epizootic abor- tion :NOTICE APPLICATIONS are invited for the " Maynard Ganga Ram Prize " of the value of Rs. 3,000/- which will be awarded for a discovery, or an invention, or a new practical method tending to increase agricultural production in the Punjab on a paying basis. The prize is open to all, irrespective of caste, creed or nationa- lity and Government servants are also eligible for it. Essays and theses are not eligible for competition and applicants should prove that some part of their discovery, invention, etc., is the result of work done after the prize was founded in 1925. The Managing Committee reserves to itself the right of withholding or postponing the prize, if no satisfactory achievement is reported to it. All entries in competition for the next award should reach the Director of Agriculture, Punjab, Lahore, on or before the 31st December, 1938. (149)
LICATIONS OF THE IMPERIAL COUNCIL OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH, INDIA 1. Agriculture and Live-stock in India A bi-monthly Journal of Agriculture and Animal Husbandry for the general reader interested in Agriculture or Live-stock in India or the Tropics. (Established 1931. Published in January, March, May, July, September and November. Prepayable subscription Rs. 6 or 9s. 9d . per annum inclusive of Indian postage. Price per part Rs. 2 or 3 s. 6 d. inclusive of Indian postage.) Volumes I to VI complete are available. 2. The Indian Journal of Agricultural Science A bi-monthly Scientific Journal of Agriculture and the allied sciences, mainly devoted to the publication of the results of original research and field experiments. (Established 1931. Published in February, April, June, August, October and December. Prepayable subscription Rs. 15 or 24s. per annum inclusive of Indian postage. Price per part Rs. 3 or 5s. 3d. inclusive of Indian postage.) Volumes I to VI complete are available. 3. The Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry A quarterly Journal for the publication of scientific matter relating to the health, nutrition and breeding of live-stock. (Established 1931. Published in March, June, September and December. Prepayable subscription Rs. 6 or 9s. 9 d. inclusive of Indian postage. Price per part Rs. 2 or 3s. 6 d. inclusive of Indian postage.) Volumes I to VI complete are available. 4. Scientific Monographs of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research NCAG152 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, II NCARPUBLICATIONS OF THE IMPERIAL COUNCIL OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH. 153 NCAGORIGINAL ARTICLES STUDIES ON THE MINERAL REQUIREMENTS OF CATTLE IN NORTH-EAST INDIA (WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO RICE STRAW FEEDING) BY M. CARBERY, D.S.O., M.C., M.A., B.Sc. Director of Agriculture, Bengal INDUBHUSAN CHATTERJEE, L. AG. Physiological Chemist* AND SUBODH KUMAR TALAPATRA, B.Sc. Research Assistant* (Received for publication on 3rd December, 1936) INTRODUCTORY THE importance of minerals in the economy of nutrition requires no special emphasis. In ordinary feeding practices, the difference in the protein-content and energy values of feeds may be insignificant, yet due to a difference in the mineral- content some will exhibit definite superiority over others. Thus, Hall and Russell [1912] when investigating the fattening and non-fattening pastures of Romney marsh were unable by ordinary chemical analysis to discover sufficient chemical differ- ence in the protein and starch-equivalent values of the two pastures to account for the great difference in the feeding values obtained in practice [Linton, 1927]. The work carried out at the Rowett Institute by Godden [1926] has shown that the difference in the feeding values of various pastures is to be found not in the content of protein but in the amount of CaO and P2O5. A somewhat similar work in Bengal shows that aman (winter rice) straw and aus (autumn rice) straw have practically the same energy value, but there is a great difference in their mineral- content. It has been found that, even when fed with concentrates, aus-straw-fed animals have always yielded better results. An intensive study has, therefore been attempted of some of these aspects under the conditions prevailing in Bengal which may be said to be typical of North-East India. * Under the grant of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research. (155) B
156 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OP VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III It is necessary to give here a brief outline of the nature of the feeds used. In North-East India paddy or rice straw is the chief staple fodder. Apart from the variations arising from soil character, the straw can be broadly divided into three kinds : (1) Aman or winter straw, (2) Aus or autumn straw and (3) Boro or spring straw. The first grows in low-lying or submerged areas, the second in high lands and the third near streams and rivers. The whole paddy area in Bengal is nearly twenty-three million acres of which aman occupies of 16,442,400 acres or 71.81 per cent, aus 6,035,600 acres or 26.34 per cent and boro 415,100 acres or 1.71 per cent*. The present paper deals with the mineral aspects of the first two and particularly of the type grown in the red, acid tracts as represented by the Dacca Farm. The analysisMINERAL REQUIREMENTS OF CATTLE IN NORTH-EAST INDIA 157 Napier grass (Pennisetum purpureum) is another recommended departmental fodder which is a prolific grower yielding about double the outturn of Guinea grass, but is poor in CaO, rich in potash and also in P2O5. Water-hyacinth can hardly be classed as a fodder but due to fodder scarcity, it is often used and even purchased for feeding cattle in some of the eastern dis- tricts. It is rich in lime, potash and chlorine but the poorest in P2O5 among the green feeds tested. EXPERIMENTAL SCHEME This has been drawn up so as to conform as far as possible to the nature and type of feeding as often used in the countryside. Thus rice straw is fed in some cases as an exclusive feed, in others in combination. In the experiments, combi- nations were made with rice polishings and also with linseed-cake, while some with green fodders have also been included. In these calculations, the mineral requirements have been assumed to bear a direct relation to body-weight instead of its power function as adopted for energy and nutrients of organic origin. The published records so far available to the authors appear to be in favour of this procedure. If, however, subsequent investi- gators show that power function is more appropriate, necessary alterations can easily be made on these data. In order to make an easier comparison all the results have been calculated on a fixed live-weight of 500 lb., which is the average on this side of India. Thus, on one side the data may be available for more direct practical application, while on the other, by simply doubling the values, they can be made comparable with the conventional procedure of 1000-lb. live-weight. The chemical analyses have been mainly conducted by the A.O.A.C. method with slight modifications here and there. The stall arrangements and procedure of metabolic tests were broadly similar to what are ordinarily followed elsewhere. The following is a brief outline of the experimental scheme. Experiment A.158 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III Nine animals were used in this experiment which lasted for eighteen weeks. In the mixed feed with straw the ratio CaO : P2O5 varied between 0.24 to 0.47 or from one-fourth to one-half, i.e., P2O5 was about two to four times more than CaO. The straw contributed the largest share of CaO, the share of kura being about one-seventh only of that of straw. The ingestion of P2O5 was from 40 to 60 grms., the kura contributing as much as 13 to 20 times that of straw. The protein may be said to be fairly adequate for maintenance. The nutritive ratio varied from 1 : 24 to 1 : 34. Experiment CMINERAL REQUIREMENTS OF CATTLE IN NORTH-EAST INDIA 159 In each, two animals were used. The straw was fed ad lib in the morning and green feed ad lib in the evening. The water-hyacinth is very rich in CaO (3.42 per cent), MgO (0.96 per cent), potash (5.9 per cent) and Cl2 (3.48 per cent). Napier grass is poor in lime (0.46 per cent) like aman straw, but rich in potash (4.8 per cent). Guinea grass is rich in lime (1 .23 per cent) and fairly so in magnesia (0.73 per cent). Its soda content (0 57 per cent) was the highest of all other feeds. This experiment was carried out on the same lines as Experiment A and lasted for about the same period. Experimental Results Experiment A.160 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III As will be noted, there was an imbalance as much from protein deficiency as from mineral, in consequence of which the food requirements fell far short of the barest necessity. The dry matter consumption was similar as in the other experiments with better-balanced feeds but here the utilization was very poor. Experiment B.MINERAL REQUIREMENTS OP CATTLE IN NORTH-EAST INDIA 161 TABLE II Aman Straw and Kura (1934) EXPERIMENT B. (Computed on the basis of 500-lb. live-weight) Animal No. Nutrients Intake In faeces Difference In urine Balance Daily loss or gain in live. weight Straw Kura Water Added minerals Total grms. grms. grms. grms. grms. grms. grms. grms. grms. lb. D1 CaO . . . . 16.491 1.355 0.128 0.050 18.024 17.755 0.269 0.089 +0.180 +0.59 MgO . . . . 12.027 17.357 0.073 0.059 29.516 22.964 6.552 1.827 + 4.725 K2O . . . . 62.018 12.790 ... 0.142 74.950 18.873 56.077 51.109 + 4.968 Na2O . . . . 9.200 1.295 ... 6.504 16.999 8.945 8.054 7.827 + 0.227 P2 O 5 . . . . 3.364 41.082 ... ... 44.446 42.773 1.673 0.187 + 1.486 CI2 . . . . . 11.074 0.122 ... 7 . 713 18.909 3.459 15.450 17.037 162 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III TABLE IIMINERAL REQUIREMENTS OF CATTLE IN NORTH-EAST INDIA 163 D3 CaO . . . . 14.049 1.901 0.092 0.048 16.090 17.518 164 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III It will be noted from Table II that lime ingestion has varied between 15 to 18 grms. while phosphate has varied from 29 to 59 grms. This has provided a ratio ranging from 1: 2 to 1 : 4. Thus, the proportion has been too wide on one side while on the other, the phosphorus in rice kura is present mainly in the form of phytin which is not readily assimilated, (vide Discussion). Regarding the ingestion of lime, it is no doubt higher than in Experiment A and may be considered as moderate from European standard, but due to various factors which will be discussed in due course, the lime requirement under rice straw feeding appears to be higher and the deficiency has been reflected in a nega- tive lime-balance for eight out of nine animals. This has affected the economy of other nutrients also ; for instance the amount of digestible carbohydrate assimi- lated by these animals has been distinctly lower than in the case of the straw and cake groups. Magee and Sen's [1931] experiment on the ratio of sugar diffusion through the walls of a rabbit's small intestine shows that when calcium is added, the diffusion increases in rate and becomes selective for glucose. Sen's [1933] later experiment with rats show that " a deficiency of calcium in the blood caused a large decrease of sugar absorption from the small intestine." Similar factors might have been responsible here. The assimilation of other components has also been affected. Thus with about the same amount of chlorine under aus straw as a single feed (Experiment D) and Guinea grass (Experiment F), a positive balance has been maintained but here, eight, out of nine, have recorded a negative balance. The chlorine ingestion is, however, on the border line when compared with other combinations. Possibly the requirement under the rice- kura-straw combination is somewhat higher, or possibly there are other factors. As regards phosphate although the ingestion here is high, three, out of nine, have recorded a negative balance and a close examination shows that even under a large ingestion a positive balance has only been maintained when the ingestion has been about 43 grms. phosphate. Yet this amount is far too much in excess as compared to the approximation of 10 grms. which in the case of more balanced combinations (Experiment E) seemed to be about the minimum requirement. The cause of it is most probably associated with less inorganic phosphorus and high phytin content, the effect of which (as discussed under lime and phosphate) seems to be the contributory cause. In the case of chlorine, a striking feature has been that the urinary excretion has been very high. In fact, leaving out the urinary excretions of the Hyacinth and Napier group (Experiment F) this experiment accounts for the largest urinary excretion of chlorine both in relation to the proportion and quantity. It may be stated further that in the cases where chlorine has recorded a negative balance whether in this or other experiments urinary chlorine accounts for the major part of the excretion,
MINERAL REQUIREMENTS OF CATTLE IN NORTH-EAST INDIA 165 With respect to other minerals, the MgO ingestion in this experiment was the highest (except in the case of the Guinea group under experiment F) and eight, out of nine, have recorded a positive balance. The largest contribution of this mineral has been from the rice kura. With respect to potash, six have recorded a positive balance and three a nega- tive. It seems that under paddy-straw feeding, when the ingestion is below 65 or 66 grms., the tendency is for a negative balance. In the case of soda, seven, out of nine, have recorded a positive balance. The chief point in this experiment is, however, deficiency of lime and excess of phosphate mainly associated with rice kura. Experiment C166 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III TABLE III Aman Straw and 1 lb. Linseed-cake EXPERIMENT C {Computed on the basis of 500 lb. live-weight) 1933 Animal NO. Nutrients Intake In faeces Difference In urine Balance Daily gain in live. weight Straw Cake Water Added mineral Total grms. grms. grms. grms. grms. grms. grms. grms. grms. lb. D1 CaO 19.277 1.836 0.140 0.055 21.302 18.900 2.402 0.400 + 2.002 MINERAL REQUREMENTS OF CATTLE IN NORTH-EAST INDIA 167 D4 CaO . . . . 19.301 1.798 0.144 0.055 21.298 21.817 168 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III It will be seen from this table (Table III) that the amount of CaO intake ranged from 20 to 21 grms. for straw, the cake contributing hardly two grms. It seems, however, that under this combination the lime supply was either just too low or on the border line, so that there was no provision for what may be called a margin of safety. Naturally those animals which were more thrifty were able to record a positive balance, while the others could not. In this experiment, two recorded a positive balance and two a negative for CaO. The phosphate balance was uni- formly positive so that the failure in the case of lime can only be ascribed to a deficiency. It, however, indicates that aman straw even when fed with cake re- quires some supplement of CaO. The potash ingestions varied from 82 to 87 grms. and were uniformly positive, but in the case of magnesia and soda, there is some tendency of inter-relation as when magnesia is deficient, soda is negative. In this experiment, three, out of four, have recorded negative balance in MgO and Na2O, and it seems that the deficiency of MgO is an important factor, as with about the same amount of soda intake in Ex- periments B and E, a positive balance has been generally recorded. Experiment D.MINERAL REQUIREMENTS OF CATTLE IN NORTH-EAST INDIA 169 TABLE IV Aus paddy straw as a single feed EXPERIMENT D (Computed on the basis of 500-lb. live-weight) 1933 Animal No. Nutrients Intake In faeces Difference In urine Balance Loss or gain in live. weight Straw Water Added mineral Total grms. grms. grms. grms. grms. grms. grms. grms. lb. D1 CaO. . . . . . . 23.056 0.122 0.056 23.234 23.370 170 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III TABLE IVMINERAL REQUIREMENTS OF CATTLE IN NORTH-EAST INDIA 171 In this experiment, the intake of CaO was about 21 to 23 grms. But two ani- mals D1 and D3 have given a negative balance and the same animals have also recorded a negative balance for magnesia, while P2O5 has been negative in all, and nitrogen in one. D7 seems to be very thrifty as with a lower intake of CaO and MgO it has been able to maintain a positive equilibrium. This experiment is in some respects comparable with Experiment A, in both of which the straw was fed as an exclusive feed without any concentrate. In the latter, CaO, P2O5, nitrogen and energy supply were all deficient, but in the former (i.e., aus straw) P2O5 was definitely deficient but lime was about one and a half times as much as in Experiment A ; yet the tendency of a negative balance still persisted. The experiment shows that up to the stage of an ingestion of 23 grms., the full requirement of CaO is still unsatisfied. It shows further that aus straw is superior to aman straw in almost all the nutrients. Experiment E.172 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII,III TABLE V Aus straw and Linseed cake EXPERIMENT E (Computed on the basis of 500.lb. live-weight) Animal No. Nutrients Intake In faeces Difference In urine Balance Loss or gain in live. weight Straw Cake Water Added mineral Total grms. grms. grms. grms. grms. grms. grms. grms. grms. lb. D2 CaO . . . . . . . 24.554 1.251 0.143 0.055 26.003 23.903 2.100 0.947 +1.153 + 0.361 MgO . . . . . . . 15.468 1.935 0.081 0.062 17.546 10.819 6.727 4.382 + 2.345 K2O . . . . . . . 78.574 3.358 ... 0.148 82.080 12.224 69.856 52.348 +7.508 Na2O . . . . . . . 8.005 1.087 ... 6.800 15.892 6.206 9.686 1.882 + 7.804 P2O5 . . . . . . . 6.806 3.922 ... ... 10.728 10.400 0.328 0.135 +0.193 Cl2 . . . . . . . 12.992 0.117 ... 8.065 21.174 5.053 16.121 8.838 + 7.283 N . . . . . . . 36.315 9.808 ... ... 45.623 25.454 20.169 12.198 + 7.971 D3 CaO . . . . . . . 27.846 1.465 0.167 0.061 29.539 25.697 3.842 1.180 + 2.662 + 0.702 MgO . . . . . . . 17.541 2.267 0.095 0.072 19.975 14.614 5.361 4.552 +0.809 K2O . . . . . . . 89.107 3.934 ... 0.174 93.215 14.150 79.065 65.379 + 13.686 Na2O . . . . . . . 9.077 1.274 ... 7.967 18.318 7.449 10.869 3.782 + 7.087 P2O5 . . . . . . . 7.718 4.595 ... ... 12.313 11.650 0.663 0.256 +0.407 Cl2 . . . . . . . 14.734 0.137 ... 9.448 24.319 8.996 15.323 8.252 + 7.071 N . . . . . . . 41.593 10.904 ... ... 52.497 31.707 20.790 12.229 + 8.561
MINERAL REQUIREMENTS OF CATTLE IN NORTH-EAST INDIA 173 D2 CaO . . . . 22.404 1.091 0.146 0.046 23.687 22.071 1.616 0.710 + 0.906 +0.580 MgO . . . . 14.113 1.688 0.083 0.054 15.938 8.118 7.820 4.088 + 3.732 K2O . . . . 71.693 2.930 ... 0.129 74.752 11.765 62.987 42.305 + 20.682 Na2O . . . . 7.304 0.949 ... 5.932 14.185 4.625 9.560 0.920 +8.640 P2O5 . . . . 6.210 3.421 ... ... 9.631 10.613 174 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III TABLE VMINERAL REQUIREMENTS OF CATTLE IN NORTH-EAST INDIA 175 It will be seen from Table V that CaO, MgO, K 2O, Na 2O and C12 have uni- formly maintained a positive figure in all the six animals under experiment. In the case of P2O5 also a positive balance has been kept in five out of six. Only one has recorded a negative balance, and this provides a very interesting study. This animal (D9) was the heaviest amongst the lot and weighed 603 lb. during the experi- mental period. It had received about half lb. of cake which when worked out on the basis of 500-lb. live-weight only provided 3.421 grms. P2O5 from cake as compared to higher amounts in the case of other animals. The result was that while the other animals received P2O5 to the amount of 11 to 14 grms. from the total feeds (cake and straw), the amount falling to the share of this animal was 9.63 grms. only. This is highly suggestive that the minimum P2O5 requirements under these conditions of feeding is about 10 grms. per 500-lb. live-weight. It would be worth while to quote here the remark of Theiler and Green [1932] that " when the phosphorus intake of an adolescent bovine drops to the vicinity of twenty grms. P2O5 per day on a natural pasture, fatal aphosphorosis will develop in due course." This suggests a requirement of 10 grms. P2O5 per 500-lb. live-weight and is corroborative of our findings. Experiment F176 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III was all negative while half of CaO was positive and half negative. This might be due to the resultant effect of a general imbalance under which this feed- ing was conducted. The results under Guinea-grass and Napier groups, however, suggest that, in the Hyacinth group, although the general imbalance might be the aggravating cause, the very high ingestion of lime by itself or potash by itself may also develop a condition of disturbed metabolism. Thus, in the case of Guinea- grass, there was otherwise a liberal supply of almost all components whether with respect to protein and energy or minerals. But CaO ingestion was considerably in excess as compared to all other experiments (except Hyacinth group), yet the results have divided into half positive balance and half negative. In other words, in spite of such heavy ingestion there was as much chance of positive balance as negative. It should be stated that from Experiment E, it would appear that a minimum dose of 24 grms. CaO is likely to effect a positive balance. On this basis, the amount in the case of the Hyacinth and Guinea-grass groups, has varied from two to two and a half times as much. Such a large amount is not only uneconomic by itself (as it would mean a waste) but is likely to react adversely on the metabolism of other nutrients. There is thus an illustration of this (as indicated from the negative balance) in the case of both the Hyacinth and the Guinea-grass groups, and even if the former is excluded on account of a general imbalance in other res- pects, the behaviour of the Guinea-grass bears out that even when other nutrients are well supplied, a faulty proportion in lime, potash and possibly soda, is undesir- able. Thus the heavy ingestion of CaO has not only exhibited a tendency of nega- tive balance by itself but has also reacted on the K 2O metabolism. It may be stated that with a similar dose of potash in Experiments B and D, a positive balance has generally been obtained. Turning now to the Napier group, it is very low in lime and very high in potash. In. fact, the potash ingestion has been the heaviest of all other feeds being as much as 156 to 173 grms. per 500-lb. live-weight. But in spite of this one has re- corded a negative balance and this combined with low lime ingestion has also re- acted on the phosphate metabolism resulting in negative balance in the case of D5 which has recorded negative balance for CaO, MgO, K 2O, P2O5 and N. The results obtained from the rather limited data on green feeds may be ten- tatively summed up as follows :MINERAL REQUIREMENTS OF CATTLE IN NORTH-EAST INDIA 177 TABLE VI Aman straw and green feed EXPERIMENT F. (Computed on the basis of 500-lb. live-weight) 1932 Feed Animal No. Nutrients Intake In faeces Difference In urine Balance Loss or gain in live. weight Straw Green feed Added mineral Total grms. grms. grms. grms. grms. grms. grms. grms. lb. Aman straw and water-hyacinth D1 CaO 6.296 58.229 ... 64.525 52.770 11.755 1.857 +10.398 178 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III TABLE VIMINERAL REQUIREMENTS OF CATTLE IN NORTH-EAST INDIA 179 Aman Straw and Guinea-grass D3 CaO 2.982 56.917 ... 59.899 57.100 2.799 0.267 +2.532 180 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III Discussion In the preceding pages, thirty individual data have been arranged and des- cribed under six heads of Experiments (A to F). They represent investigations commencing from the stage of deficiency (as for instance Experiments A, B and C for CaO) and rising to the stage of adequacy (Experiment E). Some have exhibited instances of heavy ingestion, as for instance P2O5 in Experiment B and CaO in parts of Experiment F. The combinations were drawn up mainly in conformity with the nature of the feeds often used in these parts of India. A study of these data will show that in all combinations except the green feed groups (Experiment F), rice straw has been the chief source of CaO and K2O while P2O5 has been mainly derived from the concentratesMINERAL REQUIREMENTS OF CATTLE IN NORTH-EAST INDIA 181 TABLE VII Intake of Mineral Nutrients (Computed on the basis of 500-lb. live-weight) Particulars of Experiments Animal No. Live-weight during the experi- mental period lbs. CaO MgO K2O Na2O P2O5 Cl2 N grms. grms. grms. grms. grms. grms. grms. Aman straw only Experiment A D7 343 14.707182 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III TABLE VIIMINERAL REQUIREMENTS OF CATTLE IN NORTH.EAST INDIA 183 In Experiment A (with 14 grms. intake) all are negative, in Experiment B (15 to 18 grms. intake) eight, out of nine, are negative, in Experiment C (19 to 21 grms. intake) two, out of four, are negative, in Experiment D (21 to 23 grms. intake) two, out of three, are negative. In other words up to the stage of 23 grms. ingestion of CaO, the general tendency has been definitely towards negative balance. It is only when the ingestion has reached about 24 grms. and upwards that a definite positive balance has been maintained. It would, therefore, be a reasonable assumption that under the condition of rice straw feeding the minimum lime requirement is about 24 grms. per 500-lb. live-weight. According to Kellner [1915] " the daily consumption of 50 grms. phosphoric acid and 100 grms. lime per 1,000-kg. live-weight sufficiently meet all require- ments ". This works out at 22.7 grms. CaO for 500-lb. live-weight. In the experiments carried out elsewhere, it will be noted that in Diakow's experiment . [1913] the minimum of 0.115-lb. calcium (equivalent to 79.04 grms. CaO) sufficed " to support a not inconsiderable gain ". On the basis of 500-lb. live-weight this is equivalent to 34.54 grms. CaO. In Cochrane's experiment,184 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III Food CaO P2O5 Intake Balance Intake Balance grms. grms. grms. grms. Bolarum hay . . . . 41.17 +0.08 6.64 MINERAL REQUIREMENTS OF CATTLE IN NORTH-EAST INDIA 185 In the absence of direct evidence it is difficult to assign any definite reason for this, but if the figures under rice straw feeding are carefully studied it is noted that rice straw involves a very large ingestion (about 70 to 80 grms. per 500-lb. live-weight) of potash. This is generally much in excess as compared to what is ingested through many of the other feeds. Orr [1925] considers that " the ratio of sodium to potassium affects the assimilation of both calcium and phos- phorus ". Godden [1928] says that his work in conjunction with Richards and Husband has shown that an excess of potassium in the ration while temporarily depleting the sodium has its main effect " on the nitrogen, calcium and phos- phorus balances ; a high ratio of K2O : Na2O tends to lower the assimilation of these constituents, whereas when the sodium is in excess the assimilation is raised " and he remarks that this " may be the explanation of the beneficient results of feeding sodium chloride to stock ". Remy and Müller [1931] have found in rats that a diet with a high content of potassium results in rachitic symp- toms and they ascribe it not to high potassium intake but to the consequent diminution of the Ca : K ratio. Armsby states [1917] " that fodders that cause malnutrition of the bones resulting in the disease known as rickets (Rachitis) usually show a misproportion of potassium to sodium " and he cites figures from Zuntz . [1917] of such fodders (hay) causing the disease. It need hardly be stated that very little work has been done on the aspects of calcification under cereal straw feeding. Much work has, however, been done with cereal diets and various investigators have noted a deleterious effect upon the calcification of bones and teeth in dogs and rats when fed with cereal diets. E. Mellanby [1926] proposed the idea that cereals contain some distinct anti- calcifying substance which he provisionally called a toxamine. Mellanby [1928, 1929] noticed that those cereals which frequently contained the most Ca and P had the worst effect on teeth and that Ca/P ratio was not found responsible. Holst [1927] reported a ricket-producing factor from oats which could be extracted with 0.5 per cent HCI and Mirvish [1929, 1930] reported that when a dilute HCI extract of oats was injected into animals it produced a marked fall in blood calcium. Fine [1930] ascribed the difference in the calcifying properties to varia- tions in the vitamin D content. Lowe and Steenbuck [1936] found that the in- organic phosphorus content of variously treated samples of maize bore a direct relation to the anti-rachitic effectiveness of the ration and an inverse relation to the phytin content, and the hydrolysis of phytin by HCI improved it to the extent of hydrolysis. It is very difficult to say how far similar probabilities are associated with the feeding of cereal straw. But there can be no doubt that the comparatively larger requirement of lime under rice straw feeding must be due to a poorer eco- nomy. It has been suggested by Hunter and his co-workers [cited by Godden, * Zuntz. 1912 Jahrb. Dent. Landw. Gessell, 577, quoted by Armsby (21), 342.
186 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III 1928] that the calcium in green food and carefully-won hay is in a more highly dispersed condition, hence better digested and assimilated than in dry hay. Their suggestion is based on the positive results obtained by feeding tricalcium phosphate precipitated on starch. Possibly the lime compound in the rice straw is in a coarser aggregation and the presence of a larger quantity of potassium salt accompanied with other factors complicates the matter further. There might be another factor, viz., deficiency of vitamin as suggested by Fine [1930], but Godden [1928] remarks that feeding experiments conducted at the Rowett Institute indicate that, on a properly balanced ration, with the animals kept under normal conditions in respect of sun light and exercise, there is but little risk of disease due to deficiency of vitamins. Other investigators such as Warth [1932] and Theiler, Green and du Toit [1927] also think that in the case of herbivora the evidences are inconclusive on this point. The chief facts that emerge out from rice straw feeding areMINERAL REQUIREMENTS OF CATTLE IN NORTH-EAST INDIA 187 unusual, but the same cannot be stated of Guinea grass. It is more likely that excess of lime is probably not well tolerated, as it would appear from the investi- gations of Cox and Imboden [1936] who found in their experiment on reproduc- tion in rats that excess of phosphorus was better tolerated than excess of lime. The investigation of Meigs and his co-workers [1926] on lactating cows show that an excess of calcium might interfere with phosphorus assimilation and that two parts or more by weight of calcium to one of phosphorus constituted an excess. They also point out from their work that a long continued loss of calcium will cause a loss of phosphorus even though the ration may contain plenty of assimilable phosphorus. The case of D5 under Napier group in Experiment F typically represents this condition (vide also discussion under phosphate). They further obtained results indicating that calcium is very poorly assimilated from hay which was exposed to rain. This latter point is of much importance to Bengal and more or less to whole of India where the straw is almost invariably stacked in the open. Particular care should be bestowed to guard against defective stacking by which the quality of straw will deteriorate, thereby reacting on the lime and other mineral content and also on assimilation. Phosphate requirement This aspect has been partially dealt with under Experiment E.' If the various combinations as set forth in Table VII are studied, it will be noted that the ingestion of P2O5 from them has varied from 4.67 grms. (Experiment A) to 58.91 grms. (Experiment B). The results may be divided under the follow- ing :188 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III Turning now to the next groups, if the intakes (Table VII) are followed from the stage where the figures stand on the border line it will be noted that the first minimum intake coincident with positive balance has been in the case of animal D2 which had ingested 10.728 grms. P2O5 (Experiment E) ; and the noteworthy point is that all ingestions above this quantity (excluding of course the groups departing from normal behaviour) have been attended with a definite positive balance. This particular experiment (Experiment E) represents a condition of ade- quacy in virtually all nutrients as will be borne out from the results of balances. There were six animals under it and five of them recorded positive balances in all nutrients. The sixth one (animal D9) also behaved identically in all other respects, except in P2O5 in which only it recorded a negative balance. This animal along with D2 and D8 belonged to the ½ lb. linseed-cake group and received like them about 11.2 grms. P2O5; but while the other two definitely recorded positive balance this one failed to do so. On closer examination, it was noted that this animal was the heaviest of the whole lot and weighed 603-lb. When, therefore, the ingestion was computed on the basis of 500-lb. live-weight, it worked out at 9.631 grms. P2O5 or less than 10 grms. It will be seen that there is not a single instance in which an ingestion below this amount has been followed with a positive balance whereas all ingestions above this amount have been defi- nitely positive. This amount thus constitutes the limiting factor for proper assimilation and we are provided with a definite suggestion that the minimum P2O5 requirement is about 10 grms. per 500-lb. live-weight or 20 grms. per 1,000-lb. It will be interesting to refer to the findings of other workers. The opinion of Theiler and Green has been already cited [Theiler and Green, 1932], viz., that "fatal aphosphorosis will develop" when the phosphorus intake drops to the vicinity of 20 grms. In the earlier work of Theiler and his co-workers [1927] they found that with cattle grazing on the veld a daily consumption of about 11.79 grms. of phosphorus was regarded as somewhere about the point at which osteophagia could develop or disappear in grazing cattle of 1,000-lb. live-weight. Kellner prescribes 50 grms. per 1,000-kg. live-weight. This works out at 11.35 grms. per 500-lb. Armsby [1917] computed from Lawes and Gilbert's analysis of the ash of the entire body of farm animals, that during the first year cattle retain 8.14 grms. phosphorus per day. This figure agrees with Kellner's [1914] who computed the phosphorus retention of growing calves as 8.3 grms. per day during the first year. Wellmann [1931] has given the maintenance require- ment at 25 to 50 grms. per 1,000-kg. or 5.675 grms. to 11.35 grms. per 500-lb. live-weight. Huffman and his co-workers [1933] found that 5.7 to 9.9 grms. phosphorus per day was insufficient (under sun-cured alfalfa hay and phosphorus ration 4:1 to 5:1) but 10 to 12 grms. furnished sufficient phosphorus for
MINERAL REQUIREMENTS OF CATTLE IN NORTH-EAST INDIA 189 maintenance, normal growth, and for the development of the foetus from eighteen months of age to first calving. They suggest that " at least 17 grms. of phos- phorus be allowed daily for low milk production and the dry period during the advanced stage of gestation ". Rose [1912] concluded that the necessary amount to maintain phosphorus equilibrium in milking cows appeared to be the amount eliminated in milk plus 20 mg. per kgm. of body-weight. 'Evidently the latter (26 mgm.) represented the maintenance requirement and is equivalent to 26 grms. per 1,000-kg. live-weight. Turning now to the results of Dacca experiments it may be said that when 10 grms. P2O5 per 500-lb. live-weight constitutes the limiting factor under rice straw feeding, it will be advisable to follow the American practice (as suggested under lime) and add 50 per cent to it in order to provide a margin of safety. This works out the minimum requirement at 15 grms. phosphate per 500-lb. live-weight or 30 grms. per 1,000-lb. If the amount is to be fed as a mineral supplement it is well to bear in mind the interesting theory advanced by Meigs et al [1926] viz., that assimilation is facilitated by feeding calcium and phosphorus alternately. According to them the absorption of phosphorus from the intestinal tract is hindered by the simul- taneous presence of calcium compound. They suggest from their metabolic tests that the phosphorus assimilation by pregnant cows and " probably that of calcium also " is favoured by adding di-sodium phosphate to the ration and feed- ing it on alternate days. Phosphorus ingestion exceeding the stage of adequacy The experiments bearing on this were in one case limited to four animals (Napier and Guinea grass groups under Experiment F) and in another (Experi- ment B under rice kura group) it was governed by other factors for which it does not strictly fall into this category, and will be dealt with separately. In the former case the ingestion of P2O 5 was from 24 grms. to 27 grms. and was not at any rate so large as could be considered unusual or excessive. Such ingestion may be uneconomical but may not necessarily be harmful. On these data little can be said of the possible effect of a truly excessive ingestion. There is, however, an interesting side issue which deserves attention. One of the animals D5 under Napier feeding recorded a negative balance in spite of such a large ingestion of P2O5. Its explanation probably lies in the fact that Napier grass involved a very heavy (in fact the heaviest) ingestion of potash (155 to 173 grms. K2O) while the lime ingestion was only 18 to 20 grms. CaO. The behaviour of a large ingestion of potash and its adverse effect on lime assimila- tion has been partially discussed and will also be further discussed under potash. It has been pointed out that under rice straw feeding (with which a large quantity F A
190 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III of potash is ingested) the lime requirement has been found to be higher. In the case of Napier the condition is probably further aggravated as the potash inges- tion is considerably higher while the low lime ingestion does not provide any margin to ensure a definite positive balance. This is typically reflected in the behaviour of animal D5 which probably suffered systematically from a faulty lime assimilation which adversely reacted on phosphate balance in spite of a high P2O5 intake. It has been pointed out, as already stated under lime by Meigs et al [1926], that a long continued loss of lime will cause a loss of phosphorus even though the ration may contain plenty of assimilable phosphorus as is nor- mally expected in a green feed (vide also under lime). It is very striking in this animal (Table VII) that lime, magnesia, potash, phosphorus and nitrogen were all negative. Only soda and chlorine were positive. Phosphorus ingestion in experiments exhibiting deviation It remains now to take up the results of rice kura in which as already stated, the conditions are probably governed by other factors. The phosphorus con- tent in the rice kura is very large (about 6 per cent in the sample used) and naturally the ingestion in individual animals were far more than in any other feed. This experiment would thus have served as a suitable example of exces- sive feeding of P2O5 but due to other factors the conditions have been different. The phosphorus in rice kura is largely in the form of phytin. Winton and Winton [1932] cite from Suzuki, Yoshimura and Takaishi that rice bran contains about 8 per cent phytin. The same authors also report on the work of Rather [1918] that of the total soluble phosphorus about 87 per cent and 93 per cent were found in rice bran and rice polish, respectively, as inosite penta- phosphoric acid. It has been already stated that the feeding of rice bran was followed by low appetite, loss of condition and so forth. This is in all probability associated largely with the nature of phosphorus compound in the feed as would appear from the work of various investigators. Thus Bruce and Callow [1934] reported that " the apparent rachitogenic effect of cereals when compared with other materials of the same phosphorus content is due to the fact that cereal phosphorus is not in an available form ". They expressed that " the differences between oat-meal, maize and white-flour can be completely accounted for by differences in the total phosphorus content and in the propor- tion of inositolMINERAL REQUIREMENTS OF CATTLE IN NORTH-EAST INDIA 191 with prepared phytin with basal ration and they found that phytin as a source of phosphorus was without significant value but equivalent amounts of phos- phorus given as phosphoric acid " resulted in a pronounced improvement in calcification " and " Sodium glycerophosphate was still more beneficial ". They, therefore, express that " phytin proved itself to be a poorly available source of phosphorus........". These factors appear to be chiefly responsible for the poor assimilation and negative phosphate balance in the case of D5, D8 and D4 in Experiment B in spite of an ingestion up to the range of 43 grms. P2O5. Possibly at about this stage the inorganic portion of P2O5 reached the level of requirement. In any case the behaviour of rice kura requires to be studied in greater detail and it is proposed to take it up as soon as possible. Magnesia In these experiments the MgO intake has varied from 10 grms. to 33 grms. in the different combinations. The heaviest ingestion has been in the case of the Guinea grass group under 'Experiment F and the rice kura group under Experiment B. The rôle played by magnesia is of much less im- portance as compared to lime and phosphate. According to Green [1935] the dietary requirements of magnesium are very low and are covered by all ordinary rations. He expresses doubt whether a magnesium deficiency disease would ever be found to occur naturally in farm animals. From the results of these experiments it would appear that the general tendency of positive balance is manifest from the stage when the intake has been about 15 grms. and upwards. The results under aman straw and cake (Experiment C) suggests that when the intake is sufficiently low to record a negative balance it seems to react upon the economy of soda balance which has been uniformly negative in those very instances under Experiment C in which MgO was deficient. The soda inges- tion here was about 17 grms., and with the same quantity of ingestions under Experi ment B where MgO ingestion was high, seven out of nine have recorded a posi- tive balance. In experiment E the soda ingestion was similar but MgO was moderate and here both recorded positive balances. There is thus some tendency of inter-relation which is chiefly noticeable if MgO ingestion falls below 12 grms. Amongst the feeds tested rice kura contains the largest quantity of MgO (about 2.6 per cent on dry matter). It has been found by Mendal and Benedict [1909], Hart and Steenbock [1913] and Bogert and McKittrick [1922] that exces- sive intake of Magnesia gives rise to an increased elimination of calcium. Henry and Morrison [1928] state that those feeds which contain much magnesium in proportion to calcium, such as wheat bran and middlings, when given in excessive amount for long periods "are said to cause a weakening of the bones, leading to such troubles as bran disease or miller's horse ricket". In rice bran there is much magnesium in proportions to lime and. this might be another aggravating cause (in addition to those dealt under lime and. phosphorus) to bring such poor result.
192 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III Potash There is generally an appreciable amount of potassium in all plant materials commonly used and so normally there is no great likelihood of a natural shortage. In rice straw potash is present to the amount of 1.6 per cent to 2 per cent on dry matter and is about 5 to 10 times as much as Na2O. In the experiments under reference the ingestion of K2O varied from 53 grms. to 89 grms. per 500-lb. live-weight in the combinations in which paddy straw formed the main roughage (Experiments A to E). It will be noted that although the ingestions of K2O were quite large, a very large amount found its way out specially through the urine so that a positive balance seems to be controlled by a certain level of ingestion which in these experiments was about 66 grms. per 500-lb. live-weight. In the experiments conducted by Warth [1926] the feeding was divided into two groups, viz., rice straw and hay, and the animals were of three live-weights, viz., 1,000-lb., 750-lb. and 500-lb. The ingestion of potash in his 500-lb. group animals varied from 63 .4 grms. to 92.5 grms. in the rice straw group, as com- pared to 25.6 grms. to 31.2 grms. in the hay group. Unfortunately he has not given the complete balance picture, but as urinary excretion embraces the major part of potash it gives an indication of the balance specially if it exceeds the intake. It is seen from his data * that in the case of the paddy straw feeders two out of three under 750-lb. live-weight and one out of three under 500-lb. have records in which the urinary excretion of potash has exceeded the intake, .thereby leaving no doubt of the tendency of a negative balance despite large ingestion. In the case of hay eaters, however, no such inference is possible as the urinary excre- tion was lower than the intake. As the behaviour of straw eaters is one of the main objects of comparison it will be noted that in spite of limited data there is some parallelism with the Bengal figures. In the latter the positive balance is maintained when the inges- tions generally exceeded 66 grms. per 500-lb. live-weight. In Warth's experi- ments the one recording negative balance under this live-weight had an ingestion equivalent to 58 grms. and 78 grms. on the basis of 500-lb. computation (the actual ingestions being 84.2 grms. and 117.9 grms. of intake). Both indicate that there is a certain level below which positive balance becomes uncertain. It should be stated, however, that whether in the case of positive or nega- tive balance the very large excretion is as much an evidence of low economy as it is an indication of the ingestion, exceeding much about the requirement. Yet since rice straw forms the main part of roughage there is no way of avoiding the large ingestion of potash through it. *Table XVI, page 54 of the Memoris of the Dept. of Agri. in India (Chemical series), Vol. IX, No. 2.
MINERAL REQUIREMENTS OF CATTLE IN NORTH-EAST INDIA 193 The question which opens out an interesting field of study is whether such a large ingestion of potash is associated with any deleterious effect. The litera- ture on the subject is rather conflicting. Theiler, Green and du Toit [1927] have given an account of their feeding experiment in which " higher potassium ration " containing 44 grms. K2O and 2 grms. Na2O was administered. The K2O was later on increased to 64 grms. The weights of the two animals were 470 lb. and 450 lb. at the start and increased to 1,000 and 1,130 lb. in about two years. The authors remark that on " in- creasing the total K2O to 64 grms. (ratio 32 to 1) Heifer 878 died within a few days with symptoms of tymphanitis, but showed no characteristic post-mortem lesions upon which to base a definite diagnosis ". Its companion became ill, lost appetite and declined steadily in weight for two months, recovered and gave birth to a weak small calf which died five days later while the mother suffered from "severe mastitis, following retention of the after-birth, did not respond to treatment and was killed in extremis ". The authors are, however, inclined to believe that " no disease has been manifested " and that " so far as growth is concerned a relatively high proportion of potassium to sodium appear to have little influence ". Green [1935] in a more recent communication adheres to the views of his associates and states that " no naturally occurring disease has been proved to be due to deficiency or imbalance between them ". On the other hand Orr [1925] considers that " the ratio of sodium to potassium affects the assimilation of both calcium and phosphorus ". The behaviour of lime assimila- tion as exhibited in the present experiment (vide balance figures) would rather seem to support the latter statement. At the same time the ingestion of potash under the present experiment was considerably higher than those of Theiler, Green and du Toit [1927]. In their case the maximum ingestion was 64 grms. per 1,130-lb. or 28.3 grms. per 500-lb. as compared to 53 to 89 grms. in the paddy straw feeding. As the balance figures have shown there has been a higher lime requirement under this feed. It is, therefore, very likely that the assimilation of lime is probably closely related to the quantity of potash. Hawk [1931] remarks that potassium has an important relation with calcium in maintaining the normal rhythm of contraction and re- laxation of heart muscles. The classical experiment of Ringer [1880-82] on the perfused heart show that minute changes in the concentration of calcium or potas- sium in the perfusing fluids have a profound effect on the activity of the heart A deficiency of potassium will prevent the heart muscles from relaxing and an excess will relax so completely that it stops beating. Remi and Müller's [1931] experiment with respect to rachitic symptoms associated with high potash intake has been already referred to under lime. The experiments of Richards [1927] show that the addition of potassium salts to a ration of cereal in the case of grow- ing pigs leads to a decreased retention of nitrogen, phosphorus and calcium.
194 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III As the large potash ingestion under Bengal condition is unavoidable, atten- tion should be directed towards a better adjustment of other minerals specially lime and phosphate. It need hardly be stated that the animals in Bengal have been under a straw feed for generations and for good or evil they have been accus- tomed to it. Possibly they have acquired some amount of tolerence and immunity from the deleterious effect, if any, which the larger ingestion might occasion. Effect of potash on urination There is another point which also merits attention. Warth [1926] found in his experiments that " rice straw induces a marked and persistent diuresis " and his conclusion is that " the diuresis is intimately related to potash excre- tion ". Under Bengal conditions, however, this sort of diuresis has not been noticeable. TABLE VIII Food Urine voided Water consumed grms. grms. Aman straw only (Experiment. A) . . . 2658.2 8471.0 Aman straw and rice Kura (Experiment B) . 3412.8 12853.0 Aman strawMINERAL REQUIREMENTS OF CATTLE IN NORTH-EAST INDIA 195 they give a fairly correct indication of the behaviour of urine excretion under the different feeds. It should be noted that Hyacinth has the largest percentage of potash and the ingestion of K2O was only next to that of Napier grass but even here the urination did not show a perceptible rise until it was supplemented with cake. Similarly, when straw was supplemented with cake, the urination was higher. Thus, so far as paddy straw is concerned, no marked diuresis could be ascribed to it under Bengal conditions. Ramiah's work at Coimbatore also points to same conclusion [Ramiah, 1932]. On the other hand the addition of cake seems to induce more diuresis. The only exception has been in the case of Napier group. Here potash ingestion was heaviest and urination was also the highest. This might be sugges- tive of a partial association of potash with diuresis but as will be apparent from the above results there might be other factor or factors. Warth also states that " while the amount of urine is mainly dependent upon potash there is another subsidiary factor at work", but according to him "its nature has not been established yet ". It remains only to be stated that when potash ingestion is heavy, as typified in the case of the Hyacinth and Napier groups under Experiment F, the reten- tion capacity of potash is lowered as is exemplified in the wholesale negative balances under Hyacinth and one out of two under Napier. Possibly it also induces a craving for more sodium chloride as is suggested by Bunge's classical experiment. This part has been further discussed under sodium chloride. The behaviour of the Guinea grass group is interesting from another stand- point. This group had a little over 72 to 74 grms. of potash, which would seem to be sufficient but both the animals have recorded a negative balance. But here lime ingestion was very high and it cannot be said whether this was res- ponsible for an adverse effect. Briefly the results indicate that196 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III Sodium and chlorine These two minerals are taken together because sodium chloride is the most convenient form in which they are supplied to the animal. Sodium chloride also forms a component part of the body fluid. Sodium salts exert a specific influence upon the irritability of the nerves and the relaxation of muscles. Overton [1904] showed that frog muscle immersed in isotonic cane sugar lost its excitability and that restoration could be brought about by a sodium salt or in a less degree by a lithium salt but not by salts of potassium. For the normal contraction of the heart muscle a balance must exist between the calcium and sodium contents of the blood [Hawk and Bergeim, 1931]. The above facts by themselves would induce a natural demand for common salt by the animal, and possibly this demand is further increased on account of the presence of a large amount of potash salts in plant material. This has been suggested by a highly interesting experiment by Bunge [1873]. He attempted to attribute the craving which herbivorous animals have for common salt to an excess of potassium in the diet. According to him when a salt such as potas- sium citrate gains entrance into the blood stream, a proportion of it reacts with the sodium chloride forming potassium chloride and sodium citrate. As the kidney functions in keeping the composition of the blood nearly constant, the abnormal constituents sodium citrate and excess of potassium salts are eliminated. In this way a high potassium salt intake may cause increased elimination of sodium and chlorine. This is partly indicated in the balance figures of the Hyacinth and Napier groups under Experiment F in which potash ingestion was very heavy. One of the sodium figures out of two and both, the chlorine under Hyacinth are negative, while in the case of Napier one chlorine out of two has been negative. Sodium figures were, however, positive. At the same time, it should be stated that experiments on heifers carried out by Hart, McCollum, Steenbock and Humphry [1911] show the incomplete- ness of Bunge's theory. These authors have different groups of animals with rations of different cereals and all the animals had free access to salt. They found that the sodium chloride consumed had no relation to the amount of potas- sium in the ration, either as such or when supplemented with potassium salt. Godden's work in conjunction with Richards and Husband [1928] also shows similar conclusion. Miller's later investigation on pigs [Miller, 1922] shows that a sudden increase of potassium salts in the diet caused an immediate increase in sodium and chlorine excretion during the following twenty-four hours period but as stated by Bunge, the excretion of sodium and chlorine in Miller's experiment also decreased when the high potassium intake was continued and Miller says that " the animal can distribute its sodium and chlorine as required by the different part of the body during the absorption of large quantities of potash, which may at other times cause increased sodium and chlorine excretion ".
MINERAL REQUIREMENTS OF CATTLE IN NORTH-EAST INDIA 197 Turning now to the other experiment, viz., to those in which rice straw forms the main roughage, it will be noted that in Experiments A, B, D and E, sodium has exhibited a general tendency of positive balance. In these the amount of intake varied from 14 to 23.8 grms. and would seem to be about the requirement. But although this might generally be so the results under Experi- ment C suggest that in the event of a deficiency in magnesia the soda balance is likely to be adversely affected. Here the soda intake was about 17 grms., but three out of four have recorded a negative balance and it is these three whose magnesia balances are also negative. There are also probably other factors198 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III It need hardly be stated that sodium and chlorine assume their importance both from their indispensable nature in the system as well as from their instinc- tive demand as salt by all animals including human beings. Wild herbivorous animals have been known to travel great distances in the search for salt licks to satisfy this craving. The question now arises as to what should be the minimum amount which should be fed to the cattle specially in the form of common saltMINERAL REQUIREMENTS OF CATTLE IN NORTH-EAST INDIA 199 In this way he has tried to draw a comparison of minerals per 1,000 calories. Theiler, Green and du Toit [1927] are also inclined to a similar opinion, as they stressed that it was not the percentage of phosphorus on dry matter which mattered but the amount in relation to the energy value of pasture. In a more recent publication Theiler and Green [1932] have also suggested that as a rough guide " a round figure of 1 per 100 starch equivalent " may be taken as safe for either P2O5 or CaO throughout the bovine or ovine life. Marek [1924] has emphasised the importance of " Alkali 200 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III requirements ". Similar results have been obtained by other workers also, but the results under paddy straw feeding show that instead of this amount being sufficient it is below the minimum, since positive balance could not be attained until the intake was at least 24 grms. CaO. This aspect is thus entirely controlled by the nature of the feed. Another feature that may be mentioned is that under Bengal conditions, although there is some deficiency of CaO, the deficiency of P2O5 is more definite and possibly it is the limiting factor in the large majority of cases. For the pre- sent the best practical course would be to see that the minimum supply is ensured. Like Theiler, Green and du Toit [1927] the present authors believe that the basic ratio only becomes important " when the preponderance of one over the other becomes so great that the liberal physiological mechanism for preservation of neutrality of the tissues are strained " and they are inclined to the view as ex- pressed by Theiler and Green in a later publication [1932] that '' attention may be concentrated upon the absolute intake of calcium and phosphorus per day except where the imbalance is very wide ". SUMMARY 1. In a fairly comprehensive series of experiments arranged under six broad combinations embracing thirty individual data, an intensive study of the mineral requirements of the animals have been attempted. In five of these combina- tions rice straw (both winter or the aman variety and autumn or the aus variety) formed the main roughage. The sixth combination consisted of green feeds divided into three sub-groups of Hyacinth, Napier grass and Guinea grass. The experimental scheme was drawn up in such a way as to conform as far as possible to the type of feeding used in Bengal which is typical of North-East India. 2. It is found that in all combinations except the green feed groups (Experi- ment F), rice straw has been the chief source of lime, potash, magnesia (except rice-kura group. Experiment B), also largely soda and chlorine although they are appreciably supplied through common salt, while phosphate has been mainly derived from concentratesMINERAL REQUIREMENTS OF CATTLE IN NORTH-EAST INDIA 201 have been based on the prevailing live-weights (viz., 500-lb.) of the local breeds and on this basis the minimum mineral requirements (when paddy straw froms the main roughage) appear to be 24 grms. CaO, 10 grms. P2O5, 15 grms. MgO, 70 grms. K2O, 17 grms. Na2O (equivalent to 32.05 grms. NaCl) and 20 grms. Cl2 (equivalent to 32.97 grms. NaCl). The sodium and chlorine figures show a strik- ing coincidence with the equivalent of NaCl. 4. The lime requirement seems to be higher than in investigations of many others. It is suspected that this might be associated with high potash ingestion through rice straw or the presence of anticalcifying agents in cereals (as found by some investigators) or the combination of both (vide discussion in the text). There might be other factors also. 5. The general ingestion of K2O is quite large under rice straw feeding, but inspite of it positive balance is not maintained until the ingestion is about 66 to 70 grms. per 500-lb. live-weight. Heavy potash ingestions seem to induce heavier excretion even greater than the intake as will be evident from the behaviour of Hyacinth and Napier. On the other hand, higher ingestion of CaO seems also to upset the potash balance as indicated from Guinea grass. 6. A deficiency of MgO seems to affect the soda balance as is indicated from Experiment C. 7. Rice kura (bran) is very poor in CaO and unusually rich in phosphate (over 6 per cent). The CaO and chlorine figures have definitely given negative balance ; while in spite of heavy P2O5 ingestion (39 to 59 grms.) negative balance has been recorded up to the stage of 43 grms. This is probably due to the presence of phosphorus in the rice bran mainly as phytin which is not readily assimilable. Various workers have noticed the presence of anti-calcifying agents in cereal grains and similar factors might also be further aggravating causes. Rice bran should, therefore, be supplemented with lime and chlorine on one side, while its phos- phorus compound should be brought into assimilable form by hydrolysis. 8. The results indicate that aus straw is considerably superior to aman straw in minerals and protein and hence in general feeding values, but both straws are poor in phosphate and slightly deficient in lime. The phosphate might be conveniently supplied through cake while a small supplement of chalk would make up lime deficiency. 9. In the case of green feeds, Guinea grass is better balanced than Napier and Hyacinth, but the feeding should be regulated in order to avoid a large inges- tion of lime. Napier should be supplemented with CaCO3 and both Napier and Hyacinth should be so regulated as not to involve a large ingestion of potash through them. They both (specially Hyacinth) require some cake supplement. Hyacinth is not a fodder but when there is a fodder scarcity it is often used as such in some parts of Bengal, and hence formed a subject of investigation.
202 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III 10. No interpretation has been attempted on the basis of ratios, the bearing of one mineral to the other, the E. A. values and so forth, as it is felt that informa- tion on these aspects is still meagre. An intermediate course has, therefore, been adopted by making a collection of all relevant data, ratios, etc., in the Appendices in order that they might be available for interpretation in the light of future development. It need hardly be stated that whatever might be the relation of mineral matter either with respect to the absolute amount or to their respective pro- portions, the nature of the feed is by far the chief determining factor, and although there is some deficiency of lime in rice straw feed the deficiency of phosphorus is probably the chief limiting factor. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 1. The first acknowledgment is due to the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research India, who provided the grant to conduct the investigations. 2. The authors are indebted to Mr. F. J. Gossip, Live-stock Expert, for stall facilities, to Mr. G. B. Pal, Agricultural Chemist, Bengal, for laboratory facilities, to Mr. Md. Abdul Hye for the data on non-mineral side and to Mr. Sayed Ali for a large part of computation. REFERENCES Armsby, H. P. (1917). The Nutrition of Farm animals. Boas Fixen (1935). Nutr. Abstr. and Rev. 4, 454. Bogert, L. J., and McKittrick, E. J. (1922). J. Biol Chem. 54, 363. Bruce, R. K. and Callow, H. M (1934). Biochem. J. 28, 517. Buffagni, V. (1935). Profilassi, 8, 53-54. Nut. Abstr and Rev. 1936, 6, 255. Bunge, G. (1873). Z. Biol, 9, 104. Cited by Miller (1923). J. Biol. Chem. 55, 42. Cochrane, Penna Inst. An. Nutrn. (unpublished results.) Quoted by Armsby, Nutrition of Farm Animals, p. 345. Cox, W. M. (Jr.) and Imboden, M. (1936). J. Nutr. 2, 147-176. Diakow. Landw. Jahrb. (1913), 44, 833. Quoted by Armsby, Nutrition of Farm Animals, p. 345. Fine, M. S. (1930). Cereal Chem. 1, 456. Cited by Lowe and Steenbock. Godden, W. (1926). J. Agri., Sc. 16, 78-88. Godden, W. (1928). Recent Advances in Animal Nutrition. Agri. Progress 5. Green, H. H. (1935). Empire J. Exp. Agr. 3, 37. Hall, A. D. and Russell, E. J. (1912). J. Agric. Sc. 4, 339. Hart, E. B., McCollum, E. V., Steenbock, H. and Humphrey, G. C. (1911). Wisconsin Agric. Expt. Stn. Res. Bull. 17. Hart, E. B. and Steenbock, H. (1913). J. Biol. Chem. 14, 75.
MINERAL REQUIREMENTS OF CATTLE IN NORTH-EAST INDIA 203 Hawk, P. V. and Bergeim, O. (1931). Practical Physiological Chemistry. Henneberg, Beitrag, etc., Heft. 1 (1860), p. 113. Cited by Armsby. Henry, W. A. and Morrison, F. B. (1928). Feeds and Feeding, 19th Ed., 65. Holst, J. E. (1927). J. Hyg. Camb. 26, 437. Cited by Lowe and Steenbock. Huffman, C. F. (1934). Minerals in the Nutrition of Dairy Cattle. Reprint from the Records of Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the American Society of Animal Production, 1934, 46. Huffman, C. F., Duncan, C. W., Robinson, C. S. and Lamb, L. W. (1933). Agr. Exp. Sta. Michigan State College of Agriculture, Tech. Bull. No. 134. Iyer, A. V. and Krishna Ayyar, N. (1934). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. and Anim. Husb. 4, 108-113. Iyer, A. V. (1935). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 5, 2, 129-139. Kellner, O. " Die Ernahrung der Landwirtschaftlichen Nutztier" Ed. 4, Berlin. Cited in Ohio Agr. Exp. Sta. Tech. Bull. 5421 (1914). Kellner, O. (1915). Scientific Feeding of Animals. Linton, R. G. (1927). Animal Nutrition and Veterinary Dietetics, p. 31. Lowe, J. T., and Steenbock, H. (1936). Biochem. J. 30, 1126-1134. Magee, H. E. and Sen, K. C. (1931). Biochem. J. 25, 643-646. Marek, J. (1924). Archiv.f. Tierheilkunde, Band 51, Heft. 1, Cited by Theiler, Green and du Toit. McChance, R. A. and Widdowson, E. M. (1935). Biochem. J. 29, 2694. McCollum, E. V., Simmonds, Nina, and Beacker, J. E. (1922). J. Biol. Chem. 53, 313. Meigs, E. B., Turner, W. A., Harding, T. S., Hartman, A. M. and Grant, F. M. (1926). J. Agr. Res., 32, 833-860. Mellanby, E. (1926). Brit. Med. J. 1, 515. Cited by Lowe and Steenbock. Mellanby, M. (1928). Physiol. Rev. 8, 545. Cited by Lowe and Steenbock. Mellanby, M. (1929). Diet and Teeth, London, H. M. Sta. Office. Cited by Lowe and Steenbock. Miller, G. (1923). J. Biol. Chem. 55, 45-59. Mendel, L. B. and Benedict, S. R. (1909). Am. J. Physiol. 25, 1 and 23. Mirvish, L. (1929). Nature, 124, 410. Mirvish, L. (1930). Biochem. J. 24, 233. Orr, J. B. (1925). Presidential Address to Section M. Southampton Meeting of the British Assoc. for the Advancement on Science. Orr, J. B. (1929). Minerals in Pasture. Overton, (1904). Arch ges. physiol. C. V. 276. Cited by Miller (1923). J. Biol. Chem., 55, 62. Ramiah, P. V. (1932). South Indian Fodders. Madras Agri. Dept. Bull. 33, 8. Rather, H. C. (1918). J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 40, 533. Rather, H. C. (1918). Ark. Agric. Exp. Sta. Bull. No. 147. Cited by Lowe and Steenbock. Remy, E. and Müller, A. (1931). Klin. Wochenschr. 10, 2338-2341. Cited in Nut. Abstr. and Reviews, 1931-32. 1, 773. G
204 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III Richards, M. B., Godden, W. and Husband, A. D. (1927). Biochem. J. 21, 971. Ringer, S. J. (1881-82). Cited by Orr. British Assoc. Meeting, 1925. Rose, A. R. (1912). N. Y. (Geneva) Agr. Exp. Sta. Tech. Bull. 20. Seasan and Crop Reports of Bengal, 1931-32. Sen, K. C. (1933). Ind. J. of Chem. Soc. Sir P. C. Roy Commemoration, Vol. 143-159. Theiler, A., Viljoen, P. R., du Toit, P. J., Meiar, H. and Robinson, E. M. (1927). Lamziekte in cattle in South Africa. 11th and 12th Reports of the Director of Vet. Education and Research, Pt. 2. Cited by Huffman, et al. Michigan Tech. Bull. 134 (1933). Theiler, A., Green, H. H., and du Toit, P. J. (1927). J. Agr. Sc. 17, 291-314. Theiler A., and Green, H. H. (1932). Nut. Abstr. and Rev. 1, 3, 359-385. Unpublished data of Agricultural Chemist's Laboratory, Bengal, 1917. Warth, F. J. (1926). Memoirs of the Dept. of Agri. India, Chem. Ser., 9, No. 2. Warth, F. J., Iyer, A. V., and Krishna Ayyar, N. (1932). Ind. J. Vet. Sc. & Anim. Husb. 2, 325-332. Wellmann, O. (1931). Mitteil. d. Deutsch. Landwirtsch-Gesellch. 46, 316-319. Abstract. in Nutr. Abstr. and Rev. 1, 1931, 241-242. Winton, A. L., and Winton, K. B. (1932). The Structure and Composition of Foods, 1, 150-153. Zuntz, (1912). Jahrb. Dent. Landw. Gessell, 577. Cited by Armsby.
MINERAL REQUIREMENTS OF CATTLE IN NORTH-EAST INDIA 205 APPENDIX I Composition of different feeds (on dry basis) Feed Organic matter Crude protein Ether extract Crude fibre Nitrogen free extract Ash Silica Soluble ash Nutritive ratio 1: Total digestible nutrients per 100 lb. Starch equivalent per 100 lb. Per cent Per cent Per cent Per cent Per cent Per cent Per cent Per cent Aman paddy straw . . 85.309 2.894 0.868 34.215 47.332 14.691 10.821 3.870 * 29.9 10.0 Aman paddy straw . . 85.785 3.811 0.964 34.221 46.789 14.214 10.250 3.965 116 44.17 24.18 Aman paddy straw . . 86.161 3.200 1.191 33.763 48.007 13.839 10.190 3.649 56 44.40 24.34 Aman paddy straw . . 86.786 3.750 1.147 33.239 48.650 13.214 9.082 4.132 47 44.40 24.65 Aus paddy straw . . 88.796 5.879 1.713 33.425 48.779 11.204 7.372 3.832 23 43.32 24.25 Guinea grass . . . 86.056 7.969 1.733 32.360 43.995 13.944 8.066 5.878 } 10.3 10.9 } 51.7 28.9 Napier grass . . 83.297 5.349 1.894 31.900 44.109 16.703 6.632 10.071 } 20.3 25.0 } 48.6 38.6 Water hyacinth. . . 83.533 6.544 1.700 24.696 50.593 16.467 0.404 16.063 * 34.3 28.0 Linseed cake . . . 89.611 31.606 6.812 9.614 41.579 10.389 3.335 7.054 1.5 67.41 65.20 Linseed cake . . . 89.871 30.331 6.327 9.346 43.867 10.129 3.274 6.855 1.6 66.69 64.45 Rice Bran (kura) . . 83.888 15.969 20.321 10.821 36.777 16.112 4.678 11.434 8.2 57.13 43.99 Rice Bran (kura) . . 84.440 12.000 20.455 17.441 34.541 15.560 4.414 11.146 11.4 57.71 44.54 * The nitrogen digestion was negative.
206 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III APPENDIX II Mineral composition and ratios of different feeds Feed Composition (on dry matter) Ratio CaO MgO K2O Na2O P2O5 Cl2 N CaO : P2O5 CaO : MgO CaO : K2O K2O : Na2O E. A. Per cent Per cent Per cent Per cent Per cent Per cent Per cent Aman rice straw . 0.401 0.290 1.575 0.354 0.139 ... 0.463 2.89 1.38 0.26 4.45 22.82 Aman rice straw . 0.463 0.200 1.904 0.203 0.123 0.441 0.610 3.76 2.32 0.24 9.38 21.24 Aman rice straw . 0.484 0.353 1.820 0.270 0.100 ... 0.512 4.84 1.37 0.27 6.74 30.55 Aman rice straw . 0.500 0.365 1.838 0.261 0.108 ... 0.600 4.63 1.37 0.27 7.04 30.38 Aus rice straw . . 0.635 0.400 2.032 0.207 0.176 0.336 0.941 3.61 1.59 0.31 9.82 57.21 Guinea grass: . . 1.232 0.728 1.451 0.572 0.541 0.185 1.275 2.28 1.69 0.85 2.54 0.99 Napier grass . . 0.461 0.373 4.801 0.297 0.804 0.571 0.863 0.57 1.24 0.096 16.17 154.32 Water hyacinth . . 3.423 0.957 5.913 0.186 0.361 3.484 1.047 9.48 3.58 0.58 31.79 MINERAL REQUIREMENTS OF CATTLE IN NORTH-EAST INDIA 207 APPENDIX III Showing distribution of minerals per 1,000 calories in different feeds Feed CaO grms. MgO grms. K2 O grms. Na2O grms. P2O5 grms. Cl3 grms. Protein grms. Aman straw . . . . . . 3.600 2.600 14.700 3.250 1.200 ... 26.106 Aman straw . . . . . . 2.787 1.204 11.464 1.222 0.74 ... 16.593 Aman straw . . . . . . 2.899 2.114 10.902 1.617 0.599 ... 19.162 Aman straw . . . . . . 2.990 2.186 11.009 1.563 0.646 ... 22.462 Aus straw . . . . . . 3.898 2.455 12.475 1.270 1.080 2.062 36.106 Guinea grass . . . . . . 6.300 3.700 7.400 2.900 2.800 0.935 41.047 Napier grass . . . . . . 2.500 2.000 25.000 2.600 4.400 3.000 29.600 Water hyacinth. . . . . . 28.900 8.000 50.000 1.500 3.000 20.000 55.363 Linseed cake . . . . . . 18.938 37.521 82.854 18.662 92.323 1.893 124.700 Linseed cake . . . . . . 25.998 40.233 69.820 22.614 81.544 2.432 120.962 Rice bran (kura) . . . . . 0.959 12.294 9.059 0.917 29.096 0.088 74.337 Rice bran (kura) . . . . . 1.115 12.014 8.203 2.152 28.573 0.133 55.300 * Cultivated pasture . . . . . 3.700 ... 23.080 1.850 2.700 3.520 65.300 * Cow's milk . . . . . . 3.420 ... 6.400 1.560 3.470 1.390 51.600 * Orr's figures taken from the British association address but converted into the present form.
208 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III APPENDIX IV Intake of dry matter, ratios of minerals and E. A., etc. (Calculated on 500-lb. live-weight.) Experiment No. Animal No. Dry matter consumed * Total digestible Nutrients * lb. Starch Equiva- lent. * lb. CaO : P2O3 CaO : MgO CaO : K2O K2O : Na2O E. A. Nutritive ratio 1 : Actual live- weight lb. Loss or gain in live- weight lb. Aman straw only A. D7 3667.6 1.952 0.827 2.885 1.383 0.255 2.426 22.817 MINERAL REQUIREMENTS OF CATTLE IN NORTH-EAST INDIA. 209 Aus straw only D. D1 3630.9 3.367 1.833 3.635 1.585 0.314 4.991 35.415 23.00 490 0.439 D3 3586.4 3.452 1.938 3.632 1.587 0.314 5.212 35.370 22.00 543 210 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III APPENDIX V Intakes of minerals per 1,000 calories Experiment No. Feeds Animal No. CaO grms. MgO grms. K2O grms. Na2O grms. P2O5 grms. Cl2 grms. Protein grms. A. Aman straw as single feed . . D7 4.41 3.19 17.33 7.14 1.52 5.71 31.81 D8 3.96 2.81 15.28 0.85 1.34 5.41 28.06 B. Aman straw and Rice kura . . D1 2.62 4.30 10.93 2.48 6.48 2.75 30.81 D6 2.52 3.79 10.33 2.38 5.37 2.67 27.75 D7 2.44 4.77 10.53 2.51 7.96 2.74 33.31 D8 2.68 4.13 10.04 2.62 5.97 3.22 30.06 D9 2.64 4.32 10.49 2.09 6.76 2.91 30.56 D2 2.22 5.04 9.37 2.58 9.12 2.68 30.81 D3 2.51 4.82 12.93 2.70 8.08 1.16 31.18 D 4 2.39 4.01 9.50 2.46 6.27 2.84 27.18 D6 2.66 5.78 11.11 2.97 10.27 3.13 35.81 C. Aman straw and Linseed cake . D3 2.75 1.55 11.33 2.31 1.78 3.58 35.37 D1 2.90 1.64 11.90 2.36 1.91 3.67 37.50 D4 2.70 1.52 11.09 2.20 1.76 3.43 34.62 D7 2.64 1.51 10.87 2.17 1.78 3.36 34.75 D. Aus straw as single feed . . D1 4.04 2.55 12.86 2.57 1.11 3.62 37.62 D2 3.89 2.45 12.39 2.37 1.07 3.37 35.87 D7 3.89 2.45 12.39 2.67 1.07 3.71 37.06
MINERAL REQUIREMENTS OF CATTLE IN NORTH-EAST INDIA 211 E. Aus straw and linseed cake . . D3 3.60 2.43 11.37 2.20 1.48 2.93 28.50 D8 3.90 2.64 12.33 2.42 1.62 3.21 43.37 D9 3.61 2.43 11.42 2.16 1.47 2.90 39.25 D4 3.60 2.48 11.36 2.13 1.65 2.78 41.31 D5 3.97 2.74 11.32 2.37 1.83 2.83 45.56 D6 4.08 2.95 12.18 2.41 1.92 3.01 48.43 Aman straw and hyacinth . . D1 16.64 4.57 27.37 4.82 1.84 5.03 35.43 D2 10.61 3.56 21.32 3.89 1.4.1 4.01 27.43 F. Aman straw and Napier . . D4 2.38 1.88 21.05 2.68 3.34 3.62 25.18 D5 2.60 2.04 22.68 3.05 3.58 4.05 27.37 Aman straw and Guinea grass . D3 6.14 3.44 7.57 3.59 2.48 1.85 37.18 D6 6.02 3.59 7.85 3.70 2.62 1.86 39.18 Orr's figures. * Cultivated pasture per cent . ... 3.70 ... 23.08 1.85 2.70 3.52 65.30 * Cows milk per cent . . . ... 2.42 ... 6.40 1.56 3.47 1.39 51.60 * Orr's figures taken from British Association address, 1925, but have been converted into present forms.
THE OCCURRENCE OF SPINOSE EAR TICK (ORNITHO- DORUS MEGNINI DUGES IN INDIA* BY S. K. SEN, M.Sc., F.R.E.S. Entomologist, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 27th April 1937) (With Plates XIII & XIV and one text-figure) ON the 15th January 1936, a consignment of ticks collected post-mortem from inside the ears of an Australian horse that had developed symptoms of incoördi- nation of movement evidently as a result of the infestation, was received at the Mukteswar Institute from Captain J. S. Kingston, R. A. V. C., Officer Command- ing, Military Veterinary Hospital, Saugor, Central Provinces. These, on examination, proved to be the nymphs of Ornithodorus megnini Dugès, the Spinose Ear Tick of America, the occurrence of which had not been previously recorded in India. A specimen of the tick was also forwarded to Mr. Cecil Warburton, at Cambridge, and he confirmed the identification. Concerning the animal from which these specimens of ticks were recovered, Captain Kingston wrote as follows : " The animal in question, Equitation School Horse No. 145, an Australian 7 years, has been at the Equitation School for about 4 months. It could rightly be described as insane. It took sudden frights at the approach of man, started without apparent reason, put individuals in hospital who tried to come near it, and would not allow its head to be touched ........ I did a post-mortem examination and found about twelve ticks in each ear. They had perforated both ear drums and laid bare the auri- cular nerves and infected the petrous temporal bones. They were not attached to the mucous membrane inside the ear, but lived in a cheesy mass which they produced in both ears ".1 Subsequent to the receipt of these specimens, three further consignments of the same species of tick were received, two of these being collected, as before, from imported Australian horses and one from an Indian mare foaled and reared *Paper read at the Indian Science Congress held at Hyderabad-Deccan, January, 1937. Rewritten and brought up to date. 1These observations have since been published by Captain Kingston (see list of references). (213)
214 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III at the Ahmednagar Stud Farm. Concerning this last, the Veterinary Officer, Ahmednagar Remount Depôt, furnished the following interesting information in a letter dated the 15th September 1936 :OCCURRENCE OF SPINOSE EAR TICK IN INDIA 215 As to the manner in which O. megnini came to be introduced into India, three possibilities suggest themselves : that it may have been brought (1) with mules coming from America; (2) with stock coming from South Africa, where the tick was first seen in 1898 [Bedford, 1917] ; or (3) with horses imported from Australia. It would, however, appear from a communication, dated the 13th November 1936, received from the Chief of Division of Animal Health, Australia, that the parasite is quite unknown in that country, so that it may be reasonably concluded that it has been introduced with stock coming from one or both of the other two countries mentioned above. This conclusion would seem to find support from a statement, which we have received through the courtesy of the Director of Veterinary Services, Army Veterinary Department, and which shows that the number of American and South African mules received and dealt with by the Ahmednagar Remount Depôt during the past thirteen years was eighty-two and 729 respectively. From the foregoing, it would appear that the parasite is fairly widespread in this country, and in view of its importance as a pest of domesticated animals, it would seem desirable that veterinary workers in India were made acquainted with the habits and the general features of this tick and also with the symptoms known to be produced by the infestation. It is my pleasant duty to express my grateful thanks to Mr. F. Ware, C.I.F., F.R.C.V.S., F.N.I., I.V.S., Director of the Imperial Veterinary Research Institute. Mukteswar, for the keen interest with which he has watched the progress of this investigation. In feeding the ticks on horses, I have received much help from Mr. J. A. Idnani, Veterinary Inspector, for which I am deeply indebted to him. My thanks are due to Mr. Ahmed Bakhsh, Artist, for the illustrations, which he has drawn in original from specimens bred out in the laboratory. DISTRIBUTION It is generally agreed that the original home of the Spinose Ear Tick is the United States of America, where it is particularly prevalent in certain south-western semi-arid sections. According to Imes [1918], the climatic conditions in parts of Texas, Oklahoma, New Mexico, Arizona and California are favourable for the rapid multiplication of these ticks. Nuttall and his collaborators [1908] quote Dugès [1883] as having first described the tick from Mexico, where it is reported to be abundant in the State of Guanjuato. The tick is also known to occur in South Africa, where, according to Bedford [1917], it was probably introduced with stock coming from America. Although it is not known when the tick was actually in- troduced into that locality, Bedford mentions Theiler as having found it at Vryburg in 1912 and he further refers to Manley as having first seen this species in Cape Colony in 1898.
216 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III HABITS OF THE TICKS AND THEIR EFFECTS UPON THEIR HOSTS As the name Spinose Ear Tick implies, O. megnini is characterized by the possession of spines on its body in its nymphal stage and it has the peculiar habit of locating itself deep inside the ears of its hosts, which include cattle, horses, mules, sheep, goats, dogs, rabbits and man. Story [1920] states that the tick occasional- ly feeds on the skin in the case of sheep. In cases of gross infection, the ears may be packed full of these parasites, which frequently crawl into the ear-canal and even attack the ear-drum. According to Pierce [1921], the ears of infected animals are droopy, hair rough, fattening is difficult, and under range conditions, death is not infrequent. In horses and mules marked shyness is observed, and " this is sometimes so extreme that it is almost impossible to halter or bridle an infested animal ". The symptoms are graphically described by Imes [1918] as follows : " The infested animal usually shakes its head and repeatedly turns it from side to side, meanwhile inverting first one ear and then the other. When irritation and itching are more intense on one side, the animal often turns its head so that the more seriously affected ear is held inverted. There is a tendency to run and scratch the ears, and young animals often run as though endeavouring to relieve the nervous tension. Horses and dogs seem to be more sensitive than cattle to the pain and irritation. They scratch and rub their ears, shake their heads, and often lie down and roll, rubbing their ears on the ground " Story [1920] states that young calves suffer most from this pest, its bite producing swelling and abscesses in these animals. DESCRIPTION OF THE DIFFERENT STAGES The morphological features of the different stage of O. megnini have been fully described by Nuttall and Warburton [1908] and a brief and useful description of these stages has also been given by Bedford [1912]. In the description that follows, only such features of the morphology of the tick will be dealt with as are likely to be of use to the veterinary worker in recognizing the parasite under field conditions in India. Egg (Plate XIII, fig. 1) .DIFFERENT STAGES OF THE SPINOSE EAR TICK Ornithodorus megnini FIG. 1. Egg. ×67. FIG. 2. Larva, unfed, dorsal view. × 67. ch., distal extremity of chelicera, enlarged ; t., tarsus I in profile, enlarged. FIG. 3. Nymph, dorsal view. × 6. h., bristly hairs, enlarged ; sp., spines, enlarged ; t. , tarsus I in profile, enlarged. FIG. 4. Nymph, ventral view. × 6. c., capitulum ; s., spiracle. FIG. 5. Nymph, mouth-parts (chelicerae omitted). × 67. hyp., hypostome ; p., palp. FIG. 6. Adult, dorsal view. × 6.
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim Husb, Vol. VII, Pt. III. PLATE XIII. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page]
OCCURRENCE OF SPINOSE EAR TICK IN INDIA 217 Nymph (Plate XIII, figs. 3, 4 and 5) .218 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III and the emergence of the first batch of larvae occurred on the 18th July. On the 29th July, about thirty of the larvae were introduced into the ear of a country-bred pony, the following device being adopted to prevent the ticks from escaping. The larvae were loosely held inside a small piece of muslin-gauze and the latter was then folded over to immobilize the larvae momentarily. The piece was now quickly inserted into the ear and the opening of the latter closed up by means of a piece of finely-meshed muslin glued on with Chatterton's compound. As an additional precaution, the ear, with its gauze-cover, was enclosed in a strong cloth bag, any damage to the latter being prevented by making the animal wear a specially made hood, as shown in the illustration (Plate XIV). When the ear of the animal was examined at the end of thirty-five days, four of the larvae were found to have changed to fully-engorged nymphs. A batch of larvae was also introduced into the ear of a rabbit, which was kept under observation for about a month, but the larvae died without developing. In this case, the rabbit was made to wear a card board collar to prevent it from scratching the infected ear. TREATMENT According to the Bureau of Animal Industry, United States of America, an effective remedy against ear-ticks is a mixture of two parts by volume of ordinary commercial pine tar and one part by volume of cotton-seed oil. The remedy is applied by means of a metal or hard-rubber syringe capable of holding one to two ounces, the mixture being warmed to ensure its ready flow. Story [1920] stresses the desirability of taking care that the mixture is not smeared on the hair in the ear; otherwise when the car is flapped, the mixture may get into the eye and cause irritation. REFERENCES Bedford, G. A. H. (1912). A Tick New to South Africa. Union S. Africa Dept. Agric. Second Report, pp. 343-344. Bedford, G. A. H. (1917). The Spinose Ear Tick, Union S. Africa Dept. Agri, Local series, No. 18, pp. 1-6. Imes, Marion (1918). The spinose Ear Tick and Methods of treating Infested Animals. U. S. A. Dept. Agric. Farmers' Bull. 980, pp. 3-8. Kingston, J. S. (1936). Spinose Ear Tick in India. J. Roy. Army Vet. Corps. 7, 142-143. Nuttall, G. H. F., Warburton, C., Cooper, W. F. and Robinson, L. E. (1908). Ticks : A Monograph of the Ixodoidea, pp. 71-77. Pierce, W. D. (1921). Sanitary Entomology, pp. 444-445. Story, C. (1920). The Spinose Ear Tick. Practical Suggestions for Suppression. Union S. Africa J. Dept. Agric. 1, 647-654.
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. VII, Pt. III ] PLATE XIV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Infected pony with hood.
EXPERIMENTS ON THE TRANSMISSION OF RINDER- PEST THROUGH THE AGENCY OF STOMOXYS CALCITRANS LINN* BY S. K. SEN, M.Sc., F.R.E.S. Entomologist AND ABDUS SALAM, L.V.P. Punjab Research Scholar Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 24th April 1937) (With one text-figure) THE possibility that biting flies are involved in the transmission of rinderpest in cattle has been stressed by more than one worker, but the work so far carried out to explore this possibility cannot be regarded as having been extensive. The results220 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III were negative and are, therefore, in accord with those recorded by Bhatia. Apart from reporting these results, one of the objects of this brief note is to describe a method which has proved satisfactory for the purpose of feeding a large number of flies by the " interrupted " method within a limited period of time, for it is almost needless to stress the desirability of employing a method that would substantially reduce the amount of time usually taken in carrying out feeding work of this kind and at the same time make it possible to determine, with a fair degree of certainty, what proportion of flies have actually fed. MATERIALS AND METHODS In the present trials, only wild specimens of S. calcitrans were used, these being of common occurrence on animals, notably buffaloes, grazing in the station area at Mukteswar during the summer months. The flies were kept singly in glass tubes measuring one inch in diameter and four inches in length, the mouths of the tubes being closed with mosquito netting with meshes (about eighteen to a linear inch) sufficiently large to permit of the flies biting through them. In order to provide moisture to the flies, the tubes containing them were kept inverted over moistened cotton wool in a tray, a sheet of wire-gauze being interposed between the tubes and the wool to prevent the flies from coming in direct contact with the moisture [ cf. Sen, 1926]. By this means, it was possible to keep a large proportion of the flies alive for at least ten days. The mortality was high on cold, cloudy days, or when the moisture was completely evaporated off during the night and was not replenished in due time. Specimens which persistently refused to bite on any one day were allowed to suck a drop or two of cane sugar solution placed at the mouth of the tube. Each tube was numbered, so as to make it possible to maintain an accurate history of individual flies. The flies received their infective feeds on bulls artificially infected with a virulent strain of rinderpest virus, and in all cases due care was taken to choose good reactors. After being partially fed on rinderpest-infected bulls, they were allowed to complete their feed on a young, healthy bull, housed in a small shed (chupper) , at a convenient but safe distance from infected sheds, in order to prevent it from contracting infection by means other than through the experimental flies. Throughout the observation period, a record was kept of the morning and evening temperature of this animal, as also its general condition. For feeding the flies, the glass tubes containing them were inserted through circular holes bored in a cork-sheet measuring 7 in. × 3½ in. × 1/5 in., the diameter of each hole being slightly less than an inch, so that the tubes fitted somewhat tightly in them. A cork-sheet of the dimensions mentioned above has been found capable of holding at least ten tubes (Fig. 1).
EXPERIMENTS ON THE TRANSMISSION OF RINDERPEST 221 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Fig. 1.222 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III the tubes, was partially raised without displacing the sheet of paper and the clipped area examined through the holes for the occurrence of haemorrhagic spots. EXPERIMENTAL OBSERVATIONS As mentioned earlier in this note, only one healthy bull was used in these experiments, but, as will be seen from the tables that follow, the number of infective bites inflicted on it was sufficiently large to admit of definite conclusions being drawn as to the possibility of S. calcitrans being involved in the spread of the disease. In the experiments, three batches of flies were employed, those of the first two being fed singly by the method described above, but in the case of the third batch, the flies were fed en masse, this being considered desirable in order to hasten progress of the work, particularly when it was found that a total of as many as 411 individual bites (infra) failed to produce any apparent effect on the experimental animal. In the ' massive ' feeding, the flies, numbering about 300, were enclosed in three cloth cages, each containing approximately 100 flies, and the cages were then applied directly on a closely clipped area on the body of an infected animal and allowed to remain there for from one to one minute and a half, and an approximate count was made of the number of flies found feeding during that period. They were then allowed to complete their feed on the healthy bull, it being assumed from previous experience gained in feeding individual flies that they had done so. The numbers of infecting bites inflicted on the healthy animal on different dates are shown in the following three tables :EXPERIMENTS ON THE TRANSMISSION OF RINDERPEST 223 TABLE II Number of infective bites inflicted by flies of the second batch (fed singly) Date May 18 19 20 21 22 23 Number of bites 16 17 82 56 31 25 Total number of bites . . . . . . . . 227 Total number of days over which the bites were spread . . 6 TABLE III Number of infective bites inflicted by flies of the third batch (fed on masse) Date May June 28 29 30 31 1 2 Number of bites 150 120 120 80 100 100 Total number of bites . . . . . . . . 670 Total number of days over which the bites were spread . . 6 As will be seen from the foregoing tables, the experimental bull received approximately a total of 1,081 bites spread over a period of twenty-nine days, so that it may be regarded as having been offered every chance of contracting the infection through the intermediary of these flies. The animal, however, remained normal during an observation period of about forty-five days, commencing from the date on which it received its last bite. At the end of this period, it was inoculated with 5 c.c. of virulent rinderpest blood, and as a result it died after developing typical symptoms of the disease.
224 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 1. Stomaxys calcitrans has been found incapable of transmitting rinderpest under experimental conditions. 2. A method is described for feeding a large number of flies singly, by the " interrupted " method, within a short period of time. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We are deeply grateful to Mr. F. Ware, C. I. E., F. R. C. V. S., F. N. I., I. V. S., Director of the Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar, for granting facilities in the prosecution of the investigation. The junior author is indebted to the Civil Veterinary Department, Punjab, for the grant of a research scholarship, during the tenure of which this work was carried out. REFERENCES Bhatia, H. L. (1935). The Role of Tabanus orientis Wlk. and Stomoxys calcitrans Linn. in the Mechanical Transmission of Rinderpest. Ind. J. Vet. Sci. & Anim. Husb. 5, 2-22. Crawford, W. (1933). RinderpestSOME DIGESTIBILITY TRIALS ON INDIAN FEEDING STUFFS XI. COTTON-SEED CAKE AS A CATTLE FEED BY P. E. LANDER, M.A., D. Sc., F.I.C., I.A.S. Agricultural Chemist to Government, Punjab, Lyallpur AND PANDIT LAL CHAND DHARMANI, L.AG., B.Sc. (AGRI.) Agricultural College, Lyallpur (Received for publication on 27th April, 1937) IN earlier publications [Lander and Dharmani, 1929, 1935] of this series, an account was given of the feeding values of certain American and Desi cotton- seeds as determined by digestibility trials at Lyallpur using oat hay as a basal ration. One of the objects of those investigations was to ascertain how far the prevailing prejudice against American cotton-seed as a feeding material on account of the adhering lint held good. It was shown that this prejudice could not be substantiated. It was also suggested [Lander and Dharmani, 1929] that an oil-content as high as that found in cotton-seed, viz., about 20 per cent was unnecessary for cattle, and that perhaps a greater utilization of the feed could be made if cotton-seed cake instead of cotton-seed were fed. No trials at that time could, however, be conducted with cake as it was not then possible to obtain cotton-seed cake in the Punjab. With the expansion of the soap industry in the Province a great demand for cotton-seed oil has arisen and a local mill has recently produced cotton-seed cake from 4 F American cotton seeds which are compara- tively less fuzzy than other American varieties. The cake is produced by press- ing the whole seed, without delinting or decorticating, in the expellers, from which the cake issues in fine flakes which resemble t oria (Brassica napus) cake in appearance. This cotton-seed cake has been used to a large extent by the Military Dairy Department, but has not yet been taken up by farmers although it is selling in Lyallpur at the cheap rate of from ten to fourteen annas a maund. (225)
226 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III The value of cotton-seed cake as a cattle feed is well recognised in Europe and America, but no definite data based on controlled feeding trials regarding the feeding value of cotton-seed cake manufactured in the province are available except some preliminary observations made by S. Kartar Singh in 1915. In order to investigate the feeding value of this new concentrate, digestibility trials were carried out at Lyallpur on three Montgomery breed heifers with oat hay (a maintenance ration) as basal ration fed ad lib. The technique followed during the experiments was the same as already published [Lander and Dharmani, 1929]. Cotton-seed cake was fed once a day separately after being soaked in water for about two hours prior to feeding. Two heifers were given 2.5 lb. of cotton- seed cake each per day while the third was fed 2.0 lb. only. The slight variations in the quantity of cottons-eed cake fed were made in order to see whether such variations would have any effect on the digestibility figures obtained. There was no appreciable difference to record. No untoward effects whatsoever were noticed in the general health of the experimental animals over long periods. Table I shows the chemical composition of the cotton-seed cake, and for com- parison, corresponding data for Sarson (Brassica campestris) and toria cakes, which are commonly used in the Punjab, are also shown. It will be seen that cotton-seed cake contains a lower percentage of fat and protein than the other cakes and a larger amount of crude fibre. The digestibility data for various cakes given in Table I show that the digesti- bility coefficients for dry matter, fat and fibre are higher in cotton-seed cake than in the others. A perusal of the data set forth in Table II showing starch equivalents, digestible protein, albuminoid ratio and price per unit, reveals that cotton-seed cake is slightly lower in starch equivalents than other cakes, and is markedly lower in digestible protein. It is, however, the cheapest of all the cakes from the point of view of starch equivalents and digestible protein and it would pay to buy and feed cotton-seed cake, assuming that the proteins in various cakes are of equal biological efficiency. Even if the. price of the cotton-seed cake rises to Rs. 1-10-6 per maund it would still be an economical feed to employ.
DIGESTIBILITY TRIALS ON INDIAN FEEDING STUFFS 227 TABLE I 228 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III TABLE II Name of the feed Starch equivalents Digestible protein per 100 lbs. of the feed Albuminoid ratio 1: Price per starch equivalent based on current prices at Lyallpur in pies Price per pound of digestible protein based on current prices at Lyallpur in pies Cotton-seed cake . . . . . 60.56 17.97 3.1 2.0 6.7 Sarson cake . . . . . . 69.35 28.60 1.7 7.1 17.6 Toria cake . . . . . . 69.52 27.00 1.8 7.1 18.2
DIGESTIBILITY TRIALS ON INDIAN FEEDING STUFFS 229 TABLE III 230 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III In Table III, the values of cotton-seed have been compared with those of cotton-seed cake. The figures for digestible coefficients, starch equivalents and digestible protein show that the nutrients in the form of cake have been better utilized by the animals than in the form of seed. TABLE IV Name of the feed Fat percentage Digestibility coefficients of fat Digestibility coefficients of fibre Sarson seed (crushed) . . . 35.22 82.33 Negative 4 F. cotton-seed . . . . 20.73 87.90 38.10 Toria cake . . . . . 11.83 90.84 38.09 Sarson cake . . . . . 10.10 93.08 43.62 Cotton-seed cake . . . . 8.47 98.01 73.66 Table IV shows data which indicate that the digestibility of fat and fibre in oil seeds and cakes is related in some degree to their fat content. While the digestibility of fat increases rather steadily with the fall of the fat-content, the digestibility of the fibre tends to increase irregularly. A fat-content about 8 per cent seems to be the most desirable one from the point of view of maximum utility of fat in oil-seeds and cakes. Acknowledgment is made of the assistance given in this work by N. Akbar Ali of the Chemical Section. REFERENCES Kartar Singh, S. (1915). Jour. of Dairying and Dairy Farming in India 2, 3. Lander, P. E. and Dharmani, Lal Chand (1929). Mem. of the Dept. of Agri. in India 10, 6. Lander, P. E. and Dharmani, Lal Chand (1935). Ind. Jour. of Vet. Sci. & Anim. Hus. 5, 6, 343-349.
A NOTE ON A VARIETY OF SALMONELLA ENTERITIDIS ISOLATED FROM PIGEONS BY J. F. SHIRLAW, M.R.C.V.S. Serologist AND S. GANAPATHY IYER, G.M.V.C. Veterinary Inspector, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 14th June, 1937) (With Plate XV and two charts) INTRODUCTION OUTBREAKS of septicaemia in pigeons due to S. enteritidis Gaertner are of rare occurrence judging by the few recorded cases in literature and the record- ing of an outbreak of this disease in pigeons maintained for vaccine production at this Institute is, therefore, of special interest. It may be mentioned that no previous records exist, in India, to establish the incidence of salmonellosis in pigeons and it is believed that this, if not the first outbreak, is, at least, the first in which a detailed investigation has led to definite conclusions regarding the etiology of pigeon septicaemia. The pigeons which were the victims of the attack were normally used for the production of fowl-pox vaccine. It was noted that, shortly after the virus ino- culations, pigeons rapidly commenced to die, the symptoms noted being fever and enteritis of an acute type. As the symptoms could not be ascribed to the virus inoculations, a bacterio logical examination of the diseased birds was made. A strain of S. enteritidis was readily isolated from the blood and organs of every pigeon examined, and on further biochemical and serological tests was proved to be S. enteritidis Gaertner. Significance attaches to the finding since pigeons are a popular and easily obtainable article of diet in India and as the organism in question is pathogenic for man, the potential danger of diseased or ' carrier ' birds is readily realised. MATERIALS AND METHODS The organism described was isolated in all cases from the heart-blood of pigeons after death, and four cultures were used for the experimental work. The numbers 124, 125, 127 and 115 refer to the numbers of the pigeons from which they were obtained. The cultures were subjected to a primary pathogenicity test and purified after repeated plating. No difficulty was noted in obtaining (231)
232 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III pure cultures to proceed with. The various anti-sera used for typing the Sal- monella, under study, were prepared from rabbits and the antigens from authentic stock strains. TABLE I Details of the cultures and anti-sera used for studying the agglutination reactions No. of culture Particulars regarding source Anti-serum prepared from Remarks 124 Pigeon inoculated with pox virus on 15th Oct., 1936 and died on 30th Oct., 1936. None No lesions of pox. 125 Pigeon inoculated with pox virus on 15th Oct., 1936 and died on 25th Oct., 1936. Do. Do. 127 Pigeon inoculated with pox virus on 15th Oct., 1936 and died on 31st Oct., 1936. Rabbit Pox lesions reproduced. 115 Pigeon inoculated with live culture isolated from Pigeon No. 124 (above) on 31st Oct., 1936 and died on 8th Nov.. 1936. Do. More pigeons inoculated along with this, died and Sal- monella recovered (Table IV). S. 52 Lister Institute . . . Do. Fowl typhoid (s. gallina- rum) . S. 53 Do. . . . Do. S. pullorum. S. 44 Do. . . . Do. S. enteritidis Gaertner. S. 51 Do. . . . None Paracoli (enteritidis) . S. 63 Local . . . . . Do. S. enteritidis from the Patho- logy Department of this Institute. S. 65 Local Spec. No. 537/32 Abor- tion material brood mare. Do. S. enteritidis. S. 84 Lister Institute . . . Do. S. enteritidis Limerick. S. 85 Do. . . . Do. S. enteritidis var. Danzig. S. 86 Do. . . . Do. S. enteritidis var. Dublin. S. 87 Do. . . . Do. S. enteritidis var. Rostock (Kauffmann). S. 88 Do. . . . Do. S. enteritidis var. Moscow. S. 97 Specific enteritidis in calves, Spec. No. 564/34. Rabbit S. enteritidis var. Dublin (Indian strain).
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. VII, Pt. III ] PLATE XV. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1 Twenty-four hour old agar culture of Salmonella from pigeons. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2 Smear stained by Gram's method, 24-hour old agar culture
SALMONELLA ENTERITIDIS ISOLATED FROM PIGEONS 233 MORPHOLOGY AND STAINING CHARACTERISTICS The organisms are indistinguishable from members of the Colon-typhoid group. The rods measure from 1.5 to 2.0 microns in length and from 0.5 to 0.8 of a micron in breadth. From agar cultures singles and pairs are seen. (Plate XV. Fig. 2.) Under dark ground illumination many pairs could be demons- trated with pronounced motility. It is gram-negative. CULTURAL CHARACTERISTICS Growth is luxuriant under aerobic conditions in media with a pH of 7.4. It propagates well at 37° C. in the incubator but at room temperature (14° C.) growth is rather poor. Agar.234 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III RESISTANCE As has been reported by various workers, members of the Salmonella group are not very resistant to heat. Four 24-hours old cultures from different pigeons were emulsified in normal saline solution, and the live bacterial emulsions thus prepared were subjected to heat in a water-bath, maintained at 58° C. for thirty minutes. At intervals of ten minutes, the heated material was sown on plain agar slants and incubated for seventy-two hours. In all cases the cultures were dead after thirty minutes' beating at 58° C. TABLE II Results of heating live-cultures at 58° C. in water-bath Culture from pigeon No. Results of sowing heated cultures on agar slants 10 minutes 20 minutes 30 minutes 115 . . . . Alive . . . Sterile . . . Sterile. 124 . . . . Sterile . . . Do. . . Do. 125 . . . . Do. . . Do. . . Do. 127 . . . . Alive . . . Alive . . . Do. FERMENTABLE MEDIA As sugar fermentation tests afford a fairly accurate means of differentiating the various species of organisms under the Salmonella genus, a number of carbo- hydrates were tested. Andrades' indicator was incorporated in the media for the detection of acidity. The tubes were incubated at 37° C. for ninety-six hours and the final readings then recorded. In most cases acid and gas formation were demonstrated after twenty-four hours except in xylose where fermentation occurred only after forty-eight hours. The four cultures of pigeon Salmonella as isolated from the heart-blood after death are detailed in Table III with the fermentation reactions. The usual symbols of " A " for acid and " A. G." for acid and gas are used.
SALMONELLA ENTERITIDIS ISOLATED FROM PIGEONS 235 TABLE III Showing fermentation reactions of Salmonella from pigeons Name of medium Cultures from pigeon numbers 124 125 127 115 Dextrose . . A. G. . . A. G. . . A. G. . . A. G. Lactose . . . Not attacked Not attacked Not attacked Not attacked. Sucrose . . . Not attacked Not attacked Not attacked Not attacked. Mannite . . . A. G. . . A. G. . . A. G. . . A. G. Xylose . . . A. G. . . A. G. . . A. G. . . A. G. Inosite . . . Nat attacked Not attacked Not attacked Not attacked. Dextrin . . . A. G. . . A. G. . . A. G. . . A. G. Raffinose . . . Not attacked Not attacked Not attacked Not attacked. Maltose . . . A. G. . . A. G. . . A. G. . . A. G. Levulose . . A. G. . . A. G. . . A. G. . . A. G. Dulcite . . . A. G. . . A. G. . . A. G. . . A. G. Arabinose . . A. G. . . A. G. . . A. G. . . A. G. Rhamnose . . A. G. . . A. G. . . A. G. . . A. G. Sorbite . . . A. G. . . A. G. . . A. G. . . A. G. Salicin . . . Not attacked Not attacked Not attacked Not attacked. According to Bergey and other standard books on " Determinative Bacterio- logy ", the cultures from the four different pigeons are identical, and may be classi- fied as S. enteritidis. As the creation of a new species under a particular genus would add con- fusion to the existing nomenclature, care was taken to type the species, under study, with already known members after a careful study of the cultural and biochemical characteristics of the organism. It seems reasonable to assume the pigeon strain to be one of S. enteritidis Gaertner. PATHOGENICITY As stated in Table I, pigeon No. 115 was injected with the organism isolated from pigeon No. 124 and after death, the same organism was recovered. Pigeons were inoculated subcutaneously with the culture as well as with organ emulsion L
236 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III from dead pigeons, with fatal results, in many cases attended with a rise in tem- perature and persisting diarrhoea. (Table IV). A dose of 1 c.c. of a saline emulsion of agar surface growth twenty-four hours old, containing about 300 millions bacteria per c.c. was injected while testing the pathogenicity and death occurred invariably after a week. A rabbit, when intravenously injected, died after forty-eight hours, and marked fever and diarrhoea were seen. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CHART NO 1. Temperature chart of Pigeon No. 146 injected with live-culture of Salmonella isolated from Pigeon No. 115.
SALMONELLA ENTERITIDIS ISOLATED FROM PIGEONS 237 [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] CHART NO. 2. Temperature chart of Rabbit No. 103 injected intravenously with the Salmonella from Pigeon No. 115.
238 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III TABLE IV No. of pigeon inocula- ted Date of inoculation Material inoculated Route of injection Result Remarks 113 30th October, 1936 Organ emulsion from pigeon No. 124. Subcut. Died on 13th Novem- ber, 1936. Salmonella recovered. 114 Do. . Do. . Do. Survived. SALMONELLA ENTERITIDIS ISOLATED FROM PIGEONS 239 represent complete, partial and trace agglutination respectively. The homolog- ous titres of the samples of immune sera, when submitted to test, are given in Table V. TABLE V Homologous agglutinin titres of immune sera Particulars of anti-serum Antigen Agglutinin titre after incubation for 24 hours at 37°C. Antigen control Remarks Dilutions 1/10. 1/50. 1/100. 1/500. 1/1,000. 1/5,000. 1/10,000. Pigeon No. 115 Salmonella . Homologous . C C C C C C 240 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III TABLE VI Pigeon Salmonella antigens vs. anti-sera for different Salmonella species Particulars of anti-serum Antigen Salmonella from Agglutination titre after incubation for 24 hours at 37°C. Antigen control Dilutions of serum 1/10. 1/50 1/100. 1/500. 1/1,000. 1/5,000. 1/10,000. S. 97. S. enteritidis var. Dublin Calf. Pigeon No. 115 . . C C C P SALMONELLA ENTERITIDIS ISOLATED FROM PIGEONS 241 As recorded in Table VII, S. 97 anti-serum when absorbed by pigeon No. 115 Salmonella, lost a considerable amount of its agglutinating anti-body for the specific antigen and this suggests some similarity between the agglutinogen fraction of the two. The titre was unaffected in the case of absorption of S. 44. TABLE VII Agglutinin absorption tests Particulars of serum Antigen used for absorp- tion Agglutinin titre after incubation for 24 hours at 37° C. Remarks Anti-serum for S. enteritidis Gaertner. S. 44, absorbed by pigeon No. 115, Sal- monella organism. Pigeon No. 115 Salmonella. Neg. 1/20 . 242 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III TABLE VIII Cross agglutinin titre of pigeon No. 115. Salmonella anti-serum against various types of authentic Salmonella antigens No. Antigen Type of organism Agglutinin titre after incubation for 24 hours at 37°C. Antigen control Dilutions of the serum 1/10 1/50 1/100 1/500 1/1,000 1/5,000 1/10,000 S. 44 S. enteritidis Gaertner . . T ... ... ... ... ... ... ... S. 97 S. enteritidis var. Dublin . . P ... ... ... ... ... ... ... S. 51 Paracoli enteritidis . . . C P ... ... ... ... ... ... S. 63 S. enteritidis from the Pathology Department of this Institute. C C C C C P ... ... S. 65 S. enteritidis, abortion material from brood mare. C C C C C C P ... S. 85 S. enteritidis var. Danzig . C T ... ... ... ... ... S. 86 S. enteritidis var. Dublin P T ... ... ... ... ... ... S. 87 S. enteritidis var. Rostock (Kauff- mann). T ... ... ... ... ... ... ... S. 88 S. enteritidis var. Moscow . . C T ... ... ... S. 84 S. enteritidis Limerick . . C C C P ... ... ... ... S. 93 S. anatum . . . . C P T ... ... ... ... S. 52 S. gallinarum . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... S. 53 S. pullorun . . . . P ... ... ... ... ... ... ... SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 1. In a batch of pigeons inoculated with experimental pigeon-pox virus at this Institute, deaths from a septicæmic disease occurred and from the heart- blood of such pigeons, a gram negative bacterium was isolated. 2. The cultures from the diseased pigeons were, on their cultural and patho- genic merits, subjected to a detailed study. 3. Agglutination, cross agglutination and agglutinin absorption tests con- ducted with authentic types of the genus Salmonella suggest a marked serological relationship with two stock strains of S. enteritidis isolated from animals at this Institute. REFERENCES Bergey, D. H. (1934). Manual of Determinative Bacteriology. pp. 368-381. Gaertner, A. (1888), referred to by Kelser, Manual of Veterinary Bacteriology. Kelser, R. A. (1933). Manual of Veterinary Bacteriology. pp. 196-208. White, P. B. (1929). A System of Bacteriology. 4, pp. 86-153.
ON A PIROPLASM OF THE INDIAN CAT (FELIS DOMESTICUS) * BY M. Y. MANGRULKAR, M.Sc. M.R.C.V.S., D.T.V.M. (EDIN.) Assistant Pathologist, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 14th April 1937) (With Plate XVI) ON the 17th March 1936, the carcase of one of a number of cats obtained from Bareilly (U. P.) flor experimental work at the Imperial Veterinary Research In- stitute, was received for autopsy in the post-mortem room. The animal was in a poor condition; otherwise it showed no external signs of disease. Apart from a general somewhat anaemic condition, the internal organs showed little of interest superficially. Slight congestion of the kidneys, however, was noticed. The bowels, too, showed hyperaemic patches. No evidence of icterus or haemoglobinuria was seen at autopsy. From the helminthological point of view, the carcase was full of interest as it harboured the following different parasites in varying numbers :244 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III parasites, the infection was by no means of a severe degree ; so that many fields had to be examined before it was conclusively ascertained that the parasite was a piro- plasm. The accompanying diagram (Plate XVI) drawn with the aid of the camera lucida shows a representative group of infected red blood corpuscles collected from different fields. The individual parasite was small, being on an average 1.5 µ the actual size varying from less than one µ to 2.50 µ.. Morphologically it resembled to some extent the one described by Davis [1929] as Babesia felis from the Sudanese wild cat (Felis ocreata). Small and large, rounded or ovoid forms, sometimes vacuolated (ring-forms), were common, one or more (up to four) being present in one red blood corpuscle. Amoeboid and dividing forms (Plate XVI, a) were very rare. Not infrequently typical pear-shaped parasites were seen. These were either single or, as was more often the case, in pairs ; sometimes the pair was markedly divergent as in Babesia bovis ; rarely three or four parasites were seen in one red blood corpuscle. In no instance, however, a cruciform arrangement suggestive of division into four, as seen by Davis and by Wenyon and Hamerton [1930] was noticed. The chromatin had no fixed place in the parasite but was inclined to be peripherally situated in the rounded forms and towards the blunt end in the pear-forms. Anaemic changes were observed in the blood smears. Realising that the material was not fresh, blood smears were made from time to time from the other living and apparently healthy cats, and a careful search was made for piroplasms in their blood smears and for ectoparasites on, their bodies. The result was negative in every case. But the presence of intracorpuscular bodies resembling Anaplasma marginale was detected in the blood smears of all the cats. The finding of these bodies is in conformity with that of Davis [1929] who doubts if they " bear any relation to the piroplasm " and adds " whether they are actual parasites or merely Jolly bodies it is difficult to determine ". Lingard and Jennings in 1904 mentioned the occurrence of piroplasms in various species of animals including lizards, fowls, cats, camels and elephants. They even went to the extent of recording this parasite from a man. These obser vations have not been confirmed and for certain reasons their article is open to much criticism. From their coloured plates and description of some of the para- sites it seems highly probable that the authors were, in some cases, dealing with what were really not piroplasms ; indeed, in the human case the parasites appear to be Plasmodium vivax. Unfortunately their " preliminary note " was never modified, as they had proposed to do. No description or illustration of their feline piroplasm is available and there appears, therefore, enough justification to believe with Davis [1929] that until the latter's paper appeared in 1929 no piro- plasm had " been found in any member of the Felidae ".
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. VII, Pt. III ] PLATE XVI. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] Representative group of infected red blood corpuseles collected from different fields.
ON A PIROPLASM OF THE INDIAN CAT 245 In 1930, Wenyon and Hamerton described from the Bay Lynx (Felis rufa) a piroplasm which " resembles closely " Babesia felis of Davis. Subsequently Carpano [1934] recorded a new piroplasm from the Puma (Felis concor) resembling B. gibsoni, and asserted that it too was transmitted from the local felines (presum- ably including F. domesticus and F. ocreata), which were carriers, by the tick Rhipicephalus simus. He proposed the name Babesiella felis for his parasite and would have the parasite of Davis called Nuttallia felis, perhaps because it produces cross-forms. But Wenyon points out: " the difference in size and in the number of daughter individuals produced are not sufficient grounds for the recognition of a new genus ". It is evident, however, that Carpano was dealing with a parasite entirely different from the one described by the author and by Wenyon and Hamerton. There appears to have been no further publication on feline piroplasms. In the present case, as already pointed out, a material difference from B. felis of Davis is shown by the absence of cross-forms, division being into two daughter parasites. The occurrence of cross-forms is corroborated by Wenyon and Hamerton in their description of the parasite from F. rufa. They leave little doubt as to the mode of division of the parasite into four daughter individuals, which is similar to that in B. equi. They admit, however, that even in their heavily infected case " the cross-form are few in number, but smaller forms showing division into two daughter individuals were fairly frequently seen ". From this it appears that in the Bay lynx the parasite divides usually into two, the cross-shaped arrangement resulting from a departure from this normal mode of division. Since in the Indian cat no evidence of division into four, or the presence of cross-forms, was encountered, the rare occurrence of four parasites in one eryth- rocyte may have arisen much as it sometimes does in Babesia bigeminum or B. canis. Indeed, the author has seen, although not commonly, infected red blood cells (Plate XVI, b) showing coupled pear-shaped parasites one or both of which are suggestive of stages preparatory to further division. From the description and illustrations of B. felis of Davis and from the suggest- ed resemblance of the piroplasm of Carpano with B. gibsoni, it would appear that the two parasites are similar but entirely different from those described from F. rufa by Wenyon and Hamerton, and from the Indian cat in this paper. It is, however, not clear why, in spite of the evidence of division, " fairly frequently ", of the parasite from F. rufa into double forms, Wenyon and Hamerton have found it comparable to B. felis [Davis, 1929] wherein no such forms have been described or illustrated. The division into four as described by Wenyon and Hamerton was entirely wanting in the Indian cat, and therefore, the author believes his parasite to be different from those hitherto described but refrains, in the absence of suitable material to carry out further studies by inoculation work, from referring it to a new species. M 2
246 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III ACKNOWLEDGMENT The author is indebted to Mr. F. Ware, C.I.E., F.R.C.V.S., F.N.I., I.V.S., Director, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, for the interest shown in this case, to Dr. H. N. Ray, Ph.D., Systematic Protozoologist, for helpful suggestions and criticism, and to Mr. H. D. Srivastava, M.Sc., Offg. Helminthologist, for identification of the helminth parasites. REFERENCES Carpano, M. (1934). Abstract in Vet. Bull. 6, 584. Davis, L. J. (1929). On a Piroplasm of the Sudanese Wild Cat. Trans. Roy. Soc. Trop. Med. Hyg. 22, 523. Lingard A., and Jennings E. (1904). A Preliminary Note on a Piroplasmosis found in Man and in some of the lower Animals. Ind. Med. Gaz. 39, 161. Wenyon, C. M. (1926). Protozoology 2, 1009. Wenyon C. M., and Hamerton, A. E. (1930). Trans. Roy. Soc. Med. Hyg. 24, 7.
DETERMINATION OF FATS IN BIOLOGICAL MATERIAL II.248 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III fication of the material. Reference may also be made to the recent work of Horwitt, Cowgill and Mendel [1936] on a method of determination of the fat- content of spinach leaves. They attribute their failure to obtain results by directly saponifying vegetable tissues to a probable resistance offered by the cellulose structures of the plant. It is apparent from the brief review given above that none of these workers considered the possibility of formation of a fresh quantity of fatty acids in the alkali digest of the material. Sufficient evidence has, however, been adduced in the previous paper to indicate such formation, under the conditions obtaining in the usual digestion with hot alkali, of samples of ragi straw and faeces. As this technique of fat-determination is of common use, it has been considered desirable to carry out further investigations to test its reliability and the results obtained are given in this paper. EXPERIMENTAL Repetitions of the alkali hydrolysis with ragi straw and faeces having yielded confirmatory results, a study of its effect on pure carbohydrates was undertaken. The experiments reported here were all conducted on pure specimens of cotton- wool, filter-paper, starch and dextrin as representing some types. It was thought advisable at the outset to determine the ether-extract content of these substances. Weighed quantities of the four samples in paper thimbles were subjected to a continuous extraction for eighteen hours in Soxhlet tubes. To test the completion of the extraction it was continued for another thirty-six hours. The results ob- tained were as follows :DETERMINATION OF FATS IN BIOLOGICAL MATERIAL 249 with petroleum ether show that the materials used were practically free from fat, the extraction with ethyl-ether yielded slightly different results. It is, however, sufficiently satisfactory for the purpose of this experiment to find that a continuation of the extraction over three times the period did not yield further quantities of extract. Having thus determined the limits of the possible errors that might result from the impurity already present in the pure substances, they were subjected to the usual alkali hydrolysis treatment. The modified technique described in the first communication [Seshan, 1935] was followed. The method in brief was as follows :250 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III In every such case, the titration against alkali was quantitatively titrated back with standard acid. Apparently the variation was due to the carbon, dioxide absorbed by the distillate. After the first hydrolysis and ether extraction the residual substances were subjected to an identical treatment a second time, as was previously done in the case of ragi straw and faeces (loc cit). This resulted in a fresh yield of volatile and non-volatile extractives. The results obtained in the two treatments are presented in Table III. TABLE III Action of alkali on pure carbohydrates Volatile acids and ether extractives expressed as per cent No. of test Nature of test Analysis Cotton- Wool Filter- paper Starch Dextrin First hydro- lysis. Steam distil- lation. Volatile acids . 1.78 2.07 2.12 3.37 Soxhlet ex- traction. Non-volatile acids. 3.07 4.26 0.64 2.24 Second hydro- lysis. Steam distil- lation. Volatile acids . 1.59 2.33 0.48 0.72 Soxhlet ex- traction. Non-volatile acids. 6.88 21.36 5.97 10.35 Evidently the appearance of these fatty acids is not due to the small amounts of impurities originally present. Control distillations were carried out and it was found that none of the four untreated carbohydrates gave any titration for volatile acids while the hydrolysis yielded large quantities. The increased yield of non-volatile fatty acids on a re-hydrolysis of the previously digested material also shows that the source of this fresh yield is none other than the pure carbo- hydrates themselves.
DETERMINATION OF FATS IN BIOLOGICAL MATERIAL 251 It is of interest here to note the composition of the non-volatile ether ex- tractives which were formed by the action of alkali on these carbohydrates. In Table IV the analytical data are given :252 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III This objection to the alkali hydrolysis method is, perhaps, a circums- tance which should reasonably be anticipated from the elaborate researches of Nef [1907-14] on the action of alkalies on carbohydrates. In the monograph on Carbo- hydrates and Glucosides, Armstrong [1924] states that when carbohydrates are kept with alkali hydroxides at 37°C., the optical rotation of the solution decreases and the acidity increases. In reviewing the work of Nef [1907-14], he further adds that any carbohydrate in weak alkaline solution, in the presence of air or other oxidising agent, results in a mixture containing among several other compounds acids such as carbonic, formic, lactic, hydroxybutyric, hydroxyvaleric and hydroxyhexoic, as also some resins. In conclusion, it may be stated that, where carbo-hydrate material is involved, the use of the Liebermann process of alkali digestion for fat-determination may appreciably vitiate the results obtained. SUMMARY Previous work by the same author on the alkali hydrolysis method, as applied to ragi straw and faeces, having indicated a formation of fresh quantities of fatty acids, similar experiments were undertaken with pure carbohydrates, such as cotton, cellulose, starch and dextrin. The results obtained were in complete accord with the findings previously recorded. It is, therefore, suggested that whenever carbohydrate material is involved, the direct saponification of the tissue with alkali should be abandoned. The author gratefully thanks Dr. F. J. Warth for his abiding interest in the work as also Dr. K. C. Sen, for his helpful encouragement. REFERENCES Armstrong, E. F. (1924). The Carbohydrates and the Glucosides, pp. 57-59. Eckstein, H. C. and Treadwell, C. R. (1935). J. Biol. Chem. 112, 1, 374. Horwitt, M. K., Cowgill, G. R., and Mendel, L. B. (1936). J. Nutrition 12, 3, 265, Kumagawa, M. and Suto, K. (1908). Biochem, Zeitsch. 8, 212-347. Liebermann, L. and Szekely, S. (1898). Pfluger's Archiv. 72, 360-366. Nef, J. U. (1907). Annalen 357, 214-312. Nef., J. U. (1910). Annalen 376, 1-119. Nef., J. U. (1914). Annalen 403, 204-283. Seshan, P. A. (1935). Ind. J. Vet. Sci. and Anim. Husb. 5, 355-363. Sperry, W. M. (1926-27). J. Biol. Chem. 71, 2, 361. Tidwell, H. C., and Holt Jr., L. E. (1936). J. Biol. Chem. 112, 2, 605,
ABSTRACTS Finding "Par" for dairy cows. NORDEN, E. C. (Hoard's Dairyman, 81, No. 19, 492) CHARLES STAFF, an animal nutrition authority, has prepared a series of standard production graphs for dairy cows as a result of fifteen years' accurate record keeping. Exact records were kept of hereditary ability to produce milk, age, health and con- dition, supply of water, care and management, environment, weather conditions, char- acter and quantity of the ration, date of freshening, and date of breeding for each cow. By noting changes in these factors it became possible to handle these cows so as to obtain top production. In arriving at a standard basis or ' par ', all abnormal records were eliminated. In all, seventeen peak productions ranging from 25 to 65 lbs. were classified. The re- cords were further classified according to date of breeding which governs the length of lactation period. From a knowledge of peak yields, entire lactation yield and days in milk, standard milk-production graphs were made, for each set of data which proved true under prac- tical conditions. The amount of milk given at the peak of production is the guide or index for the group in which each cow belongs. The production curve of cows varies greatly accord- ing to their peak; the higher the peak production the faster the cow declines in milk flow and cows can be compared truly only by knowing their peak production and then comparing their performance on the identical days of their lactation periods. The records further indicate that early breeding, leading to a 300-day lactation period, is generally more profitable over a number of years. [C. E. M.] Notes on feeding (mineral supply). CHARLES CROWTHER. (J. Min. Agric. (England) 43, No. 10, 991) THE author considers that the tendency to indiscriminate additions of minerals to rations has had detrimental effects in many instances ; their proper use should be based on a knowledge of the mineral requirements of animals and the mineral content of food-stuffs. A balance between the individual mineral elements in rations should also be considered. Any considerable excess of bases over acids or vice versa in a ration is undesirable ; besides, interrelation between certain elements like Ca and P and Na and K should also be taken into account, and in working these the percentage figures for the various minerals must be corrected in proportion to the respective chemical equivalents for the element concerned. (253)
254 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III Regarding what is the correct balance (or ratio) to aim at, the best temporary ex- pedient to adopt is to take the mineral matter of milk as standard. In the light of such a comparison the mineral supplements most commonly needed are lime and salt. High-yielding milch cows require 2 to 2½ oz. of finely-ground calcium carbonate per head per day, and growing cattle if they are not receiving a fair amount of good hay require 1 to 1¾ oz. of calcium carbonate. [C. E. M.] The influence of the physical state of the fat on the calculation of solids from the specific gravity of milk. PAUL, F. SHARP and RAY, G. HART. (J. of Dairy Sci. 19, 683) THE previous temperature history of the milk influences its specific gravity at 15°C. This effect is due to variations in the physical state of the fat. The magnitude of the effect increases with the fat-content. The determination of the specific gravity at 30°C., after previous warming to 45°C., for one-half minute is recommended as a method which will insure that the determina- tion is made while the fat is in the liquid state. The total solids are then worked out by the equation :ABSTRACTS 255 For the production of milk it is essential to supply in the food those amino-acids present in the milk protein which cannot be synthesised in the animal body. From the data given it is evident that certain food-proteins, viz., proteins in the form of spring grass, silage from summer grass, low temperature dried blood meal, and pea-meal re- semble milk-protein in their content of amino-acids more closely than do linseed cake, decorticated earthnut cake, maize or oats. For maximum milk production 0.5 lb. digestible true protein is required per 10 lbs. milk, but with proteins of high biological value, which supply all the essential amino-acids in the proper proportions for milk production, the amount does not exceed 0.44 lb. digestible crude protein per 10 lbs. of milk. It is uncertain whether any part of the protein can be replaced by non-protein nitrogen. [N. C. D. G.] The isolation of Brucella abortus from the milk of cows with negative blood reactions to the agglutination test. DOYLE, T. M. (J. Comp. Path. Ther. 49, 320-327) A LARGE number of samples of milk were tested from cows in Brucella-infected herds that failed to give an indication of infection on their blood test. Blood and composite samples of milk were collected from all cows under examination and sero- logical tests of the blood were carried out in order to preclude the examination of milk from positive cases. Milk from each non-reactor cow was centrifuged and 2 c.c. of the cream and the deposit inoculated intramuscularly in two guinea-pigs. The milk whey was tested for the presence of brucella agglutinins. Cultures were made, on liver agar, from each spleen of guinea-pigs about the forty-fourth day after inocula- tion and incubated for ten days under 10 per cent CO2 at 37°C. An agglutination test of serum from each guinea-pig was carried out. The antigen employed was made from a seventy-two hour old " smooth " non-thermo-agglutinable strain of Brucella abortus on liver broth culture and the density was adjusted by the addition of a forty- eight hour old washed liver agar growth. A water-clear whey was prepared by clott- ing centrifuged milk in the incubator to which rennet was added. The examination of 309 milk samples carried out by guinea-pig inoculation revealed the presence of Brucella abortus in samples from two cows whose blood proved negative on aggluti- nation test. In one case milk from a positive case was tested from which the organism was isolated. One sample of whey yielded a titre of 1 : 100, but in this case the milk proved negative on guinea-pig test. With a positive blood titre of two test guinea- pigs the cultural examination of their spleens was negative. The author carried out serological tests of 684 cows during the course of this work and the average herd infection was found to be about 35 per cent. The possibility of the infection of the udder of cows with Br. abortus showing negative or low titre is discussed. [J. A. I.] The breeding media of some common flies. THOMSEN, MATHIAS AND HAMMER, OLE. (Bull. Ent. Res., 27, 559-587) THE observations recorded in this paper were carried out in Denmark, the two main species of flies concerned being the house-fly Musca domestica and the stable- fly Stomoxys calcitrans. Under natural conditions, the former was found to breed,
256 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III in order of preference, in fresh pig-dung, bedding of calf-boxes, horse-boxes and pig- sties, whereas horse-manure was of inferior importance in this respect. (These obser- vations are of interest in view of the general belief that M. domestica prefers horse- manure to any other nidus.) As regards S. calcitrans, the larvae of this species were of infrequent occurrence in horse-manure, pig-dung and cow-dung, but they bred chiefly in the bedding of calf-boxes and to a smaller extent in humid remains of straw, etc., in corners of stables. The authors also carried out a series of oviposition experiments to determine the relative attractiveness of pig-dung, horse-dung, calf-dung and cow-dung for gravid flies, these materials being exposed in jars placed in the open air, pig-sties and calf- boxes. In the case of M. domestica, little difference was observed between pig-dung and horse-manure in their power to attract ovipositing females, for both were highly attractive. On the other hand, calf-dung was much less favoured as a medium for egg-laying, while cow-dung did not contain any eggs at all. As regards S. calcitrans, it preferred horse-manure and calf-dung for egg-laying and only a small number of eggs were laid in pig-dung and cow-dung. From the results of these experiments and also from thier general observations, the authors conclude that " calf-stalls in practice have the greatest production of Stomoxys ". In discussing the possible reason why S. calcitrans rarely bred in horse-manure in manure-pits, while under experi- mental conditions they freely oviposited in this material, the authors point out that the high temperature produced by fermentation in large heaps of manure probably exercises a deterrent effect on ovipositing flies. As for the absence of Stomoxys larvae even in manure in horse-boxes, the authors consider this as being due to the fact that stable-flies, as a rule, concentrate in cattle sheds, where they usually find suitable material for oviposition and are, therefore, not drawn to horse-manure. [S. K. S.] Differential diagnosis in plant poisoning. STEYN, D. G. (J. S. Afr. Vet. Med. Assn. 7, 226-237) IN view of the existing difficulty in arriving at a definite diagnosis of poisoning of which the author has had considerable experience in South Africa, an attempt has been made here to discuss some of the mineral and vegetable poisonings in which symptoms and post-mortem appearances, similar to those seen in infectious and other diseases, appear. The author has dealt, in a regular sequence, with the various diag- nostic criteria as history of outbreaks, symptoms, post-mortem appearances and histology of lesions. It has been pointed out that a single toxic substance may pro- duce peracute, acute, subacute or chronic poisoning depending upon the amounts ingested, and upon the conditions under which poisoning has taken place, thus giving rise to remarkable variations and even opposite effects on the animal system. That the symptoms and post-mortem appearances in heavy outbreaks of conical fluke in- festation in sheep and trichostrongylosis in blackhead Persians may resemble to a re- markable degree those seen in cases of poisoning by gastro-intestinal irritants is mentioned. While the fact of a large number of animals being taken ill or dying at the same time, severe purging and occurrence of death soon after the drinking of water (as in Dichapetalum cymosum poisoning) are suggestive of poisoning, the possibility of any microbic infection should invariably be eliminated by the microscopic examination
ABSTRACTS 257 of blood and spleen smears. In outbreaks of infectious diseases, generally only a few animals take ill at the same time, and more cases follow later on, and fever is a frequent concomitant. Excepting cases of poisoning with gastro-intestinal irritants, fever is not usually seen in poisoning. All cases of reported sudden deaths are not actually so. Isolated cases of sudden death may take place, pointing to anthrax or poisoning or a large number of animals may die suddenly or within a short period. Outbreaks may be (a) characterised by sudden deaths continuing to occur in a herd or flock for a prolonged period in the course of which very few or no animals are seen sick, or, (b) outbreaks of disease may set in with sudden deaths but in which symptoms are exhibited later during varying periods before death. Under group (a) anthrax, poisoning with Vangueria pygmaea (long period of latency sudden deaths continue for weeks in spite of grazing having been changed repeatedly), Dichapetalum cymosum (already mentioned above), and with hydrocyanic acid (mainly through eating wilted grasses) receive attention. A feature of Vangueria poisoning is that the highest mortality occurs in pregnant animals, and in those worked, while in chronic cases small greyish fibrotic areas are seen in the heart muscle, or the heart walls may be thin and fibrotic. HCN poisoning is associated with hoven, and is disclosed by chemical analysis of the ruminal contents. Sudden deaths may be caused by many other poisons, and by diseases, like peracute lamsiekte, heart water, anaplasmosis, etc. Regarding group (b), where outbreaks start with sudden deaths and symptoms develop in the later stages of their course, a large number of diseases are involved. Without dealing with them separately, the author passes on to the pathognomonic symptoms of various poisoning, including arsenic, cotyledonosis (torti-collis), cro- talariasis (elongated hoofs), and poisoning with Equisetum ramosissimum, Malva parviflora, Geigeria (Vomiting), Senecio, strychnine, Tribulus (general icterus and photo-sensitisation), Chrysocoma tenuifolia (alopecia in kids and lambs). Toxic agents and diseases with similar symptoms, and exhibiting similar post- mortem appearances are then discussed separately and in detail and this discussion should be consulted, in original, when required. Regarding symptoms of photo- sensitisation, it is stated that they may occur in many cases where the efficiency of the liver is decreased and where the animals have access to feeds rich in chlorophyll, and that these symptoms can be artificially produced by ligating the bile duct and supplying feeds rich in chlorophyll. [S. C. A. D.]
PUBLICATIONS OF THE IMPERIAL COUNCIL OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH, INDIA [Prices are inclusive of packing and Indian Postage] 1. Agriculture and Live-stock in India ICAR. 1. A bi-monthly journal of agriculture and animal husbandry for the general reader interested in agriculture or live-stock in India or the Tropics. (Established 1931. Published in January, March, May, July, September and November. Prepayable subscription Rs. 6 or 9 s. 9 d. per annum. Price per part Rs. 2 or 3 s. 6 d.) Volumes I to VI complete are available. 2. The Indian Journal of Agricultural Science ICAR. 5 A bi-monthly scientific journal of agriculture and the allied sciences mainly devoted to the publication of the results of original research and field experiments. (Established 1931. Published in February, April, June, August, October and December. Prepayable subscription Rs. 15 or 24 s. per annum. Price per part Rs. 3 or 5 s. 3 d.) Volumes I to VI complete are available. 3. The Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry ICAR. 6 A quarterly journal for the publication of scientific matter relating to the health, nutrition and breeding of live-stock. (Established 1931. Pub- lished in March, June, September and December. Prepayable subscrip- tion Rs. 6 or 9 s. 9 d. Price per part Rs. 2 or 3 s. 6 d.) Volumes I to VI complete are available. 4. Scientific Monographs of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research ICAR. 10.1 No. 1. The Fungi of India, By E. J. Butler, C.I.E., D.Sc., M.B., F.R.S., and G. R. Bisby, Ph. D. (1931). Price Rs. 6-12-0 or 11 s. ICAR. 10.2 No. 2. Life-histories of Indian Microlepidoptera, Second Series : Alucitidæ (Peterophoridæ, Tortricina and Gelechiadæ), By T. Bainbrigge Fletcher, R.N., F.L.S., F.E.S., F.Z.S. (1932). Price Rs. 3-4-0 or 5 s. 6 d. ICAR. 10.3 No. 3. The Open Pan System of White-Sugar Manufacture, By R. C. Srivas- tava, B.Sc. (1935, 2nd edition.) Price Rs. 3-2-0 or 5 s. 6 d. ICAR. 10.4 No. 4. Life-histories of Indian Microlepidoptera: Cosmopterygidæ to Neopseustidæ, By T. Bainbrigge Fletcher, R.N., F.L.S., F.E.S., F.Z.S. (1933). Price Rs. 4-8-0 or 7 s. 6 d. ICAR. 10.5 No. 5. The Bombay Grasses, By E. J. Blatter, S. J., Ph. D., F.L.S. and C. McCann, F.L.S. Illustrated by R. K. Bhide. Price Rs. 20-12-0 or 32 s. 6 d. ICAR. 10.6 No. 6. Helminth Parasites of the Domesticated Animals in India, By G. D. Bhalerao, M.Sc. Price Rs. 7-12-0 or 13 s. 3 d. (259)
260 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III ICAR. 10.7 No. 7. Influence of Manures on the Wilt Disease of Cajanus indicus Spreng. and the Isolation of Types Resistant to the Disease, By W. McRae, M.A., D.Sc. (Edin.), F.L.S. and F. J. F. Shaw, D.Sc. (Lond.), A.R.C.S., F.L.S. (1933). Price Rs. 2-4-0 or 4 s. 3 d. ICAR. 10.8 No. 8. The Silk Industry of Japan with Notes on Observations in the United States of America, England, France and Italy, By C. C. Ghosh, B.A., F.E.S. (1933). Price Rs. 4 or 6 s. 8 d. ICAR. 10.9 No. 9. Mechanical Cultivation in India. A History of the Large-scale Experiments carried out by Burmah-Shell Oil Storage and Distribut- ing Company of India, Ltd., By C. P. G. Wade. Price Rs. 3-14-0 or 6 s. 6 d. ICAR. 10.10 No. 10. The Spotted Boll-Worms of Cotton in South Gujarat, By B. P. Deshpande and N. T. Nadkarny, B.Ag. Price Rs. 5-14-0 or 9s. 6 d. ICAR. 10.11 No. 11. Investigations on the Course and Distribution of the Nerves supply- ing Levator anguli scapuli and Rhomboideus muscles and the form ation of the Phrenic Nerve in the Ox, with Observations on certain Anatomical Deviations, By H. N. Chelva Ayyangar, G.M.V.C. Price Rs. 4-10-0 or 7 s. 9 d. 5. Miscellaneous Bulletins of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research ICAR. 8.1 No. 1. List of Publications on Indian Entomology (1930), By the Imperial Entomologist, Pusa. Price As. 14 or 1 s. 6 d. ICAR. 8.2 No. 2. List of Publications on Indian Entomology (1931), By the Imperial Entomologist, Pusa. Price As. 8 or 10 d. ICAR. 8.3 No. 3. List of Publications on Indian Entomology (1932), By the Imperial Entomologist, Pusa. Price As. 12 or 1 s. 3 d. ICAR. 8.4 No. 4. Host Plant Index of Indo-Ceylonese Coccidae, By S. Ramachandran, L.Ag. and T. V. Ramakrishna Ayyar, B.A., Ph.D., F.Z.S. Price Rs. 1-10-0 or 2s. 9 d. ICAR. 8.5 No. 5. List of Publications on Indian Entomology (1933), compiled by the Imperial Entomologist, Pusa. Price As. 9 or 1 s. ICAR. 8.6 No. 6. Bee-keeping, By C. C. Ghosh, B.A., F.E.S. (3rd Edition.) Price Rs. 1-14-0 or 3 s. 3 d. ICAR. 8.7 No. 7. List of Publications on Indian Entomology (1934), compiled by the Imperial Entomologist Pusa. Price Rs. 1-2-0 or 2 s. ICAR. 8.8 No. 8. Selected Clinical Articles, Part I, By G. K. Sharma, G.P.V.S. and R. L. Kaura. Price As. 8 or 10 d. ICAR 8.9 No. 9. Statistical Methods and their Application to Agronomy : A biblio- graphy, By K. K. Guha Roy. Price Rs. 2-2-0 or 4 s. ICAR. 8.10 No. 10. Diseases of Sugarcane and Methods for their Control, By L. S. Subramaniam. Price Re. 1 As. 14 or 3 s. 3 d. ICAR. 8.11 No. 11. Tables of Standard Errors of Mendelian Ratios, compiled by Swarn Singh Purewal, M.Sc., Ph.D. (Cornell) and P. Krishna Rao, L. Ag. Price As. 12 or 1 s. 3 d.
PUBLICATIONS OF THE IMPERIAL COUNCIL OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH 261 ICAR. 8.12 No. 12. List of Publications on the Botany of Indian Crops, Part II, for the period 1928-32, By R. D. Bose. Price Rs. 3-6-0 or 6s. 9 d. ICAR. 8.13 No. 13. Two New Statistical Tables based upon Fisher's ' t ', By M. Vaidya- nathan. Price As. 6 or 8 d. ICAR. 8.14 No. 14. List of Publications on Indian Entomology (1935), compiled by the Imperial Entomologist, Pusa. Price Re. 1-4-0 or 2 s. ICAR. 8.15 No. 15. Selected Clinical Articles, Part II, By G. K. Sharma, R. L. Kaura, S. Ganapathy Iyer, G. S. Khan and S. Mangrulkar. (In the Press.) 6. Annual Report of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research ICAR. 12.31 Annual Report of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research for the years 1929-30 and 1930-31. Price As. 12 or 1 s. 3 d. ICAR. 12.32 Annual Report of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research for the year 1931-32. Price As. 6 or 8 d. ICAR. 12.33 Annual Report of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research for the year 1932-33. Price As. 6 or 8 d. (Out of Stock.) ICAR. 12.34 Annual Report of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research for the year 1933-34. Price Re. 1-8-0 or 2 s. 6 d. ICAR. 12.35 Annual Report of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research for the year 1934-35. Price Re. 1 or 1 s. 9 d. ICAR. 12.36 Annual Report of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research for the year 1935-36. Price As. 14 or 1 s. 6 d. ICAR. 12.37. Annual Report of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research for the year 1936-37. Price Re. 1-2-0 or 2 s. 7. Agriculture and Animal Husbandry in India (called Review of Agricul- tural Operations in India up to 1933.) ICAR. 9.29 Review of Agricultural Operations in India, 1928-29. Price Rs. 3-2-0 or 5 s. 6 d. (Out of stock.) ICAR. 9.31 Review of Agricultural Operations in India, 1929262 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, III VRI. 1 A description of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, and its Sub-station, the Imperial Veterinary Serum Institute, Izatnagar, By F. Ware, F.R.C.V.S. Price Rs. 1-4-0 or 2 s. ARI.T.187 The Production of Cigarette Tobacco by Flue-curing, By. F. J. F. Shaw, C.I.E., D.Sc., A.R.C.S., F.L.S. and Kashi Ram. Imp. Inst. Agri. Res., Pusa Bull, No. 187. Reprinted (1935). Price Re. 1 or 1 s. 9 d. ICAR. 16 A Handbook of Statistics for use in Plant Breeding and Agricultural Problems By F. J. F. Shaw, C.I.E., D. Sc., A.R.C.S., F.L.S. Price Rs. 4-6-0 or 7 s. 3 d. Copies of the above publications can be had from :ORIGINAL ARTICLES CROSS-BRED AND GRADE DAIRY CATTLE IN INDIA BY MAJOR C. E. MACGUCKIN, M.B.E., H.D.A. Assistant Director, Dairy Farms, Northern Circle, Lahore Cantonment (Received for publication on 8th September 1937) (With Plates XVII-XX) CROSS-BREEDING CROSS-BREEDING means the crossing of different breeds; but the term, as generally used in India, refers to the mating of a European breed (Bos taurus) with the indigenous cattle (Bos indicus) of the country. It is in this restricted sense that the term is used in this article. Therefore, the cross-bred is an animal with 50 per cent European and 50 per cent indigenous blood. GRADING Grading means the use of pure-bred sires either European or indigenous264 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV DANGERS OF CROSS-BREEDING AND GRADING Successful cross-breeding, and subsequent grading, in adverse environments, when the difference between the milk-transmitting abilities of the parents is marked, requires a knowledge of breeding, restraint and skill in cattle manage- ment. THE INFLUENCE OF CLIMATE ON MILK PRODUCTION The influence that climate has on milk production is a subject of great interest to the dairy farmer in India, but it is too big a subject to be discussed fully in this article. Briefly, one of the obstacles to the production of heavy yields in tropical and sub-tropical climates is the heat, and the detrimental influence of heat is aggravated by increased humidity. The average annual mean atmospheric tem- perature and humidity are not sufficient data on which to judge the influence of these factors. The daily and seasonal deviations from these means are also important, because animals have great powers of recuperation if given a respite from the discomforts of unsuitable weather. Apart from the actual atmos- pheric temperature and humidity, the comfort of an animal during hot weather depends on the conductivity of the skin, the type of coat, the milk-yield, and the management. The conductivity of the skin, or the efficiency with which an animal can throw off the heat generated by its body, appears to be a breed characteristic. As a rule, animals indigenous to hot climates have this factor well developed. As would be expected, the heavier the coat, the greater the discomfort felt during the hot weather. Heavy coats are due mainly to heredity, but may be caused by a check in the growth curve due to mismanagement. The production of milk gene- rates additional heat in the body in proportion to the yield. Generally, cross-bred and grade cows are not so efficient in throwing off body-heat as the indigenous animals, yet, on the average, their milk-yields are much higher. It is, therefore, not surprising that if such animals produce large quantities of milk during the hot weather, their constitutions, or the constitutions of their progeny, deteriorate. Management can, to some extent, minimise the discomfort felt by milch cattle on account of the heat, but when animal shows signs of prolonged acute distress as indicated by a rise in temperature and rapid respiration, and receives insufficient relief during the night, then the only remedy is to decrease the strain, by reducing the milk-yield, or even drying off the animal. A small amount of data collected at the Military Dairy Farms, Multan and Jullundur, bringing out the above factors, are given in Table I.
CROSS-BRED AND GRADE DAIRY CATTLE IN INDIA 265 TABLE I Statement showing the influence of heat on certain individual animals at the Military Dairy Farms at Multan and Jullundur. Temperature taken on 27th July, 1937. Name of animal Military Dairy Farm, Multan Type of coat Humidity 70 per cent Breed Daily milk- yield Tempera- ture of animal Rate of respira- tion Atmospheric temperature in shed-104° F. Time-3 P.M. Hollyhock Buffalo 26 lbs. 100.8 Normal .. Flexseed Cross-bred 25 lbs. 103.2 Very fast Fine Alacrity Cross-bred 18 lbs. 103.0 Very fast Heavy Acup 7/8ths Grade 14 lbs. 103.2 Very fast Very heavy Mallogat Indigenous cow 8 lbs. 101.2 Normal Fine Sumerun Cross-bred Dry 101.2 Normal Fine Adjunctive. Buffalo Dry 100.4 Normal . . Jimine Indigenous cow Dry 101.8 Normal Fine Humidity 89 Per cent Military Dairy Farm, Jullundur Atmospheric temperature in shed 92°F. Time-3 P.M. Lackey Cross-bred 40 lbs. 102.8 Fast Heavy Sheer Buffalo 25 lbs. 101.8 Normal .. Inder 3/4ths Grade 22 lbs. 102.8 Normal Fine Kamseen Indigenous cow 14 lbs. 101.0 Normal Fine Lurgos 3/4ths Grade Dry 101.6 Normal Normal Mianwali l/4th Grade Dry 103.0 Very fast Very heavy Mischief Buffalo Dry 100.2 Normal . . Jenny Indigenous cow Dry 101.6 Normal Normal NOTE.266 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV Table I indicates that if the dairy farmer, on the plains of India, is cross- breeding and grading and has to produce the same quantity of milk throughout the year, then a mixed herd should be maintained. Services should be so control- led that the majority of the buffaloes and average indigenous cows calve just prior to the hot season ; and the majority of the cross-breds, grades, and high yielding indigenous cows, just before the cold weather. MAXIMUM LIMIT OF PRODUCTION The production of milk imposes a certain strain on the constitution of an animal, the greater the quantity of milk produced, the greater the strain, and this strain is further increased in proportion to the adversity of the environment. Although by cross-breeding and grading animals with improved milking cap- abilities may be bred, it is essential that these animals be given skilful management to relieve the strain on their constitution as much as possible. However, there are limits, both economical and practical, to the extent that skilful management may compensate for the additional strain of increased milk production. Therefore, in a given environment, there is a maximum limit of economic production for each animal which should not be exceeded. The more adverse the environment, the lower the maximum limits should be fixed. Without these limitations the dangers of cross-breeding and grading are increased in proportion to the difference between the ancestral environments of the sire and the dam. MILK-YIELDS THAT MAY BE ANTICIPATED BY CROSS-BREEDING AND GRADING Provided constitution is maintained, environment remains constant and one parent is a pure bred, it is possible to forecast the result of cross-breeding with reasonable accuracy. In cross-breeding and grading, it may be assumed that the sire and the dam have potential transmitting abilities equal to the average of their respective breeds. Further, based on the genetic theory of intermediate, or blending inheritance, and the fact that breeds with marked dissimilar milk-producing abilities are being mated, it may be assumed that the offspring will have milk-producing abilities approximately half-way between the two parental breeds. Working on the above hypothesis, the intermediate index for the cross-breds and different grades in Table II has been compiled.
CROSS-BRED AND GRADE DAIRY CATTLE IN INDIA 267 TABLE II Comparison of the intermediate index and the actual lactation yield of different breeds Breeds Interme- diate index lbs. Actual lactation yield lbs. Error ± Per cent Pure Friesians (European) . . . . 9,400 9,406 . . 7/8ths grade . . . . . . 8,700 7,076 268 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV The reason why the 1/8th did not do better is explained perhaps by the lack of ability, even amongst most strictly selected indigenous bulls (which are not genetically pure breds) of transmitting a uniform milk-producing ability. The population is, perhaps, insufficient to disguise this lack of uniformity. It may be taken, as a rule, that to regain constitution the breeder should grade down, and to regain milk grade up. CHOOSING THE SIRES European Sires.CROSS-BRED AND GRADE DAIRY CATTLE IN INDIA 269 Good bulls of this breed with a probable index of 9,000 to 10,000 pounds can be purchased for Rs. 1,000 to Rs. 1,500 landed in India. Indigenous sire.270 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV (2) Feeding ofCROSS-BRED AND GRADE DAIRY CATTLE IN INDIA 271 TABLE IV Table showing the castings and deaths amongst the adult and young stock cows of the Military Dairies in the Northern Circle during the years 1st April 1935 to 31st March 1937 Particulars of casualties Breeds272 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV Table IV is instructive. If breeds with a population of less than 40 are ignoredInd. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. VII, Pt. IV ] PLATE XVII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. FEROZEPORE MANIHARI A typical Ferozepore-type Sahiwal. Yielded 6,954 lbs. of milk in 327 days in her first lactation. in the second lactation gave 8,837 lbs. in 272 days and still yielding 23 lbs. a day. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. GAMBAR FURSAT A typical one-fourth grade in conformation. Yielded 7,580 lbs. of milk in 406 days.
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. VII, Pt. IV ] PLATE XVIII [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. SARGODHA DODY A cross-bred. Best yield 13,180 lbs. in 350 days. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. RAWALPINDI AKANDAN A five-eighths grade. Best yield 9,430 lbs. in 317 days.
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. VII, Pt. IV ] PLATE XIX [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. ANOOP KALI A three-fourths grade. Best yield 10,561 lbs. of milk in 340 days. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. RAWALPINDI ABBEY A seven-eighths grade. Best yield 10,200 lbs. in 281 days.
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. VII, Pt. IV ] PLATE XX [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. RAWALPINDI ALLEGBAU A Friesian cow bred in India. Gave 7,448 lbs. in 212 days at the Military Dairy Farm, Sialkot. Dried off to prevent strain of milk production during the hot weather. Shows plenty of constitution. [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 2. RAWALPINDI BERDRAGA Another Friesian cow bred in India. Gave 10,188 lbs. milk in 211 days at the Military Dairy Farm, Sialkot. Dried off to prevent strain of milk production during the hot weather. Shows plenty of constitution.
ON THE TREATMENT OF BABESIA BIGEMINA INFEC- TION IN CATTLE IN INDIA BY J. A. IDNANI, G.B.V.C. Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 6th July 1937) THE introduction of trypanblue in the field of therapy of red-water in cattle, due to Babesia bigemina infection in cattle, was the result of pioneer work carried out by Nuttall and Hadwen [ 1909 ]. Trypanblue has ever since been used almost universally as a remedy against this infection. In India, cattle are known to be infected ubiquitously with various protozoan parasites which ordinarily reside in a latent state in the tissues of the hosts and cause no manifest disturbance. It is when the restrain on such parasites is relaxed by the onset of some febrile diseases such as rinderpest that they multiply at such a rate as to cause serious disease and frequently death in the affected animals [ Edwards, 1927 ]. Trypanblue, as would appear, is rarely called into use in clinical cases of piroplasmosis in cattle as a primary affection in this country, due to the fact that most of the animals are ' carriers ', and it is usually in cases of resuscitation that treatment with drugs is resorted to. In this Institute where a large amount of work on rinderpest is carried out, the control of Babesia bigemina with trypanblue presented serious obstacles in recent years. The rinderpest bull virus, which is always maintained in the Insti- tute in successive batches in hill bulls, was found to be more often than not, con- taminated with the red-water parasites rendering it unsafe for issue in the field. The mortality in such complicated cases occurred to the extent of 59.3 per cent in 1933, 55.5 per cent in 1934 and 40.7 per cent in 1935, as compared to 25.6 per cent, 16.8 per cent and 23.2 per cent during the same period respectively in uncomplicated cases. Apart from this, in the tests carried out to evaluate the potency of anti-rinderpest serum that is manufactured at this Institute, very misleading thermal reactions were set up due to the resuscitation of Babesia bigemina. In such cases the usual dose of ½ to ¾ grm. of trypanblue was adminis- tered intravenously in a 1 per cent solution per an approximate weight of 100 kg., but in a number of cases the parasites were found to be persisting, resulting in death in several cases. Due to a large number of such failures encountered (273)
274 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV in the treatment of B. bigemina infection, with the popular drug trypanblue, work was taken in hand early in 1934 to evolve more effective measures for the control of these organisms. A series of controlled experiments were carried out to test the efficacy of trypanblue in larger doses on the laboratory strain of B. bigemina. The strain was isolated and maintained in successive batches in hill bulls, but as would appear from the data collected, the drug failed to check the multiplication of the parasites. On perusal of the original work of Nuttall and Hadwen [ 1909 ], it would appear that although trypanblue produced a marked amelioration of the symptoms and checked the severity of the disease, yet in two out of the five treated cases, the parasites reappeared in the peripheral blood on the 7th and the 8th day respectively after the treatment. Theiler [ 1912 ] working in Pretoria on the same lines infected twelve susceptible cattle with the local strain of B. bigemina and treated them with trypanblue. Except one animal that died, all recovered from the disease. In three of his treated cases, however, microscopic examination of the peripheral blood revealed the presence of the parasites on 14th, 18th and 21st day respectively after the treatment. A fresh stock of trypanblue was obtained from the manufacturers, E. Merck & Co., Germany, and comparative potency tests were carried out along with the old stock but in the experiments carried out no evidence could be obtained of the superiority of the new stock as compared to the old. The drug was subsequently replaced by another proprietary preparation ' Akiron R ', manufactured by Bayer & Co., with very successful results. METHODS, MATERIAL AND OBSERVATIONS At the outset work was undertaken to determine the maximum tolerable dose of trypanblue in the hope of combating the infection due to B. bigemina with a higher dose rate. Sergent and co-workers [ 1927 ] advocated small doses in proportion to the number of parasites present in individual cases, as they were of opinion that one grm. of trypanblue per 100 kg. is liable to cause alarming- symptoms due to the liberation of toxins from the destroyed parasites. But the treatment carried out at this Institute, with 50-75 c. c. of a 1 per cent solu- tion given intravenously, failed to cleanse the peripheral circulation in several cases. For the purpose of M. T. D . tests of trypanblue, fourteen animals were in- jected intravenously at doses varying from 1.2 to 4 grms. in a 2 per cent solu- tion at an average body-weight of 220 lb. Very interesting observations, some of which have been recorded by Stirling [ 1927 ], were made which are worthy of mention. In almost all the cases, the inoculation of trypanblue was followed within a short period, depending on the degree of the dose used, by accelerated breathing, filling in of the folds of the skin round the eyes and the neck, lachrymation and
TREATMENT OF BABESIA BIGEMINA INFECTION IN CATTLE 275 salivation. The tears and the saliva were bluish in colour, and discolouration of the conjunctival and the buccal mucous membranes soon followed. The non- pigmented parts of the skin, over the regions of the groin and scrotum were stained blue a little later. A marked tendency towards defecation was observed and on straining, transparent jelly-like mucus was passed. The inoculated animals appeared to be depressed and made no attempt to rise soon after the injection. The symptoms passed off within two hours in animals that received smaller doses. Donatien and Lestoquard [1927] are of opinion that the injection of trypanblue into healthy or chronically infected cases does not give rise to toxic symptoms but on the other hand believe that such symptoms are due to the liberation of toxins on account of lysis of the parasites. Contrary to the view expressed by the above-mentioned workers it may be pointed out that the symptoms des- cribed above were observed in the batch of fourteen bulls used for M. T. D. tests that may be classed as healthy or chronically infected in view of the fact that none of these animals showed evidence of red-water when they were subjected to the experiment. In those animals that received the maximum dose, the drug was noticed to be eliminated with the body excretions six minutes after the in- oculation ; while in others that received a smaller quantity this process took from ten to thirty minutes. Severe toxic symptoms were exhibited on inocula- tion of 4 grms. of trypanblue, viz., depression, loss of control over the limbs, diar- rh276 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV In a further series of experiments the effect of administering trypanblue immediately before a combined infection with rinderpest and B. bigemina was tested. Two healthy bulls were given 3 grms. of trypanblue each, in a 2 per cent solution intravenously followed by B. bigemina infected rinderpest virus a little later. Two controls were inoculated with the virus only. All the four animals showed organisms ten to twelve days after inoculation as trypanblue produced no effect whatever in the treated cases. All four animals, however, lived, and were discontinued when the parasites had disappeared from their cir- culation. Notwithstanding the disappointing results obtained in the foregoing ex- periments in the treatment of the tropical red-water parasites by means of try- panblue, it was thought that these failures may be attributed to a deterioration in the potency of the drug used owing to long storage, or to the possibility of the particular strain of the parasites that was being used, having developed a tolerance to trypanblue as a result of continuous passaging through animals treated with this drug. The strain of this piroplasm was isolated and maintained in a series of successive passages in hill bulls that had been discontinued from rinderpest work. Only such animals were selected for this purpose as had not exhibited B. bigemina previously. The strain was successfully established in these animals throughout nine passages, using two animals each time. The sub-inoculations were done with blood drawn during paroxysms, about six to seven days after in- fection. Although none of the animals developed clinical symptoms or showed marked thermal reaction inspite of about thirty to forty per cent of the erythro- cytes having been infected, yet only one animal proved refractory. Three animals showed the parasites seventy-two hours after sub-inoculation, eight animals on the 4th day, three on the 5th, one on the 7th and one on the 11th day. In each case the number of the parasites gradually decreased after a phase of increased multiplication without producing any ill effects. Treatment with a fresh stock of trypanblue, obtained from the manufac- turers, E. Merck & Co., Germany, was now taken up with a view to test its com- parative potency with the old stock. In all, eleven animals were treated as tabulated below:TREATMENT OF BABESIA BIGEMINA INFECTION IN CATTLE 277 TABLE I278 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV It would appear from Table I that six animals were treated with the fresh stock of trypanblue and five with the old, leaving seven animals untreated to serve as controls. In all cases treatment was instituted on the day the parasites were detected in their blood after an incubation period of three to six days. On the basis of M. T. D. tests carried out at the commencement of this work, all the animals under treatment were given 30 c.c. of a 1 per cent solution of trypanblue per 25 lb. body-weight intravenously. Goodall [ 1914 ] reported successful results with heavy doses of trypanblue up to 250 c.c. of a 2 per cent solution intravenously for cattle infected with B. bigemina and attributed failures to be due to small doses being used. But our results did not support his views as in none of the eleven cases so treated was the sterilization of the circulating blood obtained during the post-treatment period of observation of twenty days. The above series of experiments yielded almost conclusive evidence as to the ineffectiveness of trypanblue to be regarded as a ' specific ' for the tropical red-water parasites. Several eminent workers have used trypanblue extensively in the treatment of bovine piroplasmosis due to B. bigemina infection doubtless with amelioration of the symptoms but, in several instances their records either do not show that the diagnosis was based on microscopical examination, or that the cures were established on examination of blood films after the treatment. Thus, Mellis [ 1914 ] reported to have treated twenty-three cases with trypanblue in North Africa on clinical manifestations and obtained nineteen recoveries. In the four cases that died the drug was stated to have been given subcutaneously. Goodall [ 1914 ] reported to have treated hundreds of cases with large doses of trypanblue but the effect of the drug was not determined by microscopical exa- mination. Yakimoff and collaborators [1917] used 25 c.c. of a 1 per cent solution in normal saline giving a total of 2TREATMENT OF BABESIA BIGEMINA INFECTION IN CATTLE 279 About this time a communication was received from Havero Trading Com- pany, Calcutta, offering samples of a proprietary preparation, ' Akiron R ', manu factured by Bayer & Co., for trial in ' Babesiosis' and ' Theilerioses' of cattle. At that time no reference could be obtained in available literature regarding the therapeutics of this drug, on which experiments could be based, but the oppor- tunity was taken and the drug obtained free of charge. It was received in 5 and 10 c.c. ampoules of a 5 per cent solution, the fluid being of a light yellow colour and ready for use. The original laboratory strain of B. bigemina was maintained and in the subsequent series of experiments the efficacy of ' Akiron R ' was tested with very successful results. These have been tabulated below:280 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV TABLE II-ATREATMENT OF BABESIA BIGEMINA INFECTION IN CATTLE 281 TABLE II-B282 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV reaction soon after the introduction of the drug, in the form of foaming at the mouth and shivering lasting for about two hours; inappetence, rise in the body tem- perature lasting forty-eight hours ; and a painful local swelling which persisted for a week. The day following, however, the parasites were not detected in blood smears from Hill bull No. 246, while the animal was under observation. In view of the toxic effects of 10 c.c. of ' Akiron R ', the dose was reduced to 5 c.c. in the remaining animals. Of the four treated animals shown in Table II-A, with 5 c.c. doses, two were injected sub-cutaneously and the other two intramuscularly, on the day the parasites were detected in their blood smears. These four animals also showed a mild reaction to the drug, but none of them revealed the presence of B. bigemina during a period of observation of ten days. Being encouraged by this finding more extensive trials were undertaken as indicated in Table II-B. In this series, the multiplication of the parasites was allowed to progress to various degrees, before treatment was given. Ten bulls were treated in different stages of the disease, leaving eleven animals to serve as controls. It would appear that in all the treated cases the peripheral circulation was cleansed of the parasites within forty-eight hours and no evidence of any relapse was confirmed by daily microscopical examination of blood films for the following ten days. In the controls, however, the parasites persisted. The drug appeared to become absorbed quickly and in the case of Hill bull No. 686, from which smears were examined every hour, it was noticed that a large number of parasites were distorted and commencing to disintegrate five hours after the injection. Whether the drug exerts a destructive action on the chromatin or the cytoplasm or both could not be definitely determined; for, both these structures, as noticed in the stained smears, were affected, leaving an irregular mass of the remnant on the erythrocytes. The destroyed parasites were then found to be gradually disappearing. At first the nucleus appeared as a speck of pink colour surrounded by a distorted, shrunk and deeply coloured cytoplasm. Later, in place of the nucleus, a small vacuole appeared within a dark mass of cytoplasm. This could then be easily mistaken for an artefact. The curative effect of ' Akiron R ' for B. bigemina infection, as would appear from the foregoing experiments proved to be far superior to that of trypanblue, for, a complete sterilization of the peripheral circulation was obtained within a short period. It will be observed that in most of the treated cases the dose of 5 c.c. of the drug produced a certain amount of reaction, and on this account, it was considered that a smaller dose may possibly yield identical results with advan- tage. The subsequent series of experiments were, therefore, directed towards the determination of a minimum effective dose of ' Akiron R '. Four trials were carried out as tabulated below (Table III), to test the efficacy of 1 c.c. on an average body-weight of 100 kg. The microscopical examination of blood films of such cases, however, showed that the reproduction of the parasites pro- gressed unabated, proving thereby that this was too small a dose to effect a cure.
TREATMENT OF BABESIA BIGEMINA INFECTION IN CATTLE 283 TABLE III Results of treatment of B. bigemina with ' Akiron R ' at 1 c.c. dose No. of animal Date of infection Date of treatment and dose Results Remarks Passage XXVII. { Hill bull 87 15th Aug.'35 20th Aug. '35 : + B. big. 1 c.c. intramuscularly. Parasites persisted throughout the period of observation. ...... 65 15th Aug.'35 20th Aug. '35: + B.big. 1 c. c. subcutaneous- ly. Parasites seen for 48 hours after treatment. ...... Passage XXVIII.{ 704 20th Aug.'35 Untreated Control . ...... Parasites persisted throughout the period of observation. 34 20th Aug.'35 ...... ...... Did not react. 733 20th Aug.'35 26thAug.'35 + + + B. big. 1 c. c. subcutane- ously. Parasites persisted for 4 days after treatment. ...... Passage XXIX. { 486 26th Aug.'35 Untreated . ...... Parasites persisted throughout the period of observation. 14 26th Aug.'35 Ditto ...... Ditto 546 26th Aug.'35 31st Aug.'35: + + + B. big. 1 c.c. spontane- ously. Parasites persisted throughout the period of observation. ...... + = few. + + + = fairly numerous. In further trials the dose was raised to 2 c.c. per 100 kg. where by a total of five animals were treated at the height of infection as indicated below in Table IV-A. TABLE IV-A Results of treatment of B. bigemina with ' Akiron R ' at 2 c.c. dose No. of animal Date of infection Date of treatment and dose Results Remarks Passage XXX. { Hill bull 58 2nd Sept.'35 9th Sept.'35 : + + + B. big. 2 c.c. intramus- cularly. Cured . A few degenerated parasites seen up to 24 hours after treatment and negative thereafter. 88 2nd Sept.'35 9th Sept.'35 : + + + B. big. 2 c.c. subcutane- ously. Do. . Ditto 645 2nd Sept.'35 Untreated Control . ... Parasites persisted throughout the period of observation. Passage XXXI. { 46 9th Sept.'35 17th Sept.'35: + + +B. big. 2 c.c. intramus- cularly. Cured . Same as in 58. 72 9th Sept.'35 17th Sept.'35: + + + B. big. 2 c.c. subcuta- neously. Do. . . A few degenerated parasites seen up to 24 hours after treatment and negative thereafter. 73 9th Sept.'35 Untreated Control . ... Parasites persisted. Passage XXXII.{ 1 17th Sept.'35 24th Sept.'35: + + +B. big. 2 c.c. intramus- cularly. Cured . Same as in No. 58. 447 17th Sept.'35 ...... ... Did not react. 118 17th Sept'35 Untreated Control . ... Parasites persisted. + + + = fairly numerous. + + + = numerous.
284 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV The results incorporated in Table IV-A indicate that a dose of 2 c.c. of ' Akiron R ' was sufficient and safe for successfully combating infection with B. bigemina in bulls averaging 100 kg. in body-weight. Furthermore, a few trials with 1.5 c.c. were also carried out but of the eight artificially infected bulls treated with this dose one animal continued to show the parasites for seventy- two hours after treatment, while in the others the circulation was free of parasites within forty-eight hours. Finally more tests were executed to confirm the cura- tive effect of ' Akiron R ' with 2 c.c. as shown in Table IV-B. TABLE IV-B Results of treatment of B. bigemina with ' Akiron R' at 2 c.c. dose No. of animal Date of infection Date of treatment and dose Results Remarks Passage XXXVIII. { Hill bull l49 29th Octr.'35 4th Novr.'35 : + + + B. big. 2 c.c. subcuta- neously. Cured . A few degenerated parasites seen up to 48 hours after treatment and negative thereafter. 148 29th Octr.'35 Ditto . Do. . A few degenerated parasites seen up to 24 hours after treatment and negative thereafter. 158 29th Octr.'35 Untreated Control . ... Parasites persisted throughout the period of observation. Passage XXXIX. { l22 5th Novr.'35 13th Novr.'35 : + B. big. 2 c.c. subcutaneously. Cured . Negative at 24 hours after treatment and thereafter. 240 5th Novr.'35 Ditto . Do. . Ditto. 139 5th Novr.'35 Untreated Control. ... Parasites persisted for 10 days after appearance. Passage XL. { 249 13th Novr.'35 21st Novr. ,35: ++ B. big 2 c.c. subcutaneously. Cured . A few degenerated parasites seen up to 24 hours after treatment and negative thereafter. 318 13th Novr.'35 21st Novr.'35: +B.big. 2 c.c. subcutaneously. Do. . Ditto. 315 13th Novr'35 Untreated Control . Cured . Parasites persisted throughout the period of observation. Passage XLI. { 293 21st Novr.'35 28th Novr.'35 : + + + B big. 2 c.c. subcuta- neously. A few degenerated parasites seen up to 24 hours after treatment and negative thereafter. 261 21st Novr.'35 28th Novr.'35: + + +B. big. 2 c.c. subcuta- neously. Do. . Ditto. 312 21st Novr.'35 Untreated Control . ... Parasites persisted for 4 days after first appearance. Passage XLII. { 165 28th Novr.'35 6th Decr.'35 : + + B. big. 2 c.c. subcutane- ously. Cured . A few degenerated parasites seen up to 24 hours after treatment and negative thereafter. 291 28th Novr.'35 Ditto . Do. . Ditto. 183 28th Novr.'35 Untreated Control . ... Parasites persisted throughout the period of observation. + =few. + + = fairly frequent. + + = frequent. + + + = fairly numerous. + + + = numerous.
TREATMENT OF BABESIA BIGEMINA INFECTION IN CATTLE 285 In this series a total of ten animals were treated at varying stages of the disease and in all cases B. bigemina disappeared from the peripheral circulation within forty-eight hours after the treatment with a single subcutaneous injection of 2 c.c. of ' Akiron R '. In none of the treated cases did a relapse occur during a post-treatment period of observation of ten days. It has since been used as routine treatment in cases of resuscitation of B. bigemina in rinderpest work as well as remedy for obtaining ' bigemina-free' rinderpest bull virus. Over fifty animals have been treated under the former category with a single subcu- taneous injection of 1 c.c. for 100 lb. body-weight yielding 100 per cent cures. Its effect in yielding parasite-free rinderpest bull virus was experimentally tested on five artificially infected animals. These bulls were injected with 5 c.c.' Akiron R ' on the day they were used as rinderpest virus producers and in no case did B. bigemina appear during the course of the disease (rinderpest). As a control, similar animals, nine in number, were used as virus producers without being treat- ed previously with ' Akiron R ' and in seven cases out of nine B. bigemina was resuscitated within three to seven days after infection with rinderpest. It may however, be pointed out that for obtaining ' parasite-free ' rinderpest virus from ' carrier ' bulls treated with ' Akiron R ', the infective material should be free from B. bigemina. As a prophylactic against B. bigemina infection, ' Akiron R' proved to be inert as observed in another series of experiment. Twenty bulls were used for the purpose in the following manner :286 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV Lastly, an attempt was made to gauge the duration of cure that ' Akiron R' is capable of imparting after treating artificially infected bulls. A batch of twelve healthy bulls was infected with the laboratory strain of B. bigemina and treated soon after the development of the parasites with a single subcutane- ous dose of 5 c.c. each and housed in an out-kraal. After the treatment was completed these animals were allowed to mix with the others in the same shed and left to graze out in the fields. Clinical observations were recorded and blood smears were examined daily for a period of twenty-two days in four cases and seventy-five days in the remaining eight cases. During this period three animals showed rare B. bigemina only once on 21st day after the treatment while the rest were negative throughout. Whether in these three cases the reappearance of the parasites could be attributed to a relapse or whether the infection was su- perimposed through the agency of the specific vectors, of which there appeared to be no dearth in that area, could not be definitely determined in view of the fact that these animals were not kept under tick-proof conditions. Seven clean animals were subsequently used as rinderpest virus producers after a period of five to six months and in no case B. bigemina was found to resuscitate. From these re- sults, it is evident that the curative effect of ' Akiron R ' is sufficiently lasting. Two other animals from the same batch of twelve bulls were infected with B. bigemina five months later and both developed the infection. The drug ' Akiron R ' has been put on the market under the name of 'Acaprin ' and is sold in 1, 5 and 10 c.c. ampoules in a 5 per cent solution. Smythe [ 1936 ] has successfully used ' Acaprin ' in the treatment of red-water in cattle due to B. bovis infec- tion. Cernaianu and collaborators [ 1936 ] report to have cured twelve bovines in 1934 showing severe symptoms of B. bigemina infection, with 2-5 c.c. doses of ' Acaprin '. In 1935, they treated fourteen animals obtaining nine recoveries as a result of one injection of the drug. Professor Horlein [ 1936 ] of the Bayer laboratories summarizing the results so far obtained with this product states thatTREATMENT OF BABESIA BIGEMINA INFECTION IN CATTLE 287 2. A proprietary preparation ' Akiron R', manufactured by Messrs. Bayer & Co. was tried with very successful results. The maximum effective dose of the drug was experimentally determined to be 1 c.c. of a 5 per cent solution per 100- lb. body-weight. 3. ' Akiron R' was found to be entirely valueless as a prophylactic agent. 4. The curative effect of the drug proved to be sufficiently lasting. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The author is greatly indebted to the Director, Mr. F. Ware, C.I.E., F.R.C.V.S., I.V.S., F.N.I., who as the head of the Protozoological Section gave all possible facilities and guidance. Thanks are due to Mr. J. R. Haddow, M.R.C.V.S., D.V.S.M., I.V.S., who while officiating as Director, made several useful sugges- tions. To Mr. S. K. Sen, the Entomologist, the author is deeply grateful for his valuable advice and help. REFERENCES Cernaianu, C., Radef, I., and Redescu, T. (1936). Bull. Soc. Path. Exot. 28, 804-806. Donation, A. and Lestoquard, F. (1927). Rev. Vét. 79, 133-139. Edwards, J. T. (1927). Ind. J. Vet. Sc. & Anim. Husb. 1, 296-300. Goodall, A. (1914). Parasitol. 7, 62-68. Horlein, H. (1936). Proc. Roy. Soc. Med. 29, 313-324. Mellis, M. C. (1914). Rev. Vét. 39, 321-334. Nuttall, G. H. F. and Hadwen, S. (1909). Parasit. 2, 236-266. Sergent Edm., Donation, A., Parrot, L., Lestoquard, F. and Plantureux, E. (1927). Ann. Instt. Pasteur. 41, 721-784. [Abstr. seen in Trop. Vet. Bull. (1928). 16, 84-86.] Smythe, A. R. (1935). Vet. Rec. 15, 635-637. Stirling, R. F. (1927). J. Com. Path. Ther. 40, 274-281. Theiler, A. (1912). Vet. J. 68, 64-73. Theiler, A. (1930). Bull. Soc. Path. Exot. 23, 506-529. Yakimoff, W. L., Schokher, N. I., Koselkima, P. M. and Paroisky, P. S. (1927). Bull. Soc. Path. Exot. 10, 302-311. E
THE EFFECT OF HIGH PROTEIN FEEDING ON MILCH COWS BY P. A. SESHAN, B.A. Animal Nutrition Section, Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (Received for publication on 8th April, 1937) AMONG the several factors which have been studied for increasing the milk- yield of cattle, considerable attention has been paid to the question of protein intake and its possible effect on the quality and quantity of the milk. Weiser [1928] observed that when the digestible protein feed of a cow was lowered from 1 290 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV It will be seen from the above review that no definite conclusions can be drawn on the effect of varying the level of protein feeding on the milk-yield of cows. An experiment was, therefore, conducted on similar lines to find out the response of cows under Indian conditions to an increased protein intake. The results obtained are presented in this paper. EXPERIMENTAL Twelve selected animals were divided into two groups so that their average age, live-weight, stage of lactation and milk-yield were about equal. All the animals were fed according to the computed requirements for maintenance and milk pro- duction. The feed consisted, on the dry basis, of about 18 lbs. of roughage, one- third of it being as jowar silage and Guinea grass and the rest as ragi straw. For maintenance requirements alone this roughage had to be supplemented by 12 oz. of groundnut cake. The animals received, besides, 1 lb. of concentrate mixture for every 2 lb. of milk-yield. The difference in the levels of protein intake between the two groups was effected by increasing the protein content of one of these mix- tures, without greatly altering its energy value. All the animals were kept under identical conditions, the feeding and milking being done twice a day. The following table (Table I) shows the composition of the two concentrate mixtures which were fed during the entire experiment. The digestible nutrients. have been calculated on the basis of the coefficients given by Henry and Morrison. It will be seen that the mixtures (Table I) provided a production ration con- taining 20.7 per cent and 29.1 per cent of digestible crude protein for the normal and high protein groups respectively. It may also be mentioned that the maintenance ration yielded 0.5EFFECT OF HIGH PROTEIN FEEDING ON MILCH COWS 291 TABLE I Composition of concentrate mixtures Concentrates Normal protein group High protein group Weight in Digestible crude protein Starch equivalent Weight in Digestible crude protein Starch equivalent lb. lb. lb. lb. lb. lb. Groundnut cake . . . . . . 3 1.443 1.588 5 2.405 2.647 Wheat Bran . . . . . . 4 0.474 1.688 3 0.355 1.266 Gram husk . . . . . . 2 .. 0.974 1 .. 0.487 Brewery grains . . . . . . 1 0.149 0.876 1 0.149 0.876 Total . 10 2.066 5.126 10 2.909 5.276
292 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV TABLE II Average daily food consumption, live-weight and milk-yield Period Normal protein group High protein group Rough- age in Concen- trate mixture in Total feed in Milk. yield in Live- weight in Rough- age in Concen- trate mixture in Total feed in Milk. yield in Live- weight in kg. kg. kg. lb. lb. kg. kg. kg. lb. lb. December . . . 6.370 5.262 11.632 23.23 743 6.464 5.056 11.520 22.23 757 January . . . 5.843 4.811 10.654 20.45 729 5.578 5.245 10.823 22.09 749 February . . . 5.342 4.232 9.574 17.73 728 4.525 4.927 9.452 20.66 751 March . . . . 5.403 4.144 9.547 16.70 740 4.657 4.433 9.090 18.19 759 April . . . . 5.248 3.545 8.793 14.62 735 4.757 3.929 8.686 16.25 759 May . . . . 5 176 2.919 8.095 10.57 733 4.848 3.478 8.326 14.08 762 June . . . . 5.445 2.498 7.943 8.60 745 5.193 2.975 8.168 11.17 755 July . . . . 5.729 2.795 8.524 11.04 732 5.692 2.486 8.178 8.86 756 August . . . . 5.523 3.257 8.779 11.82 720 5.394 2.486 7.880 8.90 734 September . . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. October . . . . 4.822 4.291 9.113 17.05 684 5.212 3.168 8.380 11.33 726 November . . . 5.321 4.541 9.862 18.84 701 5.347 2.955 8.302 12.58 710 Average . 5.475 3.845 9.320 15.51 726 5.242 3.740 8.982 15.12 747
EFFECT OF HIGH PROTEIN FEEDING ON MILCH COWS 293 TABLE III Average daily food consumption, live-weight and milk-yield Periods Normal protein group High protein group Rough- age in Con- centrate mixture in Total feed in Milk- yield in Live- weight in Rough- age in Con- centrate mixture in Total feed in Milk- yield in Live- weight in kg. kg. kg. lb. lb. kg. kg. kg. lb. Ib. December . . . 5.657 6.079 11.736 28.60 822 6.145 6.017 12.162 27.60 839 January . . . 5.704 5.890 11.594 26.58 831 6.186 5.889 12.075 26.30 852 February . . . 5.760 5.437 11.197 24.22 841 5.937 5.215 11.152 22.84 863 March . . . . 5.713 5.041 10.754 21.71 851 6.142 4.815 10.957 20.70 870 April . . . . 5.700 4.342 10.042 18.69 848 6.3105 4.367 10.472 18.46 872 May . . . . 5.675 3.829 9.504 15.95 850 6.221 3.877 10.098 16.17 884 June . . . . 5.596 3.360 8.956 12.85 861 6.222 3.500 9.722 13.13 898 July . . . . 6.039 2.785 8.824 9.72 879 6.450 2.966 9.416 9.15 922 August . . . . 6.283 2.214 8.497 4.85 891 6.465 2.399 8.864 6.40 939 September . . . 5.925 1.844 7.769 2.49 889 6.032 2.512 8.544 8.43 917 October . . . 5.955 3.431 9.386 14.13 900 5.859 3.935 9.794 16.91 866 November . . . 5.059 5.894 10.953 26.36 844 5.314 5.092 10.406 21.25 867 Average . 5.756 4.179 9.934 17.18 859 6.090 4.215 10.305 17.28 882
294 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV The following conclusions can be drawn from the data presented in the above tables. The extra protein feeding meant an increase of about 1½ lb. of oil-cake per day over the already rich concentrate ration of the normal group animals. It is interesting to note that this did not in any way affect the roughage consumption of the high protein group. The total food consumption per day remained roughly the same for both the groups. The increased intake of protein made no significant changes in the quantity of milk-yield. It is also apparent from their live-weight records that the extra protein fed was not utilized to produce an increase in the body- weight of animals. As the low protein group received a production ration containing about three times the protein secreted in the milk, these experiments do not yield any useful information regarding the efficiency of milk-protein production. QUALITY OF THE MILK PRODUCED As these experiments were started mainly with the idea of studying the quan- titative aspect of milk production, only a few samples of milk representing the two groups were analysed during their progress. The available data are given in Table IV.
EFFECT OF HIGH PROTEIN FEEDING ON MILCH COWS 295 TABLE IV Composition of milk (per cent) A = Normal protein group B = High protein group Sample No. Total solids Protein Fat Sugar Ash A B A B A B A B A B 1 13.02 12.37 2.90 2.87 4.5 4.1 4.9 4.4 0.695 0.744 2 12.70 12.26 2.90 3.02 4.5 4.2 4.5 4.5 0.679 0.737 3 12.62 12.21 2.94 3.04 4.5 4.1 4.8 4.6 0.681 0.742 4 12.65 12.23 2.96 3.03 4.4 4.1 4.6 4.3 0.689 0.750 5 12.49 12.43 3.09 3.26 4.3 4.5 4.6 4.4 0.703 0.750 6 12.89 12.00 2.98 2.97 4.6 4.0 5.1 4.4 0.688 0.753 7 14.73 14.25 3.38 3.54 5.6 5.1 5.1 5.0 0.677 0.733 Average 13.01 12.54 3.02 3.10 4.6 4.3 4.8 4.5 0.687 0.744
206 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV The last of the analyses given above refer to individual samples only as most of the animals had gone dry by that time. It may also be added that the figures in all cases represent the average of duplicate determinations. Although definite conclusions may not be drawn from the above data, it is as well to state briefly the tendencies which this preliminary study reveals. It may be observed that the percentages of fat, sugar and total solids seem to be generally higher in the normal protein group. Particular attention might, however, be drawn to the ash-content of the two groups. The high protein group has consis- tently yielded milk of a higher ash-content. In some cases the proteins have been further analysed and the casein and albumin content of the samples of milk are shown in Table V. TABLE V Composition of the proteins of milk (per cent) A = Normal protein group B = High protein group Sample No. Total N Casein N Albumin N Non-protein N A B A B A B A B 1 0.465 0.460 0.354 0.351 0.028 0.018 0.083 0.091 2 0.462 0.482 0.229 0.238 0.036 0.032 0.197 0.213 5 0.493 0.521 0.378 0.391 0.052 0.060 0.064 0.070 6 0.477 0.475 0.368 0.354 0.044 0.045 0.065 0.076 7 0.530 0.554 0.427 0.412 0.073 0.079 0.031 0.063 There appears to be a slight increase in the non-protein nitrogen fraction which may be attributed to the extra protein feeding.
EFFECT OF HIGH PROTEIN FEEDING ON MILCH COWS 297 Two main ingredients of the ash of milk, lime and phosphoric acid, have also been determined in all the above instances and are shown in Table VI. TABLE VI Lime and phosphoric acid in milk (per cent) Sample No. Ash CaO P2O5 A B A B A B 1 0.695 0.744 0.155 0.159 0.159 0.155 2 0.679 0.737 0.153 0.167 0.200 0.204 5 0.703 0.750 0.163 0173 0.200 0.202 6 0.688 0.753 0.153 0.163 0.190 0.181 7 0.677 0.733 0.159 0.171 0.204 0.213 It may be observed that the higher ash-content of the high protein group is consistently reflected in its lime-content also. In conclusion, it may be recalled that the protein and lime in milk are generally held to be independent of the nature of the feed, though some evidence to the contrary has been put forward by Perkins and co-workers [1932] and Stewart and Tocker [1936] in regard to the nitrogen-content of milk. It is not possible, there- fore, to evaluate the significance of the findings reported in this paper regarding the change in quality of the milk produced by cows under increased protein feeding. They have to be corroborated by more detailed studies covering a series of lactations with the same animals. SUMMARY An experiment has been made to study the effect of an increase in the level of protein feeding on the quality and quantity of milk-yield of cows. Besides their requirements for maintenance, one group of six cows was fed a production ration containing 20.7 per cent of digestible crude protein, while that of the higher protein group, also consisting of six similar cows, contained 29.1 per cent of digestible crude protein. No difference was observed between the two groups in food consumption, milk- yield or body-weight. The milk from the high protein group showed a slight tendency to be richer in non-protein nitrogen, ash and lime contents.
298 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV The author is greatly indebted to Dr. F. J. Warth for his valuable guidance throughout as also to Dr. K. C. Sen for his great encouragement. Thanks are also due to Mr. Z. R. Kothavalla, Imperial Dairy Expert, Bangalore, for providing the animals under experiment and their feed. REFERENCES Brouwer, E. (1931). Conference Papers, Internat. Dairy Congr., Copenhagen, 1931, Sect. 1, 2nd Ed. 97-107. Henke, L. A. and Goo, G. W. H. (1933). Hawaii Stat. Animal Husb. Div. Prog. notes No. 2, p. 8. Horwood, R. E. and Putnam, G. W. (1933). Michigan Agric. Expt. Stat. Quar- terly Bull. 16, 20-22. Horwood, R. E., Putnam, G. W. and Wells, J. G. (Jr.) (1936). Quarterly Bull. Mich. Agric. Expt. Stat. 18, 22-24. Perkins, K. E., Krauss, W. E. and Hayden, C. C. (1932). Ohio Agric. Expt. Stat. Bull. No. 515. Savage, E. S. and Harrison, E. S. (1931). Conference Papers, Internat. Dairy Congr. Copenhagen, Sect. 1. 2nd Ed. 174-181. Stewart, A. W. and Tocker, J. F. (1936). J. Dairy Res. 7, 1-13. Turner, C. W. (1936). Univ. Mo Agric. Expt. Stat. Bull. 365, p. 30. Weiser, Istvan. (1928). Proceedings of the 8th World's Dairy Congress, pp. 26-29.
Ind. Jour. Vety. Sci. & Anim. Husb., Vol. VII, Pt. IV ] PLATE XXI [NLS note: a graphic appears here - see image of page] FIG. 1. Cytoleichus nudus. Female, ventral aspect. FIG. 2. Cytoleichus nudus. Male, ventral aspect.
THE OCCURRENCE OF AIR-SAC MITE, CYTOLEICHUS NUDUS (VIZIOLI, 1870), IN FOWLS IN INDIA. BY R. L. KAURA, B.V.Sc., M.R.C.V.S. Assistant Serologist AND S. GANAPATHY IYER, G.M.V.C. Veterinary Inspector Imperial Veterinary Research Institute, Mukteswar (Received for publication on 14th July 1937) (With Plate XXI) CERTAIN mites, like the depluming mite, scaly-leg mite, feather mite, etc., attack the superficial parts of the fowl's body whereas certain fowl mites are deep- seated in the body like the air-sac mite and the connective tissue mite. The deep-seated mites are in reality degraded scab mites. A perusal of text-books on Entomology shows that the air-sac mites are known to occur within the bones, lungs, bronchi, peritoneal cavity, etc. but in India, the authors have neither met with the occurrence of mites within the body of fowls except in the case under review nor have they noted any published record of its occurrence in India. Pillers [1921] considered that this mite is parasitic upon birds and that the lesion resulting from its infestation rarely ends fatally. However, many writers incriminate it as a cause of inflammatory lesions in the lungs and intestines. Kaupp [1922] after studying a number of specimens considers that the air-sac disease caused by minute mites is fairly widespread in Colorado, North Carolina, New York and Pennysylvania. He records that the presence of a few parasites may not cause any noticeable symptom, but when they severely invade the bronchi in large numbers they cause local irritation, coughing, accumulation of mucus in the trachea and bronchi, partial asphyxiation, broncho-pneumonia, emaciation and death. Ward and Gallagher [1923] describe the air-sac mite as having been observed in the trachea, lungs, air-sacs, hollow bones and the peritoneum and ex- ceptionally in the heart, liver and kidneys. Methods of transmission and their presence within the tissues cannot be readily explained. Small miliary tubercles containing the parasites may be seen scattered through the affected portion of the lung. Their exit from the body may occur through the trachea by expulsion (299)
300 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV during coughing. Gwatkin and Glover [1931] have recorded their occurrence in the wind-pipe, lungs, air-sacs, hollow bones and the peritoneum, the air-sacs being the commonest site. They, however, consider that they are apparently harmless for they may sometime be found in large number in healthy birds. The subject of report, from which the air-sac mites were recovered, was an ailing cock received from the Fowl Breeding Station of this Institute at Latoli, on 8th October, 1936, for observation with a view to eliminate the possibility of any contagious infection. The bird was kept in a cage and died on 13th October, 1936, prior to which thermal rise, inappetence and slight respiratory distress were noticed. On post-mortem examination the entire peritoneal and thoracic cavities along with the viscera appeared as if sprinkled with sabulous deposits, which on micros- copic examination were found to be accumulations of mites. They occurred in massive numbers and were seen to be actively motile on the surface. The lungs showed signs of consolidation, and the liver was studded with numerous pin-point to pin-head sized cream-coloured nodules. Some of the mites were found embed- ded superficially in the liver. The heart blood revealed no micro-organism on microscopic and cultural examinations. The death of the fowl resulted from pneumonia. Pieces of the affected portions of the lungs and liver were sent to the Patholo- gical section for a histopathological examination and report, which showed that the lungs had suffered from a severe type of pneumonia, the sections also exhibiting mites and their eggs along with rare groups of diphtheroids and Gram-positive bacilli. Liver showed marked congestion with foci of myelocytes (myelocytoma) some of which showed mitosis. The mite on careful microscopic examination conformed in type to Cytoleichus nudus (Vizioli, 1870) given by the authors of various text-books on Entomology and Diseases of Poultry, referred to above. (Plate XXI, figs. 1 and 2). The parasite is ovoid in shape, yellowish white in colour and is just visible to the naked eye. In view of the difficulty encountered in treating the affected fowls owing to the peculiar location of the parasite inside the body, it is considered that the condi- tion is serious especially when infestation becomes heavy. It is advisable to destroy and cremate infested birds and thoroughly disinfect the premises. They should not be restocked for several months, during which period disinfection may be repeated. Recently, a further consignment of dead or dying fowls has been received from the Fowl Breeding Station, Latoli, and on post-mortem examination heavy infes- tation with Cytoleichus nudus was found in each case. It appears that the flock and premises at Latoli are heavily infested with this mite.
OCCURRENCE OF AIR-SAC MITE IN FOWLS IN INDIA. 301 SUMMARY The occurrence of mites within the air-sacs of fowls is recorded, for the first time in India. Although primarily parasitic in these sites, an extensive infes- tation of the organs had developed. This mite is indistinguishable from Cytoleichus nudus (Vizioli, 1870), popular- ly known as the air-sac mite. On account of the difficulty in treating the affected fowls it is considered to be a serious condition. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Our thanks are due to Mr. M. Y. Mangrulkar, M.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., D.T.V.M., Assistant Pathologist, and Mr. Ahmed Buksh, Artist, of this Institute for the histo- pathological examination and the illustrations, respectively. REFERENCES Gwatkin, R. and Glover, J. S. (1931). Diseases of Poultry, Ont. Deptt. Agri. Bull. 305, p. 43. Kaupp, B. F. (1922). Poultry Diseases, pp. 91-92. Pillers, A. W. N. (1921). Notes on Mange and Allied Mites, pp. 58-60. Ward, A. R. and Gallagher, B.A. (1923). Diseases of Domesticated Birds, pp. 198-200.
A NOTE ON THE METHOD FOR THE DETERMINATION OF THE CALCIUM REQUIREMENT OF MAN BY MD. ABDUL HYE, M.Sc. Assistant Physiological Chemist, Bengal (Received for publication on the 3rd September 1937) IN a very highly interesting paper on the determination of calcium require- ment of man by Dr. I. Leitch, published in the Nutrition Abstracts and Reviews [ January, 1937 ], the author has applied a new method to metabolism data, in which he divided 407 subjects into groups of negative and positive balances, based on the difference between intake and output of calcium. Out of 407 balances, 318 were negative and 89 were positive. Two linear relations, one with the negative and the other with the positive balance figures were obtained from which the maintenance requirement of calcium was estimated. It appears that no justification has been given for dividing the 407 observa- tions on normal individuals into two groupings except on balance basis which is the subject of investigation of the present paper. Assuming then the data to be normal, it is desirable to pool all the data together, neglecting the inevitable chance fluctuations from individual to individual and obtain one straight line (i.e. one relation) and estimate the maintenance requirement. In determining the protein and other nutrients requirements of Bengal bullocks, I have found this procedure to be very satisfactory.* For the application of the above method, the data of Table I, page 555 (Nut. Abs. and Reviews., Jan. 1927) may be converted as follows:304 DETERMINATION OF THE CALCIUM REQUIREMENT OF MAN TABLE ASOME OBSERVATIONS ON THE INCIDENCE AND INHERITANCE OF IMPERFORATE ANUS IN GANJAM CALVES BY P. S. KUPPUSWAMI, G.M.V.C. Veterinary Assistant Surgeon, Agricultural College, Coimbatore (Received for publication on the 7th July 1937) INTRODUCTION THE importance of the existence of lethal and sub-lethal factors in the eco- nomy of live-stock breeding deserves to be widely recognised. Numerous here- ditary defects as a result of the above factors have been recorded among live-stock. The incidence of such lethal factors results in the death of the individual some- time between conception and a few days after birth. Crew [ 1924 ] has given a detailed description of the condition (Achondro- plasia congenita) or what is popularly known as the " Bulldog " calf of the Dexter breed of cattle which results in the birth of about twenty-five per cent of calves in a dead condition and with a monstrous appearance, their heads, limbs and ver- tebral columns being much foreshortened. Similar lethal factors operating in certain strains of the Scandinavian Telemark breed have been studied by Wriedt and Mohr [ 1925-26]. A lethal factor giving the calf the appearance of being devoid of skin and hair particularly on the muzzle and feet has been discovered by Hadley and Warwick [ 1927 ]. A lethal factor causing the large intestine to be completely cut off in the region of pelvic fixture of certain foals in Japan (Atresia coli) has been des- cribed by Yamane [ 1925 and 1927 ]. Various other hereditary defects, lethal or sub-lethal in character have been recorded by a host of workers in live-stock breeding306 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV [1932 ] has recorded its incidence in pigs of the " Swabian Halle breed ". Al- though there are isolated records of this abnormality in other places its occurrence in extenso, has been found only in the Ganjam Tract which now forms a part of the new Orissa Province. In the administration reports of the Civil Veterinary Department, Madras, mention is made of the prevalence of this abnormality in the Ganjam District and of the operations carried out. In the following paragraphs, a record is made of the observations of the author which came to his notice in 1936-37 when he was in charge of the Veterinary Hospital at Berhampur (Ganjam District). OBSERVATIONSIn the year 1936-37,105 cases of imperforate anus were recorded. Of these, thirty-three were first calvings, twenty-one second, twenty-seven third, and twenty-four fourth calvings. The enquiry further elicited that in the case of cows which calved second, third or the fourth time, the preceding calves were normal. Thus it is obvious that most of the calves are produced in a normal condition and therefore the character of ' perforate anus ' appears to be a domi- nant one. The ryots of this tract, in cases of this abnormality, normally pierce the anus with a pointed red-hot iron and artificially create a faecal outlet. When veterinary aid is available, a surgical operation is performed. Most of the treated cases have been reported not to thrive well, but lead a lingering existence often resulting in early death. There is no authentic record to show that operated calves survive long enough to reach maturity. The possibility of utilising the recessive character ' imperforate anus ' in crossing experiments may, therefore, be ruled out. Accurate progeny records would be of great use in analysing the mode of inheri ance of this interesting and widely prevalent character. It seems to the writer that a fair percentage of the cattle population of the tract may be tainted in this respect. Of the 105 cases, seventy-two were bull calves and thirty-three heifer calves. The higher incidence of this abnormality in bull calves is note- worthy and whether this is mere y a chance or a phenomenon of normal occur- rence remains to be ascertained. Certain abnormalities such as congenital scrotal hernia, a small extra appendage of the skin just above or below the anal region, absence of prepuce in bull calves and hermaphroditism are found to be associated with some of the cases having imperforate anus. Many of the breeding bulls and some of the cows in the tract have also been noted to possess the extra appendage of the skin in any part of the vertebral region ; but the writer has not observed this near about the anal region as is found in some of the calves having imperforate anus.
IMPERFORATE ANUS IN GANJAM CALVES 307 It cannot be definitely stated whether the progeny of cattle having extra appendage of the skin in the vertebral region always exhibit greater incidence of imperforate anus and this is one of the questions, which requires to be pur- sued. The fact seems to be that in the opinion of the ryots, the extra appendage of the skin present in a bull enhances the breeding bull appearance of the animal and the possibility of a lurking danger in perpetuating this abnormality (imper- forate anus) does not appear to be realised. CONCLUSIONS It is obvious that the ultimate remedy lies in the elimination of this character from the Ganjam stock and the study of inheritance of this character is a neces- sary preliminary. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The observations made and recorded in this note are due to the incentive derived from the lectures of Professor William C. Miller, M.R.C.V.S., F.R.S.E., at the Institute of Animal Genetics, Edinburgh University, while working under him and the author's thanks are due to him. REFERENCES Annual administration Reports of the Madras Civil Veterinary Department for the year 1928-29, pp. 34, 1930-31, pp. 48. Crew, F. A. E. (1924). The Bulldog Calf. A Contribution to the Study of Achondro- plasia. Proc. Roy. Soc. Med., 17 (Section of Comparative Medicines), 39-58. Hadley, F. B. and Warwick, B. L. (1927). Inherited Defects in Live-stock. J. Amer. Vet. Med. Assoc. 70, 492-504. Kinzelbach, W. (1932). Studies on Atresi ani in the Pig. (Ztschr. indukt. Abst. LX, pp. 84-124). Kislovskey, A. D. (1928). Naked: A Recessive Mutation in the Rabbit. J. Heredity 19, 438-439. Loje, K. (1930). Lethal Genes in Domestic Animals and in Red Danish Dairy Cattle in particular. Tidsskrift for Landokonomi Hefte 10, 517-549. Mohr, O. L. (1929). Lethal Factors in Domestic Animals. Ztschr. Zuchtung. 4, 105-125. Roberts, J. A. F. (1926). A Hereditary Lethal Deformity in New-born Lambs. J. Min. Agr. 33, 795-801.
308 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV Roberts, J. A. F. (1929). The Inheritance of a Lethal Muscle Contracture in the Sheep. J. Genetics 21, 57-69. Wriedt, C. (1925). Lethal Factors. Ztschr. f. Tierz. u. Zucht-Biol. 3, 223-230. Yamane, J. (1925). The Lethal Malformation of the Colon in the Horse. Trans. 6th Congress Far East. Assoc. Trop. Med., Tokyo, 1925, 815-818. Yamane, J. (1927). On " Atresia coli", a Lethal, Heritable, Intestinal Malformation in Horses and its Combination with Cerebral Glioma. Ztschr. ind. Abst. Vererb. 46, 188-207.
SELECTED ARTICLES THE CONTROL OF ANIMAL DISEASES IN RELATION TO OVERSTOCKING AND SOIL EROSION BY H. E. HORNBY Director of Veterinary Services, Tanganyika Territory (Reprinted from the Empire Journal of Experimental Agriculture, Vol. V, No. 18, April, 1937, 143-154) SOIL erosion has been defined as ' the corrosive action of natural forces on the surface of the earth', and a certain amount of erosion, which in most places is more than balanced by rock decay, is a normal process. To-day, however, the term generally implies an accelerated loss of soil so far above the normal that it constitutes a very serious loss of the natural wealth of many countries. This accelerated loss is almost entirely due to disturbance by man or his domestic animals of the vegetative cover which alone can prevent the shifting of soil by rain and wind. Throughout the world generally it is probable that injudicious cultivation is by far the most important source of soil erosion, and especially wherever the rain- fall is both high and well distributed. Thus Eden [ 1 ] in his small monograph on soil erosion gave very little space to damage by stock, and the committee on soil erosion in Ceylon [ 2] did not mention stock at all. It is in countries where the rainfall is low, or sufficiently seasonal to permit an annual dry season of several consecutive months, that damage by domestic animals may equal or exceed that done by the cultivator. Thus on page 12 of the Final Report of the Drought Investigation Commission of the Union of South Africa [ 3 ] it is stated that ' Deterioration in the vegetal covering of the drier parts of the Union has been brought about mainly through the practices of kraal- ing, herding, and overstocking, together with an insufficient number of drinking places, and overgrazing'; and on page 15, ' Soil erosion is caused, mainly, by de- terioration of the vegetal cover brought about by incorrect veld management.' Also Bennett and Chapline [ 4 ] lay the blame for the appalling soil losses which are occurring in the United States of America almost equally on the shoulders of the cultivator and the stockman. We are not concerned, however, with appor- tioning blame ; our present purpose is to emphasize the fact that overstocking is an important cause of soil erosion, and that wherever it exists it calls for serious consideration and scientific intervention. Even in those areas where there is as yet no apparent overstocking, the possibility of its occurrence should be borne in mind, and preventive measures be instituted when necessary. (309)
310 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV What is overstocking ? A definition which I have given elsewhere [ 5 ] is that ' Overstocking is the maintenance of animals on a piece of land to the detri- ment of its carrying capacity '. In the same article, I pointed out that such car- rying capacity could be reduced without loss of soil or even of soil fertility, and that, therefore, soil erosion is not an inevitable sequel to overstocking. Never- theless it is a common sequel, and the one which usually makes the solution of each overstocking problem an urgent necessity. In every way overstocking is alto- gether undesirable from the European point of view; an evil which, wherever found, should be removed if possible. The significance of the qualification ' Euro- pean point of view' will be apparent later. Since an avowed aim of every veterinary department is the control of animal diseases, particularly epizootic diseases liable to cause widespread and heavy mortality, it would appear that any progress towards the achievement of this aim must tend to increase stock populations, and may lead to overstocking with con- sequent overgrazing, or to an aggravation of these evils where they exist already. This view of disease-control is taken by many, and a common statement in local reports on soil erosion is to the effect that successful veterinary measures feed the roots of this evil. For example, in the Report of the Native Economic Com- mission, Union of South Africa [6], on page 14, we read : ' Measures for combating animal diseases have largely increased the number of cattle. Normally this should have increased the capacity of the country for carrying population, but the Natives' non-economic cattle outlook caused it to have the opposite effect'. And the Report of the Kenya Land Commission [ 7 ], on page 494, states : ' At the beginning of this century, in the country now known as Kenya Colony, the cattle had been suffering for the previous twenty years from a series of disastrous epidemics ; in numbers they were comparatively few, and the grazing was more than ample to supply their needs. With the introduction of British Administra- tion, veterinary measures for the control of these diseases were introduced, and by 1920 the cattle population had increased to an estimated total of 3,000,000. Up to that year signs of overstocking and consequent deterioration of land and cattle were hardly noticeable '. Statements such as these naturally cause a government to doubt whether money allocated to its veterinary department is being spent in the country's best interest, and hesitancy in supporting every activity of their veterinary depart- ments is apparent at the headquarters of many colonial governments of the present day. It is necessary, therefore, that each veterinary department exa- mine its activities in the light of such criticisms, and ask itself if its policy of disease-control is compatible with a wider policy of rational stocking and soil preservation. Of such supreme importance to every country is its soil, that it is difficult to think of any economic desideratum which might justifiably be pur- chased by the sacrifice of much of this soil. Certainly the desideratum of disease-control should not be so purchased.
THE CONTROL OF ANIMAL DISEASES 311 No one, of course, condemns the acquisition of knowledge which alone makes disease-control possible; what is often deplored is the supposedly injudicious application of this knowledge. This critical attitude of mind is rational, and the challenge to veterinary departments is a fair one which must be met. Having made this general concession, I wish now to say that I believe the challenge is one which can be met by every veterinary department, though naturally I am not in a position to speak for any other country than Tanganyika Territory On behalf of the veterinary department of that country I readily ac- cept the challenge, and as conditions there are not unique, it is probable that conclusions of wide application may be drawn from a careful examination of the facts relating to the one country alone. Overstocking is prevalent in Tanganyika Territory. The area that is stocked to saturation is about 40,000 square miles, and probably 25,000 of these are over- stocked, including what was some of the best land of the Lake, Central, Northern and Western Provinces. The subject has been given much attention and efforts to deal with the problem are being made. It may be said, though, that these efforts amount to no more than a beginning of what requires to be done if the evil is to be removed. In this connexion the recent annual reports of the Department of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry should be consulted, particularly the one for 1931, in which Staples deals at length with the problem as it occurs in the important Usukuma district of the Lake Province [8]. As more than 95 per cent of the stock of Tanganyika Territory is owned by natives, the problem of overstocking in this country may be considered as though it concerned native-owned stock alone. It is important to note that overstocking is not a new thing in Tanganyika Territory. It is probably as old as animal husbandry itself; certainly it was ob- served by Stanley when he passed through Usukuma in September 1889. In his In Darkest Africa [ 9 ] he wrote : ' From our camp we could see the ancient bed of the Lake spreading out for a distance of many miles. Every half-mile or so there was a large cluster of hamlets, each separated from the other by hedges of milk weed. The plain separating these clusters was common pasture ground, and had been cropped by hungry herds as low as stone moss '. On p. 402 he wrote : ' The grass was so short that the cattle were feeding upon the roots to obtain subsistence '. To some people these paragraphs indicate that overstocking in Usukuma was as bad fifty years ago as it is now. and therefore, as things are not getting worse, there is no need for worry. That this assumption is not justified will be shown later ; what does emerge from all the evidence at our disposal is the conclusion that overstocking on a smaller scale existed before the days of European inter- vention. H
312 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV How large the evil is at present may be gauged by the statement given above that 25,000 square miles are overstocked. ' It has been calculated that this area is still capable of carrying satisfactorily upwards of two million cattle together with the same number of sheep and goats, and actually it is being asked at present to sustain half as many more. Considering the cattle alone, this means that some 1,200,000 cows and heifers drop 600,000 calves every year on to land of which the carrying capacity is diminishing so that these births must be balanced by at least the same number of deaths from slaughter, disease, and starvation. By the most generous estimate 150,000 is the maximum slaughtered or sold for slaughter, and we cannot avoid the conclusion that an average of at least 200,000 die each year directly or indirectly from starvation. And meanwhile much of the land is steadily or, in places, rapidly, deteriorating ' [ 5 ]. The primary cause of overstocking is the ordinary desire for wealth acting in communities where wealth is reckoned principally in terms of stock. Subsidiary causes are indifference to the future, and ignorance as to the best ways of achiev- ing the desired wealth. The result is the acquisition by each individual owner of as many animals as possible with little regard to their quality, less regard to their standard of nourishment, and no regard to the way they deplete the soil. Such a state of affairs in a European community would be reprehensible ; in an almost savage community it is not blameworthy but merely deplorable. One should not deal with the subject of native-owned stock without bearing in mind that, at present, to many natives no form of wealth can replace stock. To quote from Seligman's Races of Africa [ 10 ] : ' It is impossible to exaggerate the importance of their cattle to the Masai and kindred tribes; not only must their practical function be considered, but also their ceremonial value, indeed the prominence that grass has in ritual among these tribes is due to the fact that it is the food of their beloved animals. ' Among the Suk, and this may be true of the other tribes, cattle are so im- portant that if an adjective stands by itself the noun it qualifies is always under- stood to be " cow ". Again, in Suk even the skin of an ox has a different word to the skin of any other animal, and the verb to drink, if the fluid be milk, is differ- ent from the word meaning to drink any other liquid, while an ordinary gourd has a name different from that of one used to collect milk '. Again, on p. 175, Seligman says : ' Among the Dinka there is a well defined initiation ceremony at which the father of the young man presents his son with a bull, and it is no exaggeration to say that the youth attaches himself so strongly to this animal that the process called by psychologists " identification " takes place ; he will pass hours singing to and playing with his bull, he will be known to his associates by the name of his bull, and the death of the latter is a true bereavement. It is not then surprising that cattle are not killed for meat except on ceremonial occasions, the diet of the Nilotes being mainly milk and grain '.
THE CONTROL OF ANIMAL DISEASES 313 Although the almost religious esteem in which pastoral tribes hold their cattle is weakening under the influence of education, it is still very strong and is never scoffed at by wise adminis rators. Many of us who have the welfare of the native at heart consider that his d sire to possess many stock, if only it could be modified by consideration for the future as well as the present, is excusable, even laudable ; as the man who succeeds is then capable of supporting his family in comfort and of contributing towards the public revenue. The value of stock to the agriculturalist is particularly noticeable when drought, or the threat of drought, occurs during the season of crop growth. At such times people who are entirely dependent on their corn, e.g., those who live in thick tsetse- fly belts, have a very anxious time. On the other hand, it is precisely during these same periods that stock thrive exceedingly, and much compensation for the de- preciation of crops is afforded by the evening visits to the cattle-kraal, as the animals come home replete after a warm, dry day amidst abundance of nutritious, if wilted, grass. For it should be noted that little more than a month's drought in the growing-season may destroy the whole of a grain crop and yet do no perma- nent injury to grassland314 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV domestic animals should be among a country's most valuable assets, and that every native who wishes to possess stock is entitled to attempt to do so, also that the special importance which pastoral tribes attach to cattle must be respected ; on the other hand, there is the realization that the natives ' present methods of asserting their rights and privileges are prejudicial to general welfare. A first task of such a department should be a survey of the distribution of stock. When this was done in Tanganyika Territory, a very unsatisfactory state of affairs was revealed. No less than two-thirds of the Territory were found to be tsetse-infested and therefore free from cattle, and carrying only a sparse population of smaller stock. Two-ninths, although tsetse-free, carried a sparse animal population insufficient for the ordinary needs of the natives of the same areas ; and the remaining one- ninth was stocked to saturation. The next step was to explain this distribution. The reason why the large tsetse-infested area is nearly free from stock is obvious but the explanation of the distribution of domestic animals on the fly-free areas was obtained only after some years of study, and is briefly as follows : The two-ninths of understocked country are for the most part high-lands with granitic soils and a rainfall exceeding 30 in. Possibly the climax vegetation of such country is evergreen forest, but frequently recurrent fires now permit only a sub-climax of grassland or open deciduous savannah. The soils, too are leached and lateritic. The tall pyrophytic grasses which grow under these conditions furnish very great quantities of potential cattle-food so long as they are immature ; after maturity they lose almost all nutritive value, so that animals which are fat at the end of the rainy season lose condition rapidly throughout the cold dry months which follow. The same conditions of close grass-formation and compara- tively cool moist climate are very favourable to the extra-host existence of ticks and parasitic worms, so that tick-borne diseases, notably East Coast Fever of cattle, and helminthiases, notably distomiasis of cattle and strongyloses of sheep and goats, are enzootic. Skin diseases, such as streptothricosis and follicular mange, affecting all classes of stock, are also prevalent. The net result is heavy disease infestation in a low nutritional environment; a state of affairs leading inevitably to small flocks and herds composed of individuals which are heavily parasitized, frequently stunted, and of low fertility. There is usually a high mor- tality among young stock, and those which survive do so by virtue of acquired immunity to enzootic diseases imposed on an inherited high resistance to these diseases. Few imported animals can survive in such a locality unless they come from somewhat similar environment elsewhere. A somewhat surprising revela- tion is that although the cattle of these areas show such high resistance to local diseases, they offer little resistance to any unusual epizootic which may arise ; for example, an uncontrolled outbreak of rinderpest is usually disastrous in its consequences, and may completely exterminate a local cattle population.
THE CONTROL OF ANIMAL DISEASES 315 The owners of the animals in these understocked highland areas are entirely unaware of the true causes why their stock do so badly, and they are extremely reluctant to accept any advice as to management which may be offered by a veteri- nary officer. Throughout the whole of this type of country there is an established equilibrium of low stock-concentrations which, when upset and readjusted, tends more frequently to lower than to higher concentrations. In other words, stock are dying out in some of these areas, and the already large proportion of the Territory which is without cattle tends to become yet larger. Most of the one-ninth part of the Territory that is stocked to saturation car- ries a vegetation indicative of arid or sub-arid conditions. Some of it is naturally arid, and comprises open grass land, dry savannah, deciduous thicket, and culti- vated land. In this kind of country surface-water is scarce, and stock popula- tions are limited to the numbers which can find a bare livelihood within 15 or 16 miles of water316 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV The explanation of the healthiness is to be found by studying the nature of the most devastating stock-diseases of these parts. They are due to parasites which pass part of their existence away from their mammalian host. Such parasites include piroplasms and rickettsia, which are transmitted by ticks, trypanosomes, transmitted by tsetse and nematodes. Of these transmitters, ticks generally leave their hosts for moulting and egg-laying, and tsetse are attached to their hosts only for brief minutes of feeding. Most parasitic nematodes, too, pass critical stages of their larval life on the ground. The conditions which are most unfavourable to these disease agents are furnished by bare land exposed to the hot sun ; conditions which, in Africa, are always associated with aridity. This is explained why the parts of the Territory which are agriculturally the richest are frequently extremely unhealthy for stock, but may be made comparatively healthy by measures which favour erosion and bring about soil aridity even in the presence of good rainfall. As the environment gets more and more arid from such a cause as overstock- ing, the animals appear to become smaller rather than fewer. This point is being investigated, but already there is evidence to indicate that the seasonal under- nourishment associated with overstocking tends, through survival of the fittest, to produce a dwarf race of full fertility, but low size-potential, rather than mere stunted individuals of low fertility and retaining a comparatively high size- potential. This is probably an important point, as combined with the effect on disease pre- valence, it means that this artificial aridity does not readily provide the seeds of its own remedy ; the trend is towards a lower and lower equilibrium in which depleted soil is balanced by a more xerophytic flora and a more dwarf population of domestic animals. In this way we can reconcile the statement of modern economists that the great country of the Wasukuma lying south of Lake Victoria is being turned into desert, with the known fact that Stanley described a scene of obvious over- stocking in these parts when he passed through them with Emin Pasha fifty years ago for there is little doubt that in the areas which were then overstocked the equili- brium between soil, vegetation, and domestic animals was higher than at present. The country is on its way to desert, as it was then, but only carefully recorded data, which are non-existent, could show clearly that it is a step nearer to desert now than it was then. Naturally the native understands nothing of this. He does know, however, that he is continually faced with the alternative of exposing his cattle to the risks of starvation in dry areas, or of exposing them to the risks of such diseases as East Coast Fever in areas where grass is abundant. One might almost say that this is the chief problem in the lives of nomadic pastoral people, though with them the healthy regions are the naturally arid ones of low rainfall.
THE CONTROL OF ANIMAL DISEASES 317 The real problem of overstocking in relation to soil erosion is furnished by the agriculturalists who are also stock-owners, such as the Wasukuma, to whom re- ference has been made. These settled in the areas of greater soil fertility and originally, no doubt, lost a good many stock from enzootic diseases. As the direct result of their erosive methods of agriculture and animal husbandry they rendered these areas less fertile but healthier for stock, which consequently increased to, and are now maintained at, saturation point. This type of abused country is commonly known as cultivation steppe, and it exists in patches of varying size in every province. It is associated with a dense concentration of both natives and stock and with comparatively good water-sup- plies. Its measure is largely the measure of the badly eroded land of the Territory. Not only are conditions within areas of this type getting worse, but the areas them- selves are spreading, like ulcers, wherever surface water permits their peripheries to be extended to meet the growing need of an increasing population driven out- wards from centres of ruined fertility. This analysis of stock-distribution seems to indicate clearly that unaided native husbandry tends to create the two extremes of under-and over-stocking. Prior to the European invasion of Tanganyika Territory there were large areas of overstocked land, and enormously larger areas of cattle-free country. Since the arrival of Europeans some formerly cattle-free country has become stocked, but there has been no decrease of overstocking ; rather has this evil considerably increased. As the veterinary department is the branch of government which has most to do with the interests of the stock-owner, and since on our own finding these interests have in some respects deteriorated through increased over-stocking, it is natural that the department should be considered as in some measure responsible for the deterioration. This is a reasonable view which does not, however, justify the conclusion that disease-control is the main cause of accelerated overstocking. The most important diseases of stock in Tanganyika Territory are rinderpest, contagious bovine pleuro-pneumonia, East Coast Fever, trypanosomiases, an- thrax, contagious caprine pleuro-pneumonia, diseases due to worms, and skin diseases. There are about five million cattle and about the same number of sheep and goats, besides donkeys, pigs, dogs, poultry, etc. At the end of 1934 there were only fourteen veterinary officers in the department, including the Director and two research officers. Owing to furlough and sickness, there are never more than three quarters of this staff on duty at one time ; that is never more than ten veterinarians to deal with the diseases of ten million stock. They would be rather wonderful men if by their methods of disease-control they were able to cause overstocking.
318 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV It is true that the first aim of the veterinary department is the application of measures of disease-control to the extent that these are justified economically. I consider that an effort should be made to suppress completely both rinderpest and pleuro-pneumonia, and that staff, knowledge, and funds should be available to allow any other disease to be controlled locally at any time this becomes eco- nomically desirable. But up to now the disease-control measures or the department have perforce been confined to a struggle to keep rinderpest and. contagious bovine pleuro-pneu- monia within bounds, and to deal with the other diseases when outbreaks assumed excessive local importance. The only significant way in which these attempts have influenced mortality returns is in connexion with rinderpest, so for the pur- pose of this article we can substitute the term rinderpest-control for the wider term of disease-control, and consider very briefly any effect which such control has had on overstocking. Rinderpest is a contagious disease capable of infecting most species of rumi- nants and a few non-ruminants. In East Africa it affects particularly cattle and, among game animals, buffalo, eland, giraffe, kudu and wart-hog. Within historic times the disease made its first appearance in Africa south of Egypt about 1889, when infected cattle were brought across the Red Sea from Asia. Once introduced it spread rapidly in the form of the greatest epizootic on record. As it swept through Somaliland (1889), Masailand (1890), Nyasaland (1893,) Rhodesia (1896), Transvaal (1896), and Cape Colony (1897), it almost ex- terminated the cattle and buffaloes in its path. Other game animals also suffered heavily. So thorough was the destruction, that the epizootic soon died down for want of further large groups of animals to infect, and energetic measures by the governments of all the countries of South Africa succeeded in stamping out the embers. Thus by about 1905, the disease was completely suppressed in all coun- tries south of what is now Tanganyika Territory (then German East Africa), nor, except for a brief incursion into Northern Rhodesia in 1919, has it been allowed to spread south again since. It is one of the main duties of the veterinary depart- ment of Tanganyika Territory so to control rinderpest within its bounderies that there is no danger of the disease spreading to its southern neighbours. Total suppression is aimed at but is unachievable with a small staff, and each annual report of the department records the number of outbreaks dealt with and the number of cattle inoculated. In 1934, there were 44 outbreaks and 130,000 cattle were inoculated. It must be borne in mind that one attack of rinderpest confers almost lifelong immunity, and, for reasons which need not be discussed here, the form in which the disease occurs to-day in East Africa is much milder than the raging epizootic which worked such havoc in the final decade of last century. It is necessary only
THE CONTROL OF ANIMAL DISEASES 319 to describe what occurs to-day in that part of Tanganyika Territory where the disease is hardly interfered with by the veterinary department. This part is the large and important cattle district of Musoma, lying east of Lake Victoria. Here the disease is always smouldering and sometimes flaring up into outbreaks of considerable size. In the herds where rinderpest is actually active, every suscep- tible beast, that is every beast which is not immune from a previous attack, may become infected. Some of these die, and some recover, and the disease passes on to other herds, to return again after a period of anything between one and ten years, usually after four or five years. The most important aspect of this uncontrolled rinderpest is the mortality. Whereas the original epizootic on its way through Africa killed about 90 per cent of the cattle attacked, to-day in Musoma it kills a mere 5 to 40 per cent, depend- ing on many factors. This means that when rinderpest is uncontrolled in a district like Musoma, every beast is likely to get it sooner or later, with an expected mor- tality of 20 per cent. The normal composition of a Musoma herd of 100 head is 40 cows and 10 adult males, all of which may be immune to rinderpest, and 50 young stock of both sexes, which may be susceptible to the disease. If rinderpest comes along, these 50 become infected and 10 may die. But the 40 cows are capable of rearing 20 calves in a year, so that in the absence of mortality from any other cause the herd could increase even during the year of infection. Musoma district adjoins Usukuma and resembles it in many ways. Many parts of Usukuma are stocked to saturation, which means that no further increase in numbers can take place320 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV Pax Europa is the main reason why overstocking has increased so much in East Africa during recent years. Before the settlement of Europeans the history of much of Africa was ' a tangled skein of secessions, wars, migrations, and exter- minations ' amid which even the strongest tribes had little chance to accumulate stock unmolested for long periods. To-day the weakest tribes tend their animals without fear. Coincident with the first decades of this era of peace was natural recovery of stock populations from the effects of the greatest epizootic of cattle in history. SUMMARY Soil erosion is due to the disturbance by man or his domestic animals of the vegetative cover which alone can prevent the shifting of soil by rain and wind. In many countries with a long annual dry season, overstocking is an import- ant cause of erosion. Since adequate disease-control tends to increase stock populations, many people have suggested that these measures favour overstocking. These suggestions naturally raise a doubt concerning the economic value of some phases of veterinary activity in countries where overstocking is rife, and con- vey a challenge to all veterinary departments. It would be presumptuous for an individual to reply to this general challenge, but the author uses it as a basis for a review of the situation in Tanganyika Terri- tory where overstocking has been prevalent from time immemorial. The primary cause of overstocking in Tanganyika Territory is the ordinary desire for wealth acting in communities where wealth is reckoned in terms of stock and where cattle are held in almost religious esteem. Subsidiary causes are ignorance and indifference to the future. A brief review of the place which stock occupy in native agriculture is given, and the conclusion drawn that it is desirable for natives to possess stock, but de- plorable that ignorance and indifference should be permitted to turn a laudable industry into an economic disaster. With a view to finding some way of improving the stock industry in the face of many difficulties, the veterinary department of Tanganyika Territory made a survey of the distribution of stock. One most interesting result was the dis- covery that, generally speaking, the denser a stock population is, the freer it is from disease. The explanation of this is given, and it is shown that the parts of the Territory which are agriculturally the richest are frequently extremely unhealthy for stock, but may be made comparatively healthy by measures which favour erosion and bring about artificial soil aridity. Unaided native husbandry tends to create the two extremes of under and over-stocking, so that the latter may be considered an essential feature of unaided native husbandry.
THE CONTROL OF ANIMAL DISEASES 321 In Tanganyika Territory the only form of effective disease-control which can be carried out by a small veterinary staff is rinderpest-control, and the evidence is clear that this does little or nothing towards accentuating the bad conditions of the overstocked areas, since mortality from uncontrolled rinderpest in these areas is less than the usual average wastage from starvation. In conclusion it is pointed out that the reason for the increase of overstocking in Tanganyika Territory during recent years is pax Europa, especially when this had effect at the time when native herds were recovering naturally from, losses sustained during the greatest epizootic of cattle in history. REFERENCES 1. T. Eden, Soil Erosion. Bur. Soil Sci. 1933, Tech. Comm. No. 28. 2. Report of the Committee on Soil Erosion, Sessional Paper III, 1931, Ceylon Govt. Press. 3. Final Report of the Drought Investigation Commission, Un. South Africa, 1923, Govt. Printers. 4. H. H. Bennett and W. R. Chapline, Soil Erosion a National Menace. U. S. Dept. Agric. 1928, Circ. No. 33. 5. H. E. Hornby, Overstocking in Tanganyika Territory. East Afr. Agric. J., 1936, 1,353. 6. Report of the Native Economic Commission, Un. South Africa, 1932, Govt. Printer, Pretoria. 7. Report of the Kenya Land Commission, 1933, Govt. Printer, Nairobi. 8. R. R. Staples, Usukuma Overstocking Problem. Ann. Rept. (1931) of the Department of Vet. Sci. and Anim. Husbandry, Tanganyika Territory. 9. H. M. Stanley, In Darkest Africa, Vol. 2 (1890) London : Sampson Low, Marston & Co. Ltd. 10. C. G. Seligman, Races of Africa. Home Univ. Lib., 1930, Thornton & Butter- worth, Ltd.
PARASITE REACTIONS TO HOST MODIFICATIONS * BY ROBERT HEGNER Department of Protozoology, The Johns Hopkins School of Hygiene and Public Health (Reprinted from the Journal of Parasitology, Vol. 23, No. 1, February 1937, pp 1-12) IT is customary for the president of this society to make his address a dis- cussion of some problem in which he is particularly interested. Continuing this custom, I wish to bring to your attention one method of attacking the great pro- blem of host-parasite specificity. The term specificity as used by us does not refer to the specific identity of either host or parasite but to the specific or definite in- fection-relations existing between species of hosts and species of parasites. The use of the term may best be illustrated by several examples. We have found that in most cases each species of Giardia flagellate inhabits only one species of host and does not ordinarily live in other species of hosts in a state of nature. This we refer to as a rigid host-parasite specificity. On the other hand, the large ciliate, Balantidium coli, lives as a normal parasite in three species of hosts, namely, chimpanzees, pigs and man. A condition of this sort we consider to represent a loose host-parasite specificity in which a species of parasite lives in nature in several species of host. Or these same relationships may be described from the standpoint of the host as follows : almost every species of host is inhabited by its own peculiar species of Giardia; whereas three species of hosts, pigs, chimpanzees and man, are all inhabited by the same species of Balantidium. Why one species of host is in general inhabited by a group of parasites that do not occur in other species of hosts, or why one species of parasite lives in one or only a few species of hosts instead of in others that seem equally satisfactory to us, are very intriguing problems. One method of determining the factors in- volved is to modify hosts by subjecting them to various conditions and to note the reactions of their natural parasites or of foreign parasites introduced into them. During the past fifteen years my colleagues, students and myself have car- ried on various investigations that throw light on these problems. Our investi- gations have included the use of modifications of a purely laboratory type as well as alterations that might more or less easily occur in nature. The latter are of particular interest because we wish especially to know what factors ac- count for the host-parasite specificity observed under natural conditions. *Address of the Retiring President, American Society of Parasitologists, December 29, 1936, Atlantic City, New Jersey. Those who took part in the investigations on which this discussion is based are as follows : Justin Andrews, G. H. Boyd, L. R. Cleveland, M. S. Mac- Dougall, Lydia Eskridge, Arnoldo Gabaldon, Robert Hegner, E. C. Nelson, H. L. Ratcliffe, Eugene Schumaker, K. S. Shah, L. G. Taliaferro, and W. H. Taliaferro. (323)
324 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV Most of the protozoa of higher animals may conveniently be separated into two groups, those that live in the digestive tract and those that live in the blood stream. The intestinal protozoa are most easily influenced by modifying the diet of the host and hence we have devoted a large part of our effort to this phase of the problem. Blood-inhabiting protozoa may also be influenced by changes in the diet of the host, since the blood carries the products of digestion to the tissues. Temperature, humidity, and muscular activity also may alter the condition of the host sufficiently to bring about visible reactions of the parasites. Drugs and sera of various sorts have been employed to change the course of infections, to eliminate parasites from the host or to vary the medium within the intestine or blood stream, but these agents could not conceivably operate in nature and our results along these lines are therefore omitted here. With these few remarks as an introduction, I will now proceed to present a running account of our studies. Our attention was first attracted to this subject while studying the intestinal protozoa of amphibians. Ciliates of the genus Opalina are commonly present in the intestine of tadpoles of various species of frogs. They persist in the adults of certain species of frogs but disappear in the green frog when the tadpoles of this species undergo metamorphosis and do not ordinarily occur in the adult green frog. Metcalfe suggested that perhaps the change from the vegetable food of the tadpole to the animal food of the adult might account for the loss of the opalinids. This explanation is not satisfactory since other species of frogs that retain their opalinids after metamorphosis also live on animal food as adults. So far as I know no one has yet explained why the adult green frog differs from other species of frogs with respect to the opalinid ciliates. For several reasons the rat is more favourable than the frog for the experi- mental study of intestinal protozoa. We therefore transferred our attention to the rat and soon found that it was possible to modify this animal so as to influ- ence profoundly its protozoan parasites. We noted first that certain rats that had been used by Dr. E. V. McCollum for dietary studies were free from trichomonad flagellates which are usually very abundant in the caecum. Inquiry revealed the fact that these rats had been fed throughout their lives on a diet high in animal protein. This led to experiments which gave what appeared to be conclusive results, since trichomonads disappeared from, or became much less numerous in, rats that were fed on such a diet instead of what we call a normal diet consisting largely of carbohydrates. Then it occurred to us that the intestinal protozoa we were supplying our students for laboratory study came principally from herbivorous animals, and a review of the literature soon revealed the fact that very few intestinal protozoa have been recorded from carnivorous animals. The evidence thus seemed quite
PARASITE REACTIONS TO HOST MODIFICATIONS 325 convincing that for some reason a diet high in animal protein brings about a con- dition in the intestine that is unfavourable for the growth and reproduction of in- testinal protozoa. This appeared to be true particularly of trichomonad flagel- lates which we studied more thoroughly than we did any other type. The animal proteins that we used in our early experiments were contained in beefsteak. We next undertook to determine whether other animal proteins would have a similar effect. Rats were fed on diets containing 60 per cent of pro- tein. The protein fed to one group of rats was derived from beefsteak, to a second from beef liver and to a third from casein. The results were quite striking. After 20 days rats fed only 20 per cent protein contained on the average about 10,000 trichomonads per cubic millimeter of caecal material, whereas rats fed on the beefsteak diet gave a count of only 1,000, those fed on the beef liver diet con- tained 28,000, but those fed on the casein diet only 260. It seemed quite evident from these results that different types of protein brought about conditions within the intestine of the host sufficiently different to affect drastically the welfare of the trichomonads. Just recently we had an opportunity to try out a diet high in vegetable protein. Groups of infected rats were fed on a normal diet, on a diet high in animal protein and on a diet high in vegetable protein, respectively. The animal protein diet contained 70 per cent of casein and the vegetable protein diet contained 77 per cent of wheat gluten. The average number of trichomonads per cubic millimeter of caecal contents was 8,270 in rats fed on a normal diet, 200 in rats fed on animal protein and 1,137 in rats fed on vegetable protein. Apparently the caecal contents are adversely affected by the vegetable protein but not as unfavourably as by the animal protein. Two factors occurred to us that might account for the situation revealed by these experiments : first, changes in the hydrogen-ion concentration of the intestinal contents, and second, changes in the relative number of different types of bacteria. A preliminary examination of control and experimental animals indicated that no differences in hydrogen-ion concentration were present that seemed great enough to account for the results noted. Later a more careful study was made. The hydrogen-ion concentration of the caecal contents of rats fed on a normal diet was on the average about 6.78, of those fed on a diet of beefsteak about 6.82, of those fed on a diet of beef liver about 6.42, and of those fed on a diet of casein about 7.12. Considering the wide range in the hydrogen-ion concentration of culture media in which trichomonads live suc- cessfully, it appears probable that this condition played a relatively minor rôle in the environmental factors responsible for the growth and multiplication of these flagellates. Various investigators have demonstrated that profound changes occur in the bacterial flora of the rat's intestine when its diet is changed from one consisting
326 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV largely of carbohydrates to one high in animal protein. We were of the opinion from the very beginning that the effects on the trichomonads were due either to changes in the types of bacteria resulting from the ingestion of large amounts of protein or to changes in the products of bacterial activity or to both these fac- tors. An extensive series of experiments seemed to indicate a definite relation between types of bacteria and numbers of trichomonads. The character of the results is indicated in the accompanying table. It will be noted that when rats were fed on either beef or casein the number of trichomonads decreased markedly in numbers, proteolytic anaerobes increased in numbers, fermentative anaerobes increased in numbers coli-aerogenes forms exhibited no definite trend and acid- urics decreased in number. Av. no. trich. Av. no. anaerobes Av. no. aerobes Proteo. Ferment Coli-Aerog. Acidurics 20 per cent protein . 10,570 2.7 54,000 3,047 537,000 Steak, 10 days . . 6,820 27.1 352,000 6,268 527,000 Steak, 20 days . . 880 37.0 361,000 8,050 188,000 20 per cent protein . 16,850 112.4 55,000 3,552 1,070,000 Casein, 10 days . . 720 136.0 73,000 1,939 113,000 Casein, 20 days . . 260 532.0 73,000 1,174 40,000 20 per cent protein . 10,151 125.0 45,000 620 810,000 Liver, 10 days . . 19,800 112.0 550,000 507,730 425,000 Liver, 20 days . . 28,000 0.4 2,440,000 1,350,000 96,000 On a liver diet the trichomonads increased in number, the proteolytic anae- robes decreased in number, the fermentative anaerobes increased in number the coli-aerogenes forms increased in number and the acidurics decreased in number. Since the proteolytic anaerobes were low in number on a normal diet, increased in number on the steak and casein diets and decreased in number on the liver diet, the conclusion seemed justified that these bacteria were responsible for rendering the intestinal contents unfavourable for the trichomonads. There was a decrease in the number of acidurics but this likewise occurred when the favourable liver diet was fed to the rats. The data then available indicated that on any diet the number of trichomonads varied inversely with the number of proteolytic anaerobes present. Sometimes a condition that is unfavourable for one species of protozoon may not have any obvious effect on other species of the same genus. This led us to test the effects of a high protein diet on the human trichomonad, T. hominis, in rats. Our discovery that rat trichomonads can easily be eliminated by carbarsone treatment gave us trichomonad-free rats to work with. These were infected orally with T. hominis grown in culture. When fed
PARASITE REACTIONS TO HOST MODIFICATIONS 327 on a diet high in animal protein 5 of 10 rats became trichomonad-free, and in 2 others the trichomonads were too few to detect in smears but appeared in cul- tures. Only one of the control rats fed on a normal diet lost its trichomonads during the experimental period of 36 days. These data indicate that when rats infected with T. hominis are fed on a diet high in animal protein, the intestinal contents become unfavourable for them just as they do for rat trichomonads. Surveys that are undertaken to determine the incidence of T. hominis in hu- man populations are usually unreliable. Ordinarily many infections are missed for reasons I need not discuss at present. Occasionally an infection is noted that is accompanied by a diarrhoeic condition. A meat diet has been suggested for the treatment of such cases and a number of instances have been brought to my attention in which the results were very satisfactory both the diarrhoeic condition and the flagellates disappearing within a very few days. This suggests that a diet high in protein renders the intestinal contents of man unfavourable for T. hominis just as it does in rats. I wish now to direct your attention to another method of attacking this problem using another species of intestinal protozoon. For the most part investi- gators have devoted their time and efforts to attempts to eradicate parasitic or- ganisms, and comparatively few have endeavoured to improve the environment in the host in favour of the parasite. No one knows what factors prevent a certain species of parasite from living in a given species of host, but it might be possible to modify the host in some very simple way that might even occur in nature so as to render it susceptible to infection. We have tried to modify rat hosts so that they can be infected with balantidial ciliates to which they are ordi- narily resistant in nature. Our procedure was based on the results obtained in our trichomonad studies. We fed rats on diets either high in carbohydrates or high in proteins. Balantidia obtained directly from the intestine of pigs, or grown in culture or taken from experimentally infected rats were inoculated into rats either intragastrically or intracecally. Eighteen rats fed on a diet con- sisting of 70 per cent casein failed to become infected. Balantidia were later eliminated within 8 days from 12 rats that had been experimentally infected, by feeding them on a diet high in casein. Of 49 rats fed on a diet containing 60 per cent carbohydrates and 15 per cent casein, 47 bacame positive and retained the infection for from 1 to 33 days. When the carbohydrates were increased to 85 per cent and the casein reduced to 5 per cent, 27 of 52 rats became infected and remained infected for from 3 to 44 days. A diet of 93.5 per cent carbohydrates, however, proved to be the most effective, since 89 of 101 rats became infected when this ration was used and the balantidia were retained up to 154 days. Further- more, when rats infected on a 60 per cent or 85 per cent carbohydrate diet were changed to a 93.5 per cent carbohydrate diet the number of balantidia present increased markedly within from 5 to 8 days, K
328 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV Another method of testing the influence of carbohydrates on balantidia was to inject starch in either gelatinized or granular form into the caecum of infected rats. In every case the number of balantidia increased greatly within a short time, whereas no increase in numbers occurred in the control animals. During these experiments both division and conjugation were noted among the balantidia, but no cysts were observed. The conclusion reached was that rats might become infected in nature if they were to ingest balantidia and were to subsist on a diet containing from 60 to 93.5 per cent of carbohydrates. They could not transmit the infection to other rats, however, since infective cysts apparently are not formed within the intestine of the rat. Confirmation of these experimental results was obtained when caecal material from 79 pigs was analyzed. It was found that heavy infections with balantidia were generally accompanied by a diet high in carbohydrates in the form of grain. Large quantities of undigested carbohydrates and an intestinal flora such as would develop on a high carbohydrate diet were found in these animals and absent from pigs that were either negative or exhibited light infections with balantidia. Heavy infections with balantidia were accompanied by larger numbers of aciduric organisms and lesser numbers of lactose fermenters and proteolytic anaerobes, and light infections were accompanied by a lesser number of acidurics and a greater number of lactose fermenters and proteolytic anaerobes. At about this stage in our investigations an observation was made that directed our attention to another phase of the subject. We were fully aware of the fact that dysentery amoebae thrive better in a medium containing starch than in media free from starch and actually ingest starch grains. We found also that trichomonads will ingest starch grains and grow and multiply best in cultures to which this carbohydrate has been added. But not until we placed starch grains in a culture containing balantidia and then watched them under a microscope did we realize how voracious a protozoon can be. These balantidia did not ingest them one by one and at infrequent intervals but swallowed many of them at a time and soon became so gorged with them as to reach twice their normal size. Within 15 minutes 100 per cent of the balantidia had. ingested starch grains. This astonishing observation suggested to us that perhaps starch is used largely as food for the balantidia, and hence, when the host is fed on a high protein diet, these ciliates starve to death. A plan to test this hypothesis was soon deve- loped. This included a study of the correlation between the amount of carbo- hydrates in the intestine and the number of species and individuals of intestinal protozoa. Guatemala was selected as the scene of our activities since the natives of tropical America are known to harbour large numbers of intestinal protozoa and to live on a diet consisting largely of carbohydrates. We first had to devise a method of determining the presence and quantity of starch in human faeces. This proved to be a real problem in. itself. Then we
PARASITE REACTIONS TO HOST MODIFICATIONS 329 collected 100 faecal samples from natives in Guatemala, examined them when fresh so as to record the different species present and the relative numbers of each species, and preserved a sufficient quantity of each specimen with which to deter- mine the starch content. A large amount of time and effort was expended before we were able to evaluate our results. Unfortunately our data indicate no correlation whatever between the presence of starch and the number of species and individual protozoa in the faeces, and I am inclined to believe that it will not be easy to establish such a correlation. This means that other methods will have to be devised before we can hope to explain why modifications of the host resulting from a diet high in carbohydrates favours the growth and multiplication of certain intestinal protozoa. Various other methods of changing the intestinal contents of the host have been tried but not enough work has been done to warrant discussion except perhaps that of increasing the viscosity of the medium. Various substances were fed to rats infected with trichomonads ; the most satisfactory were psyllium seed, agar- agar and gum arabic. The average number of trichomonads per unit in the caecum of rats fed on a normal diet was 392, whereas the number per unit in rats fed on psyllium seed was 55, on agar-agar, 285, and on gum arabic, 7. We also found that the number of balantidia in rats infected with ciliates from a chimpanzee was also less when a viscus condition was set up within the intestine. In normal rats there were counted 347 balantidia per centigram whereas in rats fed on agar- agar the number was 60, on linseed was 92 and on psyllium seed was 34. In no case were all of the trichomonads or all of the balantidia eliminated but these protozoa evidently do not grow and multiply as well when the viscosity of the intestinal contents is increased by changes in the diet. Intestinal protozoa appear to be able to withstand temperatures below zero centigrade for considerable periods of time without obvious damage, but succumb quickly to high temperatures. This has led to various suggestions involving the use of heat as a method of eliminating these organisms from the host. For the most part temperatures high enough to destroy endoparasitic protozoa are in- jurious or fatal to the host, but in some cases the host survives after the death of the parasites. For example, the intestine of the large Pacific termite, Termopsis angusticollis, is swarming with four different types of flagellates and cannot di- gest the wood it uses for food without the aid of these protozoa. By subjecting these termites to a temperature of 36° C. for 24 hours all of the flagellates are des- troyed, but the hosts are not harmed. This is a temperature that might occur in nature and hence experiments of this type fall within the province of this dis- cussion. The defaunated termites continue to eat wood, but cannot digest it and therefore die in about 3 weeks in the midst of plenty. If these hosts are re- infected they are once more able to utilize the wood they eat and live indefinitely
330 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV Temperature is not the only factor that is capable of modifying termites so as to destroy the intestinal flagellates living in them. Thus if a termite is starved for 6 days it loses one type of flagellate, Trichonympha, and if it is starved for 2 days longer it loses a second type of flagellate Leidyopsis. Further experiments with oxygen under pressure have demonstrated that the other two types of flagel- lates, Trichomonas and Streblomastix, can be removed by this treatment without injury to the termites, but of course no such condition occurs in nature. However, by the use of high temperatures starvation and oxygen under pressure, it has been shown that termites will die in about 3 weeks if all protozoa are eliminated or if all but Streblomastix are removed ; that they will die in about 10 weeks if both Trichonympha and Leidyopsis are removed ; but will live on indefinitely with any combination of flagellates if Leidyopsis are present or even with Leidyopsis alone. Thus we have proved that the symbiosis involved in this instance is between the termite and Leidyopsis and that the other three species are merely hitch-hikers. Incidentally the most perfect known method of transmission of protozoa from one host to another is exhibited by termite flagellates. The young termites soon after they hatch from the egg are fed by their parents on what is known as proctodeal food. This is excreta of the adults consisting of partially-digested cellulose and many flagellates. One hundred per cent of the young termites are therefore infected soon after they emerge from the egg and are thus supplied with a complete collection of flagellates to digest their food for them. Blood-inhabiting protozoa have also furnished material for experiments de- signed to test parasite reactions to host modifications. Today I wish to use the time at my disposal to discuss three methods of treating canary birds that have resulted in obvious changes in infections with the bird malaria parasite Plasmo- dium cathemerium. The first method was to modify the sugar content of the blood by feeding the infected birds with glucose or by treating them with insulin. The clues that led to our experiments came from several sources. Bass, in 1912, found that the addition of sugar to the culture medium was necessary to cultivate malaria parasites outside of the body. In 1913, Bass and Johns reported the cultivation of the organism of human malaria in the blood of a diabetic without the addition of sugar. Certain agents that have been found to be satisfactory as provocatives in bringing on a relapse in malaria such as epinephrin, are known to increase the sugar content of the blood. These facts suggested that the blood stream can be improved as a culture medium for the growth and multiplication of malarial parasites by the addition of sugar. According to this theory, in- creasing the sugar content of the blood would result in an increase in the number of parasites. Vice versa, the blood stream should be rendered less favourable than normal as a habitat for malarial organisms, by decreasing the sugar content. It is not necessary to give details of our experiments here. In general the data indicate that an increase in sugar content renders the blood more favourable for the malaria parasites ; the number of parasites becomes greater and remains so for
PARASITE REACTIONS TO HOST MODIFICATIONS 331 a period longer than normal; relapses may occur earlier in the course of the infec- tion and more frequently than normal; and a larger proportion of the birds die as a result of the infection. When treated with insulin the parasite curve is lower than normal throughout the course of the infection. So far as I know, no attempt has been made to modify refractory foreign hosts in this way so that they may become more susceptible, but it seems to me probable that positive results would follow experiments of this nature. Another method of modifying the host that has been used in the study of malaria is to change the atmospheric humidity and temperature. Malariologists have found that an increase in these factors favours the breeding of mosquitoes and the development of sporozoites within the mosquito, and hence is responsible, at least in part, for epidemics of malaria. We attempted to determine whether such changes modify the vertebrate host so as to effect the development of the asexual and sexual stages in the blood. For this purpose we used canary birds infected with Plasmodium cathemerium. In one experiment 12 birds were inoculated each with 50 milligrams of infected blood from a single host. Six were maintained under normal conditions in a room where the temperature was about 70° F. and the relative humidity about 40 per cent. The other 6 were kept in a special room at a temperature of 90° F. and a relative humidity of about 50 per cent. The course of the infections in these 12 birds was carefully followed. The data obtained show that the average number of sexual and asexual parasites was higher in the experi- mental birds than in the controls and that both types of parasites were present in larger numbers in the blood for a longer period. Thus the higher temperature and humidity appeared to modify the host so that the parasites were able to set up a more severe infection extending over a longer period of time. A second experiment was performed in which 4 birds were maintained as controls and 7 birds were subjected to an increase in temperature and relative humidity as before. The results confirmed those of the first experiment. In a third experiment the temperature was increased to 100° F. and the re- lative humidity to about 90 per cent. Four experimental birds and 3 controls were used. The control birds exhibited normal infections whereas the experi- mental birds suffered unusually severe infections which resulted in their death These experiments add another method of modifying a host, such as is known to occur in nature, which has a favourable influence on the parasite. Although we have no experimental data of our own to offer at present, it may not be out of place to call attention to the important relation between tem- perature and the development of malaria parasites in mosquitoes. Low tempera- tures retard the growth and reproduction of the plasmodia in these insects, and when the temperature reaches a certain degree development ceases entirely. The three species of Plasmodium that live in man differ in their reactions to
PUBLICATIONS OF THE IMPERIAL COUNCIL OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH 345 ICAR. 8.12 No. 12. List of Publications on the Botany of Indian Crops, Part II, for the period 1928-32, By R. D. Bose. Price Rs. 3-6-0 or 6s. 9 d. ICAR. 8.13 No. 13. Two New Statistical Tables based upon Fisher's ' t ', By M. Vaidya- nathan. Price As. 6 or 8 d. ICAR. 8.14 No. 14. List of Publications on Indian Entomology (1935), compiled by the Imperial Entomologist, Pusa. Price Re. 1-4-0 or 2 s. ICAR. 8.15 No. 15. Selected Clinical Articles, Part II, By G. K. Sharma, G.P.V.C., R. L. Kaura, B.V.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., S. Ganapathy Iyer, G.M.V.C., G. S. Khan, B.Sc. and S. Mangrulkar, M.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., D.T.V.M. (EDIN) Price Re. 1-4 or 2 s. 6. Annual Report of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research ICAR. 12.31 Annual Report of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research for the years 1929-30 and 1930-31. Price As. 12 or 1 s. 3 d. ICAR. 12.32 Annual Report of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research for the year 1931-32. Price As. 6 or 8 d. ICAR. 12.33 Annual Report of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research for the year 1932-33. Price As. 6 or 8 d. (Out of Stock.) ICAR. 12.34 Annual Report of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research for the year 1933-34. Price Re. 1-8-0 or 2 s. 6 d. ICAR. 12.35 Annual Report of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research for the year 1934-35. Price Re. 1 or 1 s. 9 d. ICAR. 12.36 Annual Report of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research for the year 1935-36. Price As. 14 or 1 s. 6 d. ICAR. 12.37 Annual Report of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research for the year 1936-37. Price Re. 1 -2-0 or 2 s. 7. Agriculture and Animal Husbandry in India (called Review of Agricul- tural Operations in India up to 1933) ICAR. 9.29 Review of Agricultural Operations in India, 1928-29. Price Rs. 3-2-0 or 5 s. 6 d. (Out of stock.) ICAR. 9.31 Review of Agricultural Operations in India, 1929-31. Price Rs. 5 or 8 s. 3d. ICAR. 9.33 Review of Agricultural Operations in India, 1931-33. Price Rs. 5-12-0 or 9 s. 6 d. ICAR. 13-1-35 ICAR. 13-2-35 Agriculture and Animal Husbandry in India, 1933-34 and 1934-35PARASITE REACTIONS TO HOST MODIFICATIONS 333 SUMMARY We have attempted to determine some of the factors that are responsible for host-parasite specificity among protozoa, that is, the infection, in nature of a certain species of host by certain species of protozoan parasites. Our plan has been to note the reactions of natural and foreign parasites to modifications in the host. In every case the modifications were brought about by changes in the en- vironment of the host that might easily occur in nature. Only a beginning has been made but already a number of interesting reac- tions have been revealed. A carbohydrate diet renders the intestinal contents of certain species of hosts more favourable than normal for some of the intestinal protozoa natural to these hosts. A high-protein diet is correspondingly unfavour- able. Of the possible factors that may play a rôle in these results, changes in the hydrogen-ion concentrations seem of little or no importance; the character of the bacteria resulting from these two different kinds of diets may be responsible, or these protozoa may actually require carbohydrate as a food element. In one case, Balantidium coli has been successfully colonized in a foreign host, the rat. This appears to be due solely to a change in diet to one containing a higher percentage of carbohydrates than is normal for this type of host. How- ever, no cysts are known to have been formed in the normally refractory host hence transmission to other individuals of the same species probably does not occur. We cannot, therefore, consider the rat a normal host of this ciliate until we find some factor that will stimulate the formation of cysts. The reactions of the bird malaria parasites to the modifications cited are of such magnitude as to appear quite striking. Increasing the sugar content of the blood favours the parasite and decreasing it brings about an unfavourable condition. Increasing the temperature and relative humidity of the host's en- vironment also brings about modifications favourable to the parasites. Changing the periods of light and darkness are followed by definite changes in the course of infections with malaria organisms in canary birds but whether this is due to light rays, food, the muscular activity of the bird, or to some other factor is still to be determined. At least one result of practical application has developed out of these ex- periments, that is, the use of a high protein diet for the elimination of certain in- testinal protozoa of man. Patients suffering from digestive disturbances due to intestinal protozoa are not numerous but those who are so unfortunate as to be infected welcome with fervor the relief this type of treatment brings to them. In conclusion, I wish to emphasize the desirability of investigations directed towards rendering hosts more favourable as habitats for parasitic protozoa by modi- fications due to known factors. By this procedure valuable data may be obtained that might not appear when efforts are aimed solely at the elimination of the organisms.
NEW LIGHT ON THE LIFE-CYCLE OF THE MALARIA PARASITE (Reprinted from the ' Leading Articles ' Section of The Lancet, No. 13, Vol. 1, 1937, 764.) IT has long been a source of interest to the biologist and of chagrin to the clinician that the malaria parasite, when banished from the blood stream by quinine, is able somewhere to maintain its existence. That the parasiticidal effect of quinine has been at the same time so complete and yet so futile is one of the notable mysteries of clinical medicine. If it is true that the sporozoites injected by the mosquito complete their life-cycle in the cells of the circulating blood, then the infection should be scotched by the ingestion of quinine sufficient to main- tain a lethal concentration in the blood stream. And yet a patient who has taken a gramme of quinine daily before and during infection by mosquito bites, and for every day throughout the incubation period, develops an attack of malaria precisely as if no drug had been given. The life-history of the parasite in the vertebral host cannot then be as obvious as all that; for, though SCHAUDINN described the penetration of sporozoites into red blood corpuscles, no one it seems has succeeded in repeating his observations. Some years ago Lieutenant-Colonel S. P. JAMES made the suggestion1 that the sporozoites, when they are injected by the mosquito, may be carried to re- ticulo-endothelial cells of the lungs and other organs in which they complete their asexual cycle of growth and sporulation336 THE LIFE-CYCLE OF THE MALARIA PARASITE RAFFAELE3 in Rome. JAMES and TATE have observed the entry of the parasite into blood-forming cells, and every stage in their growth and multiplication until the merozoites burst the cell and are ready to enter other endothelial cells and red blood-cells, to begin the cycle anew. But while this is true of certain avian parasites it may not apply to those of man, although there is some justification for thinking that it may, if, as we believe, it is a fact that the three fundamental discoveries in malariaABSTRACTS Researches into sterility of cows in South Africa. The influence of (i) Dry rations, (ii) Lack of exercise, and (iii) Lack of sunlight on reproduction in beef heifers and cows. QUINLAN, J., and ROUX, LUCIEN, L. (Ond. J. Vet. Sci. An. Hus. 6, 2, 719.) IT has been mentioned in the literature that factors like lack of exercise, lack of sunlight, lack of green feed and high condition have been associated with low fertility in cattle but such conclusions have been based on circumstantial evidence without experimental proof. The object of the work undertaken by the authors was to collect and record data on the behaviour of the genital tract of twenty-seven beef (Sussex - Afrikandar) heifers and cows when placed in an environment enforcing the above-men- tioned factors, over a period of six years which included four calvings. Usually insuffi- ciency of light and exercise are associated with unhealthy stabling and general bad management, but in this experiment these associated hygienic factors could be ruled out. When a dry ration consisting of maize, wheaten bran and teff hay was fed for nine months and silage was added to the ration during the remaining three months of the year, very satisfactory results were obtained. The ration induced satisfactory growth of young heifers and maintained mature animals in good condition. Sexual maturity was reached before the age of 24 months and sexual activity and reproduction were in no way impaired. High condition caused no ill-effects either upon general health or reproductive processes but under conditions of restricted sunlight or exercise, breeding was delayed until the high conditioned heifers were thirty-five months of age. Cows which maintained a higher condition throughout the periods of gestation, lactation and rest usually produced calves which were small and light in weight. The restriction of sunlight and exercise in no way detrimentally affected the health, growth and vigour of heifers and cows, being fed dry rations. The onset of maturity was not delayed and it appeared to shorten rather than to lengthen the period of inacti- vity between calving and the first subsequent oestrus. About 75 per cent of dioestral cycles fell between eighteen and twenty-three days and the animals receiving an abund- ance of sunlight and exercise experienced a larger number of abnormally long dioestrus cycles. It appeared that as the ages of the animals advanced under the special environ- mental conditions enforced, the percentage of dioestrus cycles between eighteen and twenty-three days decreased and the period of inactivity appeared to shorten as the ages of the cows advanced between three and six years. The length of gestation period which in 81 per cent of the cases fell between 276 and 286 days, was not altered by limiting sunlight and exercise or with advanced age and there was no difference between the gestation periods of males or females. (337)
338 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV Unrestricted sunlight and exercise resulted in fewer services being required to establish pregnancy. Failure to conceive after the first and second service could not be considered exceptional and that appeared to be the case especially in young animals. The number of services required to establish fertility decreased as the ages of cows advanced. Unrestricted sunlight and exercise did not reflect any advantage upon the weight of calves produced. It was observed that the change of the bull greatly influenced the birth-weight of the calves. It is highly probable, in view of the results recorded in this paper, that some secon- dary concurrent factors are necessary to cause that deviation in sex-physiology which produces difficult breeding in cattle fed on dry rations and showing obesity or those which are housed under conditions enforcing restrictions of exercise and sunlight. [R. L. K.] The treatment of ascariasis in chickens. LEVINE, P. P. (The Cornell Veterinarian 26, 2, 120-127.) ASCARIDS are the most important helminths infesting poultry. Beach and Free- born (1922) were the first to advocate the use of tobacco dust in the mash for the expul- sion of the large roundworms in chickens. They mixed tobacco dust with a nicotine content of 1½ to 2 per cent with dry mash in the proportion of two parts per hundred and fed the mixture to infested birds for one to four weeks. The latter author (1923) removed nearly all the roundworms from infested birds in this' way, without any ill- effects to the treated birds. Graybill and Beach (1925), reported that the efficacy of the above treatment for the individual birds ranged from 40 to 100 per cent and for the group as a whole 76 per cent. In 1927 Beach and Freeborn observed that as the nico- tine content of tobacco was variable and the mash was not eaten readily by the infested birds, treatment with tobacco dust in most cases was not reliable. They, however, recommended dosing birds individually with capsules of Black Leaf 40 and Lloyd's Alkaloidal Reagent. Carpenter (1926) tested the efficacy of these capsules on 350 birds and found it to be 96.8 per cent efficient. He further considered it advisable to feed tobacco dust containing 1.5 per cent nicotine in proportion of two per cent of the mash for three weeks after giving the capsules. The author carried out experiments to evaluate the tobacco dust treatment for controlling roundworms in poultry. The dust used was a commercial product with nicotine content of 1.78 per cent by weight. He concluded that the tobacco dust fed to chickens continuously from the day of hatching in concentrations of 2, 4, 6, and 8 per cent in a dry mash did not prevent the hatching of embryonated eggs of A. lineata and the invasion of the intestinal mucosa by the larvae. Two per cent concentration of tobacco was not toxic for chicks, but 40 per cent of the chicks fed on 8 per cent concen- tration died of poisoning. He found that immature worms are less susceptible to tobacco treatment than adults.
ABSTRACTS 339 A nicotine compound (Black Leaf Powder) given in single dose removed all the worms from forty-five pullets infested with adult worms. However, the powder may not be 100 per cent efficient under all conditions. Quarter pound powder was mixed in 5 lbs. mash for every hundred birds. Feed was withdrawn from the birds the evening before treatment. The following morning mash was given which they readily took. The author maintains that continuous feeding of tobacco dust in mash to prevent ascarid infestation is ineffective. The feeding of the dust for four weeks to older birds was less effective than a single treatment with nicotine powder. [H. D. S.] The use of nitric acid in the serological diagnosing of cattle trypanoso- miasis. JONES, E. R. (Vet. Rec. 48, 602-605.) PRECIPITATION of excess of euglobulin produced in trypanosomiasis has been noted by this author by employing twenty different chemicals. Eight hundred and fifty- seven tests, based on the theory of precipitation of serum euglobulin excess in trypano- somiasis, were carried out to demonstrate the specific nature of reaction yielded by the use of nitric acid. Tests were performed with the technique employed by Bennett and Kenny (1928340 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV Sheep nutrition I. Measurements of the appetites of sheep on typical winter rations, together with a critical study of the sheep-feeding standards. WOODMAN, H. E., EVANS, R. E. and EDEN, A. (J. Agri. Sci. 27, 191-211.) IN three successive years, during the winter, feeding experiments were carried out with sheep kept out-of-doors on typical winter rations as lucerne hay, hay, rye grass- sainfoin hay, swedes, marrow-stem kale and potatoes supplemented with concentrates usually fed in farms. Nine, five and seven wethers were used in the respective years ranging in age from three months to two and a half years and in live-weight from 60 to 200 lbs. During the experimental periods the live-weights as well as daily consumption of dry matter and starch equivalent were recorded. Appetites were found to differ widely with diet and individuality. Even in the same animal with the same ration considerable day to day fluctuations were noticed. Variations in appetite ranged from 69.1 per cent to 108 per cent of the values predicted by Professor T. B. Wood. These latter were found to be uniformly too high, thus con- firming the results of Professor Watson and co-workers at Oxford. It is suggested that Professor Wood's values should be multiplied throughout by the factor 0.85 to obtain reasonable measures of the appetites of sheep at different live-weights. From the results obtained in the feeding trials it has been found that the recent standard of 1.26 lbs. of starch equivalent per day was more reliable than the old one (Armsby standard) of 0.74 lb. starch equivalent per day for the maintenance require- ment of 100 lbs. sheep. The higher figure enabled the prediction of live-weight incre- ment with much greater precision. Recent work on the energy metabolism of sheep have also given values in agreement with the higher figure. A table embodying a revision of Professor Wood's feeding standards for sheep is included in the paper. [T. S. K.] Sheep nutrition II. Determination of the amounts of grass consumed by sheep on pasturage of varying quality. WOODMAN, H. E., EVANS, R. E. and EDEN, A. (J. Agri. Sci. 27, 212-223.) IN order to determine the amounts of grass consumed by sheep on pasturage graz- ing trials were conducted on the light-land pasture at Cambridge. The main plot was divided by means of hurdles into five subplots. Two groups of four and five wethers each were used for the grazing trials. The sheep were passed from plot to plot in succes- sion, the animals being moved on at a rate dictated by the necessity of always having an abundance of grass available for grazing. The average daily output of faeces by the sheep on pasture was determined and during this period the digestibility of the same herbage was found out by independent digestion trials on other sheep. By a simple calculation the grass consumption of the animals on pasture was arrived at.
ABSTRACTS 341 Sheep grazing on very good leafy pasture ate on an average 5 to 6 lbs. of dry matter per day which is about 1. 3 lbs. in excess of what they would consume on ordinary winter rations fed ad lib. When the quality of the pasture deteriorated owing to unfavourable weather conditions the consumption also diminished markedly. However, even under such unfavourable conditions the dry matter consumption when grazing was greater than on winter ration by 0.41 lb. and 0.72 lb. per day in two separate experiments, the variation depending on the degree of deterioration. It is clear from the results of the experiments that sheep consume a bigger ration, in terms of lbs. dry matter, when on pasture than when subsisting out-of-doors on the usual winter diet. The consumption is highest with young leafy pasture and diminishes with deterioration in its quality. [T. S. K.]
PUBLICATIONS OF THE IMPERIAL COUNCIL OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH, INDIA [Prices are inclusive of packing and Indian Postage] 1. Agriculture and Live-stock in India ICAR. 1. A bi-monthly journal of agriculture and animal husbandry for the general reader interested in agriculture or live-stock in India or the Tropics. (Established 1931. Published in January, March, May, July, September and November. Prepayable subscription Rs. 6 or 9 s. 9 d. per annum. Price per part Rs. 2 or 3 s.6 d.) Volumes I to VII complete are available. 2. The Indian Journal of Agricultural Science ICAR. 5 A bi-monthly scientific journal of agriculture and the allied sciences mainly devoted to the publication of the results of original research and field experiments. (Established 1931. Published in February, April, June, August, October and December. Prepayable subscription Rs. 15 or 24 s. per annum. Price per part Rs. 3 or 5 s. 3 d.) Volumes I to VII complete are available. 3. The Indian Journal of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry ICAR. 6 A quarterly journal for the publication of scientific matter relating to the health, nutrition and breeding of live-stock. (Established 1931. Pub- lished in March, June, September and December. Prepayable subscrip- tion Rs. 6 or 9 s. 9 d. Price per part Rs. 2 or 3s. 6 d.) Volumes I to VII complete are available. 4. Scientific Monographs of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research ICAR. 10.1 No. 1. The Fungi of India, By E. J. Butler, C.I.E., D.Sc., M.B., F.R.S., and G. R. Bisby, Ph. D. (1931). Price Rs. 6-12-0 or 11 s. ICAR. 10.2 No. 2. Life-histories of Indian Microlepidoptera, Second Series : Alucitidæ (Peterophoridæ, Tortricina and Gelechiadæ), By T. Bainbrigge Fletcher, R.N., F.L.S., F.E.S., F.Z.S. (1932). Price Rs. 3-4-0 or 5 s. 6 d. ICAR. 10.3 No. 3. The Open Pan System of White-Sugar Manufacture, By R. C. Srivas- tava, B.Sc. (1935, 2nd edition.) Price Rs. 3-2-0 or 5 s. 6 d. ICAR. 10.4 No. 4. Life-histories of Indian Microlepidoptera: Cosmopterygidæ to Neopseustidæ, By T. Bainbrigge Fletcher, R.N., F.L.S., F.E.S., F.Z.S. (1933). Price Rs. 4-8-0 or 7 s. 6 d. ICAR. 10.5 No. 5. The Bombay Grasses, By E. J. Blatter, S. J., Ph. D., F.L.S. and C. McCann, F.L.S. Illustrated by R. K. Bhide. Price Rs. 20-12-0 or 32 s. 6 d. ICAR. 10.6 No. 6. Helminth Parasites of the Domesticated Animals in India, By G. D. Bhalerao, M.Sc. Price Rs. 7-12-0 or 13 s. 3 d. (343) M
344 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV ICAR. 10.7 No. 7. Influence of Manures on the Wilt Discase of Cajanus indicus Spreng and the Isolation of Types Resistant to the Disease, By W. McRae, M.A., D.Sc. (Edin.), F.L.S. and F. J. F. Shaw, D.Sc. (Lond.), A.R.C.S., F.L.S. (1933). Price Rs. 2-4-0 or 4 s. 3 d. ICAR. 10.8 No. 8. The Silk Industry of Japan with Notes on Observations in the United States of America, England, France and Italy, By C. C. Ghosh, B.A., F.E.S. (1933). Price Rs. 4 or 6 s. 9 d. ICAR. 10. 9 No. 9. Mechanical Cultivation in India. A History of the Large-scale Experiments carried out by Burmah-Shell Oil Storage and Distribut- ing Company of India, Ltd., By C. P. G. Wade. Price Rs. 3-14-0 or 6 s. 6 d. ICAR. 10.10 No. 10. The Spotted Boll-Worms of Cotton in South Gujarat, By B. P. Deshpande and N. T. Nadkarny, B.Ag. Price Rs. 5-14-0 or 9 s. 6 d. I CAR. 10.11 No. 11. Investigations on the Course and Distribution of the Nerves supply- ing Levator anguli scapuli and Rhomboideus muscles and the form- ation of the Phrenic Nerve in the Ox, with Observations on certain Anatomical Deviations, By H. N. Chelva Ayyangar, G.M.V.C. Price Rs. 4-10-0 or 7 s. 9 d. 5. Miscellaneous Bulletins of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research ICAR. 8.1 No. 1. List of Publications on Indian Entomology (1930), By the Imperial Entomologist, Pusa. Price As. 14 or 1 s. 6 d. ICAR. 8.2 No. 2. List of Publications on Indian Entomology (1931), By the Imperial Entomologist, Pusa. Price As. 8 or 10 d. ICAR. 8.3 No. 3. List of Publications on Indian Entomology (1932), By the Imperial Entomologist, Pusa. Price As. 12 or 1 s. 3 d. ICAR. 8.4 No. 4. Host Plant Index of Indo-Ceylonese Coccidae, By S. Ramachandran, L.Ag. and T. V. Ramakrishna Ayyar, B.A., Ph.D., F.Z.S. Price Rs. 1-10-0 or 2 s. 9 d. ICAR. 8.5 No. 5. List of Publications on Indian Entomology (1933), compiled by the Imperial Entomologist, Pusa. Price As. 9 or 1 s. ICAR. 8.6 No. 6. Bee-keeping, By C. C. Ghosh, B.A., F.E.S. (3rd Edition.) Price Rs. 1-14-0 or 3 s. 3 d. ICAR. 8.7 No. 7. List of Publications on Indian Entomology (1934), compiled by the Imperial Entomologist, Pusa. Price Rs. 1-2-0 or 2s. ICAR. 8.8 No. 8. Selected Clinical Articles, Part I, By G. K. Sharma, G.P.V.C. and R. L., Kaura, B.V.Sc., M.R.C.V.S. Price As. 8 or 10 d. ICAR. 8.9 No. 9. Statistical Methods and their Application to Agronomy : A biblio- graphy, By K. K. Guha Roy. Price Rs. 2-2-0 or 4 s. ICAR. 8.10 No. 10. Diseases of Sugarcane and Methods for their Control, By L. S. Subramaniam. Price Re. 1 As. 14 or 3 s. 3 d. ICAR. 8.11 No. 11. Tables of Standard Errors of Mendelian Ratios, compiled by Swarn Singh Purewal, M.Sc., Ph.D. (Cornell) and P. Krishna Rao, L. Ag. Price As. 12 or 1 s. 3 d.
PUBLICATIONS OF THE IMPERIAL COUNCIL OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH 345 ICAR. 8.12 No. 12. List of Publications on the Botany of Indian Crops, Part II, for the period 1928-32, By R. D. Bose. Price Rs. 3-6-0 or 6 s. 9 d. ICAR. 8.13 No. 13. Two New Statistical Tables based upon Fisher's ' t ', By M. Vaidya- nathan. Price As. 6 or 8d. ICAR. 8.14 No. 14. List of Publications on Indian Entomology (1935), compiled by the Imperial Entomologist, Pusa. Price Re. 1-4-0 or 2 s. ICAR. 8.15 No. 15. Selected Clinical Articles, Part II, By G. K. Sharma, G.P.V.C., R. L. Kaura, B.V.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., S. Ganapathy Iyer, G.M.V.C., G. S. Khan, B.Sc. and S. Mangrulkar, M.Sc., M.R.C.V.S., D.T.V.M. (EDIN.) Price Re. 1-4 or 2 s. 6. Annual Report of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research ICAR. 12.31 Annual Report of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research for the years 1929-30 and 1930-31. Price As. 12 or 1 s. 3 d. ICAR. 12.32 Annual Report of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research for the year 1931-32. Price As. 6 or 8 d. ICAR. 12.33 Annual Report of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research for the year 1932-33. Price As. 6 or 8 d. (Out of Stock.) ICAR. 12.34 Annual Report of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research for the year 1933-34. Price Re. 1-8-0 or 2 s. 6 d. ICAR. 12.35 Annual Report of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research for the year 1934-35. Price Re. 1 or 1 s. 9 d. ICAR. 12.36 Annual Report of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research for the year 1935-36. Price As. 14 or 1 s. 6 d. ICAR. 12.37 Annual Report of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research for the year 1936-37. Price Re. 1-2-0 or 2 s. 7. Agriculture and Animal Husbandry in India (called Review of Agricul- tural Operations in India up to 1933) ICAR. 9.29 Review of Agricultural Operations in India, 1928-29. Price Rs. 3-2-0 or 5 s. 6 d. (Out of stock.) ICAR. 9.31 Review of Agricultural Operations in India, 1929-31. Price Rs. 5 or 8 s. 3 d. ICAR . 9.33 Review of Agricultural Operations in India, 1931-33. Price Rs. 5-12-0 or 9 s. 6 d. Agriculture and Animal Husbandry in India, 1933-34 and 1934-35346 THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY [VII, IV 9. Miscellaneous Publications. VRI. 1 A Description of the Imperial Institute of Veterinary Research, Muktesar, and its Sub-station, the Imperial Veterinary Serum Institute, Izatnagar, By F. Ware, F.R.C.V.S. Price Rs. 1-4-0 or 2 s. ARI.T.187 The Production of Cigarette Tobacco by Flue-curing, By F. J. F. Shaw, C.I.E., D.Sc., A.R.C.S., F.L.S. and Kashi Ram. Imp. Inst. Agri. Res., Pusa Bull, No. 187. Reprinted (1935). Price Re. 1 or 1 s. 9 d. ICAR. 16 A Handbook of Statistics for use in Plant Breeding and Agricultural Problems, By F. J. F. Shaw, C.I.E., D. Sc., A.R.C.S., F.L.S. Price Rs. 4-6-0 or 7 s. 3 d. ICAR. 7 Report on the work of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research in apply- ing sciences to Crop production in India, By Sir John Russell, D.Sc., F.R.S. Price Rs. 1-14 or 3 s. 3 d. ICAR. 18 Report on the Development of the Cattle and Dairy Industries of India, By Norman C. Wright, M.A., D.Sc., Ph. D. Price Rs. l-8-0 or 2 s. 6 d. Copies of the above publications can be had from :INDEX TO AUTHORS A PAGE ABDUS SALAM (SEN, S. K. and) . . . . . . . 219 ANANT NARAYAN RAO, M., " A Preliminary Report on Canine Schisto- somiasis in the Madras Presidency " . . . . . 109 B BHATTACHARJEE, J., " A Check-list of the Nematode Parasites of the Domesticated Animals in Burma " . . . . . . 87 C CARBERY, M., CHATTERJEE, INDUBHUSAN AND TALAPATRA, SUBODH KUMAR, " Studies on the Mineral Requirements of Cattle in North- east India (with special reference to Rice-straw Feeding) " 155 CARMICHAEL,J. (METTAM, R. W. M. and) . . . . . 146 CHATTERJEE, INDUBHUSAN (CARBERY, M. and) . . . . 155 CROWTHER, CHARLES,"Notes on Feeding (mineral supply) " (Abstract) 253 D DEY, B. B., " Recent Developments in the Chemistry of Vitamins " . 133 DHARMANI, LAL CHAND (LANDER, P. E. and) . . . . . 225 DIMOCK, W. W. AND EDWARDS, P. R., " The Differential Diagnosis of Equine Abortion with Special Reference to a hitherto Undescribed Form of Epizootic Abortion of Mares " (Abstract) . . . 147 DOYLE, T. M., " The Isolation of Brucella abortus from the Milk of Cows with Negative Blood Reactions to the Agglutination Test " (Abs- tract) . . . . . . . . . . . 255 E EDEN, A. (WOODMAN, H. E. and) . . . . . . . 340 EDWARDS, P. R. (DIMOCK, W. W. and) . . . . . . 147 EVANS, R. E. (WOODMAN, H. E. and) . . . . . . 340 F FRASER, A. H. H., " The Role of Nutrition in Prevention of Disease in Farm Animals '' (Abstract) . . . . . . . 66 G GANAPATHY IYER, S. (KAURA, R. L. and) . . . . . 299 ii THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY H PAGE HEGNER, ROBERT, " Parasite Reactions to Host Modifications " . . . 323 HORNBY, H. E., " The Control of Animal Diseases in Relation to Over- stocking and Soil Erosion " . . . . . . . 309 HUFFMAN, J. (STARR, L. E. and). . . . . . 65 HUTCHINSON, J. B. and JOSHI, N. R., "Genetic Principles and the Problem of Cross-breeding for Milk-Yield in Indian Cattle " . 79 HYE, M. A., "A Note on the Method of Determination of the Calcium Requirement of Man " . . . . . . . . 303 I IDNANI, J. A., "On the Treatment of Babesia bigemina infection in Cattle in India " . . . . . . . . . . 273 J JOHNSTONE, H. G., " The Chemotherapy of Dirofilaria immitis " (Abs- tract) . . . . . . . . . . 145 JONES, E. R., " The Use of Nitric Acid in the Serological diagnosing of Cattle Trypanosomiasis " (Abstract) . . . . . . 339 JOSHI, N. R. (HUTCHINSON, J. B. and) . . . . . 79 K KARTHA, K. P. R., " A Preliminary Study of the Influence of Accessory factors on the Production of Milk by Indian Goats " . 113 KAURA, R. L. and GANAPATHY IYER, S., " The Occurrence of Air-sac Mite, Cytoleichus nudus (Vizioli, 1870), in Fowls in India " . 299 KOTHAVALLA, ZAL R. and SUNAWALA, S. D., "A Preliminary Micropho- tographic Study of the Fat Globules of the Milk of Indian Breeds of Cows and Buffaloes " . . . . . . . . 8 KRISHNAN, T. S. (WARTH, F. J. and) . . . . . . 54 KUPPUSWAMI, P. S., " Some Observations on the Incidence and Inheri- tance of Imperforate Anus in Ganjam Calves " . . 305 L LANDER, P. E. and DHARMANI, LAL CHAND, " Some Digestibility Trials on Indian Feeding Stuffs. XI. Cotton-seed Cake as a Cattle- feed" . . . . . . . . . . 225 LEVINE, P. P., " The Treatment of Ascariasis in Chickens " (Abstract) . 338
INDEX TO AUTHORS iii M PAGE MACGUCKIN, Major C. E., " Cross-bred and Grade Dairy Cattle in India " 263 MALKANI, P. G., " Kumri " (Second Progress Report) 1 MANGRULKAR, M. Y., " On a Piroplasm of the Indian Cat (Felis domes- ticus)"........... 243 MATHIAS, THOMSEN and OLE, HAMMER, " The Breeding Media of Some Common Flies " (Abstract)....... 255 METTAM, R. W. M. and CARMICHAEL, J., " ' Turning Sickness', a Pro- tozoan encephalitis of Cattle in Uganda. Its Relation with ' East Coast Fever ' " (Abstract)....... 146 MORRIS, SAMUEL, " The Protein Requirements of Lactation " (Abstract) 254 N NORDEN, E. C, " Finding ' Par ' for Dairy Cows " (Abstract) . 253 O OLE, HAMMER (MATHIAS, THOMSEN and)...... 255 P PAUL, F. SHARP and RAY, G. HART, " The Influence of the Physical State of the Fat on the Calculation of Solids from the Specific Gravity of Milk " (Abstract)....... 254 PRESCOTT, T. H. (STARR, L. E. and)...... 65 Q QUINLAN, J. and ROUX, LUCIEN L., " Researches into Sterility of Cows in South Africa. The Influence of (i) Dry Rations, (ii) Lack of Exercise and (iii) Lack of Sunlight on Reproduction in Beef Heifers and Cows " (Abstract)....... 337 R RAJAGOPALAN, V. R., " Is there a Relationship between the Viruses of Rinderpest and Doyle's Disease ? " ..... 59 iv THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY S PAGE SANKARANARAYANAN, N. S., " Haematological Studies in Indian Dairy Animals".......... 97 SEN, S. K., " The Occurrence of Spinose Ear Tick (Ornithodorus megnini Dugés) in India "......... 213 INDEX TO SUBJECTS A PAGE Abortion, equine, differential diagnosis with special reference to a hitherto undescribed form of epizootic abortion of mares . . 147 Air-sac mites in fowls in India . . . . . . . 299 Alkali hydrolysis method, determination of fats in biological material . 253 Allantoin, in the healing of chronic discharging wounds . . . 67 Animal diseases in relation to overstocking and soil erosion, control of 309 Anus (imperforate) in Ganjam calves, incidence and inheritance of . 305 Ascariasis in chickens, treatment of. . . . . . . 338 B Babesia bigemina infection in cattle, treatment of . . . . 273 Biological material, determination of fats in . . . . . 247 Bovine mastitis, diagnosis of . . . . . . . . 65 Brucella abortus, isolation from milk of cows with negative blood reac- tions to the agglutination test . . . . . . . 255 Buffaloes and cows, study of fat globules in the milk of Indian breeds of 8 Burma, check-list of the nematode parasites of the domesticated animals in . . . . . . . . . . . . 87 C Calcium requirement of man, determination of . . . . . 303 Calves (Ganjam), incidence and inheritance of imperforate anus in . 305 Canine schistosomiasis in the Madras Presidency . . . . 109 Cat (Indian), on a piroplasm of . . . . . . . 243 Cattle diseases and pestsvi THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY Cattle diseases and pestsINDEX TO SUBJECTS vii PAGE. Dairy cattle in India, cross-breeding of . . . . . . 263 viii THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY G PAGE Ganjam calves, incidence and inheritance of imperforate anus in . . 305 Genetic principles and the problem of cross-breeding for milk-yield in Indian cattle . . . . . . . . . . 79 Goats (Indian), influence of accessory factors on the production of milk by 113 Grass consumed by sheep on pasturage, determination of the amounts of . . . . . . . . . . . . 340 Grassland Congress, Fourth International . . . . . . 69 Grasses (Indian), sulphur content of . . . . . . . 54 H Haematological studies in Indian dairy animals . . . . 97 Host modifications, parasite reactions to . . . . . . 323 I Indian cattle, genetic principles and the problem of cross-breeding for milk-yield in . . . . . . . . . . . 79 INDEX TO SUBJECTS ix M PAGE Malaria parasite, life-cycle of . . . . . . . . 335 Madras Presidency, canine schistosomiasis in the . . . . 109 Mastitis, diagnosis of . . . . . . . . . . . . 65 Maynard Ganga Ram Prize . . . . . . . . . 149 Milch cows, effect of high protein feeding on . . . . . . 289 Milk of cows with negative blood reactions to the agglutination test, the isolation of Brucella abortus from . . . . . . 255 X THE INDIAN JOURNAL OF VETERINARY SCIENCE AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY P PAGE Parasite reactions to host modifications . . . . . . 323 Pigeons, Salmonella enteritidis isolated from . . . . . 231 Piroplasm of the Indian cat . . . . . . . . 243 Plant poisoning, differential diagnosis in . . . . . . 256 Pneumonia in foals due to Corynebacterium equi . . . . . . 38 Poultry diseases and pestsINDEX TO SUBJECTS xi PAGE Sulphur content of some Indian grasses . . . . 54 Sunlight, effect on reproduction in beef heifers and cows . . 337 T Theileriasis of cattle in India . . . . . . . 15 Trypanosomiasis (cattle), use of nitric acid in the serological diagnosing of . . . . . . . . . . . . 339 ' Turning sickness ', a protozoan encephalitis of cattle in Uganda. Its relalion with ' East Coast Fever ' . . . . . . 146 U Uganda,' turning sickness ' in . . . . . . . 146 V Veterinary medicines